To reveal how the polycomb repressive–deubiquitinase (PR–DUB) complex controls substrate selection specificity, we undertook a detailed computational sequence analysis of its components: additional sex combs like 1 (ASXL1) and BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1) proteins. This led to the discovery of two previously unrecognized domains in ASXL1: a forkhead (winged-helix) DNA-binding domain and a deubiquitinase adaptor domain shared with two regulators of ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase 37 (Uch37), namely adhesion regulating molecule 1 (ADRM1) and nuclear factor related to kappaB (NFRKB). Our analysis demonstrates a common ancestry for BAP1 and Uch37 regulators in PR–DUB, INO80 chromatin remodelling and proteosome complexes.
INTRODUCTIONBRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1) and ubiquitin carboxylterminal hydrolase 37 (Uch37) (also known as UCHL5) are two deubiquitinating proteases (DUBs) from the same peptidase family that share a high degree of sequence similarity not only in their catalytic ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase (UCH) domain but also in an additional conserved carboxy-terminal region, previously called the Uch37-like domain (ULD) (). The controlled removal of ubiquitin or ubiquitin-like proteins by DUBs is required in diverse cellular processes. The catalytic domains of DUBs often require adapter domains to control the specificity of substrate selection and thus to avoid cleavage of inappropriate substrates (). The human PRDUB complex contains BAP1 and additional sex combs like 1 (ASXL1). The PRDUB complex represses polycomb group target genes by removing monoubiquitin from histone H2A in nucleosomes. Recently, it was found that the ASXL1 N-terminal region (residues 2365) is essential for its interaction with BAP1, although the domains responsible for this interaction have been determined in neither ASXL1 nor BAP1 protein sequences (). The PRDUB complex has increasingly attracted medical interest as somatic mutations in ASXL1 frequently occur in different * To whom correspondence should be addressed. myelodysplastic syndromes (). ASXL1 mutations have been also associated with glioblastoma, ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma, cervical and colon cancer (). De novo nonsense mutations in human ASXL1 have also been recently associated with BohringOpitz syndrome (also known as OberklaidDanks or C-like syndromes), characterized by severe intellectual disability, distinctive facial features and multiple congenital malformations (). Human ASXL1 belongs to a family of three vertebrate paralogues () and it is orthologous to Drosophila Asx (additional sex combs), whose product is required for long-term repression of HOX genes during development and whose mutants enhance homeotic phenotypes of both polycomb and trithorax mutations (). Mouse ASXL1 is required for normal hematopoiesis and its knockout results in simultaneous anterior and posterior transformations of the axial skeleton (). In addition, several lines of evidence suggest that ASXL1 has a genuine transcription factor role by regulating retinoic acid receptors and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (). ASX proteins have been previously reported to contain two evolutionarily conserved regions in metazoa, from fly to humans: a region termed the ASX homology (ASXH) domain and a C-terminal plant homeo domain (PHD) zinc finger (). However, with the exception of its C-terminal PHD domain, significant sequence similarity was not detected with any other known protein domain. In order to trace its evolutionary history and to identify functional domains, we embarked on a computational protein sequence analysis of the ASX protein family.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Computational protein sequence analysis. The DEUBiquitinase ADaptor domainOur iterative profile-based database searches identified previously unreported homologues of ASXL1 in fungi and land plants. Animal ASX HMMer3 () profile searches (based on SupplementaryExperimentally determined interactions are shown with brown arrows corresponding to: A) An ASXLI N-terminal region (amino acids 2 to 365) interacts with full length BAPI (); B) The hRpnl3/ADRM l ULD-interacting region was localised to its second domain (amino acids 278-391), here termed its DEUBAD domain (); and C) The Uch37 ULDinteracting region of NFRKB was localised to its first 465 residues (). Summary of the experimental evidences supporting each interaction:: Reconstituted complex in humans and Affinity Capture-Western for D. melanogaster orthologs (ASX and Calypso).These approaches, however, failed to identify potential ASX orthologues in the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans or in yeasts (Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe). A profile derived from animal and fungal ASX sequences identified the Arabidopsis thaliana subfamily IV of GATA zinc fingers (): GATA27 (Tair:At5g47140, UniProt: Q5PP38) and GATA26 (Tair:At4g17570, UniProt: Q8W4H1) with E-values of 1.610 4 and 2.310 4 , respectively. Consistent with the conservation of the Polycomb H2A ubiquitination machinery in plants (), the finding of ASX and BAP1 homologues in Arabidopsis suggests that the histone H2A deubiquitination machinery (PRDUB complex) could also be conserved between plants and animals. During a search for more remote evolutionary relationships, we were surprised to find statistically significant similarities with ASXL1 for two further human proteins. HMMer3 profile searches using the ASX family profile (corresponding to Supplementarymultiple sequence alignment marked with the red bar) revealed the arthropod Pediculus humanus (UniProt: E0VM25_PEDHC) sequence (which is a known orthologue of the human NFRKB protein) with an E-value of 0.0073. The ASX/NFRKB profile (based on Supplementarymultiple sequence alignment marked with the red and yellow bars) localized the Trichoplax adhaerens (UniProt: B3S476_TRIAD) sequence (a known orthologue of the human ADRM1 protein) with an E-value of 0.0067. In addition, profile-versus-profile comparisons (using HHpred) () confirm the previously described evidences of sequence similarity among these families: the profile of the ASX family identified the NFRKB and ADRM1 families with E-values of 210 7 and 510 6 , respectively. Statistically significant E-values of sequence similarity connected these human ASXL1,2,3, NFRKB and ADRM1 proteins and reciprocal searches produced convergent results; no further human homologues were identified. NFRKB is a subunit of the INO80 chromatin-remodeling complex (). The region of NFRKB that we observe to
L.Sanchez-Pulido et al.
Common ancestry for BAP1 and Uch37 regulatorsbe homologous to ASXL1 is located within a region previously described as binding the C-terminal Uch37 ULD (). The second human protein homologous to ASXL1 is ADRM1, whose tertiary structure shows it to consist of a bundle of eight alpha-helices (). ADRM1 is a proteasome subunit that serves as a receptor for both ubiquitin and Uch37 (). Again, this ADRM1 region is known to bind the C-terminal Uch37 ULD and hence was initially called the Uch37-binding domain (). However, owing to its affinity for a specific portion (the ULD of Uch37) and its presence as a DEUBiquitinase ADaptor (DEUBAD) domain in other proteins, we term these DEUBAD domains. The presence of the DEUBAD domain in ASXL1 and its presence within a region known to interact with BAP1 () strongly implicates the ASXL1 DEUBAD domain in binding to the C-terminal BAP1 ULD ().
Identifying a putative DNA-BINDING domainAlthough these observations help to explain how the ASXL1 DEUBAD domain regulates BAP1 deubiquitinase activity within PRDUB, they fail to explain the proposed transcription factor function of ASXL1 (). To do this, we turned to the region N-terminal of the ASXL1 DEUBAD domain whose sequence is well conserved among diverse metazoa from vertebrates to cnidarians such as Nematostella vectensis, although not in Drosophila melanogaster (Supplementary). Using the HHpred server (), the profile generated for the conserved ASXL1 N-terminal region matched the forkhead domain of FOXO1 protein (PDB-ID:3coa) () with a significant E-value of 0.028 (estimated error rate <8%). Moreover, in support of the first match, the next five most statistically significant matches are members of the forkhead superfamily of transcription factors (AFX, PDB-ID:1e17, E-value = 0.089; FOXK1a, PDB-ID:2c6y, E-value = 0.16; FOXO4, PDB-ID:3l2c, E-value = 0.35 and; NF3G, PDB-ID:1vtn, E-value = 0.68) (). The consistency of secondary structure predictions and corroboration by profile-to-profile comparison (HHpred) methods, taken together provide strong evidence that animal ASX proteins contain a forkhead domain located at their N-termini. By inspecting previously characterized forkhead domain structures in interaction with DNA (), we identified two types of positions whose conservation would be in agreement with a DNA-binding role for the ASXL1 forkhead domain (Supplementary): (i) residues that have been implicated in non-specific DNA binding (DNA backbone contacts) are indicated by blue triangles above the alignment and (ii) indicated with black triangles and boxes are two residues located in alpha-helix 3 (Asn51 and His61; human ASXL1) which correspond to Asn165 and His169 of HNF3G () that are predicted to confer DNA-binding sequence specificity (major groove DNA contacts). In agreement with a DNA-binding role for the ASXL1 forkhead domain, candidate ASX orthologues from plants contain, rather than a forkhead domain, a different, GATA zinc finger DNA-binding domain at their N-termini (Supplementary) (subfamily IV of Arabidopsis thaliana GATA zinc fingers; GATA26 and GATA27) (). The human ASXL1 protein, therefore, likely binds DNA through its N-terminal forkhead domain thereby conferring DNA sequence specificity to the PRDUB complex activity of histone H2A deubiquitination. In a similar manner, a forkhead domain that has recently been identified in the trithorax protein ASH2L appears to link sequence-specific DNA binding to histone H3K4 methylation (). Although we were finalizing this article, a bioinformatic analysis of ASXL1 was published (), mainly focused on the identification of the N-terminal winged helix-turnhelix/forkhead domain. Our article is consistent with this report, but further extends the ASX family analysis by showing the structural and functional predictions for the DEUBAD domain.
CONCLUSIONIn summary, the computational identification of the DEUBAD and forkhead domains in the human ASXL1 protein should now greatly assist in experimentally delineating its critical function in regulating the histone code under non-pathological and pathological conditions.
REFERENCES
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Aravind,L. and Iyer,L.M. (2012) The HARE-HTH and associated domains: novel modules in the coordination of epigenetic DNA and protein modifications. Cell Cycle, 11, 119131. Bejar,R. et al. (2011) Clinical effect of point mutations in myelodysplastic syndromes. N. Engl. J. Med., 364, 24962506. Bell,D. et al. (2011) Integrated genomic analyses of ovarian carcinoma. Nature, 474, 609615. Bott,M. et al. (2011) The nuclear deubiquitinase BAP1 is commonly inactivated by somatic mutations and 3p21.1 losses in malignant pleural mesothelioma. Nat. Genet., 43, 668672. Boultwood,J. et al. (2010) Frequent mutation of the polycomb-associated gene ASXL1 in the myelodysplastic syndromes and in acute myeloid leukemia. Leukemia, 24, 10621065. Boura,E. et al. (2010) Structure of the human FOXO4DBDDNA complex at 1.9 A resolution reveals new details of FOXO binding to the DNA. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr., 66, 13511357. Bratzel,F. et al. (2010) Keeping cell identity in Arabidopsis requires PRC1 RING-finger homologs that catalyze H2A monoubiquitination. Curr. Biol., 20, 18531859. Breen,T.R. and Duncan,I.M. (1986) Maternal expression of genes that regulate the bithorax complex of Drosophila melanogaster. Dev. Biol., 118, 442456. Brent,M.M. et al. (2008) Structural basis for DNA recognition by FoxO1 and its regulation by posttranslational modification. Structure, 16, 14071416. Carbuccia,N. et al. (2009) Mutations of ASXL1 gene in myeloproliferative neoplasms. Leukemia, 23, 21832186. Chen,X. et al. (2010) Structure of proteasome ubiquitin receptor hRpn13 and its activation by the scaffolding protein hRpn2. Mol. Cell, 38, 404415. Chen,Y. et al. (2011) Crystal structure of the N-terminal region of human Ash2L shows a winged-helix motif involved in DNA binding. EMBO Rep., 12, 797803. Cho,Y.S. et al. (2006) Additional sex comb-like 1 (ASXL1), in cooperation with SRC1, acts as a ligand-dependent coactivator for retinoic acid receptor. J. Biol. Chem., 281, 1758817598. Clark,K.L. et al. (1993) Co-crystal structure of the HNF-3/fork head DNA-recognition motif resembles histone H5. Nature, 364, 412420. Conaway,R.C. and Conaway,J.W. (2009) The INO80 chromatin remodeling complex in transcription, replication and repair. Trends Biochem. Sci., 34, 7177.
