Motivation: The importance of RNA sequence analysis has been increasing since the discovery of various types of non-coding RNAs transcribed in animal cells. Conventional RNA sequence analyses have mainly focused on structured regions, which are stabilized by the stacking energies acting on adjacent base pairs. On the other hand, recent findings regarding the mechanisms of small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and transcription regulation by microRNAs (miRNAs) indicate the importance of analyzing accessible regions where no base pairs exist. So far, relatively few studies have investigated the nature of such regions. Results: We have conducted a detailed investigation of accessibilities around the target sites of siRNAs and miRNAs. We have exhaustively calculated the correlations between the accessibilities around the target sites and the repression levels of the corresponding mRNAs. We have computed the accessibilities with an originally developed software package, called 'Raccess', which computes the accessibility of all the segments of a fixed length for a given RNA sequence when the maximal distance between base pairs is limited to a fixed size W. We show that the computed accessibilities are relatively insensitive to the choice of the maximal span W. We have found that the efficacy of siRNAs depends strongly on the accessibility of the very 3-end of their binding sites, which might reflect a target site recognition mechanism in the RNA-induced silencing complex. We also show that the efficacy of miRNAs has a similar dependence on the accessibilities, but some miRNAs also show positive correlations between the efficacy and the accessibilities in broad regions downstream of their putative binding sites, which might imply that the downstream regions of the target sites are bound by other proteins that allow the miRNAs to implement their functions. We have also investigated the off-target effects of an siRNA as a potential RNAi therapeutic. We show that the off-target effects of the siRNA have similar correlations to the miRNA repression, indicating that they are caused by the same mechanism. Availability: The C++ source code of the Raccess software is available at http://www.ncrna.org/software/Raccess/ The microarray
ABSTRACTMotivation: The importance of RNA sequence analysis has been increasing since the discovery of various types of non-coding RNAs transcribed in animal cells. Conventional RNA sequence analyses have mainly focused on structured regions, which are stabilized by the stacking energies acting on adjacent base pairs. On the other hand, recent findings regarding the mechanisms of small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and transcription regulation by microRNAs (miRNAs) indicate the importance of analyzing accessible regions where no base pairs exist. So far, relatively few studies have investigated the nature of such regions. Results: We have conducted a detailed investigation of accessibilities around the target sites of siRNAs and miRNAs. We have exhaustively calculated the correlations between the accessibilities around the target sites and the repression levels of the corresponding mRNAs. We have computed the accessibilities with an originally developed software package, called 'Raccess', which computes the accessibility of all the segments of a fixed length for a given RNA sequence when the maximal distance between base pairs is limited to a fixed size W. We show that the computed accessibilities are relatively insensitive to the choice of the maximal span W. We have found that the efficacy of siRNAs depends strongly on the accessibility of the very 3-end of their binding sites, which might reflect a target site recognition mechanism in the RNA-induced silencing complex. We also show that the efficacy of miRNAs has a similar dependence on the accessibilities, but some miRNAs also show positive correlations between the efficacy and the accessibilities in broad regions downstream of their putative binding sites, which might imply that the downstream regions of the target sites are bound by other proteins that allow the miRNAs to implement their functions. We have also investigated the off-target effects of an siRNA as a potential RNAi therapeutic. We show that the off-target effects of the siRNA have similar correlations to the miRNA repression, indicating that they are caused by the same mechanism. Availability: The C++ source code of the Raccess software is available at http://www.ncrna.org/software/Raccess/ The microarray
INTRODUCTIONThe energy scales of the secondary structure formations of RNA molecules are rather high compared with those of many biological interactions and processes. For example, the free energy of a single GC/CG stacking is 3.4 kcal/mol. This value is about half of the 7 kcal/mol of ATP hydrolysis ATPADP+PPi, which is the basic energy unit of most biological processes, such as transcription and translation. Therefore, the secondary structure can strongly influence biological processes involving RNA molecules. Recently, a few studies that measure the regulatory activities of miRNAs and siRNAs have revealed the importance of accessibility around the target regions to these functional RNAs (). An miRNA represses the expression of its target mRNAs by recognizing the 'seed' sequences in the target genes, which are about 7 bp in length and are complementary to the 5-end of the miRNA sequence. The repression will be inefficient if the seed sequences are buried within a strong secondary structure of the target mRNA so that the corresponding RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) cannot access them because of a high energy barrier (). An siRNA represses the expression of the target mRNA that has the sequence complementary to the antisense strand of the siRNA. The accessibility around the target sites has also been shown to influence the efficacy of siRNAs (). Despite the importance of the accessibility of interacting RNA molecules, there have been few studies investigating the regions of RNA sequences that do not form any base pairs (). In this article, we investigate the accessibilities around the (off-) target sites of siRNAs and miRNAs. We define the accessibility
Target accessibility of siRNA and miRNAP acc (s a ) of segment s a in an RNA sequence x of length N bywhere S 0 is the set of all possible secondary structures of x, S(s a ) is the set of all secondary structures that have no paired bases in segment s a of sequence x, E(,x)(kcal/mol) is the energy of secondary structure  on x, which is calculated by the Turner energy model (), R = 1.987210 3 (kcal/(molK)) is the gas constant and T = 310.15K is the temperature. Since it is known that the secondary structure model based on the Turner energy parameters is less accurate for structures involving the distant base pairs, it is natural to restrict the maximal span of the base pairs to a fixed value W. In this case, S(s a ) and S 0 include only the structures containing base pairs of span less than or equal to W. If the dynamics of RNA molecules were completely governed by the Turner energy model, then the conformation distribution of noninteracting RNA molecules in solution would be represented by the Boltzmann distribution. In this case, P acc (s a ) would represent the probability that a single RNA molecule has accessible segment s a. Recent studies have shown that the techniques that combine all the possible secondary structures are highly effective in predicting secondary structures (). These studies have shown that the behavior of RNA molecules is more accurately described by including the probabilistic fluctuation of secondary structures (). Hence, we expect that Equation (1) more accurately defines the accessible regions of real RNA molecules compared to defining them from a single predicted secondary structure. To date, only a few programs can compute the accessibility based on the energy model. Sfold () computes the accessibilities using posterior sampling techniques. The time complexity of the algorithm is O(NW 2 + MNW ) where M represents the number of sampled structures. Although sampling methods are very flexible to compute various types of expectation values, their results are subject to random fluctuations, and the error of the calculated probability values is at least (1/M). In particular, it is difficult to compute small probability values unless huge number of structures are sampled. As compared to the sampling algorithms, dynamic programming (DP) algorithms can take all the possible structures into account, and they can accurately compute small probability values without increasing computational costs. OligoWalk (, b, c) uses a version of McCaskill's DP algorithm () adapted to the cases where the RNA sequence are subject to accessibility constraints. The time complexity is given by O(N 3 ). Since O(N 3 ) time is prohibitive to apply to long mRNAs, it cannot compute the accessibilities based on the global structures as defined in Equation (1) for them. Although it can use a sequence window approach, the artificial window boundaries strongly affect the accessibility values, as described in the 'Dependence on GC Composition' subsection. RNAplfold () computes the mean accessibilities averaged over sequence windows of length S (W  S  N) with complexities of O(NS 2 ) in timein this article and those in the previous studies. The white box represents the (putative) binding region of siRNAs or miRNAs. The patterns of accessible segments are represented by the arrows. The patterns investigated in the previous studies are as follows. Patterns A, B:and O(N +S 2 ) in space. Such window averaging is a reasonable approach for a genomic scan where the boundaries of potential transcripts are unknown. However, to compute the accessibilities] for transcripts with validated boundaries, we need to set S = N, which is again prohibitive in terms of complexity for long RNA sequences. Furthermore, the current RNAplfold implementation results in overflow errors when S is set to a few thousand bases, because it uses a simple scaling method for the multiplications of partial Boltzmann factors. We have, therefore, developed a software package called 'Raccess', which calculates exactly the accessibility of all the segments of a fixed length for a given RNA sequence. Raccess sums up the Boltzmann weights for all the possible global structures with the constraint that the maximal span of the base pairs is limited to a given size W. The computational complexity is O(NW 2 ) in time and O(N +W 2 ) in space. Raccess computes the inside and outside variables by using the logarithms of Boltzmann factors, so it is robust to overflow errors and returns correctly for sequences longer than N = 100 kb. Using Raccess, we first investigate the basic properties of the accessibilities. We show how the accessibility depends on the GC composition, the length of s a and the maximal span. We also show that the computed accessibilities are relatively insensitive to the choice of the maximal span. We then apply Raccess to the mRNA sequences targeted by siRNAs and miRNAs, and compare the efficacy of their regulatory activities with the accessibilities around the target sites. As compared to the previous studies that investigated the efficacyaccessibility correlations with only limited patterns of accessible segments (), we computed the accessibilities for the exhaustive patterns of the accessible segments.shows the comparison of the patterns of the accessible segments considered in this paper and those in the previous studies. From these exhaustive calculations, we have obtained several interesting observations. In particular, we show that the efficacy of siRNAs depends strongly on the accessibility of the very 3-end of their binding sites, which might reflect the underlying mechanisms of siRNA function. We also investigate the correlation between the accessibility and the off-target effects of an siRNA for the first time. We show that the miRNA repression and the off-target effects of the siRNA have a similar dependence on the accessibility. Page: 1790 17881797
H.Kiryu et al.
ALGORITHMS AND IMPLEMENTATIONBoth RNAplfold and Raccess compute the accessibilities based on the Turner energy model (). However, the algorithms they are based on are rather different: RNAplfold uses a modification of McCaskill's algorithm (), whereas Raccess uses a type of insideoutside algorithm associated with a defined context-free grammar (). Although McCaskill's algorithm is essentially an inside outside algorithm, there is no symmetry between the inside and outside variables and it is difficult to apply the RNAplfold algorithm to other stochastic context-free grammars (SCFGs). Therefore, we begin by giving an illustrative example to show how to derive the formula for computing the accessibilities in the case of SCFG models. We describe how the algorithm can be applied to the energy model in the subsequent section. We first introduce some notation to simplify the following discussion. The maximal span W is defined as the maximal distance between two sequence positions for which we consider the possibility of base pair formation. The access segment s a is the sequence segment for which we compute whether the region is accessible or not in terms of secondary structure. The access position x a is the middle position of access segment s a , and the access length l a is the length of that segment. The accessibility P acc (s a ) in Equation (1) is the probability that there are no paired bases in the access segment s a in terms of the Boltzmann distribution. In other words, it is the probability that the access segment s a is thermodynamically accessible. The access energy E acc (s a ) = RT log(P acc (s a )) is the thermodynamic work needed to dissociate all the paired bases within the access segment s a. The partition function Z(x) is obtained from the usual inside algorithm. Thus, we only derive the numerator of Equation (1) in terms of the insideoutside variables below.
Accessibility formula for a SCFGThe SCFG model that we consider has five non-terminal states (S, P, L, R and M). The transition rules of the SCFG are defined as follows.where is the null terminal symbol, a is a terminal symbol corresponding to an unpaired nucleotide and a < and a > are the respective terminal symbols that correspond to the left and right base of a base pair. Furthermore, S represents the start state, P represents the pair emitting state, L represents the left emitting state, R the right emitting state and M represents an auxiliary state to handle multifurcations of stems. To explain how this SCFG parses secondary structures, we prepare some basic terms on the energy model. In this model, any secondary structure decomposes an RNA sequence into one or more k-loops enclosed by the backbone and hydrogen bonds of base pairs. A k-loop with k > 0 denotes a loop which composed of a closing base pair, k 1 opening base pairs and zero or more unpaired bases. For example, a one-loop is a hairpin loop, a two-loop is either stacked base pairs or a bulge loop or an interior loop and a k-loop with k > 2 is called a multiloop. For more detail about the loop model of secondary structures, please refer to the Mfold manual (). For each k-loop, all the k base pairs are emitted by P  L transitions. The leftmost segment of unpaired bases is emitted by L  L transitions. The other unpaired bases are emitted by R  R transitions. Each M  MR transition represents the production of an opening base pair and, possibly, flanking unpaired bases on its right.shows the parsing tree of a three-loop structure. In the present case, the numerator of Equation (1) corresponds to the sum of all the probabilities of the parse trees that emit the segment s a as unpaired bases. To compute this, we need to enumerate all the state transition patterns that emit a contiguous sequence of unpaired bases of length l a. There arewhere (A  A) n indicate n successive A  A transitions. Hence, the sum of all the parse trees that includes these transitions can be represented using the inside  s (i,j) and outside  s (i,j) variables:where x 1 and x 2 represent the first and the last positions of s a , respectively, e s (i) represents the emission probability of state s at position i, and t(s  s ) represents the transition probability for transition s  s. We show these formulas graphically in. Therefore, the accessibility of s a is obtained by dividing the sum of the above values by the partition function Z(x):
Target accessibility of siRNA and miRNAWe note that whether or not the accessibility has such simple expression strongly depends on the grammar structure. For example, if we add to the model a transition R  L, then the transitions, L  L  L, L  R  L  L, and L  R  R  R  L  R  L all emit three contiguous unpaired bases as left emissions. In this case, the computation of the accessibilities includes the summation of all such emission patterns and is practically impossible. As another example, if we add the transition M  L then both bifurcating children emit parts of a single contiguous segment. This case also does not have a simple representation. If the grammar is unambiguous, it is easier to enumerate all the patterns emitting unpaired segments, but it is not obvious whether an unambiguous grammar generally has a simple accessibility formula.
Accessibility formula for the energy modelTo derive the accessibility formula for the energy model, we use the grammar named Rfold that was developed in a previous paper to calculate the base pairing probabilities under the maximal span constraint (). Rfold fully uses the advantage of the maximal span constraint and computes base pairing probabilities and secondary structures of a given RNA sequence with O(NW 2 ) time and O(N +W 2 ) space, which reduce to familiar O(N 3 ) time and O(N 2 ) space when there is no constraint on the maximal span (i.e. W = N). We have reproduced the Rfold grammar in the Supplementary Material. The unambiguity of the Rfold grammar is described in detail in the Supplementary Material of the original article and we do not repeat it here. The Rfold model has five types of unpaired base emission rules that correspond to external, multi (left emission), multi (right emission), hairpin and internal/bulge loops. The energy model assigns them distinct partial free energies. In the Rfold model, external loops are emitted by the Outer state as right emissions: Outer  Outera. Multi loops are emitted by two states Multi and Multi2, which emit unpaired bases on the left and right, respectively: Multi  aMulti, Multi2  Multi2a. Hairpin and internal/bulge loops do not have specific emission states, and they are emitted by the following transition rules of the StemEnd state, which represent the closing base pair of the loop model of secondary structures: StemEnd  c k1 Stemc k2 (k1+k2  1) and StemEnd  c k (k  3), where c k represents a string of length k. Owing to the grammatical structure, the complete list of all the patterns that emit contiguous sequences of unpaired bases of length l a is (see):(Outer  Outer) laTherefore, the numerator of Equation (1) is obtained by summing the parse trees that include one of these patterns, which can also be computed using insideoutside variables as shown graphically in. The explicit formulas are described in the Supplementary Material. Note that because of the maximal span constraint, insideoutside variables are computed only for the regions {(i,j)|1  i < j  L,|j i|W } in the figure. We find the accessibilities at each computation of the outside variables and immediately output them to file. We need only O(N) memory for the Outer state, and O(W 2 ) memory for the other states. We implemented the above algorithm as the software package Raccess. For a given set of access lengths l ak (k = 1,K) and a maximal span W , Raccess computes the accessibilities for all the possible accessible segments (x a ,l ak ) (x a = 1,...,N, k = 1,...,K) in a single run of insideoutside algorithms. For a modest size of K = 10  100, the computation is dominated by the insideoutside computations, so the time complexity is given by O(NW 2 ). The space complexity is O(N +W 2 ) for fixed K as in the case of base pairing probabilities ().As described in the Section 1, Raccess has the advantage over RNAplfold that it can calculate the exact accessibilities for long sequences, which is useful for avoiding the artificial effects caused by the ends of the sliding windows of RNAplfold. On the other hand, a major drawback to the current implementation of Raccess compared with RNAplfold is speed: currently, Raccess is 210 times slower than RNAplfold for similar parameter settings. This is mainly due to the substantial number of log-sum function calls needed to calculate the insideoutside variables accurately. We leave the reimplementation of Raccess as a faster program to the future.
DATASET AND DATA PROCESSING
Comparison of run time and memory usageThe experiments were performed on an AMD Opteron 854 Quad core 2.8 GHz with 64 GB RAM and CentOS release 5.3. We used RNAplfold of the Vienna RNA package version 1.8.4, a binary program of Sfold version 2.2 and OligoWalk version 1.0. The test sequences were generated randomly with equal A, C, G, U probabilities. As for Sfold, the number of sampled structures were set to its default value (1000). If a program had no options to constrain the maximal span or the sequence window, it was run with its default setting with respect to that option. The command line options are shown in the Supplementary Material.
Dependence on GC compositionWe generated several random RNAs of length 10 000 with fixed GC biases and computed accessibilities for them. We used only the accessibility values for subsequences lying at least 1000 bases from the sequence ends in order to eliminate boundary effects.
siRNA datasetFor siRNA efficacy, we used the dataset ofproduced using a dual reporter system on HeLa cells to measure the repression levels of target gene expressions. The dataset contains the efficacies of 2431 distinct siRNAs targeting 34 mRNAs derived from human and rat. The efficacies z eff are represented by the amount of mRNA expression reduction and take values between 0 (no effect) and 100 (completely repressed). This dataset is the largest single dataset available so far. It has been a gold standardPage: 1792 17881797
H.Kiryu et al.dataset for testing siRNA design tools since it was published. There are several experiments for the siRNA efficacy dataset, but the number of tested siRNAs are at least a few times smaller (see, for example). Although the set of 34 mRNAs is a very tiny portion of > 10000 mRNAs in the animal genomes, the diversity of the efficacies among different siRNAs targeting the same mRNAs indicates that a significant portion of efficacy can be explained by local features. Therefore, to investigate the local determinants affecting the efficacy, this small number of mRNAs will not be a critical limiting factor. One possible problem of this dataset is that the experimental conditions might be too idealized to represent real mRNAs; Although this experiment essentially measures the efficacies for free-living mRNAs, real mRNAs might form complexes with other RNAs and proteins. Therefore, it may be possible that the best siRNA that completely degrades the target mRNAs in this experiment fails for the nascent mRNAs in a certain condition. Still, the knowledge obtained from this idealized experiment should be useful to understand the basic mechanisms of siRNA functions.
miRNA datasetsFor miRNA efficacy, we used the results of a microarray experiment by, which measured the changes of gene expressions, before and after the knock down of miR-155 of mouse by RNAi. The efficacy z eff in this case is given by z eff (i) = log, where g B (i) and g A (i) are the mRNA concentrations of the i-th gene before and after the miR155 knock down, respectively. We also used the microarray data of, where the authors measured gene expression changes after the transfection of miRNAs (miR-1, miR-124) in HeLa cells. The efficacy z eff in this case is given by z eff (i) = log g B (i)/g A (i) , where g B (i) and g A (i) are the mRNA concentrations of the i-th gene before and after the miRNA transfection, respectively. In both cases, the putative target genes are defined by all the genes that have 7mer seed sequences in their 3-UTR sequences. There are numerous papers that the existence of 6,7-mer seed sequence is the most important feature of the mRNAs targeted by miRNAs (). Usually, we observe clear statistical evidence that the mRNAs with seed sequences are down(up) regulated after over(under) expression of the miRNA. Since there are no comprehensive dataset that identifies the binding sites at single nucleotide resolution, we used the putative binding sites. We expect that if the number of false positives are too large, then no statistical significance will be observed. On the other hand, if there is any statistical significance, then we consider that it suggests the nature of true binding sites.
siRNA off-target datasetThe dataset ofonly measures the repression of target mRNAs for a large number of siRNA species, and it does not measure off-target effects of those siRNAs. To investigate off-target effects of siRNA transfection, we conducted a microarray experiment where human fibroblast cells (CCD-18co) were transfected by a 27mer siRNA (positivesiRNA) targeting the 'carbohydrate (N-acetylgalactosamine 4-sulfate 6-O) sulfotransferase 15' (CHST15) gene. This siRNA is currently in a preclinical study and is being developed for the treatment of Crohn's disease stricture, which occurs in 30% of Crohn's disease patients, and is the leading cause of repeat surgery. CHST15 has been shown to be overexpressed at sites of fibrosis in Crohn's disease patients, and upregulation of CHST15 correlates with the severity of fibrosis in animal models of colitis with intestinal fibrosis (). The gene expression is compared with those of a negative control [the same fibroblast cells transfected by a different 27mer siRNA (. The siRNA in the negative control was derived from a green fluorescent gene that did not have a significant match (i.e. no contiguous 19mer match within hamming distance 1) with any of the human RefSeq genes. We calculated the efficacy by the formula z eff (i) = log, where g P (i) and g N (i) represent the mRNA concentrations of the i-th gene after the transfection of positive-siRNA (25 nM) and negative-siRNA (5 nM), respectively. The details of the microarray experiment are described in the Supplementary Material. The microarray dataset is available from our web site.
Efficacyaccessibility correlationWe categorized the dataset into two groups based on the accessibilities around the target sites. For a given access segment s a which was specified by an access length l a and an access position x a relative to the (putative) binding site, we ranked the dataset by the accessibility of s a. We labeled the most accessible 30% of data points as group 1 and the others as group 2. Then we computed Welch's t-statistic, which tests the difference of the efficacy distribution between two groups:where  i and s i are the mean and the SD of the efficacy in group i, respectively, and n i is the size of the group i. A value t > 0 indicates that more accessible segments are more effective targets. Because the size of the dataset is rather large, the null distribution for t can be approximated by the standard normal distribution. This approximation is used when we mention P-values in Figures 7, 8, 10 and 11. There are three major statistics for testing the difference of means (or medians) between two groups of data: Student's t-statistic (ST), Wilcoxon MannWhitney U statistic (WMW) and Welch's t-statistic (WT). Each of these methods is based on specific assumptions about the null distribution: ST assumes that two groups of data are sampled from an identical normal distribution; WMW assumes two groups of data are sampled from an identical but arbitrary-shape distribution; WT assumes two groups of data are sampled from two distinct normal distributions with equal mean. Since it is difficult to assume that our datasets exactly conform to these assumptions even in the null case, we have to use them under the existence of certain violations of basic assumptions. There are numerous statistics papers that investigate to what extent those methods are robust under such violations. Generally, the statistical power does not suddenly disappear with a tiny violation from the assumptions, but it rather degrades gradually with increase of deviation from them (). A recent article recommends WT, which we have used in the following, as the first choice method for testing differences between group-wise means (). In the following, we do not consider the multiple corrections for P-values, since it is very difficult to find an appropriate method for multiple correction, due to the strong correlations of the P-values among neighboring accessible segments. Still, the obtained P-values are very useful, as they represent the relative strengths of the efficacyaccessibility correlations taking the datasizes and variances into account.shows the run time and memory usages for several patterns of sequence length, maximal span and sequence window size. The accessible length l a is fixed to 20 in these computations. Among the programs, Raccess is the only program that returns correctly within 10 h. RNAplfold is a few times faster than Raccess in many cases, but it does not work for large sequence windows due to overflow errors. Sfold does not return within 10 h for the 10 000 base sequence. OligoWalk is slower than the other programs. The memory usage shows that all the programs use only moderate memory space when they return correctly within the time limit.The numbers in the brackets on the title row represent (N: sequence length, W: maximal span, S: sequence window size), respectively. Symbol '' indicates that the program does not return results within 10 h. Symbol 'x' indicates that the program terminates within 10 h but does not return any result due to overflow errors.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Comparison of run time and memory usage
Page: 1793 17881797
Target accessibility of siRNA and miRNA
A BCshows how the access energy E acc depends on the GC composition, the access length l a and the maximal span W .shows that the access energy increases with GC composition and their slopes are more steep with increasing l a .shows that E acc is linearly dependent on the access length l a .shows that, if W > 100, the accessibility is only weakly dependent on the maximal span W , as compared to the strong dependence on the GC composition. This insensitivity to W is a favorable feature which is not satisfied by other statistics, such as the base pairing probability matrix where the number of highly probable base pairs constantly increases with W. The predicted secondary structure also changes considerably with W. In this sense, it may be said that the accessibility is a better statistic of the energy modelthan the base pairing probability matrix or the predicted secondary structure. We have also investigated the dependence of the accessibility on the distance to the end points of the sequence and on the distant nucleotide contents of the sequence. The results are shown in the Supplementary Material, where we show that the accessibilities are affected by the positions of the end points and by the distant nucleotides if they are located within a distance several times as large as the maximal span W .shows the scatter plot of siRNAtarget data at particular W , l a and x a values. Although the variances are very large, the mean value of efficacy z eff steadily decreases with the access energy E acc , which suggests that the accessibility is an important determinant of efficacy. Page: 1794 17881797shows the main result of the article, namely the correlation between the accessibility and the siRNA efficacy for various access lengths and access positions relative to the binding sites. Here, we can clearly see a strong positive correlation between the efficacy and the access segments on the vertical line of the downstream end of the binding site (x a = 0). The blotted regions are roughly symmetrical around x a = 0, and moreover, almost all the corresponding access segments include the base at x a = 0. This may indicate the underlying mechanism of the siRNA function: the accessibility of this position may be essential for the RISC complex to recognize the target site and to implement its cleavage function. Previous studies have considered the efficacyaccessibility correlation in the context of static or equilibrium aspects of siRNA function, where they have compared the free energy difference between bound and unbound states of siRNAmRNA pairs (). However, our results suggest that the accessibility is more related to the dynamical or kinetic aspects of the siRNA mechanism, that is, accessible target sites might help siRNA binding by lowering the activation (initiation) energy barrier of the reaction.shows the dependence of siRNA efficacyaccessibility correlations on the maximal span W. Although the accessibility values are relatively insensitive to W as shown in, W = 400 shows better correlation r s and maximal t-value t max than the other W values. Hence, we set W = 400 in the following sections.shows the density plots of t-values for the miRNA datasets. Compared to, the statistical significances appear much weaker. This may be due to the non-specificity of 7 mer sequence, bearing a high level of noise, and the smaller size of the dataset (a few hundred points compared to 2431 for siRNA). We can, however, still find some interesting features in these figures. The miR-124 dataset () shows strong correlations between the efficacywith different W. and the accessibility around the putative binding site, which appears similar to the siRNA case. On the other hand, the miR-155 and miR1 datasets show weak t-values at x a  0, but there are broad regions (l a = 70  100) downstream of the putative binding site, where accessibility is positively correlated with efficacy. Interestingly, all the figures have a weakly blotted region around x a = 40...60, l a = 10...20. They might be reflecting the mechanisms of the miRNA functions such as protein binding and specific conformations of the mRNAs downstream of the binding site.
Dependence on GC composition
siRNA efficacy dataset
H.Kiryu et al.
miRNA datasets
siRNA off-target datasetAs described in the Methods section, an siRNA targeting a glycogene (CHST15) are transfected into human fibroblast cells. The length of the siRNA is 27 mer instead of the 21mer of conventional siRNAs. Such longer siRNAs are called Dicer-substrate siRNAs (DsiRNAs) (). They are first cleaved by Dicer to form 21mer siRNAs, which then implement their usual RNAi function. Previous studies () have shown that transfection of DsiRNAs is far more efficient than transfecting 21mer siRNAs directly. The sequences of the siRNA are shown in. There are two possible patterns (L, R) that produce a 21mer siRNA with a single Dicer slicing. Each cleavage pattern is expected to show off-target effects specific to the seed sequence at the cleavage site. We computed the t-values for all the 7 mer subsequences of siRNAs and the corresponding P-values are plotted in. Position 6 of the sense and antisense strand have the largest P-values, which implies that both the 'L' and 'R' cleavage patterns show off-target effects. The density plot of t-values for this seed GAUGAAU corresponding to 'R' type cleavage () is very similar to the plots for the miRNAs, especially that for the miRNA knock down dataset (). This indicates that the siRNA off-target effect occurs by the same mechanisms as miRNA repression.shows the accessibilityefficacy plot for each gene (l a = 16, W = 400 and E acc is averaged over access positions x a in the range). The genes whose expressions might be most strongly affected by the off-target effects are shown in
Target accessibility of siRNA and miRNAA B C(2) is indicated by shading according to the density scale shown. Note that scale bars of these plots are, which is different fromof. Therefore, the significances are much lower than those in.growth factor. The repression of these genes might cause side effects in the therapeutic application of the siRNA.
A B
FURTHER DISCUSSION
Comparison of different toolsIn this subsection, we summarize the notable features of the used programs. Sfold is based on the posterior sampling algorithm and has time complexity O(NW 2 +MNW ) (N: sequence length, W : maximal span, M: number of sampled structures). It is useful for computing various types of expected values other than the accessibility. Sfold is an integrated software package which has various options for Page: 1796 17881797). It does not only compute the accessibilities but also predicts efficient siRNAs by combining the accessibility with other features. The high accuracy of predictions are confirmed in Lu and Mathews (2008a). As a tool to compute the accessibilities, it is slower than other programs. Further, since the maximal span is always equal to the sequence window size, the computed accessibility values are subject to boundary effects for long RNA sequences. RNAplfold has time complexity O(NS 2 ) (S: sequence window size). It is the fastest program in many cases and appropriate for a genomic scan. When sequence window size S is small, the accessibility values are subject to boundary effects. When S is as large as one thousand bases, RNAplfold causes overflow errors. Raccess has time complexity O(NW 2 ). It can compute the accessibility values for long sequences without using sequence windows nor causing overflow errors. On the other hand, it is a few times slower than RNAplfold in many cases. It does not predict efficient siRNAs.
H.Kiryu et al.
Limitation of our studyThere are a few limitations in the experimental data as well as the analyses used in this study. As for the siRNA efficacy data (), the number of target mRNAs is only 34, which is a small sample of the human genes. Hence, it is possible the results obtained from them might not generalize to other mRNAs. Regarding our analytical method, it should be noted that the accessibility values between neighboring or overlapping accessible segments are similar to each other. It indicates that the t-values among close points in the density plots are not independent and correlated. It is also noted that even when the computed P-values are quite significant, the underlying efficacy data are subject to high variability as shown in. Further, since these analyses is based on observational studies, the correlation ofcould be subject to confounding and unreported correlations. However, none of these limitations easily explains the pattern of the t-value densities around the 5-end of binding sites observed in. Since the high t-value regions are roughly symmetric around position zero, it is unlikely that they are caused by any sequence bias of the siRNA sequences. The fact that the high t-values occur for accessible segment with length up to 100 indicates that they are not simply caused by the local sequence features around position zero. These are the reasons that we believe thatreflects the roles of the accessibility in the siRNA mechanisms. On the other hand, the results are somewhat weaker for the miRNA dataset and siRNA off-target dataset (). Since only a few number of miRNAs and siRNA are examined due to unavailability of data, it is difficult to extract general rules for the accessibilityefficacy correlations with confidence. Furthermore, since the binding sites used for the density plots are only putative, the results are subject to statistical noise caused by the false binding sites.
Using accessibility for efficient siRNA designPrevious studies () have used the accessibility as one of the major features to predict efficient siRNAs. In particular, OligoWalk () combines several sequence and thermodynamic features including the accessibility using a support vector machine. Although the correlation of each of those features is only up to 0.35, it predicts siRNAs of efficacy > 70% with high performance (sensitivity 22.7% and specificity 96.5%). It will be interesting to investigate whether our exhaustive calculation further improves the performance of siRNA design tools.
Page: 1797 17881797
Target accessibility of siRNA and miRNAaccessibilities has many potential biotechnological applications other than efficient siRNA design. For example, accessibility can be an important factor in the design of efficient probes for in situ hybridization. Some portion of the positional inhomogeneity of read tag counts observed in RNA-seq data can be also attributed to the local accessibilities of mRNA molecules. Investigating to what extent the computed accessibilities are useful in these applications will also be interesting.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CONCLUSION We have conducted a detailed investigation of accessibilities around the target sites of siRNAs and miRNAs. We first developed an algorithm for computing local accessibilities of RNA sequences, and implemented it as a software package called 'Raccess'. Raccess exhaustively calculates the exact accessibilities based on an energy model under a maximal span constraint of base pairs. Using Raccess, we investigated how accessibility depends on the GC content, the access length and the maximal span. We showed that the computed accessibilities are relatively insensitive to the choice of the maximal span. Then, we computed for both siRNAs and miRNAs the correlations between efficacy and accessibility around the target sites. We found that the efficacy of siRNAs depends strongly on the accessibility of the very 3-end of their binding sites, which might reflect the mechanism for target site recognition by the RISC complex. We also showed that the efficacies of some miRNAs have positive correlations with accessibilities in broad regions downstream of their putative binding sites, which might imply that the downstream regions of the target sites are bound by other proteins, allowing the miRNAs to implement their function. We also investigated the off-target effects of an siRNA which is being investigated as a potential RNA medicine. We showed that the off-target effects of the siRNA have similar correlations to the miRNA activities, indicating that the off-target effects of the siRNA are caused by the same mechanism as the target repression of the miRNAs. We only investigated the relation between accessibility and siRNA/miRNA efficacy. However, accessibility is expected to influence every type of biological process involving RNA molecules. It will be interesting to investigate the accessibilities of general mRNAs and other functional RNA molecules. Computation of
