Motivation: Microtubules are dynamic polymers of tubulin dimers that undergo continuous assembly and disassembly. A mounting number of microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) regulate the dynamic behavior of microtubules and hence the assembly and disassembly of disparate microtubule structures within the cell. Despite recent advances in identification and functional characterization of MAPs, a substantial number of microtubule accessory factors have not been functionally annotated. Here, using profile-to-profile comparisons and structure modeling, we show that the yeast outer kinetochore components NDC80 and NUF2 share evolutionary ancestry with a novel protein family in mammals comprising, besides NDC80/HEC1 and NUF2, three Intraflagellar Transport (IFT) complex B subunits (IFT81, IFT57, CLUAP1) as well as six proteins with poorly defined function (FAM98A-C, CCDC22, CCDC93 and C14orf166). We show that these proteins consist of a divergent N-terminal calponin homology (CH)-like domain adjoined to an array of C-terminal heptad repeats predicted to form a coiled-coil arrangement. We have named the divergent CH-like domain NN–CH after the founding members NDC80 and NUF2.
INTRODUCTIONMicrotubules are dynamic polymers that form a variety of cytoskeletal constellations in the eukaryotic cell. Common to all microtubule arrangements, ranging from the short centrioles of the centrosome to the elaborate structures of the mitotic spindle in mitosis or the axoneme of cilia, are a set of microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) that influence the dynamics, stability and function of the tubulin polymer (). Many putative MAPs and accessory components of the mitotic spindle, centrosome and cilia have not been functionally annotated. This is due in part to the high abundance of coiled-coil propensity proteins populating these subcellular compartments (e.g.). Coiled-coil containing proteins are notoriously difficult to functionally annotate because of the high degree of sequence redundancy of coiled coils, which renders coiled-coil segments unsuitable for phylogenetic analysis. Some MAPs associated with e.g. kinetochores or centrosomes, however, adopt a bipartite structure comprising, besides their coiled coil hub, a globular head domain. The presence of such a conserved domain can greatly facilitate the identification of remote homologs in other species. For instance, in NDC80 (HEC1 in humans; hereafter referred to as NDC80) and NUF2 of the NDC80 kinetochore complex, or the microtubule plus end-tracking proteins EB1-3, the coiled-coil region is preceded by a conserved N-terminal calponin homology (CH) domain, which has aided in the identification of orthologs (). In the NDC80 kinetochore complex, formed by heterodimerization of NDC80 and NUF2, the interaction between the C-terminal coiled-coil regions produces a microtubule-binding interface consisting of two tightly interacting CH domains (). Structural analysis has indicated that the NDC80 CH domain resembles that of the first CH domain of human fimbrin, which itself adopts a divergent CH domain fold (). Despite this structural similarity, previous sequence-based analyses have not identified NDC80 as a member the proposed major groups of CH domaincontaining proteins (). Here we show by means of sequence profile-to-profile analysis that NDC80 and NUF2, three Intraflagellar Transport (IFT) complex B subunits, as well as six other poorly defined proteins constitute a novel family of bimodular proteins containing a divergent N-terminal CH-like domain followed by a C-terminal region of heptad repeats predicted to form a coiled coil arrangement. We have named the divergent CH-like domain NNCH after the founding members NDC80 and NUF2.
METHODSpBLAST and Iterative BLAST searches with PSI-BLAST were performed at NCBI (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) and MPI bioinformatics toolkit (http://toolkit.tuebingen.mpg.de) servers (), respectively, using the non-redundant (NR) protein sequence database at NCBI. Default settings were utilized in the searches. Unless otherwise stated, profile-to-profile hidden Markov model (HMM)HMM searches were performed using HHpred () with default settings against the PFAMA database (http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk). For, multiple sequence alignments (MSA) were built by MAFFT (http://myhits.isb-sib.ch/cgibin/mafft) () and the resulting alignment edited in *To whom correspondence should be addressed. Jalview (http://www.jalview.org/). The consensus of the alignment was calculated and colored using the Clustalx color scheme implemented in Jalview. Secondary structure information and structural alignment were predicted using HHpred (). For Supplementaryamino acid sequences were retrieved at NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm. nih.gov/protein) and aligned with the COBALT server (http://www.ncbi. nlm.nih.gov/tools/cobalt). Sequence alignments were analyzed for the occurrence of secondary protein structure in the Ali2D program (http:// toolkit.tuebingen.mpg.de/ali2d). MODELLER (http://toolkit.tuebingen. mpg.de/modeller) () was employed for homology modeling of 3D structures using templates chosen based on highest probability and significantly low E-value to the target sequence, as obtained in HHpred by mining the PDB and SCOP databases. Resulting 3D model coordinates were analyzed in Discovery Studio 3.5 Visualizer. Coiled-coil propensities were predicted as high propensity heptad repeats in Coils (http:// embnet.vital-it.ch/software/COILS_form.html) () using weighted and unweighted search algorithms. Identified coiled-coil regions were further validated based on the occurrence of alpha-helical content (450% helical) using the HNN server (http://npsa-pbil.ibcp.fr/cgi-bin/np sa_automat.pl?page/NPSA/npsa_hnn.html).
RESULTSIn an effort to functionally annotate uncharacterized members of the core centrosome as well as accessory factors, we surveyed the protein architecture of previously identified and putative centrosomal proteins (). We noted that proteins such as C14orf166/CGI-99 and FAM98B bear homology by sequence to the N-terminus of kinetochore protein NDC80. High probability sequence similarities between, e.g. the N-terminus of human FAM98B (aa 9128) with the N-terminus of NDC80 are apparent by HMM-based profile-to-profile searches using either local or global search algorithms in HHpred (local/ global probabilities 92.46/90.60 and E-values 0.049/0.017) (). Interestingly, as with NDC80, the C-terminus of human FAM98B (231) contains disparate arrays of heptad repeats () as predicted by weighted and unweighted matrices in Coils (), indicating that these proteins are members of a common evolutionary family of coiled-coil proteins. To identify additional NDC80 paralog candidates, we first searched the PFAM database in HHpred using a HMM based on five reiterative PSI-BLAST searches initiated with the NN CH domain of human NDC80 (aa 98195). This search identified the DUF2465 domain (PFAM entry PF10239) of the FAM98 protein family as the highest scoring match (probability 95.14, E  0.018), suggesting that FAM98 (AC) carry a NN CH domain. The alignment of DUF2465 was merged with the NDC80 alignment to initiate a subsequent HMMHMM searchhydrophobicity is conserved, which participate in the alpha-helices of the CH fold, are blue and designated h in the consensus sequence shown below the alignment. Aromatic residues are abbreviated a. Hydrophobic (h, blue), histidine/tyrosine (turquoise), acidic (violet), glycine (brown), proline (light green) and serine/threonine (dark green). Regions corresponding to alpha helices, predicted by HHpred and based on NDC80, are shown above the alignment (see also Supplementary). For accession numbers, see Supplementaryagainst the PFAM database. We repeated this procedure once more, totalling three iterative HMMHMM searches, to compile all the matched alignments that produced only high probability scores (495). The resulting MSA was used to kick-start HMM HMM searches in the PFAM database directed specifically against human proteins (). We thus identified 10 human proteins with high probability homology to the NDC80 N-terminus (Figs 1, 2 and Supplementary). Each protein was validated by reciprocal HMMHMM searches for the occurrence of a conserved NNCH domain. In each instance, the minimal N-terminal portion showing sequence homology to NDC80 was extracted and used as a query in HHpred. We confirmed the presence of the NNCH domain in all 10 identified proteins with probability values 495, suggesting genuine homology to the NNCH domain of NDC80. Alignmentbased secondary structure predictions using the Ali2D program (http://toolkit.tuebingen.mpg.de/ali2d) supported these findings (Supplementary). Further, we could predict an N-terminal tertiary-structure model of each protein NNCH domain that was compatible with the known 3D structure of the NDC80 N-terminus (Supplementary) (). Structural threading using MODELLER () confirmed human NDC80 (2IGP) as the best, and statistically significant match in a search in the PDB database for similar tertiary structures (detailed list of all PDB entries found is available upon request). To examine the NNCH proteins for the co-occurrence of coiled-coil conformations, the C-terminal portion of each protein candidate was first probed for the presence of heptad repeats in Coils () and subsequently analyzed in HNN for high alpha-helical content coinciding with heptad repeat tendency. Interestingly, all newly identified NNCH domain-containing proteins were predicted to harbor C-termini consisting of long alpha-helical matrices exhibiting a high-degree coiled-coil propensity (), suggesting that all the NNCH protein derivatives structurally resemble NDC80. Although the N-terminal domain of NDC80 was shown to adopt a CH domain fold (), our searches failed to detect any high-scoring matches to canonical CH domaincontaining proteins such as EB1 (), consistent with previous sequence-based analyses of CH domain-containing proteins (). Likewise, a HMMHMM search seeded with the CH domain of human EB1 () failed to recover significant matches to any of the newly identified NNCH domain-bearing protein profiles in PFAM, indicating that the NNCH domain represents a discrete branch of the CH domain protein family. In support of this, a comparative analysis of the history and evolution of the NNCH family members, as assessed by pair-wise BLAST searches against representative proteomes, revealed that all NNCH family members likely evolved from a precursor of yeast NDC80 and NUF2 (Supplementary). The NDC80 and NUF2 proteins thus share common ancestry with all NNCH domain derivatives. Based on the homology of NNCH proteins to components of the yeast NDC80NUF2 kinetochore complex, we propose that these proteins, including the ciliary IFTB proteins identified in this survey, evolved, at least partly, as a specialized form of the kinetochore Ndc80p complex.
LRNFTEMMRALGYPR-HISMENFRTPN-FGLVSEVLLWLVKRYEP-QTDI-PPDVDTEQDRVFF CCDC22 3-EADRILIHSLRQAGTAVP-PDVQTLRAFT-TELVVEAVVRCLRVINPAVG-SGL-SPLLPLAMSARFR IFT81 2-SDQIKFIMDSLNKEPFRKN-YNLITFDSLEP-MQLLQVLSDVLAEIDPKQL-VDIREEMPEQTAKRMLS CCDC93 28-TEILELLVAAGY-FRARIKGLSPFD-KVVGGMTWCITTCNFDVDV-DLLFQENSTIGQKIALSEKI C14ORF166 5-KLTALDYHNPAGFNC-KDETEFRNFI-VWLEDQKIRHYKIEDR-GNLRN-IHSSDWPKFF NUF2 16-VAEIVIHIRNKILTGADGK-NLTKNDLYPNPKPEVLHMIYMRALQIVYGIRLEHFYMMP-VNSEVMYPHLMEGFLPF Consensus-h-h-a-h-hh-hh-hFAM98B 85 SGFLKEMAC-PYSVL-ISGDIKDRLKKKED-CLKLLLFLSTELQASQILQNKFAM98A 80 SGLLGEMNC-PYLSL-TSGDVTKRLLIQKN-CLLLLTYLISELEAARMLCVNAP-PKKAQEGG FAM98C 84 GSLLRELHC-PDRAL-CGGDGAAALREPGA-GLRLLRFLCSELQATRLLCLRIFT57 116 SNILSELRS-FGRTA-DFPPSKLKSGYGEH-VCYVLDCFAEEALKYNDC80 119 FTFLYGFLC-PSYEL-PDTKFEEEVPRIFKDLGYPFALSKSSMYTVGAPHTWPHIVAALVWLIDCIKIHTAMKESSPLFDDGQPWGE CLUAP1 66 IKAIAQFMA-TKAHI-KLNTKKLYQADG-YA-VKELLCCDC22 67 LAMSLAQAC-MDLGY-PLELGYQNFLYPSEPD-LRDLLLFLAERLIFT81 68 LLGILKYKP-SGNAT-DMSTFRQGLVIGSKPV-IYPVLHWLLQRTNELKKRCCDC93 91 VSVLPRMKC-PHQLE-PHQIQGMDFIH-IFPVVQWLVKRAIETKEEMGDYC14ORF166 61 EKYLRDVNC-PF-KIQD-RQEAIDWLLGLAVRLENUF2 86 SNLVTHLDS-FLPICRVN-DFETADILCPKAKR-TSRFLSGIINFIHFREACRETY-MEFLWQYK Consensus-hh-h-h-hh-h-h
CH domain CH domain
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
K.B.Schou et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS For many coiled-coil proteins such as MAPs, components of centrosomes and the IFTB complex of cilia, evolutionary annotation based on comparative analysis has been hampered by sequence redundancy of coiled coils and the lack of a conserved reference domain. This is in contrast, for example, to many IFTA proteins, which display homology to vesicle coating and nuclear pore complex proteins (Jekely and Arendt, 2006; van Dam et al., 2013). Here, using profile-to-profile searches, we show that three IFTB proteins and several poorly characterized human proteins belong to a family of bimodular NNCH and coiled-coil proteins that appears to share common ancestry with yeast NDC80. The NNCH domains were identified as a novel branch of the CH domain. Structure analysis of NDC80 revealed that the NDC80 N-terminus adopts a CH domain fold (Ciferri et al., 2008; Wei et al., 2007). Indeed, fold searches seeded with NNCH profiles against the PDB database recovered significant hits to the solved NDC80 structure as well as to canonical CH domains confirming that the NNCH and CH domain adopt the same tertiary structure. Several of the identified NNCH proteins associate with microtubule-based structures, namely kinetochores/spindle microtubules, centrosomes and cilia. First, NDC80 and NUF2 bind directly to microtubules at the outer kinetochore (Tooley and Stukenberg, 2011) and a FAM98B ortholog was identified as a meiotic MAP in Xenopus (Gache et al., 2010). Second, CCDC93 and C14orf166 co-fractionate or interact with centrosome proteins (Howng et al., 2004; Jakobsen et al., 2011). Third, IFT81, IFT57 and Cluap1 are components of the IFTB complex in flagella of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (Cole et al., 1998) and other organisms (Pedersen and Rosenbaum, 2008), and are required for ciliogenesis (Botilde et al., 2013; Li and Sun, 2011; Pasek et al., 2012; Perkins et al., 1986; Tsujikawa and Malicki, 2004). Since the NNCH NN-CH Coiled-coil Coiled-coil NN-CH Coiled-coil NN-CH NN-CH Coiled-coil NN-CH Coiled-coil Coiled-coil NN-CH Coiled-coil NN-CH CC NN-CH CC NN-CH Fig. 2. Schematic domain organization of the identified NNCH proteins. UniProt identifiers are indicated. CC, coiled-coil region. FAM98B* designates all three FAM98 isoforms in humans
Evolution of ciliary IFT complex B proteins at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from domains of the NDC80NUF2 dimer directly bind to kinetochore microtubules (Ciferri et al., 2008; Wei et al., 2007), it is likely that the other NNCH family members similarly interact directly with microtubules, although association with other known CH domain interactors, such as F-actin, cannot be ruled out (Sjoblom et al., 2008). This has interesting implications for the three IFTB proteins IFT57, IFT81 and Cluap1. IFT is required for the assembly and maintenance of virtually all eukaryotic cilia and flagella (Pedersen and Rosenbaum, 2008) and consists of large IFT protein complexes that fractionate as two biochemically distinct IFT A and IFTB sub-complexes. These are transported anterogradely and retrogradely along the ciliary axoneme, together with associated ciliary cargo proteins/building blocks, by kinesin-2 and cytoplasmic dynein-2 motors, respectively (Pedersen and Rosenbaum, 2008). In contrast to IFTA proteins the origin of the majority of the IFTB polypeptides is unknown (van Dam et al., 2013). Our finding that IFT81, IFT7 and Cluap1 share overall protein architecture with NDC80 and NUF2 indicates that they may have microtubule binding properties. Indeed, while this article was in review, an elegant study was published demonstrating that the amino terminus of IFT81 contains an NDC80-like CH domain (PDB entry 4LVP) that directly binds tubulin (Bhogaraju et al., 2013). Moreover, IFT81 was found to interact directly with IFT74 (Bhogaraju et al., 2013; Lucker et al., 2005), forming a dimeric complex that binds purified tubulin and microtubules with high affinity (Bhogaraju et al., 2013). Another recent study also indicated the presence of a CH domain in the Nterminus of IFT57 and IFT81 (Taschner et al., 2012), but a phylogenetic relationship with NDC80, NUF2 and other NNCH domain proteins was not reported. Collectively, we identified a novel protein family of 11 proteins in the human proteome that contain a novel CH domain, which we have named the NNCH domain. The conserved bimodular protein composition of the NNCH members, comprising a NNCH domain and a coiled-coil region, and the association of these members with the kinetochore, centrosome and cilia suggest that the novel NNCH protein family members function in various microtubule-associated activities. Funding: Lundbeck Foundation; Novo Nordisk Foundation; Danish Council for Independent Research, Natural Sciences [grant number 10-085373]; Nordforsk. Conflict of Interest: none declared
