Motivation: Many studies have shown that epigenetic changes, such as altered DNA methylation and histone modifications, are linked to estrogen receptor (ER)-positive tumors and disease prognoses. Several recent studies have applied high-throughput technologies such as ChIP-seq and MBD-seq to interrogate the altered architec-tures of ER regulation in tamoxifen (Tam)-resistant breast cancer cells. However, the details of combinatorial epigenetic regulation of ER target genes in breast cancers with acquired Tam resistance have not yet been fully examined. Results: We developed a computational approach to identify and analyze epigenetic patterns associated with Tam resistance in the MCF7-T cell line as opposed to the Tam-sensitive MCF7 cell line, with the goal of understanding the underlying mechanisms of epigen-etic regulatory influence on resistance to Tam treatment in breast cancer. In this study, we used ChIP-seq of ER, RNA polymerase II, three histone modifications and MBD-seq data of DNA methylation in MCF7 and MCF7-T cells to train hidden Markov models (HMMs). We applied the Bayesian information criterion to determine that a 20-state HMM was best, which was reduced to a 14-state HMM with a Bayesian information criterion score of 1.21291 Â 10 7. We further identified four classes of biologically meaningful states in this breast cancer cell model system, and a set of ER combinatorial epigenetic regulated target genes. The correlated gene expression level and gene ontology analyses showed that different gene ontology terms were enriched with Tam-resistant versus sensitive breast cancer cells. Our study illustrates the applicability of HMM-based analysis of genome-wide high-throughput genomic data to study epigenetic influences on E2/ER regulation in breast cancer.
INTRODUCTIONThe dysfunction of estrogen receptor (ER), an estrogen (E2)inducible transcription factor, accounts for the growth of $70% of breast tumors (). Treatment with tamoxifen (Tam), an estrogen antagonist and a selective ER modulator, has been successful; however, $25% of the patients that respond to antihormonal therapy relapse within 10 years (). Many studies have shown that epigenetic changes, such as altered DNA methylation and histone modifications, are linked to ER-positive tumors and prognoses of the disease (). Other recent studies, including ours (), have applied high-throughput technologies such as chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) and methyl binding domain sequencing (MBD-seq) to interrogate the altered architectures of ER regulation in Tam-resistant cells. However, the details of combinatorial epigenetic regulation of ER target genes in breast cancers with acquired Tam resistance have not yet been fully examined. We sought to develop a computational approach to identify and analyze these epigenetic patterns to gain insight into the epigenetic changes associated with Tam resistance in the MCF7-T cell line compared with the Tam-sensitive MCF7 cell line, and ultimately to understand the underlying mechanisms of epigenetic regulatory influence on Tam resistance in breast cancer. The hidden Markov model (HMM), originally developed for computerized speech recognition, is a widely used statistical method for computational modeling and analysis of various biological questions (). The basic principle of a Markov model is that it is a form of a Markov chain (a type of stochastic finite-state machine) in which each state has been extended with a set of outputs and probabilities to emit each output. In an HMM, the state sequence giving rise to the outputs is not visible, but the output sequence is known. Ernst et al. used HMMs to find epigenetic states in several human cell types on the basis of epigenetic data ().used HMMs to identify differential histone modification sites between two ChIP-seq samples. Given these successful applications of HMMs, we applied the HMM to study epigenetic mechanisms underlying Tam resistance. In this study, we used ChIP-seq of ER, RNA polymerase II (PolII), three histone modification marks and MBD-seq data of DNA methylation in both MCF7 and MCF7-T cells to train a first-order HMM. These datasets were used because they were the only datasets available in both MCF7 and MCF7-T at the time this study was begun. We then applied the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) () to determine a best number of combinatorial epigenetic states. We further identified a set of ER-regulated combinatorial epigenetic states, including promoter states and several levels of transcription, by their probability of emitting ER/E2. Finally, gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed through the web-based tool DAVID on the genes in each list to find functional enrichments (, b) (). *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
METHODS
PreprocessingEach chromosome in the entire genome (hg18) was divided into 1000-bp bins with the exception of chrY (as MCF7 and MCF7-T are female-derived cell lines) and chrM (no histones). The 1000-bp size was decided because the intent of this study is to identify combinatorial regulatory patterns, not necessarily to replicate the annotation scheme developed by Ernst et al. Additionally, this study uses fewer datasets than the Ernst studies, potentially increasing the effect of bias or spurious reads in one dataset on the output sequence used for HMM training. A total of 1000 bp was used to mitigate possible spurious reads. For each dataset, the unique matched reads (UMRs) (Supplementary) were assigned to a bin according to their 5 0 end. We determined the mark status for each bin for each of eight datasets as either '0' for non-mark or '1' for mark if the number of reads in the bin is sufficient such that P510 4 under the Poisson distribution, as described by). An alphabet of 256 (2 8 ) observation symbols was constructed by enumerating each possible combination of marks including no marks. This enumeration was performed by mapping each mark to a bit in an integer value (Supplementary), and for each possible combination of marks, calculating the logical odds ratio of the bits of these marks. For example, observation 137 (0b10001001) corresponds to the presence of DNA methylation (128  0b10000000), H3K4me2 (8  0b00001000) and ER/E2 (1  0b00000001), and the absence of all other marks. Each bin was assigned an observation according to the combination of marks in the bin as calculated according to the aforementioned cutoff. This was done for both cell lines to produce the HMM training sequences, for a total of 46 sequences and 6 045 312 bins.
HMM trainingFor each number of states from 9 to 24, five first-order HMMs were randomly initialized and learned over all observation sequences of both cell lines. The HMMs were learned over the aforementioned alphabet of 256 symbols corresponding to each possible combination of marks. Each HMM was trained for 300 iterations to ensure that they approach convergence (Supplementary) using the BaumWelch algorithm (), with a minimum of 10 6 enforced for all transition, emission and start probabilities (see Supplementary Material, Minimum probability enforcement). The BIC scores of each HMM were compared, and the lowest was of the third 20-state HMM, 1.21246  10 7. This HMM was chosen as the initial HMM (Supplementary). As States 3, 9, 10, 11, 13 and 14 were called in 5350 bins in either cell line (Supplementary) by the Viterbi decoding algorithm (run over the HMM training observation sequences) (), these states were removed from the model, and the transition probabilities of the remaining states to them were equally divided and added to their transition probabilities to the other remaining states (Supplementary). This was done to simplify the HMM and to maximize the descriptive power of its states. The resulting 14-state HMM (BIC  1.22497  10 7 ) was trained for a further 100 iterations to produce the final 14-state HMM, with a BIC score of 1.21291  10 7 (). The log-likelihood of this HMM after each training iteration was calculated to show that our BaumWelch implementation truly improves the goodness-of-fit of the HMM with each iteration, and that 100 iterations were sufficient for this HMM to approach convergence (Supplementary). To show that this state reduction procedure produced a better fitting 14-state HMM than 14-state HMM training would have alone, 45 additional 14-state HMMs were randomly generated and trained for 300 iterations (Supplementary), and the significance of the BIC score of the model with state reduction was calculated versus all 50 HMMs initially trained with 14 states (P50.001, Student's t-test).
Combinatorial epigenetic patternsAfter the final 14-state HMM was learned, the Viterbi decoding algorithm was used to determine the most likely states of each bin in MCF7 and MCF7-T, using the same observation sequences used for HMM training (Supplementary). The distributions of the states in each bin were then compared with several other datasets by listing the bins occupied by a state for each state in both cell lines. Each list of bins for each state was first subjected to gene annotation, by calculating the distance of each bin to the nearest gene and assigning a label to the bin based on it (see Supplementary Material, Gene annotation) (). Next, the percentage of bins with each state within 2 kb of a transcription start site (TSS) region was computed to detect promoter-associated states. Similarly, the percentage of bins with each state within a gene (5 0 end to 3 0 end) was computed to detect transcribed-associated states. The percentage of bins with each state within RepeatMasker regions was calculated to find states corresponding to repetitive DNA (). Non-coding RNA regions (n  2975) were determined by filtering a set of hg19 genes with a refSeq ID beginning with 'NR' (n  2979), then using LiftOver to convert their positions to hg18 coordinates (). The average percent of GC content in bins with each state was calculated by first dividing the gc5base file into 1000bp bins analogous to those used for HMM training to map genome-wide average GC content, and averaging the GC content in each bin with each state (). Bins not covered by the gc5base file were excluded from the calculation of the average. To correlate HMM states with actual epigenetic marks, the proper mark combination was first selected, as described earlier [by mapping each mark to a bit in an integer value, see Supplementary Tables S5S7, column Output(s)]. These mark combinations were enforced to exclude spurious bins, by filtering for those bins that actually have the marks that would be expected from that states' emission probabilities and interpretations. The bins containing the desired state were intersected with the bins containing the desired mark with BEDTools' intersectBed (). The bins were then filtered according to their region (for example, only the bins in State 8 within a 5_TSS region were selected). The reported expression level of each gene is that of the splice variant with the highest expression level (see Supplementary Material, Microarray data).
Gene expression and GO analysisThe average microarray expression in bins with each state was computed similarly to the average GC content, using the expression of the highest-expressed splice variant of each gene (). GO analysis of the genes in each list in each cell line was performed using DAVID (). The annotations from SP_PIR_KEYWORDS, GOTERM_BP_3 (biological process) and GOTERM_MF_3 (molecular function) were used.
RESULTS
Determination of combinatorial epigenetic patternsWe applied an HMM to de novo identification of combinatorial epigenetic patterns for ER regulation in both MCF7 and MCF7-T cells. In addition to the 'omics data publicly available, ChIP-seq of H3K27me3, H3K4me2, PolII and ER, the latter two performed separately in both estrogen-treated (ER/E2 and PolII/E2) and untreated cells (ER/control and PolII/control), and MBD-seq for DNA methylation (), we have performed ChIP-seq on histone H3 lysine 9 dimethylation (H3K9me2) in both MCF7 and MCF7-T (see Supplementary Material, ChIP-seq for H3K9me2). This resulted in a total of $108 million UMRs in MCF7 and $111 million UMRs in MCF7-T for all eight datasets (Supplementary). A 14-state HMM (BIC  1.21291  10 7 ) was trained over all chromosomes except chrY in both cell lines, with each combination of epigenetic marks as outputs (). The optimal state sequence was then determined for both cell lines with this HMM (Supplementary). Particularly by its emission probabilities (), our model revealed spatial relationships between epigenetic marks with ER/E2 binding, and we were able to infer specific types of functional elements associated with a given combinatorial epigenetic pattern, such as promoter, enhancer, transcribed, heterochromatin and mapping bias/copy number variation. The comparison between the model's output probabilities and the actual output frequencies for each output under each state in each bin yielded R 2  0.9898 in MCF7 and R 2  0.9889 in MCF7-T (Pearson correlation, Supplementary Figs S5B and S6).
Interpretation of combinatorial epigenetic patternsNext, we integrated other genomic information with our HMM training results to propose potential biological interpretations of each of the detected combinatorial epigenetic patterns () (see Supplementary Material, Additional data sources). We were able to identify four classes of biologically meaningful states in this breast cancer cell model system.
Promoter states States 8 and 11were determined to correspond to promoter regions, primarily because 58.06 and 53.76%, respectively, of the bins with States 8 and 11 were within AE2 kb of a TSS region. This is further supported by their high emission probabilities for PolII and H3K4me2. Additionally, both States 8 and 11 had relatively high GC content (53.80 and 50.50%, respectively), as expected of the majority of promoters (). State 8 was classified as active promoter because of the high average microarray expression value of genes associated with it (9.32). State 11 was similarly classified as weak promoter because of its lower (compared with State 8) but still relatively high average expression value (7.99). In addition, State 11 has a probability of 0.209 to transition to State 3 (low transcribed and hypomethylated), and State 8 has a probability of 0.095 to transition to State 9 (active transcribed) and a probability of 0.114 to transition to State 1 (low transcribed and hypermethylated). These promoter to transcribed transition probabilities further support the assignment of States 8 and 11 as promoters, especially given that these probabilities would be lowered by the presence of genes on the  strand (where the promoter region is encountered last when reading the  strand from the 5 0 to 3 0 direction). It is also possible that State 8 is at least partially influenced by ER, as it has a relatively high emission probability for ER/ E2 (0.414); however, the average microarray expression values differ little with E2 treatment, and they differ by an average of 0.311 between MCF7 and MCF7-T.
Transcribed statesStates 1, 2, 3, 4 and 9 were determined to correspond to transcribed regions, primarily because the percentages of their bins within transcribed regions were the highest among the states with the exception of the promoter States 8 and 11 (57.30, 52.73, 47.96, 74.79 and 67.10% for States 1, 2, 3, 4 and 9, respectively). In addition, high proportionsincreased somewhat with E2 treatment, and State 1 has a 0.114 probability to emit ER/E2 and a 0.070 probability to emit ER/control. E2 may at least partially activate some of these regions of the genome., note the bands at State 5 and 14, output 160). The corresponding probabilities for State 5 are 0.5975, 0.1072, 0.1431 and 0.0234. In sum, whenever State 14 emits H3K27me3 or methylation, it emits both 39.21% of the time, versus 8.55% for State 5. Therefore, State 14 was classified as double repressed and State 5 as merely weakly repressed. State 12 was classified as polycomb repressed because of its very low average expression value (5.21) and its high probability for H3K27me3 (0.819), which is commonly associated with polycomb repression ().
Repressed states
Other states
Identification of ER combinatorial epigenetic regulated genesOur goal is to uncover combinatorial epigenetic influence on ER regulated genes in MCF7 versus MCF7-T cells. A total of 1 219 650 bins (40.35% of all bins) were in a different state between MCF7 and MCF7-T (Supplementary). Because of the number of different bins, we could not directly compare the state sequences between the cell lines. We believe that this is due in part to noise in the original ChIP data. Thus, we selected States 1, 7, 8, 9 and 14 for further analysis, as they have a probability40.1 of emitting ER with E2 treatment in at least one cell line (we select these E2-associated states, as Tam is an E2 antagonist). State 1 was correlated with DNA methylation (see Section 2, Supplementary) and filtered for intragenic bins (as it was assigned as low transcribed and hypermethylated) (v). All bins in State 7 were used for the analysis. State 8 was correlated with DNA methylation, H3K4me2, ER/E2, ER/ control, PolII/E2 and PolII/control, and filtered for TSS bins (as it was assigned as active promoter). State 9 was correlated with DNA methylation, ER/E2, PolII/E2 and PolII/control, and filtered for intragenic bins (as it was assigned as highly transcribed). State 14 was correlated with DNA methylation, H3K27me3, H3K9me2, ER/E2 and ER/control. These results support the assignment of State 7 as mapping bias/CNV. A total of 132 genes were shared by both the MCF7 and MCF7-T lists. This state was distributed consistently (Pearson R 2  0.898) between the cell lines as expected (as the reference sequence used was the same for all ChIP alignments) (Supplementary), and the high degree of overlap (91.0% of the MCF7 genes and 67.7% of the MCF7-T genes) observed here is consistent with this conclusion. A total of 2154 genes were found to have methylated intragenic bins in State 1 with ER/E2 binding and no ER/control binding in MCF7, while 339 genes were similarly found in MCF7-T (). Additionally, the average expression level with E2 treatment of the MCF7-T genes was higher (8.0940 in MCF7-T versus 7.2170 in MCF7, P56  10 9 , Benjamini57  10 8 and two-tailed Welch's t-test) (). A total of 213 of these genes were found (and included) in both lists. The average expression level of the genes in the MCF7 list in E2-treated MCF7-T is 7.1893 (SD  2.4311), and the average expression level of the genes in the MCF7-T list in E2-treated MCF7 is 7.9295 (SD  2.4545) (P55  10 7 and Benjamini55  10 6 of significant expression difference between them). ER/E2 binding without ER/control binding is clearly more common in MCF7 than MCF7-T, as evident with the much higher number of genes found in MCF7, as well as theactual emission frequencies of ER/E2 in MCF7-T (Supplementary). MCF7-T is apparently able to maintain similar expression levels of these genes even without ER/E2 binding. The genes in the MCF7-T list appear to simply be more active than the other genes discussed here (Supplementary). This may be related to the ER/E2 binding observed in both cell lines. Also, the MCF7 gene list was strongly enriched for the GO term 'regulation of cell communication' (P510 10 and Benjamini 510 7 ). The number of genes with bins in State 8 and 9 dropped significantly in MCF7-T compared with MCF7, as was observed with State 1. The expression levels of the genes in the State 8 lists changed little between MCF7 and MCF7-T, or with and without E2 treatment. The State 9 MCF7-T gene lists had higher expression levels than MCF7 (P50.02 and Benjamini 50.04 in all cases). All four of the States 8 and 9 MCF7-T gene lists were enriched with the GO term 'purine nucleotide binding', but the P-values for many GO terms were relatively high (Supplementary), in some cases failing to reach statistical significance with Benjamini correction (Supplementary). This is most likely because of the relatively small size of these gene lists, as well as the fact that they are not necessarily functionally related to each other, as they were selected on the basis of the combinatory epigenetic patterns identified by the HMM. The relatively large size of the MCF7 gene lists also diminished the significance of the GO terms found in them, as well as their lack of guaranteed functional relation. We chose to look at genes with bins in State 14 containing H3K27me3, DNA methylation, H3K9me2 and ER binding (both with and without E2). Most notably, the average expression levels of the MCF7-T genes were significantly elevated with and without E2 treatment (P50.02 and Benjamini50.04 in both cases) (Supplementary Tables S6S7). Although few genes were found in either cell line (and only 11 genes are shared between them), these genes are clearly little affected by E2 treatment in both cell lines, independent of the Tam resistance of MCF7-T (P40.93 in both cases, as would be expected given this). The significance of the GO terms was low, probably because of the small size of the gene lists (Supplementary).
DISCUSSIONUsing a HMM, we have identified states reflecting combinatorial epigenetic patterns for ER regulated target genes in MCF7 and MCF7-T. We have interpreted each of the states to determine their biological significance. With our results, we have determined lists of genes affected by ER binding with E2 in both MCF7 and MCF7-T, considering a variety of other epigenetic effects. Although these results do not conclusively elucidate the epigenetic mechanisms underlying Tam resistance, they nonetheless illustrate the applicability of HMM-based analysis of genome-wide high-throughput genomic data to study epigenetic influence on E2/ER regulation in breast cancer. Although the application of GO analysis did not yield statistically significant terms for every gene list, the results of this study nonetheless suggest several possible future directions. For instance, this study was confined to HMM analysis and gene listing. Perhaps, application of gene network analysis could reveal key genes responsible for the regulation of the genes in the lists formulated by this study. The lists of genes may provide a starting point for further analyses, such as microarray assays of tumor samples focusing on these genes. The methods used here should be applicable in cases other than Tam resistance in MCF7-T, using other genome-wide epigenetic datasets than those used in this study. The HMM training and identification of combinatorial regulated genes is extensible to more than two cell lines [O(n) in HMM training time and space, where n  number of cell lines, but this is parallelizable with a sufficient number of compute cores]. For example, this can be used to interrogate combinatorial epigenetic regulation patterns in multiple types of cancer, or multiple patient samples with the same type of cancer. In the HMM implementation used in this study, each possible combination of marks is enumerated as a possible output of the HMM. This permits more straightforward analysis of combinatorial marks (for example, whether marks X and Y are found together more often or not), which is critical to this study. Ernst et al. used a multivariate HMM approach, in which the output probabilities of each mark are considered independently of each other (). Although multiple marks are allowed in each bin with this model, it does not directly model the frequency with which marks co-occur (which would be calculated after Viterbi decoding). For example, consider a toy HMM with two marks and one state, learned over a sequence of two bins. If Bin 1 has Mark 1 and Bin 2 has Mark 2, the state in both an Ernst HMM and one of our HMMs would have an emission probability of 50% for each mark. However, if Bin 1 has both Marks 1 and 2, and Bin 2 has no marks, the Ernst HMM would be the same, and our HMM would have an emission probability of 100% for both marks and 0% for each mark alone. Future studies could greatly benefit from the incorporation of additional data in the HMM. Although many MCF7 datasets are available, datasets were available for only the eight epigenetic marks used in this study in both MCF7 and MCF7-T at the time this study was begun (a dataset must be available in all cell lines studied to be usable in the HMM). Histone acetylation data could broaden the context of the HMM analysis by providing histone epigenetic data separate from the methylations analyzed in this study. For example, H3K27ac data could support the H3K4me2 data and possibly allow the detection of enhancers enriched in both marks (), as well as better differentiation between active promoter and weak promoter states. H3K9me3 data may permit differentiation between constitutive and facultative heterochromatin. H3K36me3 data could allow differentiation between exons and introns. ChIP-seq of ER and PolII with Tam and E2 treatment would allow more direct investigation of Tam resistance. The potential utility of further next-generation sequencing (NGS) data is most powerfully demonstrated by the scope of the work of), in which the authors were able to define 51 HMM states by using datasets of 18 acetylations, 20 methylations and 3 other marks. Though it would undoubtedly be impractical with current technology to perform 41 NGS experiments each in two cell lines, it is clear that the addition of other carefully selected datasets can improve the discriminatory power of HMM-based methods such as those used by Ernst et al. and this study. Additionally, the usage of additional datasets can reduce the impact of biases in individual datasets produced by differing experimental protocols, as the contribution of each dataset to the observation sequences used for HMM training is reduced. This may allow the state sequences in each cell line to be directly compared instead of comparing state-associated genes, as well as reduction of the 1000-bp bin size for higher resolution. The addition of further NGS datasets may be complicated by the increased computational and memory requirements potentially necessitated by additional data. Additional datasets may require additional states to be included in HMMs. As the computational and memory costs of our implementation of the BaumWelch algorithm (in particular, the gamma values) grow according to O(nb 2 ), where n  number of bins and b  number of states, this would become prohibitive with increasing numbers of states. For example, the gamma values for 20 states, 1000-bp bins and two cell lines with long double precision (16 bytes with GCC on the x64 architecture) would require about 36 GB of memory (3022656  2  16  20  20 bytes). With 30 states, this increases to $81 GB. Although not all of this must be allocated at once (as forwardbackward is performed separately on each chromosome to allow it to be parallelized), this would nonetheless require a computer with a great deal of available memory. However, given the historical decrease of the cost of memory, this may become less of an issue in the future. In addition, there are many subjective parameters in this study. For example, 1000-bp bins were used, primarily to mitigate ChIP-seq noise. Reducing the bin size can potentially increase the resolution of the state assignments; however, it would increase the sensitivity of state assignment to ChIP-seq noise. The cutoff of P510 4 for the number of reads in a bin required to call that mark present was selected solely because of its successful use in previous work (). This cutoff may potentially be overly strict or overly permissive in this study. We chose to select states with at least a 0.1 probability of emitting ER/E2 for further analysis. Although we used this threshold to choose states with some relation to ER binding, it is admittedly arbitrary. Perhaps a statistical method could be devised to select states for gene identification in future work. Additional data files are available at http://motif.bmi.ohiostate.edu/ERHMM.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Regulation, pathways and systems biology at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
R.Bonneville and V.X.Jin at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
