Motivation: Kinesin is a smart motor protein that steps processively forward and backward along microtubules (MTs). The mechanical kinetics of kinesin affecting its stepping behavior is not fully understood. Here, we propose a mathematical model to study the mechanical kinetics of forward and backward stepping of kinesin motor based on the four-state discrete stochastic model of the motor. Results: Results show that the probabilities of forward and backward stepping can be modeled using the mean probabilities of forward and backward kinetic transitions, respectively. We show that the backward stepping of kinesin motor starts when the probability of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) binding to the motor is much higher than that of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) binding. Furthermore, our results indicate that the backward stepping is related to both ATP hydrolysis and synthesis with rate limiting factor being ATP synthesis. Low rate of ATP synthesis under high backward loads above 10 pN is also suggested as a reason for the detachment of kinesin motor from MT in the kinetic state MTÁKinesinÁADPÁP i .
INTRODUCTIONKinesin-1, which will be referred to as kinesin hereafter, is a twoheaded motor protein that advances unidirectionally along a microtubule (MT) in discrete 8.2 nm steps () by walking in an asymmetric hand-over-hand fashion (). Kinesin can processively step forward and backward along an MT (), taking approximately 100 steps before detaching from the MT (). Experimental investigation of kinesin processivity has revealed that kinesin can undergo discrete steps in the presence of fuel, i.e. adenosine triphosphate (ATP), or in the absence of ATP, if external load is applied to the motor (). The significance of studying the mechanical kinetics underlying stepping of kinesin motor becomes apparent when considering the important roles the motor plays ranging from human diseases to synthetic nanotechnological applications and the development of novel active nanodevices. Molecular biology have revealed critical roles of kinesin motor in brain wiring and formation, neuronal survival, higher brain function and control of central nervous system (). It is also evident that the impairment of these functions of kinesin motor would contribute to neuronal disease pathogenesis, such as Alzheimer () and hereditary spastic paraplegia (), and other diseases such as cancer (). Kinesin stepping can also exert localized forces on nanostructures. This force can be exploited in nanorobotics (). Thus, engineers have commenced to invent synthetic nanodevices powered by kinesin motor that have unique potentials for use in medical diagnostics as well as engineering applications (). However, precise temporal and spatial control of such nanodevices is a challenging problem because of the stochastic motion, high complexity and small size of kinesin (). Even though the biophysical properties of kinesin motor have been widely studied, yet little is known about how the mechanical kinetics of kinesin affect its stepping behavior in the complex cellular environment (). Better understanding of the mechanical kinetics of kinesin stepping may translate into the development of molecular-targeted therapy for various human diseases () and precise motion control for artificial nanomotors with a wide variety of missions (). Mathematical modeling can be used to not only conceptualize and characterize kinesin behavior under different experimental settings, but also to make predictions for novel applications. One major theoretical approach for the modeling of kinesin motor motion is based on a multistate discrete stochastic model and the assumption that a single stepping of the motor involves passing through a sequence of discrete kinetic states connected by reversible transition rates (). Here, we mathematically model and analyze the mechanical kinetics of ATP-driven stepping behavior of kinesin motor over a discrete stochastic model at various forward (negative) and backward (positive) loads and ATP concentrations () at room temperature (forward and backward steps are taken toward the plus and minus ends of MT, respectively). We show that our mathematical model can be used to analyze, conceptualize and predict forward and backward stepping of kinesin motor in different situations.
RESULTS
Mathematical modelFor kinesin's processive movement, the simplest discrete stochastic model reported bysingle stepping cycle of the motor as passing through a sequence of four kinetic states where state (i) may transit to states (i  1) and (i  1) with forward and backward transition rates u i and w i , i  0, 1, 2, 3, respectively:In this discrete stochastic model, the intermediate kinetic states of the model are denoted as MK, MKATP, MKADPP i and MKADP, respectively, where MK designates MT-kinesin complex and ADPP i complex stands for the products of ATP hydrolysis: adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate (P i ). The d i represents the substep length for the center of force of kinesin along MT, where the total step size is d  (d 0  d 1  d 2  d 3 ). It has been shown that the rates of transitions between kinetic states are influenced by the temperature T () and external load F () as:). The parameter values of Equations (1) and (2) summarized inas well as the parameter values ofwhere k 0  1.8 mM 1 s 1 , k' 0  0.225 mM 1 s 1 and c 0  16 mM. The four-state discrete stochastic model asserts that forward stepping of kinesin motor is associated with ATP hydrolysis, whereas backward stepping could give rise to ATP synthesis. Our mathematical model indicates that the backward stepping of kinesin motor is related to both ATP hydrolysis and synthesis. In discussing backward stepping under high backward loads,stated that backward stepping is unlikely to result in ATP synthesis. However,remarked that the experimental observations in Carter and Cross (2005) rest on a misconception of the significance of dwell times before forward and backward stepping, and asserted that backward stepping could result in ATP synthesis. In addition,have shown that kinesin motor can step in the direction of the applied external load in the absence of ATP due to the strain on the kinesin head generated by the external load. Although the external load was able to trigger stepping in the absence of ATP, our work focuses on the ATP-driven stepping of kinesin motor and we study the effect ofand loads on the forward and backward stepping.is considered as a factor that affects the motor velocity at various loads () and thus, it affects the mean waiting time over kinetic states modeled in this work. In several recent works,is proposed as a mean for temporal control of synthetic nanodevices powered by kinesin motor (). Equations (1)and(2) show that the rates of forward and backward transitions change under different loads,and temperatures. We expect this rate change to change the probabilities of triggering these transitions, as well as the mean waiting time and the probability distribution over each kinetic states. We define the probabilities of forward and backward transitions in terms of the forward and backward transition rates as follows:where i  0, 1, 2, 3. Using the forward and backward transition rates, the mean waiting time in kinetic state s i (i  0, 1, 2, 3) can be defined as follows:Equation (7) defines the mean waiting time over the four kinetic states of kinesin motor during forward and backward stepping processes. We also define the stationary distribution of probability over each kinetic states of kinesin motor using the Hill's diagram method (), where a kinetic state change diagram is represented as a graph. Let G be a connected and directed graph with vertex set V(G) and edge set E(G), which represent kinetic states and transitions of the fourstate discrete stochastic model of kinesin motor, respectively. The edge weights of G correspond to transition rates of the discreteis a directional diagram of v} is the sum of products of all directional diagrams of vertex v; Q D  Q {e(m, n)j{m, n}2V(D)} is the product of edge weights of a directional diagram D; e(m, n) is the edge weight between vertices m and n; and P total is the sum of all P v. D is defined as a directional diagram of a vertex v if for any vertex x2V(D) and x 6  v, there is exactly one path from x to v. Collectively, the mathematical model of the mechanical kinetics of stepping behavior of kinesin motor protein shows the behavior of the motor changes in response to changes in the environment.
Analysis and discussionExperimental determinations reported the stall force of kinesin motor as a load ranging between 57.5 pN (). It was observed in Carter and Cross (2005) and Nishiyama et al. (2002) that (i) below stall, forward stepping of kinesin motor is dominant, (ii) at stall, the forward and backward stepping are equally likely and (iii) above stall, backward stepping is more frequent. To model the probabilities of forward and backward stepping of kinesin motor, we define the mean probabilities of forward and backward kinetic transitions as follows:where P(u i ) and P(w i ) are the probabilities of forward and backward transitions given by Equations (5) and (6).C shows the mean probabilities of forward and backward kinetic transitions at loads over the range 10 pN F 32 pN. We define load F  10 pN as the supremum forward load where at this point and beyond, Pu 40.99 and Pw 50.01. Similarly, the supremum backward load is defined at load F  32 pN where at this point and beyond, Pw 40.99 and Pu 50.01. FromC, we observe that with increasing load from forward to backward, the mean forward transition probability Pu decreases from almost 1 and intersects with the mean backward transition probability Pw at load between 78 pN, beyond which Pw becomes dominant. Therefore, the stall force (F stall ) of kinesin motor can be obtained by solving equation Pu  Pw at various. Our results show an almost constant andindependent stall force of F stall $ 7.3 pN, in agreement with the experimentally measured stall force between 57.5 pN (). These results are also consistent with the experimental observations that stall force of kinesin motor is independent of(). Our obtained F stall also agrees with the experimental results ofin which the probabilities of forward and backward stepping intersect at load around 78 pN.C also indicates that the mean probabilities of forward and backward transitions are almostindependent. This is consistent with the observedindependent but load dependent probabilities of forward and backward stepping by. It was reported that under forward loads of  15 pN F 2 pN only forward stepping was observed (), but with increasing backward loads the probability of observing backward stepping increases (). These experimental observations agreed with our results inC as over the forward load ranging from 10 pN F 2 pN, Pu 40.98 and Pw 50.02, whereas with increasing backward load the probability Pw increases. In addition, our calculations show that at loads over the range 0 F 8 pN and at various, Pu decreases from40.95 to $ 0.48 (see). This is in good agreement with the reported probabilities for forward stepping of 1 and 0.5 at the respective loads of F  0 pN and F  8 pN by. These agreements of our model with experimental findings indicate that the probabilities of forward and backward stepping of kinesin motor can be modeled well using the mean probabilities of forward and backward transitions defined in Equations (9) and(10), respectively. To further analyze the probabilities of forward and backward stepping of kinesin motor using kinetic transitions, we separately examine the probabilities of forward and backward kinetic transitions given by Equations (5) and (6) (seeF).F shows that with increasing load from high forward to backward loads at all, P(w 0 ) is the first backward probability function that intersects its corresponding forward probability function P(u 0 ). As only transition rates u F 0 and w F 0 aredependent, the minimum load at which P(u 0 ) intersects with P(w 0 ) at 5 mM is F  1.987 pN (). At 100 mM and 2 mM, the crossover load points of P(u 0 ) and P(w 0 ) are found to be at F  2.754 pN and F  4.034 pN, respectively (and F). These results indicate that at limitingthe probability of forward stepping is almost equal to 1 when the applied load is 51.987 pN because at loads F51.987 pN all the probabilities P(u i ) are greater than P(w i ), i  0, 1, 2, 3 (see). Similarly, at highalmost all steps are made in the forward direction when the applied load is 54.034 pN (see). This is in good agreement with the experimental observations of Nishiyama et al. (2002) that at loads lower than 4 pN the probability of forward stepping is almost equal to 1. In analyzing the probabilities ofindependent kinetic transitions, we explore their respective forward and backward kinetic transitions. Equation (1) is capable of showing that with increasing load from high forward to backward, u F 2 and u F 3 rates fall equally, as they have the same parameters (see), whereas they are lower than the decreasing u F 1 , indicating that the rate limiting step of the ATPase cycle is P i or ADP release in the presence of MTs (). However, w F 2 rises with a rate much smaller than w F 3 because w 0 2  1.6 s 1 is small compared with w 0 3  40 s 1 , meaning that P i binding rate is faster than the ATP synthesis rate, as reported by. Thus, according to Equation (5), due to low rate of ATP synthesis, i.e. w F 2 , the probability of P i release dominates the probability of ADP release, i.e. P(u 2 ) ! P(u 3 ), with a large difference. The low probability of ADP release agrees with the results of Hackney in) where they observed that the rate limiting factor of ATPase activity of kinesin motor is the ADP release. Also, as w F 3 is equal to w F 1 , P(u 1 ) falls between P(u 2 ) and P(u 3 ), indicating that P i release is at least as fast as ATP hydrolysis (). Similarly, the slow rise of w F 2 leads to lowering the rise of P(w 2 ) in comparison with P(w3), confirming that P i binding rate is faster than the ATP synthesis rate (). P(w 1 ) ! P(w 2 ) also indicates that the rate of ATP dissociation is higher than that of ATP synthesis, as w F 1 ! w F 2. The forward and backward stepping processes of kinesin motor start from kinetic state '0' by the forward and backward transitions rates u F 0 and w F 0 , respectively. As forward stepping of kinesin motor switch to backward at loads F4F stall , we examine P(u 0 ) and P(w 0 ) at F  F stall. Our calculations show that P(w 0 )40.97 and P(u 0 )50.03 at load range F4F stall. This result implies that the backward stepping of kinesin motor starts when the probability of ADP binding to the motor is much higher than that of ATP binding. The crossover load points of probabilities ofindependent kinetic transitions are also calculated at loads:(iii) F  17.102 pN for P(u 2 ) and P(w 2 ). However, we are not able to relate these crossover load points with the available experimental data because in current experiments,andare not separately measured (). The result obtained by separately examining the probabilities ofindependent kinetic transitions illustrates that the probability of ATP hydrolysis, P(u 1 ), is higher than that of ATP synthesis, P(w 2 ), at loads F stall 5F513 pN. At this load range,C indicates that the backward stepping of the kinesin motor is more probable than forward stepping. This result suggests that the backward stepping of kinesin motor is related to ATP hydrolysis as experimentally observed in. What gives rise to thedependent detachment of kinesin from MT? Equation (7) enables us to model the mean waiting time over the four kinetic states of kinesin motor during forward and backward stepping processes at differentand loads (). The results show that at 5 mM and low loads the mean waiting time in kinetic state '0' is greater than that of other states and peaks at a maximum of 0.1055 s at F  1.148 pN in comparison with a maximum of 0.0063 s at F  2 pN and 100 mM (seeand B). These results are consistent with experimental findings as at limiting, kinesin is paused at MK kinetic state, waiting for ATP binding (). It has been observed bythat at limitingthe probability of detachment of kinesin motor from MT in kinetic state '0' increases with the increase in the duration of this state, whereas at highthe probability of detachment from kinetic state '0' diminishes. Our results inand B indicate that the load points that maximize ts 0  are close to the crossover load points of P(u 0 ) and P(w 0 ) at 5 mM and 100 mM. Thus, these results indicate that at lowthe probability of detachment from kinetic state '0' is the highest when the probabilities of ATP and ADP binding to the motor are close.also shows that at high, the ATP binding rate rises, which leads to a reduction in the duration of kinetic state '0' and an increase in the durations of kinetic states '2' and '3'. This agrees with the findings ofthat at highthe probability of detachment from kinetic state '0' diminishes. Accordingly, our results suggest states '2' and '3' as the most probable kinetic states for the detachment of kinesin motor from MT at highand low loads, in agreement with the reported kinetic states for the detachment of kinesin from MT (). The detachment of kinesin motor from MT under high backwardloads has been observed more commonly at loads 410 pN, F detach 410 pN (). Therefore, our results inC show that at high backward loads 410 pN and allthe mean waiting time in kinetic states '2' and '3' is greater than that of other kinetic states. These results suggest states '2' and '3' as the first and second most probable kinetic states for the detachment of kinesin motor from MT at loads410 pN, in agreement with the reported kinetic states for the detachment of kinesin from MT (). To explain the higher durations of kinetic states '2' and '3', we analyze their respective forward and backward kinetic transitions. As we discussed in analyzing the probabilities ofEquation (7), the slow rise of ATP synthesis rate, i.e. w F 2 , is the reason that ts 2  attains its maximum at higher loads and at a time that is higher than that of ts 3  .C indicates F  10.946 pN as the load point that the mean waiting time in kinetic state '2' is the highest, ts 2   0.0046 s for all, due to the slow rise of w F 2. This implies that at high backward loads F4F stall the rate limiting factor of kinesin's backward stepping is ATP synthesis, w F 2. To compare the duration of kinetic state '2' with that of other kinetic states at load F  10.946 pN, we compute the ratio of ts 2   0.0046 s to ts i  using Equation (7), where i  0, 1, 3 (see).shows that the duration of kinetic state '2' is at least 63 times greater than that of kinetic state '0' at load F  10.946 pN and 5 mM. With increasing, the duration of kinetic state '0' decreases, which leads to a rise in the ratio of ts 2  to ts 0  . As the forward and backward kinetic transitions of states '1' and '3' areindependent, the ratio of the duration of kinetic state '2' to those of kinetic states '1' and '3' at load F  10.946 pN are constant, at 5.067 and 4.200, respectively (see). Hence, in accordance with the observations of, our results insuggest F  10.946 pN as the load point where the probability of detachment of kinesin motor from MT in kinetic state '2' is the highest. This is consistent with the common detachment load F detach 410 pN observed by). As we showed that at loads F stall 5F F detach the long mean waiting time in kinetic state '2' is due to the low transition rate w F 2 , this low rate of ATP synthesis can be proposed as a reason for the detachment of kinesin motor from MT in kinetic state '2'. Furthermore,C shows that at loads F410.946 pN the mean waiting time in state '2' decreases because of the fast rise of ATP synthesis rate, w F 2. Thus, based on these results, it can be deduced that with an increase in the rate of ATP synthesis at high backward loads F4F stall , the long duration of being in kinetic state '2' would decrease, which leads to the reduction of the detachment probability of kinesin motor from MT. The rise of ATP synthesis rate may lead to increase in the velocity of backward stepping of kinesin motor under high backward loads. These results and the results obtained by separately examining the probabilities ofindependent kinetic transitions (see) conclude that the backward stepping of kinesin motor is related to both ATP synthesis and hydrolysis. The duration of state '2' decreases to almost 0 at loads F ! 32 pN as inthis load range the rate of ATP synthesis, w F 2 , is at least 93 times greater than the rate of P i release, u F 2. Obviously, the duration of kinetic states in the forward and backward stepping processes of kinesin motor should agree with the stationary distribution of probability in these states. According to Equation (8), to compute the stationary distribution of probability over kinetic states, it is required to obtain the directional diagrams of the states. We derive the directional diagrams of four kinetic states using the definition of directional diagram given in the previous Section (see). For example,shows four directional diagrams of kinetic state '0', which result in four products and their sum as, 2, 3, are obtained fromD, respectively. P total is the sum of all 16 products obtained from four states:Therefore, we define the distribution of probability over kinetic states s i (i  0, 1, 2, 3) as follows:where u i and w i (i  0, 1, 2, 3) are computed by Equations(1) and(2). Using Equations (14)(17), the distribution of probability over the four kinetic states is plotted inand shows a similar pattern to the mean waiting time over these states in. As it can be seen from, at lowand low loads the distribution of probability in kinetic state '0' is the highest. This is consistent with the obtained results of the mean waiting time over kinetic state '0' and confirms that at limitingkinesin mainly stays in kinetic state '0' and waits for ATP binding ().and B shows that the distribution of probability in kinetic state '0' peaks at maximum points of 0.93 and 0.43 at loads F  1.987 pN and F  2.754 pN, respectively, coincide with the crossoverare depicted as u i and w i , respectively, where i  0, 1, 2, 3 load points of P(u 0 ) and P(w 0 ) at 5 mM and 100 mM. These results imply that the probability of observing kinesin motor in kinetic state '0' will be the highest when the probabilities of ATP and ADP binding to the motor are equal, i.e. P(u 0 )  P(w 0 ). This also confirms our earlier results about the duration over kinetic state '0'. At highand low loads, the plot shows that the distribution of probability in kinetic states '2' and '3' becomes dominant (see), in agreement with the obtained results of the durations of kinetic states '2' and '3' in. It is also seen fromC that at high backward loads 410 pN and at all, the distribution of probability in kinetic states '2' and '3' is greater than that of other kinetic states. This suggests '2' and '3' as the first and second most probable kinetic states that kinesin motor stays at loads 410 pN, in agreement with the obtained results of the durations of these kinetic states and the reported kinetic states for the detachment of kinesin from MT (). The high distribution of probability in kinetic state '2' at high loads F stall 5F F detach confirms the long duration of this state due to the low rate of ATP synthesis.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
H.Khataee and A.Wee-Chung Liew at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Mathematics of mechanical kinetics of kinesin at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
