Motivation: Structural characterization of protein interactions is necessary for understanding and modulating biological processes. On one hand, X-ray crystallography or NMR spectroscopy provide atomic resolution structures but the data collection process is typically long and the success rate is low. On the other hand, computational methods for modeling assembly structures from individual components frequently suffer from high false-positive rate, rarely resulting in a unique solution. Results: Here, we present a combined approach that computationally integrates data from a variety of fast and accessible experimental techniques for rapid and accurate structure determination of pro-tein–protein complexes. The integrative method uses atomistic models of two interacting proteins and one or more datasets from five accessible experimental techniques: a small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) profile, 2D class average images from negative-stain electron microscopy micrographs (EM), a 3D density map from single-particle negative-stain EM, residue type content of the pro-tein–protein interface from NMR spectroscopy and chemical cross-linking detected by mass spectrometry. The method is tested on a docking benchmark consisting of 176 known complex structures and simulated experimental data. The near-native model is the top scoring one for up to 61% of benchmark cases depending on the included experimental datasets; in comparison to 10% for standard computational docking. We also collected SAXS, 2D class average images and 3D density map from negative-stain EM to model the PCSK9 antigen–J16 Fab antibody complex, followed by validation of the model by a subsequently available X-ray crystallographic structure. Availability:
INTRODUCTIONBiologists are identifying components of macromolecular assemblies and networks (). To understand how these assemblies and networks underpin essential biological processes and to modulate them for therapeutic purposes, we need to describe the structures of both natural and engineered protein interactions (). Owing to the difficulty of determining the atomic structures of protein complexes by X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy as well as inaccuracy of alternative methods, such as proteinprotein docking, new techniques are necessary (). One major computational approach to predicting structures of protein complexes relies on molecular docking of unbound single-component structures. Even for complexes with two proteins, docking problem remains challenging despite recent advances (). The major bottlenecks include dealing with protein flexibility and the absence of an accurate scoring function (). Pairwise protein docking methods can be divided into three classes based on their configurational sampling algorithm (): (i) global methods using a fast Fourier transform (FFT) () or geometric matching (); (ii) medium-range methods such as Monte Carlo sampling (); and (iii) methods guided by data, such as complex refinement based on NMR restraints, cross-linking, interface prediction or site-directed mutagenesis (). It is common to begin docking two proteins with an unbiased global search followed by refinement of the best scoring models ().Characterizing the structures of multi-subunit complexes benefits from using varied experimental datasets (). In this hybrid or integrative approach, the datasets are encoded into a scoring function used to evaluate candidate models generated by a sampling method. Integrative structure determination typically iterates through the following stages: (i) gathering information, (ii) designing model representation and evaluation, (iii) sampling good models, and (iv) analyzing models and information. Here, we present an integrative approach to pairwise protein docking. First, data from one or more of five different experiment types are translated into the corresponding scoring function terms. These data include (i) the pair-distance distribution function of the complex from a small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) profile, (ii) 2D class average images of the complex from negative-stain electron microscopy micrographs (EM2D), (iii) a 3D density map of the complex from single-particle negative-stain electron microscopy micrographs (EM3D), (iv) residue type content at the protein interface from NMR spectroscopy (NMR-RTC) (), and (v) chemical cross-linking detected by mass spectrometry (CXMS). These five experimental methods were selected because of their feasibility and efficiency of data collection: a SAXS profile of the complex in solution can be collected in several minutes (); a 3D EM density map can be reconstructed from a smaller sample amount than that for SAXS, but data collection process is significantly longer (); 2D class averages can be computed from micrographs more easily and rapidly than performing a full 3D reconstruction; the composition of interface residues from NMR () provides information about the interaction interface, unlike the SAXS and EM data; and cross-linking data () provide information at intermediate resolution imposing an upper distance bound on inter-molecular pairs of residues. Second, complex models are sampled, relying on efficient global search methods developed for pairwise protein docking, followed by filtering based on fit to the experimental data, conformational refinement and composite scoring. Third, good-scoring representatives of clusters of models are picked as final models. To validate this approach, we apply the integrative method in two contexts. First, we test the method on a large benchmark for protein docking () with simulated experimental data and known complex structures. This test allows a robust assessment of the value of the individual types of experimental data for specific types of proteins. Second, we also collected SAXS, EM2D and EM3D data to model the PCSK9 antigenJ16 Fab antibody complex, followed by validation of the model by a subsequently available X-ray crystallographic structure. This second test highlights the advantages of the integrative method that allows computing an accurate model in a timely manner.
METHODS
Integrative docking method summaryGiven the atomic structures of two proteins and one or more datasets from SAXS, EM2D, EM3D, NMR-RTC and CXMS, we compute the 3D structure of their complex. The approach involves four major stages (, Supplementary Material): 2.1.1 Stage 1: Global search A global search in the space of all possible docking models is performed using geometry-based molecular docking (). The configurational sampling precision is increased significantly compared with the default settings (Supplementary: from 4.510 3 to 21210 3 models) to ensure the interface and global shape of the complex are sampled with precision commensurate with that of the data.
Stage 2: Data-guided filtering Each available experimentaldataset is used independently for scoring and filtering of models inconsistent with the data. To account for noise in the data, we convert the data into soft restraints. For SAXS profile, a model is filtered out if its radius of gyration is in significant disagreement with the experimentally derived one (). For EM2D class averages, there is no filter. For EM3D density map, a model is filtered only if it significantly protrudes out of the density map. For NMR-RTC data, a model is filtered out if it does not satisfy at least half of the specified residue type frequencies. For the cross-linking data, a model is filtered if it does not satisfy any of the cross-links. For each data type, the scores of the remaining models are normalized, using the average and standard deviation of their scores (S Data ). This normalization facilitates combining and comparing of scores for different data types with different noise levels. The models are clustered, and the cluster representative with the best fit to the data is selected. Top-scoring 5000 cluster representatives are processed further. This number of models usually guarantees that near-native models are not excluded even in the case of noisy data (Supplementary).
Stage 3: Conformational refinementThe goal of this stage is to compute an interface energy score. Because rigid docking models may contain steric clashes, the side-chain conformations as well as relative positions and orientations of the model components are refined, and an interface energy score (S Energy ) is computed ().
Stage 4: Composite scoringThe final models are scored and ranked by a composite score consisting of a normalized interface energy term and the fit to the data:. Schematic representation of the integrative docking method. The number of possible configurations for two docked proteins is on the order of $10 11 (three rotational degrees of freedom sampled in five degrees interval and three translational degrees of freedom sampled at 1 A  interval). As the method proceeds, the number of considered configurations decreases
Benchmark using simulated experimental dataPairwise protein docking benchmark 4.0 () is used to validate integrative docking method. This benchmark contains 176 complexes and their corresponding unbound structures, classified into 121 low-difficulty or rigid-body cases, 30 medium-difficulty cases and 25 high-difficulty cases, based on the degree of conformational change at the interface upon complex formation. For testing EM2D and EM3D, only a subset of 27 complexes with 4675 residues is used (EM benchmark). These complexes are divided into 16 rigid-body, 4 medium-difficulty and 7 difficult cases. Each of the benchmark complexes also had SAXS, EM2D, EM3D, NMR-RTC and CXMS data simulated based on its native complex structure (Supplementary Material). We have also tested the method on three experimental SAXS datasets from pyDockSAXS benchmark (). Integrative docking is performed on each of these cases starting from the unbound structures and the predicted complex models are compared with the native complex and assessed for accuracy. Each model is assessed for accuracy by two measurements: orientation and interface accuracy, similar to CAPRI (; Lensink and Wodak, 2010a). Orientation accuracy (high, medium, acceptable or incorrect) is based on RMSD criteria (Supplementary Material), whereas interface accuracy is based on the fraction of correctly predicted interface residues (Supplementary Material). In line with previous docking papers, we define a near-native model as a model of high, medium or acceptable accuracy. The success rate is the percentage of benchmark cases with at least one near-native model in the top N predictions (N is typically 10, referred to as top 10).The success rate depends on the difficulty of the benchmark cases, but there is a significant increase when compared with standard docking, independent of the difficulty (Supplementary Tables S2 and S3). The success rate also increases when only high or medium accuracy models are considered as near-natives (Supplementary).
RESULTS
Docking benchmark results
Interface prediction accuracyWe find that the topscoring model has a correctly predicted interface (, Supplementary Material) in 5068% of cases compared with 32% for standard docking. Although NMR-RTC performs worse than other data types in orientation prediction, the success rate in interface prediction is comparable with that for other data types. Based on these benchmark results, the probability of a correctly predicted interface in the top-scoring model is 5070% (depending on data type used) versus 32% for standard docking, and it increases to 8491% if top 10 models are considered.
Dependenceof success rate on complex size For each of the five data types, we test the dependence of the success rate on the complex size. The 176 benchmark complexes were divided into four groups according to complex size, with the fourth group corresponding to the 27 complexes in the EM benchmark (). Varying data types are most informative and applicable for different complex sizes. In particular, the success rate of standard docking decreases with the increase in complex size from 34% for small complexes to 19% for the EM benchmark. The reason is that the number of configurations and flexibility increase with protein size. The success rate for NMR-RTC drops sharply for complexes with 4300 residues (for complexes with 4675 residues, there is no significant difference between standard docking and docking with NMR-RTC). The reason is that the number of potential interfaces (i.e. the size of the search space) increases with protein size. In contrast, the success rate of SAXS is not sensitive to complex size. Unsurprisingly, the success rate for CXMS decreases slightly for the larger and more challenging complexes. 3.1.4 Dependence of success rate on protein shapes Protein complexes were classified into oblate, spherical and prolate based on the eigenvalues of the gyration tensor () (). The success rate of standard docking is highest for oblate proteins and lowest for prolate proteins. The reason is that oblate proteins have larger interfaces and better shape complementarity. The success rate of NMR-RTC, CXMS and SAXS is not sensitive to protein shapes owing to a combination of data and energy scores. The most significant increase in the success rate compared with standard docking is for prolate proteins: 3-fold increase for NMR-RTC, 5-fold increase for CXMS and 4-fold increase for SAXS. No analysis was performed for EM, owing to a small size of the EM benchmark.
Combining different experimental datasets increasesthe success rate We tested pairwise combinations of the five experimental data types. The top 10 success rate increases from 4282% for individual data types to 6382% for pairwise combinations (). More important is the increase in the top 1 success rate from 1736% to 2652%. CXMS data complements all other data types, with most significant improvement for the top-scoring model, where the success rate increases from 36% for CXMS alone to 4752% for all four pairwise data type combinations. The top 10 success rate for CXMS combined with SAXS or NMR-RTC is 80% and 81%, respectively, and is comparable with the success rate of EM data types. Another successful pairwise combination is SAXSNMR-RTC, improving the success rate for the whole benchmark from 4751% for SAXS and NMR-RTC separately to 68% when both data types are used. No significant improvement in the top 10 success rate is obtained by combining EM (2D or 3D) with other data types, as their independent success rate is already high (7982%). For the EM NMR-RTC combinations, there is even a slight decrease in the success rate because the NMR-RTC data is not informative for large protein complexes in the EM benchmark. When all five data types are combined, the top 10 success rate is similar to that for EM (83%), but more important is the increase in the top 1 success rate to 61% from 33% for EM alone.
Application to an antibodyantigen complexTo test the applicability of the integrative method for determining pairwise protein complexes in a biopharmaceutical setting, we applied it to an antibodyantigen complex with experimentally generated datasets. In a typical biopharmaceutical discovery project, antibodies for a specific target can be generated by mice immunization or by phage-display libraries. The next step is selecting an optimal antibody out of several candidates for further development into a drug. Knowledge of the epitope is an important factor in antibody selection process. Therefore, a method that can model antibodyantigen complexes rapidly and accurately would be extremely useful. In our case, the antigen PCSK9 plays a major regulatory role in cholesterol homeostasis and it is an important drug target (). PCSK9 binds to the EGF-A domain of the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and induces LDLR degradation. Reduced LDLR levels result in decreased metabolism of low-density lipoproteins, which may lead to). For the J16 Fab, 20 comparative models corresponding to two different elbow angles (136 and 168 ) and 10 different CDR loop conformations were selected based on the fit to the J16 Fab SAXS profile (Supplementary Material). In addition, the missing loops, N-termini, C-termini and His tags were added for PCSK9 and the J16 Fab with MODELLER-9v8, to better model the SAXS data. The integrative docking protocol was applied to PCSK9 and 20 J16 Fab models; the final clustering considered all complex models simultaneously. The structure of the complex was determined by X-ray crystallography during the course of this project, but was made available to this study only after the model of the complex was computed. Therefore, this application corresponds to a real-life antibody discovery scenario, where the unbound structures of the drug target and the antibody are known, but the structure of the complex is not available.
Assessment against X-ray structureBecause the accuracy of a docking prediction highly depends on the accuracy of the input structures, we first assess the accuracy of our input structures. The C-RMSD between the bound and unbound PCSK9 structures is 1.4 A  and between the bound and modeled J16 Fabs is 1.0 and 3.0 A  for elbow angles of 136 and 168 , respectively. Thus, there are no major PCSK9 conformational changes on binding. The elbow angle of the J16 Fab in the complex X-ray structure is 137.6. Therefore, the prediction of the elbow angle based on the Fab SAXS profile was correct (Supplementary). We have also tested the fit of the Xray structure of the complex against each data type (Supplementary) and observed high-quality fits for SAXS ( of 2.24), EM2D (cross-correlation coefficient of 0.87) and EM3D (cross-correlation coefficient of 0.78). Next, we analyze the accuracy of the best-scored models in terms of orientation and interface accuracy for different datasets. The best-scored models with acceptable accuracy were ranked 14, 2, 2 and 2 for SAXS, EM2D, EM3D and all three datasets combined, respectively (Supplementary). The bestscored models with a correct epitope were ranked 3, 2, 1 and 1, respectively (Supplementary). Docking results are slightly better for models with the elbow angle of 136 than for 168 , with acceptable accuracy models ranked 5, 2, 1 and 2 for SAXS, EM2D, EM3D and all three data types combined, respectively (Supplementary).
Data-guided filtering and funnel analysisIdeally, the normalized fitting scores would correlate strongly with the accuracy of the model over a broad range of accuracy (i.e. I-RMSD of 0-5 A  or L-RMSD of 0-15 A  ). We now examine whether or not such a 'funnel' exists for each type of data () and how these funnels relate to specific complex structures (). The three experimental datasets indeed result in pronounced funnels, revealing similar complex structures (). Typically, there are three or four funnels associated with complex structures related by the pseudosymmetry of the antibody (i.e. light chain versus heavy chain) and the triangular shape symmetry of PCSK9 (). The SAXS dataset produces four funnels. One of them includes the near-native models, although this funnel is the least pronounced among the four funnels. The EM2D dataset produces three funnels with comparable scores. One of the funnels is centered close to the native structure, demonstrating the predictive power of EM2D. The EM3D dataset produces four funnels similar to those from the SAXS dataset. In contrast to SAXS, the funnel with near-native models has the best EM3D scores, although this funnel is not centered on the native complex structure (its center is $11 A  RMSD away from the native structure). While the EM3D dataset is best in selecting the correct funnel, the EM2D score is better in picking the highest accuracy model once the correct funnel has been selected. The shift in the near-native EM3D funnel relative to the near-native EM2D funnel can be explained by a distortion of the 3D density map that results from inaccuracies in the initial density map used for the 3D reconstruction that was obtained from the 2D class averages by the random conical tilt method.
DISCUSSIONWe developed an integrative method for docking two protein structures by combining protein docking techniques with data from five experimental methods including SAXS, EM2D, EM3D, NMR-RTC and CXMS. To assess the accuracy of the integrative method, we used a benchmark of 176 complex structures with simulated experimental data. We also applied thescoring cluster representatives (red, green, gold and yellow) for integrative docking with SAXS, EM2D and EM3D filters, superimposed on X-ray crystallographic structure (blue). The models are superimposed on PCSK9 (prodomain in cyan, catalytic domain in blue and C-terminal domain in dark blue). (C) Fit of the top-scoring cluster representatives to the SAXS profile, EM2D class averages and EM3D density map method to an antibodyantigen complex, relying on experimental datasets collected specifically for this study. Additional information, such as sequence conservation and impact of site-directed mutagenesis on complex formation, has been used previously to increase the accuracy of pairwise protein docking (). Here, we analyze the improved docking success rates afforded by data from five accessible experimental methods. Our integrative framework can be modularly extended to support additional types of experimental data, such as those from footprinting, site-directed mutagenesis, FRET spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy (). In addition to the data types tested here, binding site residues and distance constraints, if available, can be added directly to the PatchDock input. In principle, experimental datasets can be used either to filter docking models or directly to drive the sampling. We select the first approach, because it allows seamless integration of any combination of datasets and we can rely on efficient global search methods already developed for pairwise protein docking. Moreover, driving the docking with global shape data, such as SAXS and EM2D, is algorithmically challenging.
Experimental datasets and their impact on dockingThe experimental methods were chosen for their utility in a biotherapeutics discovery context where multiple artificial binding proteins (such as antibodies) are engineered to bind a specific drug target and rapid tools for epitope prediction are required. According to our large benchmark analysis, EM (2D and 3D) are the most informative of all datasets (). However, collecting experimental information to generate a 3D map is generally possible only for complexes larger than approximately 100 kDa and requires a relatively large amount of work. Here, we show that 2D class averages, which can be obtained significantly faster and for a wider range of samples, can provide the same information for pairwise docking as 3D density maps. In contrast to EM, SAXS has the advantage of being able to collect and analyze multiple samples in a few hours. As a result, purification, SAXS data collection and docking of multiple antibodies binding the same target could be performed in a matter of days. Automation of collecting EM data is more challenging than that for SAXS, although recent advances in data acquisition and an increase in computing power have allowed more streamlined processes in single-particle EM (). While cross-linking with mass spectrometry is informative on its own, it also complements all other data types. With recent advances in data collection (), it is becoming a method of choice for combination with shape informative methods, such as SAXS and EM. While validation of integrative docking by a large benchmark using simulated data has allowed a robust statistical analysis (), data collection and application to a specific target with real data has highlighted advantages and challenges of the integrative docking approach. Unlike NMR-RTC, which depends on protein expression in a cell-free expression system, both SAXS and EM gave useful data for the PCSK9J16 Fab complex. In general, larger size and higher symmetry of a complex simplify EM data acquisition and interpretation. The larger mass of an IgG (150 kDa) compared with a Fab fragment (50 kDa) would simplify the data acquisition and image processing. However, the flexibility of an IgG may result in a conformationally heterogenous complex sample, favoring the use of the more rigid Fab fragment. Although the EM3D data was most informative for identifying the near-native cluster of models and predicting the epitope, more accurate structural models could be selected by the EM2D score. Despite the relatively low information content of the SAXS profile, the SAXS score predicted the same clusters as the EM-based scores. Additionally, the J16 Fab SAXS profile was useful in predicting the Fab structure and its elbow angle.
Improvement compared with standard dockingAlthough integrative protocol succeeds in including a nearnative model among the top 10 models in 4282% of the cases (), state-of-the-art docking methods succeed only in 3040% of the cases, depending on the benchmark and accuracy criterion. ZDOCK-ZRANK ranks a model with I-RMSD5 4.0 A  among the top 10 models in 3540% of the rigid-body cases of Benchmark 2.0 (). Recently developed residue potential, SIPPER (), succeeds to rank a model with L-RMSD 510 A  in 28% of the 81 Benchmark 3.0 complexes, where at least one model with L-RMSD510 A  was generated by FTDock. In a recent CAPRI evaluation, an acceptable accuracy model was submitted by at least one participating group for 11 out of 13 complexes (). However, top 8 predictors could only predict correctly 6 out of 13 complex structures. While predictors can use additional information manually, a fully automated method, ClusPro (), succeeded to predict correctly five targets.
Comparison to other hybrid docking methodsDocking has been previously combined with additional data. HADDOCK () benefits from a consensus interface predictor CPORT (), succeeding to rank an acceptable accuracy model among the top 10 models for $19% of the Benchmark 2.0 complexes. pyDockSAXS (), which combines FTDock sampling with the pyDock scoring function and a SAXS profile, succeeds to rank a model with L-RMSD 510 A  in 43% of the Benchmark 2.0 complexes (i.e. for 70 of the 84 complexes with similar molecular mass for bound and unbound structures). In comparison, our approach applied to the same benchmark with a SAXS profile only, results in the significantly increased 63% success rate. The increase in the success rate is because of the increased precision of configurational sampling and higher accuracy of interface energy score in FireDock (Supplementary Tables S6 and S7). The integrative approach had a similar performance for three experimental SAXS dataset from pyDockSAXS benchmark () (Supplementary).
Sampling versus scoringThe current work highlights the challenges in protein docking. Sufficient sampling is required in the global search stage to maximize model accuracy, hit rate and the quality-of-fit to the experimental data (Supplementary Tables S1 and S6). Our integrative approach is designed to benefit from the increasingly focused molecular docking search space afforded by consideration of experimental data. While an acceptable accuracy model is contained among the $200 000 models generated by a global search for 97% of benchmark complexes, our integrative protocol succeeds to rank such models among the top 10 scoring models only in 4282% of the test cases, depending on the data used (Tables 1 and 2); correct binding sites are identified among the top 10 scoring models in 8491% of the cases (). We suggest that a combination of finer sampling methods (including flexible docking) and improved scoring functions with physico-chemical and/or statistical terms can be helpful for further improving the success rate of pairwise protein docking. Integrative docking, such as that described here, may provide the best compromise between the relative expediency and inaccuracy of standard docking on one hand and relative complexity and accuracy of experimental structure determination by X-ray crystallography or NMR spectroscopy on the other hand. Software. The package is downloadable from http://salilab. org/idock. SAXS, EM2D, EM3D, NMR-RTC and CXMS scoring functions are implemented in our open source Integrative Modeling Platform (IMP; http://salilab.org/imp). PatchDock and FireDock are available at http://bioinfo3d.cs.tau.ac.il. Docking with a SAXS profile can also be done via a webserver at http://salilab.org/foxsdock.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Structure determination of protein-protein complexes at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
.1.1 Docking accuracy increases significantly for individual datasets Integrative docking method shows 2-fold increase in the top 10 success rate compared with standard docking (PatchDock-FireDock protocol) for SAXS and NMR-RTC, almost 3-fold increase for CXMS and 4-fold increase for EM2D and EM3D (Table 1, Fig. 2A). The standard docking protocol succeeds to rank a near-native model in the top 10 scoring models in 24% of benchmark cases. When SAXS data is used, this number goes up to 51%. If we consider only $65 rigid body cases with53% missing residues (unbound structures compared with complex), the success rate increases to 77% (Schneidman-Duhovny et al., 2011). For EM2D and EM3D, the success rate is 82% and 79%, respectively. This success rate quadruples when compared with standard docking, with the 19% success rate for the 27 complexes in the EM benchmark. For NMR-RTC, the success rate is 47%. With up to three cross-links, the success rate is 65%. If we consider the top-scoring model, there is a 2-fold increase in the success rate for SAXS and NMR-RTC (22% and 18% versus 10%), almost 4-fold increase for CXMS (36% versus 10%) and almost 5-fold increase for EM2D and EM3D (33% versus 7%). Although using any type of data significantly improves the results relative to standard docking, we are still far from the upper limit on the success rate, given the initial sampling by finer docking (97% of the benchmark cases have a near-native model sampled by a global search). When we allow for a nearnative model in the top 100 instead of top 10 models, the success rate increases to 7189%, depending on the data types. For the failing benchmark cases, the near-native model is usually among the top 1000 models. Fig. 2. Success rate of integrative docking for Benchmark 4.0. (A) Success rate in prediction of orientation (top, top10) and interface (top-I, top10-I) for standard docking and docking restrained by NMR-RTC, CXMS, SAXS, EM2D and EM3D. (B) Success rate for predicting a near-native model within the top 10 models as a function of complex size for standard docking as well as docking restrained by NMR-RTC, CXMS, SAXS, EM2D and EM3D. (C) Success rate for predicting a near-native model within the top 10 models as a function of complex shape for standard docking as well as docking restrained by NMR-RTC, CXMS and SAXS
D.Schneidman-Duhovny et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
