Motivation: Genes with indispensable functions are identified as essential; however, the traditional gene-level studies of essentiality have several limitations. In this study, we characterized gene es-sentiality from a new perspective of protein domains, the independent structural or functional units of a polypeptide chain. Results: To identify such essential domains, we have developed an Expectation–Maximization (EM) algorithm-based Essential Domain Prediction (EDP) Model. With simulated datasets, the model provided convergent results given different initial values and offered accurate predictions even with noise. We then applied the EDP model to six microbial species and predicted 1879 domains to be essential in at least one species, ranging 10–23% in each species. The predicted essential domains were more conserved than either non-essential domains or essential genes. Comparing essential domains in prokaryotes and eukaryotes revealed an evolutionary distance consistent with that inferred from ribosomal RNA. When utilizing these essential domains to reproduce the annotation of essential genes, we received accurate results that suggest protein domains are more basic units for the essen-tiality of genes. Furthermore, we presented several examples to illustrate how the combination of essential and non-essential domains can lead to genes with divergent essentiality. In summary, we have described the first systematic analysis on gene essentiality on the level of domains.
IntroductionGenes are widely regarded as the basic units of a cell, a complex system made up of a large number of components and reactions. Therefore, a fundamental question in synthetic biology is, what is the minimal gene set that is necessary and sufficient to sustain life ()? The individual genes that constitute a minimal gene set are called essential genes. Experimentally, essential genes are defined as those that when disrupted, confer a lethal phenotype to organisms under defined conditions. Therefore, the essentiality of a gene is the indispensability of this gene's product to the survival of), transposon mutagenesis (), or antisense RNA inhibitions (). These experiments have provided a tremendous amount of resources to further our understanding on gene essentiality, one important step closer to unraveling the complex relationship between genotype and phenotype (). Recent comparative research on the available essential gene datasets has shown surprising results and has challenged many early assumptions in genomics. First, it was discovered that microorganisms share a limited set of essential genes. For example, a comparison of the essential gene sets of four bacteria revealed that only 1272% of essential genes are shared between any pair, indicating that a large number of unique essential genes exist (Supplementary). This is somewhat expected as independent studies have firmly established that bacterial species share a very limited number of orthologs (e.g. 1953% in Supplementary), regardless of which ortholog detection method is used (). This may reflect the physiology of diverse microorganisms. Increasing the number of organisms in the list will further decrease the number of orthologs and thus common essential genes. For example, merely 265 orthologs and 34 essential genes are common to all four bacteria (Supplementary). It is highly unlikely that these 34 essential genes would be capable of executing all functions of a cell. Second, and more surprisingly, a recent study showed that, when tested experimentally in model bacteria, less than a quarter of the highly conserved genes were essential (). This suggests that evolutionary conservation of a gene does not necessarily imply that it is essential for microbial survival. Consider a hypothetical bacterium that utilizes both solar and chemical energy. Although the genes for converting solar and chemical energy have been highly conserved and optimized (thus allowing them to be conserved through evolutionary time), neither is essential for survival if both solar and chemical energy are present. Finally, orthologs are often observed to be essential in one organism but not another. For example, the dapE gene is essential in Escherichia coli but non-essential in Pseudomonas aeruginosa (). It is also possible for orthologs to have different functions in different organisms (), even though it is a fundamental assumption of genomics that most orthologs perform a similar function. This suggests that differences in genetic regulation, genetic redundancy and divergence in cellular pathways or processes between organisms may all affect gene essentiality; their combined effects result in the discrepancy in essentiality between orthologs. Given the above evidence, a theoretical approach that attempts to identify a universal minimal gene set by searching for conserved orthologs across multiple organisms is unlikely to succeed. Since relying on orthologs, or conservation on the gene level, does not adequately explain essentiality, are there other characteristics among different organisms that are more consistent with essentiality? Observing that genes from different evolutionary origins perform the same function (i.e. non-orthologous gene displacements), a group of researchers switched their focus to defining the set of essential functions (). However, knowing a set of essential functions does not necessarily mean that the genes responsible for these functions can be easily identified, especially in understudied organisms.In this study, we have reexamined gene essentiality from a novel essential protein domain point of view. Our results suggest that this new perspective may offer unique insights into the mechanistic basis of gene essentiality and help to resolve the controversy regarding this phenomenon. Protein domains with known function, such as those of the ATPase enzyme class (), are amino acid sequence patterns with an associated activity. They often correspond to structural domains, the independent globular components of the polypeptide chain found in three-dimensional protein structures, although the correspondence is not exact (). Independent of neighboring sequences, a protein domain folds into a distinct structure and mediates the protein's biological functionality () (Supplementary). Protein domains can be detected from gene/protein sequences by well-established algorithms, such as HMMER (). Currently, the Pfam v.27.0 database contains 14 831 domains detected by HMMER, many of which have unknown functions (). We hypothesized that gene essentiality is likely preserved through the function of protein domains or domain combinations, rather than through the conservation of the entire genes. Numerous examples can be found in literature to support this postulation. For instance, there is only a single copy of DNA polymerase III subunits s and c domain III (PF12169) () in E.coli, P.aeruginosa and Bacillus subtilis. The host gene of this domain, dnaX, is essential in all three species; however, the sequence identity between them is low (Supplementary). In further support of modularity within essential genes, previous studies have discovered that although a gene as a whole may be essential, not every domain within the gene is required for the essential function. For example, E.coli ftsK (b0890) is an essential gene consisting of two domains: the N-terminal (a.a. 1780) and the C-terminal (a.a. 7811329). Only the N-terminal domain of this gene is required for its role in cell division and viability (). This study, among others, provides direct evidence that protein domains may be responsible for the essentiality of a gene. The structure of this paper is as follows: In the Section 2, we describe the data sources and give the details of the Essential Domain Prediction (EDP) model. In the Section 3, we first assess the performance of the EDP model on simulated datasets. We then use the EDP model to predict essential domains in six microbes, detailed domain information can be found in Supplementary Table S2. Next, we investigate the properties of these predicted essential domains, such as their conservation and functions. We also use these essential domains to reproduce the annotation of essential genes as a validation of our predicted essential domains and present several cases where literature provides support for our predictions. In the Section 4, we discuss the significance of our research, the advantages of explaining gene essentiality from a domain perspective, and possible improvements that can be applied to our EDP model.
Methods
Essential gene datasetsEscherichia coli K-12 sequence data were collected from Comprehensive Microbial Resource (CMR) (http://cmr.jcvi.org/tigrscripts/CMR/GenomePage.cgi?databasentec01). This database contains 4289 protein sequences in total (). The essential genes of E.coli K-12 were collected from the PEC database (). The Kato dataset contains 302 essential genes from gene deletion experiments. Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 sequence data were collected from the Pseudomonas Genome Database (http://www.pseudomonas.com/) (Pseudomonas_aeruginosa_PAO1.faa, revision 200907-17). PA essential genes were acquired from (). The Jacobs dataset contains 678 essential genes from transposon mutagenesis experiments in PAO1. Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1 sequences were downloaded from the Magnifying Genomes Database (http://www.genoscope.cns.fr/ agc/mage). Out of a total of 3308 genes, 499 essential genes were adopted from (). Bacillus subtilis sequence data were collected from Microbial Genome Database (http://mbgd.genome.ad.jp/). This dataset contains 4117 ORFs. The essential gene list was obtained from () and consists of three datasets: 150 essential genes detected with Kobayashi's mutant genesis experiments, 42 known essential genes from previous studies, and 79 essential genes by homology mapping to other bacteria, most of which encode proteins involved in ribosome or synthesis. Saccharomyces cerevisiae sequences were acquired from Saccharomyces Genome Database (http://downloads.yeastgenome. org/sequence/genomic_sequence/). This resource contains 5885 ORFs. The essential gene list was obtained from (). This dataset contains 1049 essential genes from targeted mutagenesis experiments. Neurospora crassa ORFs were adopted from Neurospora crassa database at Broad Institute (http://www.broadinstitute.org/annotation/ genome/neurospora/MultiDownloads.html). Dubious ORFs and pseudo genes were excluded from this list. Essential gene data was kindly provided by K. Borkovich from the systematic genome deletion project in N. crassa at UC Riverside. This list contains 1251 essential genes. Gene ontology (GO) annotations for domains were downloaded from the Mappings of External Classification Systems to GO (http:// www.geneontology.org/GO.indices.shtml).
The domain dataset and data filteringWe used Pfam (http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/;) to derive domain information from protein sequences, and Pfam-A entries are combined with Pfam-B entries to construct our domain dataset. In total, 3629 Pfam-A and 5098 Pfam-B domains were included in our analysis. Genes that had no domain annotation were excluded, leaving a total of 23 009 genes. Specific numbers of genes and domains for each species are shown in.
The essential domain predictor (EDP) modelWe defined G  fg 1 ; g 2 ;. .. ; g n g for a genome with n genes. For g i , i 2 (1, n), let g i  1 if the ith gene is essential, and 0 otherwise. The vector G was obtained from the experiments, which was treated as observed data. Suppose gene g i is annotated with n i different domains, we define Dg i   fD 1 i ; D 2 i ;. .. ; D ni i g. Here variable D j i  1 for being an essential domain, and 0 otherwise, where (i, j) denotes the jth domain of the ith gene. The values of D j i are unobserved and treated as missing values, which will be estimated by the model. Each protein may include multiple distinct domains and one type of domain may occur in different proteins. We defined D  fD 1 ; D 2 ;. .. ; D m g for all the unique domains that can be found in a given genome, where D k  1, k 2 (1, m) for an essential domain, and 0 otherwise. We also defined S  fS 1 ; S 2 ;. .. ; S m g, where S k , k 2 (1, m) is the set of kth unique domain D k in the whole genome. We use jS k j to denote the size of the set S k , and we further define d k as the probability of domain D k to be essential.We further included two kinds of errors that may exist in the prediction process: falsely predicted essential rate (FER) and falsely predicted non-essential rate (FNR). The definitions are as follows: FER  Pr p i  1 j g i  0; FNR  Prp i  0 j g i  1;where p i  1 if the ith gene is predicted to be essential and 0 otherwise. The goal of this model is to estimate the parameters set h to maximize the likelihood of observed essential genes. Since it is difficult to directly optimize L(Gjh), we augmented the observed likelihood L(Gjh) with missing data D, and the complete data likelihood is thus defined as: L(G,Djh)  L(Djh)L(GjD,h). The formulas are further derived as:where L i  1  FNR : g i  1 and one D j i 2 Dg i   1 FER : g i  1 and allwhere FER and FNR are defined as Formula (1) and h  d k ; FER; FNR. Under this framework, we adopted the conventional Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm () to compute the optimal h that maximizes L(Gjh). The EM algorithm is derived as follows: E-step: during the E step of the tth iteration, D is updated by the conditional expectation given the estimated h from last iteration h t1 and G, that is:M step: update h using maximum likelihood estimation approach. h t d k ; fer; fnr  max h Lh; G; DEach domain would be assigned with a probability score d j indicating the likelihood of being essential. In this study domains with d j ! 0.9 were classified as essential to minimize the sum of false positive and false negative essential gene predictions. The Perl script of EDP model is provided in Supplementary Files.
Test EDP model with different initial valuesThe initial values of the EM-algorithm may influence the result of the model. For the EDP Model, three parameters are given by initial values: the probability that one domain is essential D  fD 1 ; D 2 ;. .. ; D m g, the falsely predicted essential rate (FER) and falsely predicted non-essential rate (FNR). The initial value of D k is set to be the percentage of essential genes in all genes that contain domain k. We fixed the initial value of D and tested the influence of different FERs and FNRs on the results of the EDP Model. Six pairs of FER and FNR values were tested, and the final result of the EDP Model was convergent as long as the dataset remained constant.
Building the domain clustering matrixThe matrix describes the existence and essentiality of all domains in the six species. The values for the matrix elements are as follows: 1 for an essential domain, 1 for a non-essential domain, and 0 if no domains were found. Here we evaluate the distance between species based on the Mutual Information of the domains' essentiality. For species X and Y, the Mutual Information I(X;Y) is:and the distance between X and Y is D(X,Y)  1  I(X;Y). The bootstrapping values of each branch are evaluated by randomly selected 400500 domains to rebuild the evolution tree for 1000 times.
Results
Testing the essential domain prediction (EDP) model using simulated datasetsBased on the ExpectationMaximization (EM) algorithm, we designed the EDP Model (see Section 2 for details) to predict the essentiality of each domain. To test the performance of the EDP Model, we generated 20 independent simulated datasets, each of which contains 1200 genes and 1000 domains (Supplementary) and are provided in Supplementary Files. Previous study has shown that the number of domains for each gene follows a power-law-like distribution (), and we found the same distribution in the combined gene-domain annotation for the six microbes (Supplementary). Therefore, we required that the degree of genes and domains in the simulated datasets follow a power-law distribution (Supplementary). For each dataset, we randomly assigned a certain number of essential domains, and then assigned essential genes if and only if the gene contains at least one essential domain. Among the 20 simulated datasets, the number of essential domains ranged from 50 to 83, while the number of essential genes ranged from 120 to 164. We then applied the EDP Model to these simulated datasets, revealing only the essential gene labels and gene-domain association. When given different initial values (discussed in Section 2), the EDP Model produced convergent results for each simulated dataset. The results from the 20 simulated datasets were then compared to the original assignment of essential domains (Supplementary). All pre-assigned essential domains were correctly predicted, i.e. no false negative (FN) predictions, while the false positive rate (FPR) is $0.4. All false positive (FP) assignments were the results of the same scenario: a domain appeared in only one gene and that gene was essential. Additionally, we annotated the essentiality of genes reciprocally based on the predicted essential domains, and no false predictions were made (Supplementary). Next, we added noise to the simulated data and repeated the prediction process. The noise data included 10 genes, five were annotated as essential but contained no essential domains, and the remaining five were annotated as non-essential but contained at least one essential domain. When adding 'noise genes' to the dataset, the number of domains that a noise gene contained was randomly determined and followed the same degree distribution as the 'real genes' in the dataset. The errors for repeated predictions are also shown in Supplementary. For essential domain prediction, the number of FP errors remained almost the same and even decreased in some cases (due to the influence of noise genes). The FPR increased slightly because of the loss of true positives, which became FN errors. Each of these was caused by the addition of noise genes. As for the re-annotation of genes based on predicted essential domains, 16 simulated datasets had no incorrect essential gene assignments and four of them had only one, each of which were noise genes. The number of FN predictions ranged from 8 to 17, including 35 noise genes (Supplementary). The test on simulated data shows that the EDP model offers an accurate prediction of essential domains, even with substantial noise.
Predicting microbial essential domains using the EDP modelAfter testing the predictive capability of the EDP Model on simulated datasets, we applied it to predict essential domains in real datasets, which included six microbes: E.coli (EC), A. baylyi (AB), P.aeruginosa (PA), B.subtilis (BS), S.cerevisiae (SC) and N.crassa (NC). Essential gene annotation for these species were collected and filtered, excluding genes that do not have annotated domains in PfamA or PfamB (see Section 2). After filtering, we obtained 23 009 genes and 8727 domains (3629 from PfamA and 5098 from PfamB) in total. The number for each species is shown in. Considering that gene essentiality differs across species, we applied the EDP Model to each organism separately. We first tested the influence of initial parameters of the iterative EM algorithm on its ability to converge. There are three parameters in the EDP Model: domain essentiality, falsely predicted essential rate (FER) and falsely predicted non-essential rate (FNR) (defined in Section 2). Specifically, we obtained the initial essentiality of domains by computing the percentage of essential genes associated with each domain. To test the influence of changes in the FER and FNR, we generated six pairs of FERs and FNRs, and compared their convergence process to the final results within each species. As shown in Supplementary, all processes converged within 50 steps, including the pair with an FER of 0.9 and an FNR of 0.8. This result indicated that the iterative process produces stable resultsfor all datasets despite wide variation in the initial FER and FNR values. Based on the distribution of domain essentiality scores, we set the cutoff for essentiality to 0.9 for the final prediction. Thus, when we generated the set of essential domains, we accounted for 10 23% of the total number of domains in different species (). We found that the number of essential domains was much larger in eukaryotes than prokaryotes. We identified 713 essential domains in SC and 1009 in NC, while the numbers were 350, 247, 141 and 314 for AB, EC, BS and PA, respectively. This difference was not caused by the variation in gene numbers; the number of genes in our prokaryotic dataset was similar to that of the eukaryotic dataset. For example, PA and SC have 4654 and 4116 genes, respectively. We interpreted this phenomenon to be a consequence of the increased complexity of eukaryotic genomes. In order to increase the number of essential functions in a genome without increasing the size (gene count), there must be an increase in functionally essential 'core' components, i.e. essential domains.
The conservation of essential domainsThe microbes used in our study differ in both the number and type of their associated genes and domains, as well as the essentiality of these components. To further analyze conservation patterns, we built a phylogenetic tree based on ribosomal RNAs (16S rRNAs for prokaryotes and 18S rRNAs for eukaryotes; Supplementary) and used this as the gold standard for assessing evolutionary distance among species. Based on this phylogenetic tree, we see that the six microbes form three groups: NC and SC in the fungi group, AB, PA and EC in the Gram-negative group, and BS in the Gram-positive group. Concurrently, we clustered these species based on domain essentiality. We used a matrix to represent the association between domains and species, where rows are domains and columns are microbes. As shown in, domains are assigned different colors according to their existence and essentiality (see Section 2). We then applied hierarchical clustering on the columns to group the microbes. The clustering result closely resembled the rRNA-based phylogenetic trees, i.e. AB, EC and PA are closest to each other, BS is the outlier of the prokaryotes, and the fungi group is separated from the prokaryotes. This result suggests that the conservation pattern of domains is highly indicative of the evolutionary distance across species. The conservation of non-essential domains also contained evolutionary information. We further compared the conservation level between essential and non-essential domains. In this comparison, domain D would be considered as conserved between two species if it is present in both species without limit on which gene domain D is found. The comparisons were made between every pair of the six species (). In general, essential domains were more conserved than non-essential domains. The odds ratio of the percentage of conserved domains is also correlated with the evolutionary distance among species, that is, more closely related species tend to have a higher odds ratio. For example, the three highest odds ratios were shared among AB, PA and EC, all members of the Gram-negative group. The lowest three odds ratios were found between SC and BS (1.187), NC and BS (1.312), SC and PA (1.47), each comparison between a eukaryote and a prokaryote. This result suggests that essential domains are highly correlated with the species specificity  the more closely related two species are in evolutionary distance, the more essential domains they tend to share rather than non-essential domains.We further show the difference in domain copy numbers between essential and non-essential domains in the six genomes as follows. According to the UniProt database, there are multiple copies of most domains in each of the six species. The number of copies of a domain in a genome is indicative of its prevalence in that species. We compared the detected frequency between essential and nonessential domains in each species using a Wilcoxon Rank Sum test (). In all six species, the non-essential domains were present in a significantly higher frequency than essential ones. Furthermore, the occurrence of non-essential domains tended to be more frequent in the eukaryotes (SC and NC). This result provides additional support for the conservation of essential domains. If one considers domains to be the building blocks of proteins, essential domains are the key components that constitute an organism's core functions and would therefore be more likely to be conserved during. Essential domains are more conserved than non-essential domains or essential genes. Comparisons between species pairs are made. The percentage of essential domains conservation is compared with non-essential domains in (A), and with essential genes in (B). Fisher's exact test was used to assess the significance, and test results are labeled in each of the subfigures evolution. On the other hand, non-essential domains are more like decorative blocks and evolve much faster to enable the organisms to diversify and to better adapt to a complex environment, which makes them less conserved across species and present in higher copy numbers within a genome than their essential counterparts. In our analysis, essential domains were identified based on essential genes, and we found that essential domains are more conserved than essential genes. Here we focused on prokaryotic genes and domains to maintain the conservation of essential genes. Two genes from different bacteria are considered 'conserved genes' if they are mutual best hit in reciprocal BLAST and have a sequence similarity higher than 30%. Between any two bacteria, the percentage (intersection to union) of conserved essential domains was higher than essential genes (). The odds ratios were between 4.52 (AB and EC) and 10.31 (PA and BS). Like the relationship between essential and non-essential domains, the difference between essential domains and essential genes were also correlated to the species similarity: the more closely related two species were, the more significant the difference between the number of conserved essential domains and conserved essential genes would be. This result provides additional support to the idea that essential domains are more conserved than essential genes, and are therefore likely more basic units responsible for the essentiality of genes.
Results of single domain genesFrom Supplementary Table S3 we can see that in all the six species, the result of Fisher's exact test suggests that when we evaluate a gene's essentiality, the single-domain genes would not influence the process. We also compared with a simpler and straightforward method: select all single-domain essential genes and assign these domains as essential. Then we check the percentage of non-essential genes in multi-domain genes which include essential domains. Compared with EDP model (shown in Supplementary), this simpler method would generate many more false predictions. Supplementaryshows results of paralogous genes in different species. In all six species, although there are only a small number of genes with a differently annotated paralogous gene, they made up the majority of false evaluations on the essentiality of genes.
Functions of essential domainsCompared with non-essential domains, would essential domains be more frequently related with certain biological functions? We performed GO enrichment analysis for domains that are essential for at least one species. In total there are 48 GO terms significantly highly enriched in essential domains (adjusted P-value < 0.05, Supplementary). We grouped these functions in larger branches and show their percentage in essential domains in. GO terms which are also enriched in domains that are essential for a given species are shown in the figure. These enriched functions are mainly related with metabolic process, including heterocycle metabolic and organic substance biosynthetic process. Given that essential domains are correlated with species relatedness, we subsequently investigated whether the functions are related with species. To simplify the analysis and also because these three species have many essential domains in common (), we combined the domains in PA, AB and EC together into Gram-negative group (GN). All domains were then further grouped according to their essentiality in the following species (or groups): GN, BS, NC and SC. For some of these groups, GO enrichment analysis also showed significantly enriched functions related to the corresponding species' feature. For example, the lipid A biosynthetic process (GO:0009245) was enriched in GN-specific essential domains, while the GPI anchor biosynthetic process (GO:0006506) was enriched in NC-and SC-specific essential domains (Supplementary). In domains that were found non-essential in NC but essential in SC, the transcription factor TFIIA complex (GO:0005672) was enriched. This TF is necessary for the initiation of gene transcription in eukaryotes, but only got one copy in SC and had at least two copies in NC. The DNA polymerase III complex (GO:0009360) was enriched in domains that were only essential in prokaryotes, while the RNA biosynthetic process (GO:0032774) was enriched in conserved essential domains in all groups. Further study of the enriched functions of domains with various conservation levels and essentiality patterns will reveal the characteristics of each species and their unique requirement of essential functions.
Annotate gene essentiality using essential domainWe identified each domain's essentiality designation using that of the gene(s) to which it belongs. Reciprocally, we tried to reproduce the annotation of essential genes based on these predicted essential domains. The rationale is that if we can accurately reproduce the essential gene annotations based on essential domains, there are two implications: First, the EDP model has made accurate predictions of essential domains. Second, gene essentiality can be adequately explained from a protein domain perspective. For each species, we annotated the essential genes based on essential domains: that is, we assigned to a gene the label 'essential' if and only if it contained at least one essential domain. Those genes that did not contain any essential domains were labeled 'non-essential'. We then compared the assigned essential genes with the observed essential genes in each species. As shown in, the 'reproduced essentiality' of genes is highly consistent with the observed cases. As a control, we randomly assigned the essential labels to genes in the real dataset (labeled 'random' in), and used the EDP model to produce a set of 'essential domains' based on this randomized dataset. When comparing the area under the ROC curves (AUCs) of the essential gene estimates using real data versus random data, we found that the essential domains based on the real dataset produced significantly more accurate annotation for essential genes (Student's t-test). We also combined all six datasets and tested the prediction on essential genes with a nested cross validation. We randomly take 10% of data out, train the EDP model on the rest 90% with a 10 fold cross-validation and then test the trained model on the previous 10% data. The test is repeated for 10 times, and the result is shown in Supplementary Table S7. This result suggests that gene essentiality can be adequately explained from a protein domain perspective, and thus protein domains are likely more basic units that are responsible for gene essentiality.
Literature support of the predicted prokaryotic essential domainsWe investigated further some of the essential domains we predicted. Below we will present several cases to illustrate how these domains could be used to explain gene essentiality (). The first case includes two domains, PF00294 and PB003571. The domain PB003571 is annotated by PfamB with unknown function but is predicted as an essential domain. All genes contains this domain are essential genes, including BSU35740, PA4996, YGR277C and NCU05311 and all these genes contain only this domain except for PA4996. This result is consistent with a recent report, in which Goodacre et al. found that many essential genes in microbes contain only one domain without known function (). Also, this domain is conserved among four microbes which differ a lot in taxonomy, indicating a significantly important function it may have. At the same time, the other domain PF00294 which is also found in essential gene PA4996 is predicted as non-essential, for its function of pfkB family carbohydrate kinase is not that important, and could be found in many non-essential genes including b1723, ACIAD1992 and BSU14390. The second case includes four domains. PF03120 and PF00533 are predicted as essential domains while PF00633 and PB002244 as non-essential. PF03120 is the DNA ligase OB domain, which is necessary for the ligation of DNA fragments during DNA duplication, repair and recombination. These functions are necessary for organisms to survive, and genes containing this domain are all essential genes, such as ACIAD0848 PA1529, b2411 and BSU06620. As for PF00533, the BRCT domain that is conserved in proteins involved in cell cycle checkpoint function is also predicted as essential domain. On the other hand, PF00633 is the helix-hairpin-helix DNAbinding motif, which is related with the interaction between protein and DNA. The function of that domain is not indispensable, since ACIAD0848 could also function in DNA repair process without PF00633's present. And even contains this domain, like BSU25590, won't make it essential as well. The last case also includes four domains: PF00986 is the essential one, and PF02518, PF01751 and PB011111 are the non-essential domains. PF00986 is the carboxyl terminus of DNA gyrase B subunit, and is responsible for the ATP-independent relaxation during the complexation of DNA gyrate process. This function is important during DNA duplication, and many genes contains this domains could be inhibited by antibiotics(). Many genes containing this domain are essential, such as ACIAD004, b3030 and b3699. It's worth noting that in E.coli there are two copies of that domain, however the evaluation of its essentiality has not been effected. Most interestingly, the EDP model seems to be able to tolerate mistakes in the original essential annotations. We found that the PA3987 gene contained the same domain as PA3834, PA4560, b0026, b0642, ACIAD3106 and ACIAD0022. There other genes are all essential for the organisms, and it's odd that PA3987 alone is a non-essential gene. The non-essential annotation was from the dataset produced by (). In their experiment, only one transposon insertion, which did not change the reading frame, was observed within PA3987. It is well recognized that a single transposon insertion is often insufficient to disrupt a gene's function, and this can result in false annotation of essential genes (). Therefore, the annotation based on this transposon mutagenesis is highly likely to be a false-negative error. Our EDP model correctly predicts the PF00133 domain to be essential despite the error in this annotation based on the transposon mutagenesis.. Estimates of gene essentiality based on essential domains. A ROC curve and precision-recall curve are shown for both the estimation based on real data (black) and random data (light grey) from which the essentiality of genes are randomly assigned. Also shown is t-test that was run between the AUC of real and random data and P-valuesAlthough protein domains have been sought in determining the mechanistic basis of some essential genes, to our knowledge, largescale analysis of essentiality from a protein domain perspective has not been attempted. In this study, using well-defined essential gene datasets in six microorganisms, we have developed an EM algorithm-based EDP model to evaluate the gene essentiality from a protein domain perspective. We demonstrated that, when tested with simulated data, the EDP model was capable of identifying essential domains and could tolerate the disturbance of substantial noise. Further application of this model to both prokaryotic and eukaryotic datasets led to the identification of hundreds of essential domains in each organism. There are several interesting findings based on the analysis of these domains. First, essential domains are highly conserved among species, not only more so than non-essential domains, but to a higher degree than essential genes as well. This result suggests that essential domains may play the role of 'functional bricks' during the evolution of genes, which would be constrained through evolutionary pressure and undergo few changes. Second, conserved essential domains perform species-related functions, such as the lipid A biosynthetic process shared among gram-negative bacteria. Third, domain essentiality can be used to accurately reproduce the annotations of essential genes, and can even be used to test the results of the transposon mutagenesis datasets. The EDP model could be influenced by the following factors and may be further improved for use in our future studies. First, the cross talk between domains may affect the EDP model's accuracy. According to the study of Vogel et al, certain domain pairs might be highly associated to occur in genes together (). In these cases, these protein domains are more likely to be estimated as non-essential if their related genes were not all essential. In some extreme situations, the combination of domains might even generate novel functions () and thus result in different essentialities. This would impact the conservation of domain's essentiality when species were analyzed separately, or bring false predictions of essential domains when using combined datasets from multiple genomes. Second, the estimation of domain essentiality can be improved. For example, in the EDP Model, FER and FNR are estimated based on the entire dataset (both essential genes and domains) (Equation 1). However, FER and FNR influence each domain's essentiality score when re-estimating the probability for each domain to be essential (Equation 4). As a result, applying the EDP Model on two separated gene-domain associations may produce different results when this data is combined and the model is run again. Third, the performance of the EDP Model is dependent upon the quality of the dataset. Although we have shown that it is capable of tolerating noise to some degree, the quality of the input data will inevitably affect the accuracy of the predictions. Despite some limitations, there are several advantages of an essential domain-centric versus gene-centric approach to gene essentiality: First, essential domains are more basic functional units than essential genes. Many genes consist of multiple domains that carry out distinct functions. Employing an essential domain concept will allow us to pinpoint which function is essential. The seemingly diverse mechanistic basis of essential genes and higher-order essentiality, e.g. synthetic lethality, may be revealed and united. Second, essential domains are more transferable between organisms. EC and PA share <20% of their genes (orthologs), but they share more than 50% of their domains. Third, essential domains are more scalable than genes. Recently, it was discovered that although the number of multi-domain architecture families (MDAs) is growing rapidly over time, the number of single-domain architecture families (SDAs) appears to be reaching a saturation point (). Nearly all novelty comes from the arrangement of known SDA domains along an MDA sequence (). In summary, with these new insights gleaned from the study of essential domains, it will become possible to discover the fundamental principles that govern gene essentiality, which will lead to the eventual deciphering of the complex relationship between genotype and phenotype. Furthermore, unraveling the mechanistic basis of gene essentiality will provide crucial information on cell physiology and lead to drastic improvements in our ability to efficiently re-engineer microorganisms. This will have applications on many fronts, including energy, biodefense, pharmaceuticals and bioremediation.
FundingThis work was supported by the exchange program fund of doctoral student under the Fudan University Graduate School (to Yulan Lu), the Natural Science Foundation of China (No.31071167) and Medical Engineering Cross Research Foundation of Shanghai JiaoTong University (to H. L.) and NIH R21 AI111062 to LJL. Conflict of Interest: none declared.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Y.Lu et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Pval= 4.98e66 NES Domain ES Domain NES Domain ES Domain NES Domain ES Domain NES Domain ES Domain NES Domain ES Domain NES Domain Fig. 3. Frequency of non-essential domains and essential domains in different species. The detection frequency of each domain in six microorganisms is shown in boxplot. Frequency of essential domains (ES Domain) is compared with non-essential domains (NES Domain) in each species. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test is used to specify the significant difference between essential and non-essential domains in the same species
