Motivation: We have recently characterized an instance of alternative splicing that differs from the canonical gene transcript by deletion of a length of sequence not divisible by three, but where translation can be rescued by an alternative start codon. This results in a predicted protein in which the amino terminus differs markedly in sequence from the known protein product(s), as it is translated from an alternative reading frame. Automated pipelines have annotated thousands of splice variants but have overlooked these protein isoforms, leading to them being underrepresented in current databases. Results: Here we describe 1849 human and 733 mouse transcripts that can be transcribed from an alternate ATG. Of these, 480% have not been annotated previously. Those conserved between human and mouse genomes (and hence under likely evolutionary selection) are identified. We provide mass spectroscopy evidence for translation of selected transcripts. Of the described splice variants, only one has previously been studied in detail and converted the encoded protein from an activator of cell-function to a suppressor, demonstrating that these splice variants can result in profound functional change. We investigate the potential functional effects of this splicing using a variety of bioinformatic tools. The 2582 variants we describe are involved in a wide variety of biological processes, and therefore open many new avenues of research.
INTRODUCTIONAlternative splicing is one of the most significant contributors to proteome diversity (). Through the production of multiple mRNA transcripts, a single gene can encode multiple and functionally distinct protein isoforms. These isoforms can differ subtly, varying in only a single amino acid, or demonstrate drastic changes in their peptide sequences accompanied by equally significant changes in their function. Automated pipelines have been developed which can identify and annotate alternative splice events and their encoded proteins, primarily through the alignment of Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) (). We have previously characterized an alternative splice form of the mouse non-SMC condensin II complex, subunit H2 (Ncaph2) gene that was incorrectly annotated by these pipelines (). The gene can produce a transcript that lacks the last 17 bp of the first exon. While normally such a deletion would produce a frame-shift of the downstream sequence, translation at an alternate start codon rescues the reading frame of the sequence downstream from the splice event while shifting that of the upstream sequence. The result is a protein isoform that possesses a unique amino terminus, but in which the remainder of the protein is identical to the known isoform (). An exhaustive literature search revealed only three other proteins displaying similar alternative splicing; mouse Innositol polyphosphate-4-phosphatase, type II (Inpp4b), human Leishmanolysin-like (metallopeptidase M8 family) (LMLN) and Otubain-1 (OTUB1) (). All couple a frame-shifting splice event with an alternate start codon to change the readingframe of the amino terminus, and all have been overlooked by the genome annotation pipelines, leading us to question if the few documented instances of this splicing are a true representation of their prevalence. Here we report the genome-wide identification of new examples of this type of alternative splicing, using publically available EST data.
METHODS
Identification of novel protein isoformsReference gene and EST sequences were downloaded for human and mouse genomes from NCBI Unigene. The original search was conducted using Unigene Builds #231 for human and #192 for mouse, based on RefSeq Assembly 46. EST sequences were aligned to the gene reference sequence using BLAST (v2.2.12) (). In cases where a gene possesses more than one reference sequence, we chose the longest. Alignments were conducted using gap initiation and extension penalties of 5 and 2, respectively and an E-value threshold of 10 5. Events were required to show an insertion or deletion of at least four nucleotides not divisible by three in an annotated region of translation. These events also needed to be flanked by a minimum of 20 unambiguous bases of sequence on either side and observed in at least two independent EST sequences. Events creating exons of 520 bases or insertion events contained entirely within annotated exons were discarded. Finally, transcripts arising from these events that could be: translated into a peptide sequence from an alternate start codon, with no premature stop codons, and thus possessing a conserved carboxy-terminus relative to the canonical protein were *To whom correspondence should be addressed. selected. A summary of the full search strategy is shown in Supplementary. Prevalence of alternative splicing within gene ontology biological process functional categories was determined using DAVID gene ontology software ().
Identification of conserved alternative splicingGenes undergoing splicing in both mouse and human were identified and the resulting transcripts compared. If the transcripts were of a similar size (within 60 bp of each other) they were aligned using clustalw2 (v2.1) () and the results passed to PhyloCSF (). The protein sequences of alignments that received a positive score from PhyloCSF (which is indicative of conservation) were then checked manually.
Analyzing ribosome profiling dataAlternate start codons predicted in this study were considered supported by the results ofif the Ribosome Profiling study identified a start codon in the same Reference Sequence at the same position. Identification of supported start sites was facilitated by the fact that both our studies used the same numbering method; the position of start codons was determined relative to their position within a Reference Sequence.
Secondary structure analysis of splice junctionsA 60-bp window of sequence centered on either the 5 0-or 3 0-splice junctions was identified by mapping the regions flanking the splice event (provided in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2) back to the genomic sequence (downloaded from ENSEMBL, Human Assembly GRCh37.p12; Mouse Assembly GRCm38.p1). The initial scan identified 97% of the predicted splice junctions. The remaining 3% were excluded from the analysis. An equal number of randomly chosen exons (downloaded from ENSEMBL) were used to generate a control group of splice junctions. The level of secondary structure was determined by predicting the Mean Free Energy (MFE) of the sequence using RNAfold (), a component of the ViennaRNA package (v2.1.3) with default parameters. Differences between the groups of exons were assessed using an un-paired t-test.
Identification of supporting Mass Spectrometry evidenceWe adopted a combined-database approach of peptide identification (). Our predicted alternate-proteins were appended to a list of all annotated human or mouse proteins downloaded from NCBI. We also included reversed versions of all the target proteins to act as decoys in order to calculate the False Detection Rate (FDR). Mass spectra were obtained from Peptide Atlas (). We used data from two experiments for human (PAe000116, derived from the human erythroleukemia K562 cell line and PAe000053, derived from human blood) and mouse (PAe000373, PAe000370, PAe000359 and PAe000380 derived from the ctyoplasmic, microsomal, mitochondrial and nuclear fractions respectively, of mouse whole brain extracts and PAe000300, derived from mouse testes). Spectra were then analyzed using X!Tandem (v2010.12.01.1) () with the following parameters: parent ion mass tolerance of AE100, monoisotopic mass, trypsin cleavages only and no more than one skipped cleavage in the peptide. Peptide assignments were statistically validated using PeptideProphet (from the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline Suite v4.4.1) (), discounting spectra assignments below 0.05 or to peptides 57-amino acids long. Proteins identifications and the protein FDR were made using MAYU (), ignoring ambiguous peptides. We chose a peptide-spectrum match FDR of 0.009 as our cutoff, which corresponded to protein FDRs of 6.69% and 5.95% for human and mouse, respectively. The complete list of alternate protein sequences used in the MS analysis is provided in Supplementaryand S2.
RESULTS
Identification of 42000 novel protein isoforms in human and mouseIn order to identify potential frame-shifted protein isoforms, we designed a program that downloaded each gene's ESTs from Unigene and then aligned them back to the reference sequence using BLAST. Alignments were then parsed for splice events that produced frame shifts that could be rescued through use of an alternate start codon. An overview of the search program is given in Supplementary. Our program predicted 1849 alternative splice events in the human genome and 733 instances in the mouse genome that result in proteins with a novel aminoterminus derived from an alternate reading frame. The full lists of these transcripts are provided in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2. Examples of genes displaying the splicing are provided in. The highest percentage of supporting ESTs recorded was for human LGALS14 (lectin, galactoside-binding, soluble 14), in which the 'alternative' transcript accounts for 58% of the total transcripts. Thus, this previously under-appreciated form of alternative splicing can affect a large percentage of the annotated transcripts for a given gene. We compared our alternate protein sequences to a list of all annotated proteins present in the NCBI and ENSEMBL/ GENCODE databases. In total 324 (18%) of the human and 44 (6%) of the mouse proteins have been previously annotated. Thus,480% of the alternative translations we have identified are completely novel. Examples of this unusual form of splicing were found in genes involved in a diverse range of biological processes. We used DAVID Gene Ontology software () to identify pathways enriched for this form of splicing. These
Conservation of splice events between human and mouseComparing the splicing events found in human and mouse identified 40 instances of conserved alternative splicing between the two species (). The conservation of these forms implies likely evolutionary selection. As well as the 40 genes displaying conserved splicing, we found an additional 102 genes that, while displaying this form of splicing in both human and mouse, did not produce conserved proteins. The relatively low species conservation is consistent with recent findings showing that alternative splicing is often species-specific ().
Secondary structure of splice sitesAnalysis of the secondary structure surrounding the alternate splice junctions showed that in both human and mouse, the alternate 5 0 junctions were predicted to possess a lower secondary structure and the 3 0 junctions a higher level of structure when compared to a control group (Supplementary Figs S2 and S3). Given the influence of mRNA secondary structure on alternative splicing () these results may suggest a method of regulation, although the precise mechanism remains unclear.
Prevalence of Kozak sequencesIdentification of these splice events using ESTs provides strong evidence for their transcription. Translation of these alternative splice forms however, relies on the translation machinery correctly identifying the alternate start codon, a process often mediated by the Kozak sequence (). We therefore investigated the context in which the start codons were presented, paying attention to both the canonical and alternate start sites. We classified the surrounding sequence as either an optimal). Full results are given in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2. In human, 66% of the canonical start sites were found within an optimal Kozak sequence as opposed to 37% of the alternate sites (64% versus 37% for mouse). For both species, the alternate start sites were distributed evenly between optimal and sub-optimal Kozak sequences. Interestingly, the Kozak signals of the conserved alternate start sites appeared to be more likely to exist in an optimal Kozak sequence (47.5% of conserved sites versus 36.9% of nonconserved).
Proteomic evidence for the translation of the alternative splice formsUltimately, translation needs to be proven experimentally. We therefore adopted a proteomics approach, searching for evidence of the proteins in publicly available Mass Spectrometry (MS) data. As our proteins differ from the canonical forms only in the amino-terminus, such an approach is difficult because first, in order to be identified the alternate protein must produce unique peptides of appropriate length upon tryptic digestion, and second, such a peptide (matching either fully or in part to the altered amino terminus) must be identified in the MS experiment. By reanalyzing raw spectra from two human and mouse experiments, we found evidence supporting the translation of 19 novel human and seven novel mouse proteins. We used stringent search criteria corresponding to a protein false detection rate of 6.69% for human and 5.95% for mouse (i.e. no more than one match is likely to be a false positive). The mouse MS data came from experiments on brain and testes. Four of the seven splice variants were represented by an EST derived from brain (or embryo upper head) and one by an EST derived from mouse testicles. Thus, the tissue derivation of the ESTs matches the provenance of the MS datasets, providing strong support for the validity of our search strategy. Such a correlation was not observed in human as the MS data were derived from blood and a leukemic cell line rather than specific tissues. The identification of examples of alternate proteins in these MS datasets therefore provides independent proof of concept, indicating that these alternate isoforms can indeed be translated into proteins.
Evidence for the selection of alternate start codonsRibosome profiling is a technique that identifies mRNAs undergoing translation within a cell, by determining what transcripts are bound by ribosomes (). In 2012, Lee et al. modified the technique to identify translation initiation sites in both a human and mouse cell line (). By comparing their list of identified translation initiation sites to our list of predicted alternate start codons, we were able to find evidence supporting our annotations for 35 instances in human and three in mouse (full list provided in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2). This provides direct evidence that the translational machinery can utilize the alternate start codon predicted by our pipeline.
Prediction of functional effects of alternative splicingThe selective modification of the N-terminus may allow for the regulation or change of protein function. Given the preference for localization signals to be found within the amino-terminus, one possibility is that this method of splicing can regulate a protein's subcellular localization. To assess this, we compared the predicted localization of each of the canonical and alternate protein isoforms using the Wolf pSort program (). Of the mouse and human proteins 450% were predicted to change their localization due to these alternative splicing events (examples provided in, full results in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2). Another key determinant in modification of protein function is the selective removal or addition of functional domains. In order to investigate this possibility, we used the Pfam software suite (v1.3) () to identify differences in potential functional domains between the canonical and alternate isoforms (full data presented in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2; examples provided in). One or more functional domains are predicted to be removed upon splicing in 33% and 38% of the human and mouse genes, respectively. In comparison, only a small number of the events were predicted to add a functional domain (six in mouse and 19 in human). Of the genes predicted to change their functional domains, 57% of the human proteins and 64% of the mouse proteins are also predicted to change their subcellular localizations. By pairing these two functional effects, this method of alternative splicing may produce protein isoforms that display unique functions and are located in separate cellular compartments.
CONCLUSIONThe aim of this study was to investigate an unusual outcome of alternative splicing that results in the amino terminal exons of a gene being translated in two reading frames. Our pipelinepredicted a total of 2582 instances of this splicing in the mouse and human genomes, the majority of which have not been previously annotated. Previous large-scale studies have treated genes as possessing a single start codon, only considering alternate sites of translation initiation when a splice event removes the canonical start codon. A few studies have investigated the potential of alternate start codons, but these have focused on either downstream, in-frame, start codons that produce truncated versions of proteins (), or those that result in a frame shift of the entire transcript (). Our study is the first to investigate the prevalence of this unusual amino-terminus frame-shifting form of alternative splicing. Our search strategy identified three of the four published instances of this alternative splicing. Upon further inspection, it was found that Inpp4b was not detected due to low EST coverage. The Unigene database contained only 58 ESTs associated with Inpp4b, none of which encode the experimentally validated splice variant. The 2582 splice forms we have identified are therefore likely to be an underestimate of the true frequency of this splicing. Low EST coverage of genes hides instances of this splicing (as seen in Inpp4b) in addition, variants transcribed at low levels or under restrictive conditions (such as in specific cell subsets or under particular metabolic conditions) may not be represented in databases. Only one of the 2582 splice variants we have identified, otubain-1, has been previously functionally characterized and was found to have a dramatic effect on the function of the protein (). While the canonical form of the protein activated T-cells, the alternate form was found to promote Tcell anergy (turn off T-cells). The profound functional difference found in the only one of these genes studied, coupled with our predictions for alterations in domain composition and subcellular localization, highlights the potential importance of the novel proteins we have identified. In this study, we have identified 42000 novel protein isoforms in human and mouse genomes. These result from an unusual outcome of alternative splicing, combining frame-shifting splice variants with alternative start codons. This largely overlooked form of alternative splicing therefore contributes significantly to transcriptome diversity. In each case, the novel proteins differ from their known isoforms by their amino terminus being translated from an alternate reading frame; the remainder of the protein is identical in both isoforms. This can result in a profound change to protein function. The proteins we have identified are involved in a wide range of biological processes. Research into the biological functions of these novel proteins will therefore open new avenues of research into almost every facet of cell biology.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
L.O.W.Wilson et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Novel human and mouse protein isoforms at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
