Motivation: Cellular interactions of kinesin-1, an adenosine triphos-phate (ATP)-driven motor protein capable of undergoing multiple steps on a microtubule (MT), affect its mechanical processivity, the number of steps taken per encounter with MT. Even though the processivity of kinesin has been widely studied, a detailed study of the factors that affect the stepping of the motor along MT is still lacking. Results: We model the cellular interactions of kinesin as a probabilistic timed automaton and use the model to simulate the mechanical processivity of the motor. Theoretical analysis suggests: (i) backward stepping tends to be powered by ATP hydrolysis, rather than ATP synthesis, (ii) backward stepping powered by ATP synthesis is more likely to happen with limiting ATP concentration ([ATP]) at high loads and (iii) with increasing load the frequency of backward stepping powered by ATP hydrolysis at high [ATP] is greater than that powered by ATP synthesis at limiting [ATP]. Together, the higher frequency of backward stepping powered by ATP hydrolysis than by ATP synthesis is found to be a reason for the more dramatic falling of kinesin processivity with rising load at high [ATP] compared with that at low [ATP]. Simulation results further show that the proces-sivity of kinesin can be determined by the number of ATP hydrolysis and synthesis kinetic cycles taken by the motor before becoming inactive. It is also found that the duration of a backward stepping cycle at high loads is more likely to be less than that of a forward stepping cycle. Contact
INTRODUCTIONKinesin-1 is an adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-driven motor protein that walks in an asymmetric hand-over-hand fashion () on a microtubule (MT) in discrete 8.2 nm steps (). Mechanical processivity of kinesin has revealed that the motor takes multiple steps in the forward direction (i.e. to the plus end of MT) and occasionally in the backward direction (i.e. to the minus end of MT) () before detaching from MT in the presence of ATP (), or in the absence of ATP if external load is applied to the motor (). Processivity of kinesin ensures that cellular cargos are transported reliably over long distances. Processive stepping of kinesin exerts localized forces on nanostructures, which can be exploited in nanorobotics by inventing artificial nanomotors and thus, synthetic nanodevices powered by the motor (). This stepping is also manipulated in the controlled propagation architecture of nanonetworks whose information molecules are carried by kinesin motors between transmitter and receiver nanomachines (). Synthetic nanodevices and nanonetworks are anticipated to contribute in medical diagnostics as well as engineering applications (). Despite this progress, artificial nanomotors still lack the functionality and efficiency of their biological counterparts (). Processivity of kinesin motor and thus, its mean run length (i.e. the distance that the motor travels before detaching from MT) is correlated to the cellular interactions of the motor (). Yet, little is known about how this motor can remain attached to MT through the hundreds of stepping cycles (). A better understanding of the cellular interactions of kinesin would provide new insights into the mechanical processivity of the motor. Recently, we developed a mathematical model that simulates the behaviour of kinesin stepping (). We showed that the model could be used to analyse and predict forward and backward stepping of kinesin motor at different ATP concentrations () and loads. On the basis of our findings in, here we aim to model the stochastic behaviour of a single kinesin molecule by constructing a probabilistic timed automaton based on a discrete stochastic model of the motor at variousand loads. The probabilistic timed automata (PTA) are mathematical models augmented with time and discrete probability distributions for modelling the temporal and stochastic properties of stochastic discrete-event systems (). Our proposed automaton model shows that the mean run length of kinesin, at differentand loads, can be determined by the number of ATP hydrolysis and synthesis kinetic cycles taken by the motor before detaching from MT.
RESULTS
Theoretical analysisFor a kinesin motor, the four-state discrete stochastic model defines a single stepping cycle as:d1!j d2!j d3!j d4!j *To whom correspondence should be addressed.where). In this four-state stochastic model, kinetic state i may transit to states i + 1 and i  1 with forward and backward transition rates u i and w i (i = 1, 2, 3, 4), respectively, influenced by the temperature T and external load F as:where u 0 i and w 0 i are the transition rates at zero load, + i and  i are the characteristic distances for the load, d is the step size (=8.2 nm) and k B is the Boltzmann constant (;). The load distribution factors demonstrate how the external load affects the individual kinetic rates where it is assumed thatThese factors are related to substep lengths). The parameter values of Equations (1) and (2) summarized inas well as the parameter values ofdependent rates presented in Equations (3) and (4) have been estimated by Fisher and Kolomeisky (2001) through regression on the experimental data of Block and colleagues in () at room temperature:in the direction of the applied load in the absence of ATP due to the strain on the motor head generated by the load, in this work, we focus on the ATP-driven stepping of kinesin motor based on the four-state discrete stochastic model.is considered as a factor that affects the motor velocity at various loads () and thus, it is proposed as a mean for temporal control of synthetic nanodevices powered by kinesin motor (; Wang and Manesh, 2010). In modelling kinesin processivity, Block and colleagues inused an energy landscape formalism, where the kinetic rates followed a Boltzmann-type relationship, and showed that the mean run length of kinesin, L, exhibits MichaelisMenten kinetic behaviour, L = L 0/ (+ L M ), where L 0 is the mean run length at zero load and L M is Michaelis constant. Using a global analysis of kinesin processivity data carried out from MichaelisMenten functions at differentand loads and then, fitted to kinetic rates, L was calculated as follows:where A = 107 AE 9 gives the maximum average number of catalytic cycles before detachment, = 1.3 AE 0.1 nm is the characteristic distance associated with load dependence and B = 0.029 AE 0.009 mM is a parameter of Michaelis constant. It was observed that run lengths of kinesin motor are exponentially distributed under fixed load or(). The energy landscape model proposed inpredicts that kinesin motility should remain tightly coupled to ATP hydrolysis even under load. Meanwhile, the four-state discrete stochastic model, derived from this energy model, describes the dynamics of kinesin stepping by both the ATP hydrolysis and synthesis kinetic cycles at variousshown that there is a small probability of detachment per mechanical stepping cycle (). As the detachment of kinesin from MT in each stepping cycle is an independent event and does not depend on any previous stepping cycles, the distribution of the number of steppings before detaching of kinesin from MT is a geometric distribution. Thus, the mean number of forward steps derived from ATP hydrolysis before the motor becomes inactivated is given by:where P off is the detachment probability of kinesin from MT per mechanical stepping cycle. Since kinesin dissociates from MT after each single run, the detachment probability of the motor from MT per mechanical stepping cycle in relation with the mean run length is exponentially distributed as follows ():where L is the mean run length given by Equation (5). To obtain the mean number of steps taken by kinesin per encounter with MT, the mean number of backward steps derived from ATP synthesis should be deducted from 5n h 4. We define the mean number of backward steps derived from ATP synthesis before detaching of kinesin from MT as follows:where P s is the proportion of ATP synthesis pathway to ATP hydrolysis pathway defined as follows:where u F 2 and w F 3 are computed by Equations(1) and (2). Thus, the mean number of steps taken by kinesin per encounter with MT is defined as follows:Theoretical predictions for the processivity of kinesin motor at differentand loads are obtained from Equation (10) ().and B shows that the processivity of kinesin motor dramatically declines with increasing load or decreasing, in agreement with previous findings in Liepelt and Lipowsky (2007) andshowed that at low loads and high, the mean run length L was $600 nm. L fell to $300 nm when thewas reduced to 5 M, and to $80 nm when load was increased to 5 pN. We show that the computed 5RL4 is comparable with the experimentally obtained L, where 5RL4 is almost equal to: $601 nm at= 1 mM and F = 1.1 pN, $300 nm at= 5 mM and F = 2.4 pN and $80 nm when load increases to 5 pN at$1 mM. Results inand B also agree with the findings of Liepelt and Lipowsky (2007) in which a 7-state kinetic scheme, based on several motor cycles, was used to calculate the 5RL4. At high,and D indicates that the mean backward displacement (5BD4) powered by ATP synthesis decreases with rising load. This implies that the falling of 5RL4 with rising load at highobserved incould only be due to the rising frequency of backward stepping powered by ATP hydrolysis. This is in agreement with the experimental observations inand theoretical results in Khataee and Liew (2014) and Liepelt and Lipowsky (2007) that backward steppings are mainly generated by ATP hydrolysis at high. At limiting, backward stepping powered by ATP hydrolysis has low frequency due to low. At low,shows that 5BD4 has rising trend, indicating that ATP is increasingly likely to be synthesized during backward movement, as reported in, Fisher and Kolomeisky (2001) and Kolomeisky and Fisher (2007). However, the slower falling rate of 5RL4 at limitingthan at highinindicates that the rate of backward stepping powered by ATP synthesis at limitingis lower than the rate of backward stepping powered by ATP hydrolysis at high. This supports the observations that backward steppings are more likely to be generated by ATP hydrolysis than by ATP synthesis whenis not limiting, and that the frequency of backward stepping rises with(). Moreover,shows that the rise of 5BD4 slows down with increasing, implying that backward stepping powered by ATP synthesis is more likely to happen with limiting. Together, these theoretical analyses indicate thatthe processivity of kinesin can be determined by the number of ATP hydrolysis and synthesis kinetic cycles taken by the motor before becoming inactive.
Automaton modelTo simulate how the cellular interactions of kinesin affect its processivity, we abstract an important set of its cellular interactions as a parametric probabilistic timed automaton (), and construct the automaton model shown inwith M kinesin = (S, s initial , s final , I, C, tran, inv, A s , EC s ). The model simulates the ATP hydrolysis and synthesis kinetic pathways that resulted in the processivity of kinesin at variousand loads. The set S = {s off , H/S} indenotes the states of M kinesin where s off corresponds to the kinetic state in which kinesin is detached from MT and state H/S stand for an ATP hydrolysis (H) or synthesis (S) kinetic cycle. State H/S is composed of H and S cycles connected by a state s 0 defined to determine which cycle is randomly chosen to be executed. Each H or S cycle is composed of states s 1 s 4 , which stand for the kinetic states '1''4' of the four-state discrete stochastic model, respectively (). s initial = {s off } & S and s final = {s off } & S are the initial and final states of M kinesin , respectively, because, in vivo, kinesin mainly exists as soluble motor where its activity is switched off and the motor is autoinhibited from binding to and moving on MTs (). The input set I = {E, T, D, P, E 0 , T 0 , D 0 , P 0 } denotes the events E, T, D and P, which stand for the presence of enabling condition of kinesin (e.g. low external loads, the presence of MT and the absence of regulatory factors), ATP binding, ADP binding and P i binding, respectively. The complement of an event (i.e. E 0 , T 0 , D 0 or P 0 ) represents the opposite molecular role of that event. To express the temporal properties of kinesin mechanism, we define the clock set C = {x}, which contains a non-negative real-valued variable (i.e. 2 R + ) that increases at the same rate as real time. Clock x indicates the time elapsed in M kinesin states, corresponding to the mean waiting time in kinetic states of kinesin. The set tran of transitions which are tuples of the form e s = (s, p, a, C, s 0 ) representing a transition from state s to state s 0 with probability p, event a 2 I [ {"} and set C C of clocks which are reset to 0 by transition e s , where " denotes null event. The function inv: S ! is defined to assign to each state of M kinesin an invariant condition from the set of clock constraints. A state stays invariant, i.e., no change, when the constraint is true. The invariant condition of state s off is assigned as true because, in vivo, kinesin mainly stays in the detached state without time constraint. As state s 0 is defined to determine the kinetic pathway, its invariant condition is assigned as true to show no time constraint. For states s 1 s 4 , we assign invariant conditions x t F i where clock x 2 C and t F i denotes the mean wait time of kinesin in kinetic states i (i = 1, 2, 3, 4). It was shown that the waiting time in each kinetic state is inversely proportional to the transition rate from that state (). Therefore, t F i is calculated as follows:where the transition rates u F i and w F i are computed using Equations (1) and (2) and i = 1, 2, 3, 4 (). The invariant condition of state H/S inis defined as the H or S cycle completion time as follows:where t F i is given by Equation (11). To associate a non-empty set of finite discrete probability distributions with each state s i (i = off, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4), we define action sets A i = {a i1 ,. .. ,a ij } such that: X ei2tran pa ij ; e i =1 13 where p(a ij , e i ) is the probability of using the edge e i from source state s i if the action j has been chosen and j is the number of actions associated with state s i. Two actions a off1 and a off2 areM kinesin starts with incoming unlabeled arrow to state s off with clock x initialized to 0. As the invariant condition of s off is true, the control stays in state s off until perceiving input E. By sensing input E, s off changes to state H/S and clock x is reset to 0. In state H/S, one of ATP hydrolysis or synthesis pathway is randomly chosen to run or M kinesin becomes inactivated with probability P off. (B) Detailed representation of M kinesin. By sensing input E, ATP hydrolysis or synthesis pathway is chosen to run with probability P h or P s , respectively. Then, the value of clock x increases uniformly with time. When x is equal to t F 1 the invariant condition x t F 1 requires that the action with event T or D must be taken. Alternatively, if x exceeds t F 1 then the action with event label E may be taken with probability 1. These behaviours correspond to the attachment of kinesin to MT in the absence of regulatory factors and the start of stepping initiated with kinetic state changing 1! u1 2 or 1! w1 4. However, ifis limiting then the motor detaches from MT due to long pausing. For clarity of the graph, transitions of a single action are connected with a dotted line. Also, actions a i3 (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) are not shown associated with state s off , i.e. A off = {a off1 , a off2 }, representing staying in detached state of kinesin and the attachment of kinesin to MT, respectively. For transitions from state s 0 to the ATP hydrolysis or synthesis pathway, a single action a 01 is assigned to define the proportion of each pathway with probability P s given by Equation (9) and P h given as follows:where u F 2 and w F 3 are computed by Equations(1) and (2). Three actions are associated with each state s i (i = 1, 2, 3, 4), i.e. A i = {a i1 , a i2 , a i3 }: a i1 and a i2 correspond to the forward and backward kinetic transitions from kinetic state i and a i3 expresses the detachment of kinesin from MT in kinetic state i or staying in kinetic state i. To compute the probability of actions a i3 , we distribute P off given by Equation (7) to states s 1 s 4 according to the probability of being in each state. Therefore, the inactivation probabilities of M kinesin in states s 1 s 4 per H or S cycle, corresponding to the detachment probabilities of kinesin from MT in kinetic states i (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) per mechanical cycle, are defined as follows:where P i is the probability in kinetic states i defined as follows ():Finally, the function EC i : a ij ! is defined to assign an enabling condition to each action a ij 2 A i , where i = off, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and j is the number of actions associated with state s i. An enabling condition allows the corresponding action to be triggered. The enabling condition of actions associated with state s off is assigned as true, EC off : a off1 , a off2 ! true, meaning that these actions can be triggered at any time. This resembles the cellular mechanism of kinesin, which can stay unattached or attached to MT without time constraint. The enabling condition of action a 01 associated with state s 0 is also assigned as true, i.e. EC 0 : a 01 ! true, meaning that upon the attachment of kinesin to MT, ATP hydrolysis or synthesis pathway can be taken randomly without time constraint. The enabling conditions of actions associated with states s 1 s 4 and resemble forward or backward kinetic transition are assigned as x = t F i , where x 2 C and t F i is computed using Equation (11). These conditions enable transitions to be triggered when the mean wait times in their corresponding states are met. For the third actions of states s 1 s 4 , a i3 (i = 1, 2, 3, 4), the enabling condition is assigned as true, meaning that the detachment of kinesin from MT in kinetic state i or staying in kinetic state i has no time constraint.
Simulations and discussionTo simulate the processivity of kinesin using M kinesin model at variousand loads, the function of M kinesin is analysed over its states, according to the principles of PTA, where the behaviour of a system is modelled as a sequence of system states (or events) called a trace (). Accordingly, to simulate the processivity of kinesin, we compute the numbers of the following two traces completed in each run of M kinesin :where T(h) and T(s) traces correspond to the stepping cycle derived from ATP hydrolysis and synthesis kinetic cycle, respectively. In each run, M kinesin starts in state s off , transits stochastically between H or S cycles by executing T(h) and T(s) traces until it becomes randomly inactivated in state s off. This run corresponds to the attachment of kinesin to MT, hydrolysis or synthesis of ATP, and detachment from MT. Hence, the mean numbers of T(h) and T(s) traces after many runs of M kinesin would represent 5n h 4 and 5 n s 4, respectively. Then, using Equation (10), 5RL4 is computed byshown by bar graphs. Line graphs are the results obtained from theoretical analysis, as shown in. M kinesin simulates5RL4as a function of (A)at various loads and (B) load F at different. M kinesin also simulates 5BD4, computed by the mean number of T(s) traces  8.2 nm, against (C)at different loads and (D) load F at various. The 25 and 75 percentile values obtained from the simulation are shown in A and B panels. For panels C and D, these values are equal to zero showing that more than 75% of runs of M kinesin do not execute T(s) trace 5n4 8.2 nm. M kinesin is run for 10 000 times and the simulation results of 5RL4, shown inand B, indicate good agreement with experimental observations inand theoretical findings in Liepelt and Lipowsky (2007). Results inand B show that the processivity of kinesin diminishes with increasing load or decreasing, as showed in Liepelt and Lipowsky (2007) and. Similar toand D, simulation results inand D show that 5BD4 is less than 8.2 nm, implying that on average kinesin is not likely to step backward by synthesizing ATP. This supports the observations that backward steppings are more likely to be generated by ATP hydrolysis (). The low 5BD4 is due to the low rate of ATP synthesis, w F 3 , compared with that of ATP hydrolysis, u F 2 , which leads to low P s in comparison with P h. Therefore, the mean number of T(s) trace is below 1. This low mean number of T(s) trace indicates that very few T(s) traces are executed by M kinesin , supporting the theory of the four-state discrete stochastic model in, Fisher and Kolomeisky (2001) and Kolomeisky and Fisher (2007) that backward stepping could result in ATP synthesis.D also indicates a close agreement between the simulation results and the results obtained from theoretical analysis. This agreement of our simulation and theoretical results indicates that the number of T(h) and T(s) traces executed by M kinesin can be used to determine the mean run length of kinesin. Temporal analysis of M kinesin shown inindicates that the inactivation of M kinesin executing either the T(h) or T(s) trace most probably occurs: (i) in state s 1 at lowand low loads and (ii) in states s 3 and s 4 at high loads or high. These analyses suggest kinetic state '1' to be the most probable kinetic state for kinesin detachment from MT at lowand low loads (). This is consistent with the detachment of kinesin from MT due to a long mean waiting time in kinetic state '1' at limiting, as observed experimentally inand shown theoretically in Khataee and Liew (2014). In accordance with the findings ofthat at highthe probability of detachment from kinetic state '1' diminishes, our simulation further shows that at highkinetic states '3' and '4' are the first and second most probable kinetic states for the detachment of kinesin from MT due to their longer durations (). This is in agreement with the reported kinetic states for the detachment of kinesin from MT (). These results are also consistent with the weak affinity of kinesin to MT in kinetic states '3' and '4' (). Simulation results infurther confirm the small detachment probability of kinesin from MT in kinetic state '2', as reported in Seitz and Surrey (2006) due to tight affinity of the motor to MT in this state. In analyzing the temporal properties of M kinesin , Equation (12) further indicates that at lowand low loads the duration of a stepping cycle is dominated by the duration of kinetic state '1' due to waiting for ATP binding (), as reported in. With increasing load, t F T curve decreases suggesting that the duration of a backward stepping cycle at high loads is more likely to be less than that of a forward stepping cycle. In discussing the durations of kinetic states, it was shown that with an increase in the(11) and correspond to the mean waiting time in kinetic states '1''4' () rate of ATP synthesis at high loads, the detachment probability of kinesin from MT would decrease as the duration of being in kinetic state '3' diminishes (). Hence, the rise of ATP synthesis rate would lead to a rise in the backward stepping frequency and thus, lowering 5RL4. In conclusion, our probabilistic timed automaton model constructed using the simple four-state discrete stochastic model could accurately simulate the mechanical processivity of a single kinesin motor at variousand loads. We showed that the mean run length of the motor can be calculated by considering both the ATP hydrolysis and synthesis kinetic cycles. By simulating both the ATP hydrolysis and synthesis kinetic pathways, we could also explain some of the discrepancies between the previously reported theoretical and experimental findings.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
A stochastic automaton model at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
H.Khataee and A.W.-C.Liew at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
