Motivation: Variant calling from genome-wide sequencing data is essential for the analysis of disease-causing mutations and elucidation of disease mechanisms. However, variant calling in low coverage regions is difficult due to sequence read errors and mapping errors. Hence, variant calling approaches that are robust to low coverage data are demanded. Results: We propose a new variant calling approach that considers pedigree information and haplotyping based on sequence reads spanning two or more heterozygous positions termed phase informative reads. In our approach, genotyping and haplotyping by the assignment of each read to a haplotype based on phase informative reads are simultaneously performed. Therefore, positions with low evidence for heterozygosity are rescued by phase informative reads, and such rescued positions contribute to haplotyping in a synergistic way. In addition, pedigree information supports more accurate haplotyping as well as genotyping, especially in low coverage regions. Although het-erozygous positions are useful for haplotyping, homozygous positions are not informative and weaken the information from heterozygous positions, as majority of positions are homozygous. Thus, we introduce latent variables that determine zygosity at each position to filter out homozygous positions for haplotyping. In performance evaluation with a parent–offspring trio sequencing data, our approach outper-forms existing approaches in accuracy on the agreement with single nucleotide polymorphism array genotyping results. Also, performance analysis considering distance between variants showed that the use of phase informative reads is effective for accurate variant calling, and further performance improvement is expected with longer sequencing data.
INTRODUCTIONOwing to the progress of next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies, whole-genome sequencing for each individual becomes possible in practical time and with reasonable cost for the identification of disease-associated mutations. Also, individual genome data from casecontrol study or study with pedigree analysis contribute to the elucidation of unknown disease mechanisms. Because accurate variant calling is required for the analysis of these genomes in a reliable manner, the development of accurate variant callers is demanded. In most of the variant callers, variants such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), insertions and deletions are detected at each position in a reference genome from the information of mapped sequence reads. Because there exist positions with insufficient coverage of reads due to bias in the library preparation and mapping failures at short tandem repeat polymorphic sites or variable number of tandem repeat sites, reliable variant calling is challenging at these sites (). To improve the reliability of variant calling, several approaches have been proposed, where additional information such as pedigree information among individuals and linkage disequilibrium among SNPs is considered (). At present, read length of sequence reads from most of the next-generation sequencers is 5250 bp. However, read length is still extending from the improvement of sequencing protocols, and several sequencers such as Pacific Biosciences' RS sequencer can produce sequence reads with thousands of base pairs although their throughput is not high and their read error rate is relatively high compared with other sequencers such as Illumina HiSeq (). Longer sequence reads are more likely to cover two or more heterozygous genotyping positions, and the use of reads spanning multiple heterozygous positions is effective for accurate phasing (). Thus, an approach considering such phase informative reads is promising for reliable variant calling even in low coverage regions. We propose a new statistical variant calling approach that considers pedigree information and haplotyping based on phase informative reads. In the estimation process, genotyping and haplotyping by the assignment of each read to a haplotype based on phase-informative reads are simultaneously performed in a probabilistic manner. Thus, positions that have low evidence for heterozygosity owing to the lack of mapped sequence reads are rescued by the phase informative reads, and such rescued variant positions also can be used for the evidence on phasing. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.In addition, the use of pedigree information is effective not only for phasing but also for estimating variant positions because low coverage regions in each individual are supported by sequence reads covering the same regions in other individuals via pedigree information. From the synergistic effect by the use of phaseinformative reads and pedigree information, more accurate variant calling is expected in our proposed approach than other variant callers estimating variants independently on positions and individuals. In the haplotyping process of our approach, sequence reads are assigned to a more probable haplotype between two haplotypes based on a binomial model, and heterozygous positions are phased by the assigned reads spanning multiple heterozygous positions. Although homozygous positions are not informative for phasing and cannot be used to distinguish between haplotypes, they are also used for data for the binomial model for phasing. Because the majority of positions are homozygous, information from heterozygous positions is weakened and assignment of reads to haplotypes can be misled. To address this issue, we introduce latent variables that determine zygosity at each position to the model. By filtering out the information from highly probably homozygous positions by using the latent variables, only information from heterozygous positions is selectively used for phasing. The remainder of this manuscript is organized as follows. We describe a statistical model of our proposed approach and provide how the parameters and genotypes are estimated in Section 2. In Section 3, we compare the performance of our proposed approach and other existing variant callers through a simulation data analysis and real data analysis with human whole-genome sequencing data from Illumina HiSeq 2000 and SNP array genotyping results from Illumina OMNI 2.5 BeadChip. We finally discuss and conclude the performance evaluation results and effective points of our approach in Section 4.
METHODSOur approach uses mapped sequence reads to a reference genome on the SAM/BAM format and pedigree information of individuals as input data, and then variant calling results are returned in variant calling format (VCF) () after the estimation. The model of our approach comprises three parts: allele likelihood part, pedigree part and haplotype selection part. Allele likelihood part represents a likelihood function of an allele, given aligned reads at a position under the consideration of sequencing errors and mapping errors. Pedigree part represents the allele transmission from parents to offspring, and haplotype selection part represents selection of haplotype from which sequence reads are generated. In the following sections, we describe the details of these three parts and procedures for parameter estimation and genotype inference in the proposed model.
Allele likelihood partLet R xi be the ith read in a SAM/BAM file for individual x. R xi contains its mapping quality score in Phred scale MAPQ xi , strings for bases aligned to position k in the reference genome r k xi and vectors of base quality scores in Phred scale for the aligned bases bq k xi. Note that r k xi is just one nucleotide such as 'T' in many cases, but it can be a string with more than one nucleotide for representing insertion, e.g. a string 'TGC' represents an insertion 'GC' right after a base 'T'. The r k xi can also be a string of length 0 to represent deletion. By using these notations, we give a likelihood function for allele A at position k as:is a binary variable that takes 1 if the alignment of r k xi is correct and 0 otherwise. The term b k xi is a vector of binary variables, and each element indicates the correctness of each base in r k xi , i.e. if sequencing of a base is correct, the corresponding element takes 1 and 0 otherwise. The term I is an indicator function that returns 1 if condition in its argument is true, and 0 otherwise. As with r k xi , allele A is represented by a string with nucleotides 'A', 'T', 'G' and 'C'. The term Pr k xi jA, b k xi  in Equation (1) is the probability of read generation for the correct read alignment, and we represent the probability as:where Al is the lth nucleotide of A, r k xi l is the lth nucleotide of r k xi , b k xi l is the lth value of b k xi and function Indel represents read skip errors and insertion errors. j  j takes a string or set as its argument and returns length for string or size for set, e.g. jATGj  3. We model function Indel by using read skip error rate and insertion error rate as:In this study, we set and to 0.001. Pr k xi ljAl, b k xi l models base substitution error on each base and is given by:P mis r k xi  represents the probability of read generation for misaligned reads. We consider that reads representing indels, i.e. reads with 0 length or 41 nt are generated more probably than reads with 1 nt in the misalignment, and design P mis r k xi  as:Here, N mis is the normalization factor given bywhere A xk is a set of possible alleles for individual x at position k. A xk is given by f'A', 'T', 'G', 'C'g[ null string for deletion. In addition, if there exist reads with nucleotides more than one aligned at position k, the corresponding sequences are added, A xk. In this study, we set p mis to 1.0, i.e. we assume that the read is generated from possible alleles equally probably.
Pedigree partPedigree part considers statistical relationship among the genotype of individuals in a pedigree. Here, we consider a model of a parentchild trio with child c, mother m and father f. Let G xk be a genotype  A 1 xk , A 2 xk  at position k for individual x 2 fc, m, fg. We also let t mk and t fk be binary variables that take 1 or 2 to indicate the allele transmission to the offspring, e.g. if t mk is 1, A 1 mk is transmitted to the offspring. The joint probability of genotypes for child, mother and father is factorized as:PG ck jG mk , G fk , t fk , t mk  represents allele transmission, and we model it as:The conditional probability P  A 1 ck jA 1 mk ; "  is given by:where " is de novo mutation rate including both germline and somatic mutation rate. We set " to 2:5  10 7 based on the assumption about de novo mutation rate in the genome-wide mutation study of parent offspring trio sequencing data from the 1000 Genomes Project (). For considering chromosomal recombination, we give a probability on transition of t mk between positions by:where is chromosomal recombination rate. We set to 10 8 , as 1 cM is on average $ 10 6 bp in human genome (). For prior probabilities of founders' genotypes G mf and G fk , we assume the following factorization:PA 1 mk  is a prior distribution for allele frequency, and we use a distribution considering reference allele and an empirical distribution from aligned reads given by:where P ek is an empirical distribution for allele from aligned reads to position k and A ref k is a reference allele at position k. e , r and u are non-negative parameters for adjustment. For alleles in neither reference allele nor aligned reads, uniform distribution 1=jA mk j is considered. We deal with e as a position-dependent value and set it to the read depth at each position, whereas r is set to the coverage of data. Because 1/1000 homologous positions are different between two chromosomes in empirical rough estimate, we set u to 0:001  r .
Haplotype selection partHaplotyping part links allele likelihood part and pedigree part by selecting a haplotype from which read is generated. Given a genotype at position k for individual x, haplotype selection part selects an allele, from which each read is generated, by using binary variable h k xi in the following manner:where I xk is a set of indexes of reads for individual x that contain aligned reads at position k. In a simple setting, the allocation of each read to haplotypes is equally probable and independent of positions, i.e.where p hxi is a rate for the assignment of read R xi to a haplotype and z xk is a binary variable that determines zygosity at position k for individual x and takes value 1 for heterozygote and 0 for homozygote. For paired-end data, p hxi is shared in each read pair. To represent zygosity with z xk , we introduce a conditional probability P  z xk jA 1 xk , A 2 xk  that is given by:The role of z xk is to filter out highly probably homozygous positions from data for read assignment via Equation (4), and hence only highly probably heterozygous positions are used for haplotyping. p hxi represents one of the two chromosomes from which read R xi comes. Because each read comes from one of the two homologous chromosomes equally probably in an ideal condition, we represent this property with the following formula:where N represents normal distribution and L is the average read length. P i2Ixk p hxi is considered as the number of reads from the same chromosome at position k. Because P i2I xk p hxi is a continuous value, normal approximation of a binomial distribution with parameter 0.5 is used. Although the mean and variance of the normal distribution approximating a binomial distribution with parameter 0.5 are jI xk j=2 and jI xk j=4, respectively, we set the variance to LjI xk j=4 to normalize the effect with the average read length.
Parameter estimation and genotype inferenceBy using allele likelihood part, pedigree part and haplotype selection part, the complete likelihood of our model is given in the following formula:where I x is a set of indexes of reads for individual x and Pp hx1 ,. .. , p hxjI x j  is the joint probability ofgives a graphical representation of our proposed model, where observed variables are in gray and latent variables and parameters are in white. We use an EM algorithm for parameter estimation, as the model contains many latent variables and the model structure of these variables is complicated. In E-step, the calculation of the marginal probabilities on latent variables such as h k xi and z xk is required. However, unlike usual hidden Markov models, exact probabilistic inference requires high computational time when the pedigree size is large and its structure is complicated. To address this type of computational issue, we use loopy belief propagation to calculate the approximated marginal probabilities required in M-step (). In M-step, p m k xi and p hxi are updated by using the marginal probabilities calculated in E-step. For details of parameter estimation by the EM algorithm, see Section 1 in the Supplementary Material. Genotype inference is performed at each position independently. For genotype inference on position k, we search a configuration of latent variables A 1 ck , A 2 ck , A 1 mk , A 2 mk , A 1 fk and A 2 fk that maximizes their marginal probability. We again use loopy belief propagation to calculate the approximated marginal probability of these variables and then apply the max-product algorithm to obtain the configuration maximizing the approximated marginal probability ().
Suppression of variant calling at positions next to homopolymer regions and indelsIn the base calling on Illumina reads, the position next to a homopolymer region tends to be called as the base comprising the homopolymer because phasing accumulated in synthesis during the Illumina sequencing process affects the base calling result. Thus, if there exists a homopolymer left side of a position in the reference genome, reads from the forward strand tend to have the base comprising the homopolymer at the position, whereas reads from negative strand do not. From this observation, our approach suppresses variant calling at positions satisfying the following three conditions for Illumina reads: A position is next to homopolymer whose length is more than two. The majority of alternative alleles is the same as the base comprising the homopolymer.More than 90% of the aligned reads have the same strand.In addition, to avoid false positive (FP) variant calling around indels, we use base alignment quality BAQ from SAMtools () as base quality score.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
Simulation data analysisWe evaluated our proposed approach, which hereafter we call PedigreeCaller, by using synthetically generated parentoffspring trio sequence data. We first generated genome sequences of chromosome 21 for two Utah residents with Northern and Western European ancestry (CEU) individuals NA12286 and NA12287 according to the variant calling and phasing results in a VCF file released on November 23, 2010, by the 1000 Genomes Project. We then synthetically generated genome sequences of their child by randomly choosing one of the genome sequences for each individuals and recombining them with recombination rate of 1:0  10 8. The number of variants for these three individuals is 149 947. From these genome sequences, we generated paired-end sequence reads and put 0.1% bases substitution errors. As base quality scores for the reads, we uniformly gave Q30 to each base, which corresponds to 0.1% error. We generated three types of datasets with the following conditions:Read length is 100 bp, and insert size is normally distributed with mean 400 bp and standard deviation 50 bp. Read length is 500 bp, and insert size is normally distributed with mean 2000 bp and standard deviation 250 bp. Read length is 1000 bp, and insert size is normally distributed with mean 4000 bp and standard deviation 500 bp.
Father's reads:Mother's reads:Child's reads:The BAM files for these datasets were obtained by mapping the sequence reads to UCSC hg19 reference genome for chromosome 21 with BWAMEM (). To evaluate the performance of our proposed approach with various read coverage, we downsampled the BAM files with Picard DownsampleSam (http://picard.sourceforge.net/) and obtained BAM files with read coverage of 5, 10, 20 and 40 for each individual. These downsampled BAM files were realigned with Genome Analysis Toolkit(GATK) Indel Realigner (). For the comparison with existing approaches, we used the following four methods: GATK Unified Genotyper (), BCFtools with SAMtools mpileup (), TrioCaller ()and PolyMutt (). In Unified Genotyper and SAMtools, variant calling is performed for each individual independently, i.e. no pedigree information is considered. TrioCaller takes variant calling results from other callers as input data, and re-estimates variants by considering pedigree information and linkage disequilibrium. Note that linkage disequilibrium information is limited in this experiment, as only three individuals are considered. For the input of TrioCaller, we used results from SAMtools as is in the instruction of TrioCaller users' example. PolyMutt takes genotype likelihood information from other variant callers as its input data, and estimates variants by considering pedigree information. As is instructed in PolyMutt web page, we obtained likelihood information from SAMtools in Genotype Likelihood Format (GLF) and used it as the input data of PolyMutt. We used Unified Genotyper and PolyMutt with default options. For SAMtools/BCFtools, we used the commands described in SAMtools Web site without variant filtering with depth (http://samtools.sourceforge.net/mpileup.shtml). For TrioCaller, we set 'round' option to 100 and used default setting for other options.summarizes the performance of variant detection on our proposed approach and these four methods: the numbers of true positives (TPs), FPs, accuracy, recall, precision and FNote: The best result on each condition is underlined. measure for the sequencing data with read coverage of 5 and 10. Results for 20 and 40 are summarized in Section 2 of the Supplementary Material. In variant detection, if a genotype estimated at a position and true genotype at the position are not homozygous for the reference allele, the estimated genotype is counted as TP. On the other hand, if true genotype is homozygous for the reference allele, the estimated genotype is counted as FP. Note that TPs could contain estimated genotypes that are different from their corresponding true genotypes, e.g. if an estimated genotype and true genotype at a position with reference allele A are (A, B) and (B, B), respectively, the estimated genotype is counted as TP. Recall and precision are given by # of TPs # of trues and # of TPs # of TPs  # of FPs , respectively. F-measure is given by the harmonic mean of recall and precision as 2  recallprecision recallprecision , and achieves overall performance by capturing the trade-off of recall and precision. These measures are valued between 0 and 1, and larger value is better. In all scenarios in, PedigreeCaller outperforms other methods in recall and F-measure. For the datasets with read coverage of 10 and read length of 100 bp, PolyMutt outperforms other methods including PedigreeCaller in precision. Also, for the datasets with read coverage of 5 and read length of 100 and 500 bp, GATK outperforms other methods including PedigreeCaller in precision. However, recalls of GATK in these conditions are low and hence its F-measures are worse than those of other methods. In the datasets, except for the conditions with 5 and 100 and 500 bp, precisions of PedigreeCaller are higher than those of other methods. To see the effect of read length to PedigreeCaller, we focus on the difference on the performance between PedigreeCaller and PolyMutt. For dataset with read coverage of 10 and read length of 100 bp, the number of TPs on PedigreeCaller is 616 more than that on PolyMutt, but the number of FPs on PedigreeCaller is 46 more than that on PolyMutt. On the other hand, for dataset with read coverage of 10 and read length of 500 bp, the number of TPs on PedigreeCaller is 617 more than that on PolyMutt and the number of FPs on PedigreeCaller is 27 less than that on PolyMutt. In addition, in the dataset with read length of 1000 bp, the number of TPs on PedigreeCaller is 615 more than that on PolyMutt and the number of FPs on PedigreeCaller is 65 less than that on PolyMutt.summarizes the performance of genotype concordance on our proposed approach and four existing methods for the sequencing data with read coverages of 5 and 10. Results for 20 and 40 are summarized in Section 2 of the Supplementary Material. In genotype concordance, if a genotype estimated at a position and true genotype at the position are the same and not homozygous for the reference allele, the estimated genotype is counted as TP. On the other hand, if the genotype of the estimated variant is different from the true genotype, the estimated variant is counted as FP. Note that the recall and precision for genotype concordance are respectively the same as sensitivity and PPV used for evaluation of variant callers inthat the number of trues is not equal to the sum of the number of TPs and the number of false negatives (FNs) because some trues can be in FPs. Similar to variant detection, all the conditions in, PedigreeCaller outperforms other methods in recall and F-measure.
Real data analysisTo evaluate performance on real sequencing data, we use 100-bp paired-end sequencing data of HapMap CEU parentoffspring trio comprising NA12878 (child), NA12891 (father) and NA12892 (mother) (). The data were sequenced with Illumina HiSeq 2000 with read coverage of 45 for each individual, and stored as BAM files after mapping to UCSC hg19 with BurrowsWheeler Aligner (). The average insert size is $300 bp. We downsampled the sequencing datasets to 5, 10, 20 and 40 for each individual with Picard DownsampleSam. These downsampled BAM files were realigned with GATK Indel Realigner, and base quality scores are recalibrated with GATK Base Quality Score Recalibration. We evaluate the performance by assessing the concordance of estimated variants from these variant callers for datasets with various read coverages with SNP array genotyping results from Illumina OMNI 2.5 BeadChip. The number of SNP sites considered is 2 310 349, and the number of variants for these three individuals is 2 122 147. We also assessed the concordance with the 1000 Genomes Project and commonly estimated variants by the five callers for the dataset of 40. Results for those cases are given in the Supplementary Material.summarizes the performance of variant detection on PedigreeCaller and four existing methods for NA12878, NA12 891 and NA12 892 from the real datasets with read coverages of 5, 10, 20 and 40. PedigreeCaller outperforms other four variant callers in F-measure for all the read coverages. Also, PedigreeCaller achieves the best performance on the number of TPs and recall rate except for the dataset of 40. Although Unified Genotyper produces better recall rate than that of PedigreeCaller in the 40 data, the result of Unified Genotyper contains four times as many FPs than PedigreeCaller, and hence its F-measure is worse than that of PedigreeCaller. Although recall of SAMtools is low for all the datasets, the results of SAMtools contain the least FPs for all the datasets. In precision, SAMtools outperforms other variant callers including PedigreeCaller except for the datasets with read coverages of 5, 10, 20, and gives the same performance as PedigreeCaller for the dataset with read coverage of 40. The performance gaps between PedigreeCaller and other variant callers are larger in lower coverage data, e.g. the maximum gap on F-measure in the 40 data is 0.0025, whereas that in the 5 is 40.1. Because read data is insufficient for accurate variant calling in low coverage data such as the 5 data, the effects from pedigree information and haplotyping are high, and the larger performance gaps can be obtained in lower coverage data. This is also observed in the results between TrioCaller and SAMtools. The results of TrioCaller contain more TPs and less FPs than those of SAMtools in the 5 and 10 data, whereas SAMtools achieves better performance in the numbers of TPs and FPs than TrioCaller in the 20 data.summarizes the performance of genotype concordance on PedigreeCaller and four existing methods for NA12878, NA12891 and NA12892: the numbers of TPs, FPs, true negatives (TNs), FNs, accuracy, recall, precision and F-measure for the sequencing data with read coverages of 5, 10, 20 and 40. Accuracy is given bySimilar to the case of variant detection, PedigreeCaller outperforms these three variant callers in accuracy and F-measure on genotype concordance for all the coverages. The performance gaps between PedigreeCaller and other variant callers are larger in lower coverage data, e.g. the maximum gaps on F-measure and accuracy for the datasets of 40 are 0.002 and 0.001, respectively, whereas gaps on F-measure and accuracy for the dataset of 5 are 40.1 and 0.05, respectively. Because read data is insufficient for accurate variant calling in low coverage data such as the 5 data, the effects from pedigree information and haplotyping are high, and the larger performance gaps can be obtained in lower coverage data. This is also observed in the results between TrioCaller and SAMtools. The results of TrioCaller contain more TPs and less FPs than those of SAMtools in the 5 and 10 data, whereas SAMtools achieves better performance in the numbers of TPs and FPs than TrioCaller in the 20 data.shows relationship between the physical distance of variants and the performance gap of PedigreeCaller and other existing variant callers in the 5 data. The x-axis indicates the distance between positions in base pairs. The y-axis indicates the F-measure difference given by the F-measure of PedigreeCaller subtracted by that of other variant caller for the SNP positions from which there exists a position with heterozygous genotype call within a distance indicated by the x-axis. Here, we restrict the position with heterozygous genotype call to the position where at least two heterozygous genotypes are estimated by PedigreeCaller among the trio members. As shown in, PedigreeCaller shows the strong performance for the SNP positions distant from other variants within 100 bp. Because the read length in our data is 100 bp, this result implies that phase-informative reads effectively work for haplotyping and consequently improve the performance of variant calling. Also, we can observe a slow decline of the performance gap for the SNPs 4100 bp away from other variants. PedigreeCaller uses paired-end reads for phase-informative reads as well, and less paired-end reads are available as phase-informative reads for more distant positions. Therefore, this slow decline of the performance gap is due to the decrease of the haplotyping effect by paired-end reads.We proposed a new statistical variant calling approach that considers pedigree information and haplotyping based on phaseinformative reads. In a navenave way, modeling of haplotyping based on phase-informative reads may fail to estimate accurate results owing to undesirable influence from homozygous positions in the estimation of the assignment of each read to a haplotype. To address this issue, we introduced latent variables that determine zygosity, and avoided the undesirable influence from homozygous positions by using the estimated zygosity in the latent variables. Through variant calling in the practical NGS data and the comparison of the estimated variants with the SNP array genotyping results, we showed that our approach outperforms existing variant callers, including variant callers that consider pedigree information. Also, the analysis of the performance on the positions located close to other heterozygous variants showed that our approach is more powerful in such positions than other variant callers, especially for SNPs distant from other variants within 100 bp. Because read length in the data used for the evaluation is 100 bp, the result of the analysis implies that haplotyping based on phase-informative reads with these variants effectively works for the improvement of the performance in our approach. We also observed the performance improvement by the effect of haplotyping based on paired-end reads through the slow decline of the performance gap between our approach and other variant callers on the SNP positions distant 4100 bp from other variant positions. Owing to the rapid progress of NGS technologies, read length is extending in the current sequencing platforms. In addition, systematically new technologies such as the Nanopore technology (http://www.nanoporetech.com/) and the Moleculo technology (http://www.moleculo.com/) are now under development, and these technologies are considered to enable the production of more accurate and longer sequencing data. Therefore, further accurate variant calling is expected in our approach by using longer reads available in the near future.. A plot representing performance gaps between PedigreeCaller and other existing variant callers with respect to distance between target SNP positions and other closest variants in the 5 data. The x-axis indicates distance in base pairs between target SNP positions and other variants. The y-axis indicates the performance gap between PedigreeCaller and other variant callers in F-measure
0
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
K.Kojima et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Variant caller with pedigree information and local haplotyping at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
