Motivation: Deciphering the response of a complex biological system to an insulting event, at the gene expression level, requires adopting theoretical models that are more sophisticated than a one-to-one comparison (i.e. t-test). Here, we investigate the ability of a novel reverse engineering approach (System Response Inference) to unveil non-obvious transcriptional signatures of the system response induced by prion infection. Results: To this end, we analyze previously published gene expression data, from which we extrapolate a putative full-scale model of transcriptional gene–gene dependencies in the mouse central nervous system. Then, we use this nominal model to interpret the gene expression changes caused by prion replication, aiming at selecting the genes primarily influenced by this perturbation. Our method sheds light on the mode of action of prions by identifying key transcripts that are the most likely to be responsible for the overall transcriptional rearrangement from a nominal regulatory network. As a first result of our inference, we have been able to predict known targets of prions (i.e. PrP C) and to unveil the potential role of previously unsuspected genes.
INTRODUCTIONA major challenge in Systems Biology is to provide a global and quantitative understanding of complex diseases by means of high-throughput technologies. In a system-level approach, the synergistic response dictated by the cooperation and interplay of all the components within an organism is considered as a fundamental concept in the interpretation of 'omics' data. Recent efforts employ model-driven analysis and transcriptomic data for studying neurodegenerative diseases (). However, while DNA microarrays have been extensively used to comprehensively characterize the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), the application of more sophisticated models, working beyond simple differential expression detection, is still an open * To whom correspondence should be addressed. challenge (). To this end, the ability of reverse engineering algorithms to infer putative genegene interactions, functional relationships and genome-scale regulatory networks has been already proven to be successful (). Although the applications to multicellular organisms are still sporadic, this class of algorithms represents a promising approach toward genome-wide studies of complex diseases (). Our aim in this article is to propose a novel reverse engineering strategy in order to investigate transcriptional changes induced by prion propagation in mouse models. Among the various neurodegenerative disorders, prion diseases have captured the attention of the scientific community due to their infectious nature and transmissibility (). The cellular form of the prion protein (PrP C ) is the substrate for an autocatalytic reaction that, through its recruitment and modification, acts in the propagation of a disease-causing form denominated PrP Sc or prion. This autocatalytic process leads to the formation of fibrils and amyloid deposits, and is associated to a progressive fatal damage of the brain tissue. Importantly, experimental evidence has demonstrated that PrP knockout and PrP anchorless () mice are resistant to infection. In spite of the many approaches aimed at unveiling its physiological functions, the degree of overlap between the pathogenic dysfunction of the protein in prion diseases and its normal role is still largely unknown [for a review see. In such a complicated 'puzzle', it is widely accepted that since PrP C is a key mediator for the neurotoxicity of PrP Sc , studying its biological functions through the identification of its related molecular partners may help unraveling the mechanisms underling prion-dependent neurodegeneration. In light of this observation, we integrate here a recently published transcriptional dataset (), monitoring prion propagation in mouse brain tissues, with independent gene expression experiments performed under many diverse conditions. The computational framework introduced in this article aims at deciphering transcriptional variations in the context of a systemwide regulatory network, moving from a single gene perspective to a system-level analysis (). The procedure is composed of three steps. In the first step, using a compendium of gene expression measurements, we obtain a genome-scale interaction graph of the mouse brain. Then, in a second step, we refine the initial model via a multiple regression scheme. In the third step, this linear regressive model is used to investigate expression changes associated to Prion infection, where for each gene we estimate the influence of prionand one downregulated (green/-node), while the remaining three do not show any changes (grey nodes). By knowing the corresponding genetic regulatory network (d), we can discriminate the coherent variations from the unexpected ones. As shown in the example, two of the genes that showed a significant expression variations are consistent with model predictions i.e. the expression changes of genes x and y can be explained by the variation of gene z. This is reflected by a skew distribution of discrepancies (i.e. residues), between model predictions and observed data, centered around 0 (f ). At the same time, one transcript, w, is not responding coherently to the initial model. The fact that its expression is unchanged, when it should have been increased, might relate to an anomalous direct effect of the pathology, preventing a synergistic response between all the genes in the system. Hence, the list of 'perturbed genes' can be sensibly different from the standard DEGs identified from individual fold change analysis (b/e).propagation on its transcriptional regulation. In other words, we systematically identify the genes that result 'perturbed' with respect to the nominal model by a prion infection. A remarkable outcome of our network-based strategy is the ability to identify PrP C among the predicted prion targets, in agreement with its role of primary substrate for prion replication. This result is even more important if we consider that to our knowledge prion infection has never been noted to interfere with the transcriptional regulation of the Prnp gene. Moreover, the comparison between the PrP C partners inferred on the nominal model and the PrP Sc targets predicted from the perturbed model allows to estimate the significance of the overlap between the two.
METHODS
Data collectedFor Mus Musculus, we compiled a collection of microarraysfor the list of GEO codes. All datasets were preprocessed and normalized prior to network inference. Protein Complex network for human, rat and mouse were downloaded from the CORUM database (), whereas PPIs from the MppDB website ().
SRI procedureIn this section, we describe the method used for reverse engineering large-scale genegene transcriptional dependencies and predicting systemic changes induced by a perturbing event (i.e. prions). This framework is inspired by the works ofprofiles, we first seek for significant transcriptional interdependencies by means of a relevance network approach (Step I). We then use this relevance network to identify a nominal model based on a linear ODE description (Step II). Finally, the inferred model is used to detect gene expression changes caused by prion infection or Prnp deletion incompatible with the model (Step III). Step I: Relevance network algorithms have the remarkable advantage of being computationally feasible for genome-wide applications (). This class of methods assumes that genegene interactions can be identified by determining the gene pairs possessing the highest expression similarity over multiple conditions. A square matrix (nn, where n is the number of genes) of pairwise Pearson's correlations between gene expression patterns is computed. The (unsigned) absolute values of Pearson's correlation between gene i and j is:where x i is the expression vector for gene i (i.e. m gene expression measurements made under diverse conditions) and x j is the expression vector for gene j. In Equation (1)  x i , v i and  x j , v j are means and variances of x i and x j over the m experiments and Edenotes expectation. Each row/column of C (i.e. C i ) can be considered as a distribution of pairwise similarity coefficients between a gene (i.e. i) and all the others. This distribution can be transformed in the corresponding vector of rankings, from 1 to n (W i ). As a consequence of this transformation, the correlation between i and j is associated to two 'ranking values'. Denote W i (j) and W j (i) the rank of C ij with respect to C i and C j , respectively. Genes (i and j) are considered as putative interactors if and only if both their ranking indexes (W i (j) and W j (i)) are above a certain common threshold ]. A graph of putative interactions, G R , is obtained by the following relationship:Step II: for each gene i, we assume that the change in concentration can be expressed as a linear combination of the concentrations of interacting genes [i.e. x j such that (i,j)  G R ], plus possibly an additive external stimulus/perturbation. This external input can be an environmental change (i.e. nutrient viability), a genetic perturbation (i.e. overexpression/deletion) or a toxic compound able to perturb the system (i.e. drive the system to a new steady state). Similar to, the responses of the system to the various perturbations can be formalized as a system of linear differential equations (ODEs) in which the input vector u =[u 1 ,...,u p ] is modeled as a linear combination of the external perturbations u ior in matrix form (forwhere the coefficient a ij , representing the influence of gene j on gene i, is non-zero if and only if (i,j)  G R. The variable u can be taken as a vectorPage: 3409 34073414
A system-level approach to prion infection(p1) identical to 1. The np input matrix B collects the influences of the external perturbations u on each single gene. The k-th column of B indicates how effective/intense the k-th perturbation u k is on the state vector x (di). Under steady state conditions, the variation in time of the mRNA concentration is by definition equal to zero. In this case, Equation (4) becomes a simpler system of algebraic equations: Ax +Bu = 0.In order to estimate the parameters of the model, we employ a large compendium of gene expression profiles (X Training ), containing many different external perturbations, none of them is related to prion infection. In Equation (5), we assume that the matrix A stays constant over all the different experimental conditions, and that the columns of B are sparse (i.e. few nonzero elements). This last assumption reflects that the different perturbations collected in the dataset are likely to affect just a small portion of genes, if compared with the entire genome. This is justified for example in case of mutants, where a specific gene has been knocked out. By collecting a vast selection of different experimental conditions (i.e. >1300 chips), we aim at avoiding that particular perturbations are overrepresented in the dataset, hence that the assumption of sparsity does not hold for some of the rows of B.Therefore, for each transcript, expression changes caused by the direct effect of an external stimulus are likely to occur just in few of the experimental conditions of the training dataset, and to be 'uniformly' distributed over the rows of B (i.e. different perturbations do not act always on the same transcripts). Under these assumptions, the contribution of B is marginal, and sufficiently accurate estimation of the non-zero terms of the A matrix (a ij ) can still be drawn from the following approximation:Similar arguments are used in most reverse engineering algorithms, see e.g. in (). A multiple regression framework is here used to learn the network coefficients a ij from the training dataset X Training. This framework seeks for the solutions which minimize the L 2 norm between the predictions of the model and the experimental values of X Training. For each gene, the result is the following vector of coefficients:where x i is a vector of gene expression measurements of gene i (i.e. row of X Training ). The solution of Equation 7 is correct up to an undetermined scaling factor (the diagonal term a ii ) by which we rescale each row of A. The outcome of the n regression problems is a weighted asymmetric matrix A c and, for each gene i, a vector of residues (r i ), resulting from the difference between observed and predicted values. Selection of : In order to avoid an arbitrary selection of the cut-off parameter  in Equation (2), we adopt a Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). Since an increase in the number of free parameters in Equation (7) always reduces the absolute sum of residuals (r), we search for the best compromise between the model complexity, in terms of the number of parameters (i.e. non zero entries in the connectivity map G R ) and fitness quality (i.e. discrepancies between predicted and observed values). Therefore, we fitted multiple models corresponding to different choices of  in Equation (2) and estimated the corresponding fitness qualities via the BIC. The BIC, Equation (8), is the most common criterion for the fitness of a mathematical model to observed data, leaning more toward lower dimensional models (i.e. sparse matrices)whereThe identification of the graph G R is the most underdetermined step of the reverse engineering approach. However, coherently with, we found that small changes of  do not drastically change the structure of A c and its numerical entities. Step III: the resulting A c model is used to predict the expression profiles associated to a new condition, here denoted as X Prion [in our case, the dataset published in. The procedure is to search for the genes for which the nominal model A c is incorrectly describing the expression changes in the new experimental condition. The dataset X Prion contains perturbative effects induced exclusively by prion propagation or Prnp absence: prion infection (143 experiments/columns in X Prion ), Prnp deletion (22 experiments) and both perturbations at the same time (27 experiments). According to Equation (6), we expect that if gene i is not directly influenced by these external agents, then its expression changes should be correctly predicted by the nominal model (i.e. A c X Prion  0). This should be reflected in a skewed distribution of residues around 0 (named r Prion ). On the contrary, whenever gene i is directly influenced by a prionrelated external stimulus we expect the initial model to be ineffective in predicting gene expression variations. This indicates that the equation should be corrected as A c x Prion +B Prion u Prion = 0. Non-zero entries in the i-th row of B Prion unveil the input 'pathway' of the prion-related perturbation. For each gene i, we test this hypothesis by comparing the discrepancies that follow if we impose A c x Prion i  0 (i.e. r Prion i ) with those obtained during the fitting procedure of Step II (r i ), through a two-sample t-test [Equation (10)] ():(10)where r i and r Prion i are the mean of the residues in the training and the 'prionspecific' dataset for gene i and s r i , s r Prion i are the corresponding SDs. Using the Student's t-probability distribution, a statistical significance (P-value) is assigned to each gene. Once the distribution of analytical P-values has been generated, the q-value is used to correct the measure of significance for multiple testings (). When the two distributions of residues are significantly different, the gene i is considered to be a target of the applied perturbation.
RESULTSIn a recent work (), more than 400 DNA chips were collected, monitoring the transcriptional changes associated to various disease stages, prion strains and mice backgrounds. The authors interpreted differentially regulated genes in light of the known network of proteinprotein interactions and hypothesized a specific temporal order of the biological processes involved. In our study, the same dataset ofis integrated with a large compendium (i.e. 1366 Affymetrix experiments) of gene expression measurements associated to various conditions. We first trained a gene network model (A c , see Section 2) on this large compendium. Next, on the background of this initial network, we evaluated the impact of an independent dataset () containing gene expression variations caused by a perturbing event, that can be either an external agent (i.e. prion inoculation) or an endogenous perturbation (i.e. Prnp knockout). In our interaction network, inoculated prions were modeled as hidden variables/nodes, while a gene knockout was interpreted as a node deletion (). We then investigated the behavior of the system upon Prion infection or Prnp deletion with special attention. Our outcome was different from previous studies [such as] because we allowed a gene to be 'significant' regardless of its individual difference in expression between infected and normal samples. Rather, systemic gene expression alterations are here considered and used in order to estimate the expected expression changes of the singular transcript. In a systemlevel response, a global transcriptional rearrangement is expected to counter balance the new 'operating point/equilibrium'. If this regulation is not taking place, or in other words if the gene is not able to properly respond, enhancing or repressing its transcription, its contribution in the disease progression should be taken into account as well (). Therefore, our approach can be considered to be complementary to the analysis performed inare discussed. Subsequently, we consulted a drug database in search for druggable targets among the first neighbors identified in the extrapolated network for PrPs. Finally, an analysis performed across human, mouse and rat samples revealed co-expression patterns that were highly conserved across these species.
Prion protein co-expressed partnersBy applying SRI to the collected gene expression database on mouse brain tissue samples (see Supplementaryfor GEO codes), we first identified 450 significantly Prnp-related genes, of which 37 were anticorrelated (see Supplementary Table S2-partners and). As we have already observed in a previous studyvalidation: we assessed the ability to recover the network of proteinprotein interactions (PPI), protein complexes (PCs) and transcriptional regulation (TF) in three different mammals (mouse, rat and human, see Section 2). We evaluated the overlap between the inferred networks (dashed red lines in the toy network) with the known networks (solid black lines) by computing the relative sensitivity index ( true positive true positive + false negative ). The histogram shows that even in such underdetermined conditions (ratio experiments/genes 0.1), a reverse engineering approach on a multicellular system may extrapolate meaningful information.() for unicellular prokaryotes and eukaryotes (i.e. Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae), the strongest source of co-expression was the co-participation of gene products in the same protein complex (). This observation reflects the tendency to establish 'stable-bindings' between gene products of the inferred interacting gene pairs. Indeed, many predictions were in agreement with previous experimental studies seeking for proteins capable of binding PrP C such as Cltc, Gpm6a, Gpm6b (), Lsamp, SparcL1 (), Ywhag, Ywhah and Gnao1 () or to co-localize with prion (i.e. ApoE) () (see Supplementary Material for further discussion). In addition, Aplp1, the precursor-like amyloid protein, has been identified, in association with App, as a probable ligand of PrP (). Such prediction was supported by their similar proteolytic processing and ability to bind copper Page: 3411 34073414
A system-level approach to prion infectionand, in case of Aplp1, to inhibit the cleavage of App by -secretase (Bace1). It is worth noting the connection with Apbb1, thought to modulate the internalization of -amyloid precursor protein and Rtn3, also inhibiting Bace1 activity. Furthermore, synaptojanin1 (Synj1), the major inositol 5-phosphatase (jointly with Pitpna and Cadps) is known to reduce the levels of cellular PIP2 and it has been shown to have an important impact in determining the level of A42 (). The co-regulation with Rtn4, which reduces the anti-apoptotic activity of Bcl-xl and Bcl-2, might relate to the observed inverse transcriptional proportionality between Prnp and Bcl2l2 (e.g. Casp6, Prdx4), pointing to a role of PrP in apoptosis (). Btf 3, Cdk2 and Baz1a, all involved in transcriptional regulation, are candidates for inhibiting the Prnp expression. By performing an ontology enrichment (Supplementary), we identified some of the biological functions already associated to PrP C , suggesting the potential molecular partners responsible for these roles. For instance, the presence of small GTPase molecules such as Rab proteins might emerge because of clathrin-mediated endocytosis, reflecting their control role in PrP C trafficking. Furthermore, the enrichment of categories like Golgi vesicle transport and endocytosis may be related to the transit of PrP C from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cell surface through the Golgi apparatus. Several other genes were involved in nerve impulse transmission, such as again Synaptojanin-1, which in association with Lrp11, reinforced the evidences that PrP C is internalized via clathrin-coated vesicles (). In parallel, caveolin-mediated signaling () (here represented by Cav2) and the localization of PrP C on membrane lipid rafts might explain the occurrence of genes related to lipid transport. In light of the many studies observing behavioral changes in Prnp knockout mice [i.e. reduced level of anxiety (, we highlighted the presence of genes related to anxiety, such as Gnao1. Impaired hippocampal-dependent spatial learning was observed in Prnp null-mice as well, supporting the inferred relationship with Ncdn, required for spatial learning processes and Cpeb1 involved in long-term memory () (see next section for further discussion). Furthermore, several sources of experimental evidences have shown the effect of PrP on cell proliferation and differentiation () and were here confirmed by the enriched categories such as the nervous system development and differentiation (i.e. Ids, responsible for mental retardation, Trim2 contributing to the alteration of neural cellular mechanisms, and Nedd1). These properties were related to the activation of PrP C by cAMP and MAP proteins kinases (which are also identified as significant ontological categories) through the interaction with Ncam (). Our analysis did not retrieve the Ncam interaction, but identified a closely related gene Nrcam, alongside many other cell adhesion molecules. Furthermore, the role of PrP in synaptic activity, neurotransmission and neuronal excitability was highlighted by the identification of Syn1. The previously observed relationship between PrP and Erk activity might be just a secondary effect of the relationship here identified with Ras signal transduction, MapK, calcium signaling pathways and PKC signaling (i.e. Gnb2l1, Prkd3). Furthermore, the high percentage of genes related to homeostatic processes and ion transport (i.e. Adam11 a metalloprotease, probably reflecting the known interaction with Adma23) indicated a possible involvement in protection against oxidative stress (i.e. Oxr1) and metal ion dysmetabolism. Finally, it is interesting to notice that melanogenesis emerged as a highly significant biological pathway (Supplementary), hence indicating the possibility for a relationship between non-pathogenic presence of proteinsase-resistant PrP and the mechanism of production and formation of melanin ().). The former is a transmembrane glycoprotein receptor involved in the negative regulation of receptor tyrosine kinases, being a substrate for tyrosine phosphatases (PTP). This gene may participate to the signaling cascade involving Fyn () and their concomitant activation with Prnp was observed in bovine monocytes infected by Theileria (). The latter has been recently discovered to be able to aggregate as a prion-like protein (). Additionally, inthe authors showed its vital role in long-term memory, and it is tempting to speculate that a similar function may exist for PrP. It is worth noting that both transcripts are similarly reacting to a Prnp deletion and to prion infection (Supplementary), thereby suggesting that in case of prions replication the system is attempting to compensate for a lack of PrP C. By comparing the residues in Prnp-null infected mice with mock-inoculated Prnp 0/0 (), no significant genes were identified (q < 0.05). This result was consistent with the insensitivity Page: 3412 34073414
PrP knockout compensation
M.Zampieri et al.of prion knockout mice to prion infection and it was in agreement with the conclusions in
Prion targetsThe same procedure has been used to determine the portion of the inferred network which is most 'sensitive' to prion perturbation. Hence, in order to unveil the nodes (i.e. genes) which are likely affected by prions, the predictions of the initial model were tested on the experimental data collected inand the inconsistencies were detected through a rigorous statistical test (see Section 2 and). Model-based inference on prion-infected mice resulted in 3255 genes with an associated q-value lower than 0.01 (see Supplementary, targets). As already mentioned, previous results showed that prions bind with high specificity to PrP C , and that further effects were mediated by its autocatalytic recruitment and conversion, although so far, no transcriptional variations have been extrapolated for the Prnp gene during infection (). Notwithstanding these studies, the Prnp gene was here identified among the most significant prion 'targets'. Therefore, as a reference threshold for the q-value significance, we selected the one associated to Prnp (7.12 * 10 9 ), as we did previously for the Prnp deletion. This led to the selection of 389 genes (out of the total 13 204 considered). In, the authors identified 7400 DEGs in at least one of the five combinations prion-strain/mouse-background, and among these genes, 333 were identified in all the combinations. Again, only a small fraction of genes (i.e. 58) are in common with our list, mainly those involved in immune system processes (Supplementary). Among the detected prion targets, several were in common with the previously observed co-expressed partners (Section 2.1) of the cellular prion form (P = 1.0710 6 hypergeometric test): for example, Magi2, encoding a protein interacting with Astrophin1 (modulating activin-mediated signaling), Snap25, already detected in scrapie-infected GT1 cells () or Cntn1, also involved in nervous system development. This in turn, reinforced the evidences of the central role of PrP C as a mediator of prion neurotoxicity. Various genes in the list were involved in apoptosis, inflammatory response and leukocyte activation (Supplementary). It is not clear what are the primary damage causes, nor whether such damage is due to a gain or a loss of PrP functions, but our findings suggested apoptosis as a mechanism directly influenced by prion propagation. Genes involved in signaling, neurotransmitter transport and integrinmediated signaling were perturbed during prion infection, in agreement with the reduced synaptic neurotransmission and dysfunction observed during TSE propagation (). In this respect, it has previously been reported that scrapie-infected mice showed higher Bace1 activity, suggesting an impairment of the regulatory role of PrP C in its modulation. Our results indicated an unbalanced response of Bace2, which stimulates App processing in a non-amyloidogenic pathway suppressing the level of A production, probably in an attempt to compensate for Bace1 dysfunction. It is also worth noting the Atf6 gene, one of the main stress sensor of the ER membrane and the related Eif4e, which has been recently found to potentially play a main role in prion, induced neurodegeneration (). In addition, it has been observed that transgenic mice expressing PrP C deletion mutants, or overexpressing Dpl are characterized by vacuolation of the myelinated fibers (), where PrP C presence was discovered (), bringing back our analysis to genes involved in myelination (i.e. Lgi4, Klk6) and the several integrins among the most significant hits (Itgax, Itgb2, Itgb4). The enrichment of genes involved in the glycan degradation pathway and lipid transport and sequestering might reflect the response of the system in controlling the amount of PrP on the membrane surface, where its attachment is a necessary condition for prions to induce neurotoxic signals (). We also noticed the presence of several apolipoproteins, such as Apoc1, shown to play a role in Alzheimer, whereas ApoD and Apold1 may play a role in brain vasculature, affecting brainblood permeability.
Druggable targetsPrion molecular targets may pave the way to the development and identification of compounds able to disrupt the mechanism of action of prion neurotoxicity. By targeting the inferred gene products, it might be possible to modulate disease progression, delaying it in time or to interrupt a fundamental neurotoxic chemical reaction. We consulted a repository database (www.Drugbank.ca) and linked approved drugs to the genes identified in our analysis (Supplementary). Drugs acting on cholesterol by inhibiting its biosynthesis, such as statins, have been previously used () for the treatment of Prion diseases. In particular, here we identified simvastatin () its ability to interact with Itgb2. We also noticed Spermine (polycataionic compound) and N-Acetyl-D-glucosamine, which have been shown to prolong the incubation time (). Compounds such as antihemophilic factors, Tenecteplase and Bevacizumab, are instead acting on the coagulation process, removal of blood clots and the inhibition of blood vessel growth, respectively. The second one in particular seems to be a promising treatment since it prevents the interactions of VEGF with its receptors. Abnormal regulation of VEGF expression has been implicated in several neurodegenerative disorders, including Prion disease (), where neurodegeneration might be caused by impairing neural tissue perfusion. Another promising compound is choline, a major component of the polar head group of phosphatidylcholine, which plays a vital role in basic biological processes, including the maintenance of cell structure and function. The recent hypothesis that prions can form permeable pores and influence ion channels (), points to the predicted drugs acting on sodium (like Lamotrigine, Amiloride, Quinidine) or potassium channels (Glibenclamide), while Iron Dextran could in principle be used to counteract metal ions dysmetabolism, a common effect of several neurodegenerative pathologies. We were also able to extrapolate three drugs acting on tyrosine kinase activity, Aldesleukin , Insuline and Methymazole, in conjunction with antioxidant compounds, such as L-cysteine, vitamin C, NADH, succininc, L-glutamic acids and others, shown to be able to reduce PrP Sc propagation in infected cell ().
Co-expression patterns across multiple speciesThe SRI approach provides an analysis of transcription changes that is not restricted to individual isolated genes, but rather considers the system as a whole. This method is hence appropriate to characterize the prion protein interactome in its genetic network Page: 3413 34073414and Supplementary Materials). Gene centric view (a): genes belonging to the identified significant enriched pathways are highlighted in different colors. Edge centric view (b): by selecting only the predicted edges of genes belonging to enriched categories and using the same color code, we highlighted the 'compactness' of relationships characterizing specific pathways, such as oxidative phosphorylation, ribosome, long-term depression and proteosome (see Supplementary Figs S3S4 for further details). Genes related to neurodegenerative processes seemed to have many 'promiscuous' interactions linking to diverse biological processes (red edges). context. Three nominal networks for mouse, rat and human (and Section 2) were inferred from three large compendia of transcriptional data. By retaining only the parts of these networks with consistent signs, we were able to extrapolate the co-expression patterns which are conserved among the three species. An analysis of the connectivity of the resulting network clearly revealed the presence of a major connected component (Supplementary). Surprisingly, this conserved connected component included several genes related to various neurodegenerative diseases (i.e. Prnp/Prion diseases, Snca, Uchl1/Parkinson's disease, Bace1/Alzheimer's disease), making neurodegeneration one of the most significantly represented biological process (and Supplementary). It is tempting to speculate on the fact that the conservation across species of these transcriptional interdependencies, might reflect the important role of coordination in their transcriptional regulation. The fact that a large fraction of genes is related to neurodegenerative diseases suggests the existence of a delicate balance at the transcriptional level, whose alteration may have severe consequences. Focusing only on the relationships identified for the genes belonging to the significantly enriched processes, we evinced an interesting property of this evolutionarily conserved graph (and Supplementary). While genes related to cell cycle, ribosome and oxidative phosphorylation were clustered in compact modules, genes related to neurodegeneration (red dots) were sparser in the network, with many cross-talking edges. Our results are complementary to other studies performing global analysis of human protein interactions (). In a recent work (), investigating the known network of PPIs, the authors showed that genes characterized by an altered expression level in neurodegenerative diseases take part in many different pathways, reinforcing the concept of a multifactorial pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders. In our study, relying exclusively on transcriptional dependencies, similar conclusions are drawn. This in turn supports our first claim that key genes might be responsible for mediating and triggering the systematic response to a perturbing event (i.e. Prnp, see Supplementary Figs S3S4) and that even in such complex systems, valuable information can be extrapolated by their transcriptional analysis.
A system-level approach to prion infection
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Even if the PrP sequence is very well conserved among mammals, its ablation in mice results in no clear phenotype, nor is essential for their survival. This might be due to several reasons, such as the presence of buffering genes masking the PrP C absence or to an adaptive process during central nervous system development. We used the inferred mouse transcriptional gene network model to interpret the response to a Prnp deletion from the same dataset of (Hwang et al., 2009) (see Section 2 and Fig. 3c). We immediately noticed that, as expected, the perturbation intensity, as well as the Prnp associated q-value, was the lowest (see Supplementary Table S2, knockout). In addition, 27 genes show an equal incoherent variation (i.e. q-value = 0), which was not predicted by the initial gene network model. It is worth observing that a simple comparison of these transcripts with their reference counterparts (i.e. normal state) does not show any relevant expression changes. Indeed, in Hwang et al. (2009) no significant expression changes were found in PrP-null mice. This highlights the difference between our approach and a standard comparative study, emphasizing the ability of our method to extrapolate non-obvious transcriptional signatures. Among these genes, the enriched biological processes were tRNA metabolism, intracellular transport and synaptic transmission (Supplementary Table S4). We could observe for example the presence of Dstn, encoding for an actin-binding protein belonging to the ADF family responsible for enhancing the turnover rate of actin. In addition, Gls catalyzes the conversion of glutamate from glutamine and its potential role for compensating PrP absence may derive from its implication in behavior disturbances in which glutamate acts as a neurotransmitter (Prusiner, 1981). Gls is also involved in Alzheimer, just like Chgb, a tyrosine-sulfated secretory protein. Given their co-expression patterns with PrP C (see previous section) and their high significance as targets of PrP Sc (next section), Sirpa and Cpeb are of particular interest (see also Supplementary
DISCUSSION In this study, we employed previously published gene expression datasets to recognize the function of PrP C and its role in responding to prion inoculation inducing incoherent gene expression variations in a gene network model. A reverse engineering approach was here adopted to analyze the data of Hwang et al. (2009) starting from the basic assumption that a global transcriptional rearrangement must take place in order to adapt to a new condition (i.e. prion infection). Specific gene expression changes were expected to trigger other expression variations to finally reach an internal state of balance possibly different from the original one (see Figs 1 and 3). Our model-based results restricted the spectrum of potential key interactions, performing an educated selection of transcripts that show an incoherent response with respect to the overall systemic reaction to prion infection. The proposed framework offers new insights into the physiological function of PrP C and the molecular mechanisms underlying prion disease pathogenesis, unveiling a potential key role of previously unsuspected genes. Our results suggest that in order to fully explore the potential and advantages of microarray technologies, the size of the collected datasets must be large enough to capture the complete range of variations associated with the studied phenomenon. In this perspective, the data derived from a single experimental condition are complemented by the large independent dataset. Here, we show that SRI is not only a valuable tool to perform genome-wide studies in mammals, but is also capable of predicting the complex effects of endogenous and exogenous perturbations in a biological system, restricting the spectrum of plausible relationships that have to be experimentally investigated. Funding: MIUR (PRIN project) (to C.A.) and PRIORITY FP7 project (contract no.: 222887 to G.L.). Conflict of interest: none declared.
