Motivation: We study microRNA (miRNA) bindings to metastable RNA secondary structures close to minimum free energy conformations in the context of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and messenger RNA (mRNA) concentration levels, i.e. whether features of miRNA bindings to metastable conformations could provide additional information supporting the differences in expression levels of the two sequences defined by a SNP. In our study, the instances [mRNA/3 0 UTR; SNP; miRNA] were selected based on strong expression level analyses, SNP locations within binding regions and the computationally feasible identification of metastable conformations. Results: We identified 14 basic cases [mRNA; SNP; miRNA] of 3 0 UTR-lengths ranging from 124 up to 1078 nt reported in recent literature , and we analyzed the number, structure and miRNA binding to metastable conformations within an energy offset E above mfe conformations. For each of the 14 instances, the miRNA binding characteristics are determined by the corresponding STarMir output. Among the different parameters we introduced and analyzed, we found that three of them, related to the average depth and average opening energy of metastable conformations, may provide supporting information for a stronger separation between miRNA bindings to the two alleles defined by a given SNP. Availability and implementation: At http://kks.inf.kcl.ac.uk/MSbind. html the MSbind tool is available for calculating features of metastable conformations determined by putative miRNA binding sites.
INTRODUCTIONWithin the past few years, analyzing concentration levels of microRNAs (miRNAs) and their putative messenger RNA (mRNA) targets has become a major topic in miRNA research.experimentally evaluated a parameterized analytical expression that estimates the number of genes g having t transcripts present in a single cell. The parameters are adjusted based on microarray data for a large number of genes extracted from single embryonic mouse neural stem cells, where the actual aim is the comparison of transcript numbers in phenotypically identical cells. The authors conclude from observed data for $13 000 genes that the typical number of gene copies lies between 520, with 85% of genes having 5100 copies in a single cell. Although the analysis is carried out for a specific cell type, the authors expect similar distribution results for a wide range of cell types.provide experimental evidence that short RNAs (miRNAs and siRNAs) having a higher number of target transcripts within a single cell will downregulate each individual target gene to a lesser extent than those with a lower number of targets, which implies that the competition between target genes for a limited number of small RNAs may determine the degree of downregulation; see alsofor the concept of competing mRNAs associated with the number and distribution of multiple binding sites.provide data supporting the assumption that endogenous miRNAs preferentially target mRNAs with long 3 0 UTRs. The authors also discussamong other featuresthe interaction between exogenous and endogenous miRNAs and critically assess the value of microarray data in the context of miRNA target prediction. The sequencing method developed bysupports the assertion that only the most abundant miRNAs mediate target suppression. For example, deep sequencing of monocyte cells revealed the presence of $310 miRNAs, with only $40% of the miRNAs showing suppressing activity. For 480% of the targets, the corresponding miRNA was expressed 4100 reads/million. For the miRNA target prediction tool TargetScan,demonstrate how predictions may improve if target abundance is accounted for in binding scores. The impact of the life cycle of mRNAs on siRNA and miRNA efficacy is studied in. The authors draw the conclusion that miRNA target prediction could be improved if data about mRNA turnover rates are incorporated into prediction tools. Althoughwhere X m and X s are the mRNA and siRNA concentrations, k m is the mRNA transcription rate, d m the basal mRNA degradation rate and X m , X s  is the siRNA-induced mRNA degradation rate. The models differ in the assumption about X m , X s  and are fitted to experimental data obtained for a single siRNA targeting the coding region of the EGFP mRNA. The authors obtain the best fit for X m , X s   pX m X h s =q h  X h s  with h $ 4:5, P $ 0:008=min and q $ 0:1 pmol. Within a similar *To whom correspondence should be addressed. framework,study the so-called miRNAmediated feedforward loop in which a master transcription factor regulates an miRNA together with a set of target genes, and the mathematical models studied byadditionally account for the concentration level of the argonaute protein complex.study analytically the impact of multiple small non-coding RNAs on the regulation of a single target mRNA and subsequently the dynamics of protein production.combine the concept of miRNA binding site accessibility with miRNA and mRNA concentration levels. For, [T] anddenoting the equilibrium (final) concentrations of the miRNA, target mRNA and of the hybridized structure, respectively, the authors use the equilibrium condition ST=ST  expG=c, where G is the energy score that accounts for making the binding site accessible and the free energy of the hybridized structure (the constant c stands for the product of the gas constant and the temperature). Combining the equilibrium condition with conservation of mass equations (for initial concentrations S 0  and T 0 ) eventually leads to an analytical expression forin terms of S 0 , T 0  and G, where the latter is calculated for a particular binding site. Marin and Vanio ek (2012) introduce a new accessibility-based algorithm that uses a statistical analysis of all putative binding sites for a given miRNA-3 0 UTR pair. Among the top 100 target predictions for 153 fruit fly miRNAs, the algorithm finds more than twice as many validated targets compared with other accessibility-based target prediction methods. Reviews of existing miRNA target prediction tools and information about latest developments can be found in. The target prediction tool CoMeTa designed byoperates on the assumption that targets of a given miRNA are coexpressed with each other. The target prediction score is based on the evaluation of thousands of publicly available microarray data. For the 675 human miRNAs analyzed in the study, 490% of the validated targets fall within the first 50% of predicted targets (which, however, could be a large number). In a similar way, the tool miRror designed bycombines scores produced by an ensemble of established miRNA target prediction tools with rankings obtained from gene expression and HITS-CLIP data.consider the problem of selecting an antisense sequence that is able to effectively bind to a target mRNA and block protein synthesis. One of the key features of the authors' method is the presuppositions that mRNA secondary structures are in a constant state of flux and are assuming different suboptimal states, which also determines the approach taken in the present article. Johnson and Srivastava (2013) designed a tool that generates and compares suboptimal secondary structures of a given mRNA sequence. The comparison aims at identifying regions that are least similar among the set of folded structures, which indicates volatility in intramolecular hydrogen bonding. Such regions are seen as candidates for antisense binding. The method is evaluated on six mRNA sequences and compared with results produced by the Soligo application of Sfold (). In our article, we study miRNA bindings to sets of metastable secondary structures induced by 3 0 UTRs and their mutated counterparts, where the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are located within the miRNA binding site.briefly mention the analysis of miRNA bindings to metastable conformations. The authors compare the prediction performance over samples of 1000 secondary structures without constraints to samples of 100 metastable conformations. They report the sample of 1000 conformations is more favourable. In our approach, we discriminate between metastable conformations with regard to depth and average opening energies. The impact of SNPs on minimum free energy mRNA conformations has been comprehensively studied in. The authors analyzed a total number of 34 557 SNPs in 12 450 genes. The minimum free energy conformations were calculated by using RNAfold (). The authors provide a great variety of data about the distribution of SNPs within mRNA transcripts and their effect on minimum free energy values of secondary structures as well as on the profile of the ensemble of suboptimal structures and structures with highin the 5 0 UTR of the human FTL gene in conjunction with associated SNPs that restore the overall wild-type ensemble of secondary structures, thus leading to the notion of structure-stabilizing haplotypes. The authors also analyzed the stabilizing effect of multiple structure-stabilizing haplotypes on binding sites of miRNAs and RNA binding proteins (nine cases of 3 0 UTRs and one case of 5 0 UTR). As pointed out by the authors, the findings suggest that certain SNP pairs are conserved in the human population because they stabilize ensembles of mRNA conformations. Recently, databases have become available that report SNP data in the context of miRNA bindings, for example, miRdSNP (), PolymiRTS (), MicroSNiPer () and the related tool RNAsnp (). Sethupathy and Collins (2008) critically assess several genetic association studies related miRNA bindings and the potential impact of SNPs in bindings regions. The authors highlight the importance of follow-up functional experiments for a deeper understanding of the real effect miRNA target site variations may have on the development of various human diseases. Consequently, we researched for our analysis the recent literature for studies on the impact of SNPs on miRNA bindings meeting the following four conditions: (i) the expression levels of both alleles involved are analyzed experimentally by SNP genotyping (for some instances, a combination of clinical association studies and strong in silico results) or related methods involving PCR experiments, (ii) the underlying allele information can be extracted as consistent data from the NCBI database, the dbSNP database and the Ensembl database (3 0 UTR transcripts), (iii) the miRNA bindings are predicted by the latest version of STarMir () at least for the allele with the stronger inhibitory effect with the SNP position being inside the binding region and (iv) identifying all metastable conformations within an energy offset E above mfe conformations is computationally feasible (3 0 UTR length & 1000 nt). Meeting all four conditions at least to a certain extent reduced the number of case studies we found to a small set of 14 RNA instances.
APPROACHThe present study assumes the existence of multiple active RNA conformations instead of a unique minimum free energy conformation as the single biologically active state, see Johnson and Srivastava (2013), Solomatin et al. (2010) and the literature therein. The second basic feature of our approach relates to the presence of multiple copies of each individual mRNA. In more detail, we proceed as follows for a giveninstance (a flowchart of the approach is provided in SupplementaryiPart I, Section IA):(A) For both alleles (3 0 UTR and SNP), the sets MS3 0 UTR, E and MSSNP, E of metastable states (MS states) within an energy offset E above the mfe conformation are identified by using RNAsubopt andselected from recent literature were analyzed in the corresponding publications by prediction tools different from STarMir, we obtained for each of the cases at least for one allele a binding site predicted by STarMir with the SNP position inside.(C) For the predicted binding site BS(miRNA), the elements of the sets MS3 0 UTR, E and MSSNP, E are examined with respect to a number of basic features, such as the number of base pair bindings within BS(miRNA) and the approximate free energy G BS of bindings within BS(miRNA) according to standard data of the nearest neighbour model ().For a given set of metastable secondary structures, the application MSbind is available at http://kks.inf.kcl.ac.uk/MSbind. html for calculating features of metastable conformations determined by putative miRNA binding sites. The data are sourced from the following publications:, and the authors presume an additive effect of both instances on bladder cancer risk. For PARP1/rs8679, the authors conjecture a stronger inhibitory effect of miR-145-5p for the T-allele.mention the impact of miRNAs as subject of future research, i.e. no specific miRNA is identified. Based on miRNA target predictions for ORAI1 and the SNP position, we selected miR-519a-3p for the present study. For miR-519a-3p, the binding prediction returned by StarMir is stronger for the C-allele.The 3 0 UTR-and SNP-sequences were identified by using NCBI databases and transcript information provided by ENSEMBL. A detailed description of all instances in terms of ENSEMBL ID codes is given in Supplementary Table S1 in Part I (SupplMat-I), Section I-B.
RESULTSWhen executing step (A), we applied the standard settings of RNAsubopt and Barriers, where isolated base pairings are not permitted and free energy values are discriminated with an accuracy of 0.1 kcal/mol. The setting of E depends on the length of the 3 0 UTR and was selected in such a way that a sufficiently large number of metastable conformations is available for analyzing MS   , k with k 100. Along with the energy offset E, we tried to restrict metastable states to 'deep' local minima: The parameter D indicates the 'depth' of a local minimum or 'escape height' from a local minimum, which is taken from the barrier tree as the distance to the nearest saddle point. By jSecStruc w=s j (short for both cases of jSecStruc weak j and jSecStruc strong j) we denote the number of secondary structures returned by RNAsubopt for an offset E above the mfe conformation, where the index w indicates the allele with the weaker and s with the stronger miRNA inhibitory effect (binding predictionfor [ORAI1;rs76753792;miR-519a-3p]). Analogously, jMS w=s j is the number of local minima within the E range with an 'escape height' larger or equal to D.
Number of metastable conformationsResults of step (A) with respect to E, D and jMS w=s j are summarized in. For jSecStruc w=s j, the data are provided in Supplementary Table S2 in Part I (Suppl-Mat-I), Section I-C. For 9 of the 14 instances, the values of jMS w j and jMS s j are relatively close or (much) larger for jMS s j, seeand. For the remaining instances, the ratio jMS w j=jMS s j ranges from 1.31 (FGF20) up until 6.47 (AGTR1). Thus, the number of secondary structures classified as metastable conformations per se does not discriminate between the two cases of weaker and stronger binding to the associated miRNA.The correlation between jMS w j and jMS s j does not necessarily extend to jSecStruc w=s j. For example, for LIG3 we have jMS w j=jMS s j41, whereas jSecStruc w j=jSecStruc s j51.
MiRNA binding sites and energy predictionsThe results obtained in step (B) are summarized in. For a given input(a) G nucl relates to the assumption that the initial stage of base pairing (nucleation) requires a gain in free energy that is greater than the energy cost for the translational and rotational entropy loss when both miRNA and mRNA are fixed in a conformation by intermolecular base pairing. The value of G nucl is calculated by using a sample of 1000 structures computed by Sfold, where the calculation is restricted to short base pair blocks within a 4 nt singlestranded segment of a putative binding site. The energy cost for the translational and rotational entropy loss is called initiation energy G init , and the standard setting in the STarMir tool is G init  4:09 4kcal/mol, i.e. G nucl  G initiation 50kcal/mol can be seen as a basic requirement for miRNAmRNA interaction.(b) G disrupt is the energy needed for the disruption of base pairs that are present within a putative binding site in a given mRNA secondary structure. We set G dis  G w disrupt  G s disrupt .(c) G hybrid is the energy gained by the hybridization of the miRNA with the particular binding site.. jMS weak j=jMS strong j ratios: The green colour indicates a larger or equal number of metastable conformations for the allele with the stronger miRNA binding. For the blue colour the ratio is larger but close to one, and the red colour indicates a much larger number of metastable conformations for the allele with the weaker miRNA binding match among all predictions having the SNP position inside, leading in some cases to weaker G total values. In case of a missing strong seed match, the target predictions provided by the PITA tool () are taken into account. By jBP w j and jBP s j, we denote the number of base pairs in the corresponding mfe conformation within the miRNA binding region predicted by STarMir for an individual allele (w  weak and s  strong allele with respect to miRNA binding). Detailed information about the STarMir output is provided in Supplementary Material Part II (Suppl-Mat-II), which also includes PITA predictions and, where available, data provided by FindTar (); for target predictions by other tools, please see Supplementary Material Part I (Suppl-Mat-I), Section I-D. Except for IL-23 R (L  851), the G total predictions by STarMir are stronger for the allele identified for stronger miRNA bindings in the corresponding publication (cf. the row for G tot and description of instances in Section 2; we recall that for ORAI1 no particular miRNA is mentioned). Except for LIG3 (L  124), HTR3E (L  302), HLA-G (L  386), IL-23R (L  851) and AGTR1 (L  888), the absolute value of G disrupt is smaller for the allele with the stronger miRNA binding stated in the corresponding publication (s-allele indicated in, see also the row for G dis ). For IL-23R and AGTR1, the total STarMir score is positive for both alleles, for IL-23R even with G s total 4G w total .The instancediffer only slightly towards the 5 0 end of the C allele. We note that for the A allele we have the only case inwhere the SNP position is not within the 'binding site' predicted by STarMir. The PITA tool returns (the equivalent of) G total  14:12 kcal/mol for the C allele, and G total  10:02 kcal/mol for the A allele (see Suppl-Mat-II), which is in line with the experimental data from. The absolute value of G disrupt is also slightly smaller for the C allele. For, the absolute value of G disrupt is larger for the C allele by 4.19 kcal/mol, and there is no PITA prediction with the SNP position inside the reported binding region. The PITA predictions close to the SNP position favour the C allele with respect to the total score and G hybrid , which complies with. The selection of positions 7798 for the A allele and 8098 for the C allele is motivated by the seed-like bindings predicted by STarMir, see Suppl-Mat-II. For ORAI1, the positions 6988 were selected for the C allele due to the larger value of G s nucl  4:32kcal/mol. For, the G hybrid values is stronger for the G allele (s-case) by 6.2 kcal/mol, and the stronger binding prediction is supported by PITA and FindTar (no binding prediction for A allelew-case). For [HLA-G;rs1063320;miR-148a-3p], PITA returns a stronger total score for the G allele, which is in line with the STarMir total score and experimental data from. The absolute value of G disrupt is larger for the G allele (by 1.12 kcal/mol for PITA and 1.73 kcal/mol for STarMir). FindTar also strongly supports the miRNA binding to the G allele. For, the G hybrid values is stronger for the A allele (s-case) by 4.3 kcal/mol. The stronger binding prediction for the A allele is supported by PITA and FindTar (no binding prediction for C allelew-case). For the 14 instances under consideration, the PITA predictions either support (or improve for IL-23R) the STarMir predictions displayed in, or no predictions with the SNP position inside the reported binding region are returned. In summary, if STarMir and PITA (for IL-23R) are taken together, the G total predictions are stronger for the corresponding allele (s-case) identified in the description of the 14 instances in Section 2.
Analysis of metastable conformationsSTarMir and PITA operate on sequences as input, not on representations of secondary structures. Therefore, we use RNAeval () for the energy evaluation of metastable conformations within binding regions predicted by STarMir, which also complies with the data generated by RNAsubopt and Barriers, see. To facilitate a coherent analysis of energy values, we use energy values calculated for binding regions within the corresponding mfe structure as templates for comparisons, instead of using the associated G disrupt values reported in. Let S denote a secondary structure (either mfe conformation or metastable conformation) for a 3 0 UTR (wild-type or SNPtype) listed in. By S open we denote the associated secondary structure where all base pair bindings within the miRNA binding region reported inare removed. For example, if S is the mfe conformation of the 3 0 UTR of the C allele of LIG3, then S has seven base pair bindings in positions 8098 (see), and the seven base-pair bindings are removed in S open. For S being a metastable conformation, the number of base pair bindings within the miRNA binding region can be larger, the same or smaller in comparison with the corresponding value reported infor the mfe conformation. We then defineThe index 'ind' specifies the different cases we consider, and the different values in (1)and(2) relate either to individual structures or to average values (according to the value assigned to 'ind') over sets of metastable conformations:(i) ind  mfe indicates the single mfe conformation. (ii) ind  tot indicates the average value over all metastable conformations as counted inFurthermore, we order the metastable conformations S ms with respect to the absolute value of jG open j and the depth DS ms  (deepest first), respectively. As in (2), we define, the N metastable conformations are ranked in ascending order with respect to jG open j, and the average value is taken over N conformations. Finally, we combine 'opening energies', as defined in(2)and(3), with the depth DS ms  of metastable conformations, as defined by D w=s N and used in (4): We look at the average depth of structures S ms with the N smallest values of jG open j. Let D N:s open and D N:w open denote the average depth of metastable conformations S ms counted in the calculation ofComprehensive information about the distribution of metastable conformations and their respective energy values is provided in Supplementary Material Part III. (Suppl-Mat-III). Inwe report representative data that are useful for discriminating between the two alleles involved for each instance. Positive values of G mfe , G tot , G N , G asc:N and D N open are interpreted as being in favour of the allele with the stronger miRNA binding stated in the underlying literature source, which is also the case for R N 51. For LIG3 (L  124), HTR3E (L  302), HLA-G (L  386), IL-23R (L  851) and RAD51 (L  978), the data for G mfe , G tot , G N and G asc:N shown inare not in favour of the allele with the stronger miRNA binding stated in the underlying literature (HOXB5 with L  952 not included here, please see later in the text). For LIG3, IL-23R and RAD51 the values of R N are either close to or smaller than 1.00, and the values of D N open are all positive, suggesting more stable local minima for structures with the smallest absolute value of opening energies for the allele with the stronger miRNA binding. For HLA-G, the values of R N are equal or close to 1.00, and the values of D 60 open and D 100 open are positive. Moreover, the G asc:N-values shown inare close to zero, and the values of G N are in the range of G s disrupt  G w disrupt  1:73 kcal/mol from. Thus, for HLA-G the values of G s=w hybrid shown inseem to be decisive for an assessment of a putative miR-148a-3p $ HLA-G/rs1063320 binding (based on prediction tools). For HTR3E, only the values of D N open are in favour of the allele with the stronger miRNA binding stated in the underlying literature. Unlike the case of HLA-G, the negative values of G N and G asc:N are more substantial, i.e. in terms of absolute values above the range of corresponding values from. Thus, only the values of G s hybrid , G s nucl (both) and D N open () support the binding to the G allele (s-case). For HOXB5 (L  952), the G N values are negative yet close to zero, and the G asc:N values support the stronger miRNA binding to the A-allele (s-case), which makes the HOXB5 instance different from the five instances discussedappear to determine the evaluation of miR-196a $ RAP1A/rs6573 bindings. For CBR1 (L  284), WFS1 (L  779), RYR3 (L  880), AGTR1 (L  888), FGF20 (L  903) and ORAI1 (L  1034), the data for G mfe , G tot , G N and G asc:N () are all in favour of the allele with the stronger miRNA binding stated in the underlying literature. However, for each of the five instances at least one of the two parameters R N and D N open does not fully support the predicted binding. For RYR3, only D 20 open  0:26 kcal/mol is clearly not in favour of the predicted binding. Similarly, the values of D N open do not support the predicted stronger binding for CBR1. For ORAI1, this is the case for the R N values and D 100 open  0:05 kcal/mol, but with a relatively strong value of D 20 open  0:75 kcal/mol. For AGTR1, all three values of D N open are clearly in favour of the predicted binding pattern. The instances WFS1 and FGF20 are the only two cases where for all N  values both parameters do not support the predicted stronger binding. Finally, for PARP1 (L  769) all energy values shown insupport the stronger miRNA binding to the T-allele (s-case). We recall that for the instance ORAI1 from Chang et al.(2012) no individual miRNA is identified in the literature source. For ORAI1 and miRNA-519a-3p, the two binding sites predicted by STarMir intersect only by 8 nt, with a positive value G total  5:62 kcal/mol for the T-allele (w-case), which suggests that no binding occurs. Although R N 41:00 for all cases of N considered, we obtain strong positive values for G mfe , G tot , G N and G asc:N , along with the STarMir predictions G total  7:21 kcal/mol and G nucl  4:32 kcal/mol for the C-allele (s-case). Moreover, the data for D N open are D 10 open  0:89 kcal/mol, D 20 open  0:75 kcal/mol and D 60 open  0:08 kcal/mol, which support a binding of miR519a-3p to the 3 0 UTR of ORAI1.
CONCLUSIONOf the 14 instances we analyzed, 13 instances are sensitive to the parameters G ind , G asc:N , R N and D N open we introduced in Equation (1) until Equations (5). For RAP1A (L  1078), slightly larger values of E did not create differences between basic parameters for both alleles and eventually led to an unmanageable size of data for standard desktop computer configurations. The absence of experimental data about copy numbers of mRNA transcripts considered in the present study prevents the selection of a particular value of D N open (or of the other two highlighted parameters), which is why we considered three representative values of N  simultaneously, without calculating P-values. The upper bound of N  100 is motivated by the data provided in, seethere. The data provided inindicate that G mfe , G tot , G N not necessarily contribute to a deeper insight into miRNA binding patterns to different alleles, see also the discussion of instances in Section 3.3. In particular, G tot and G N are related only to free energy values of metastable structures, which is why a further discrimination by the depth of metastable conformations and the opening energy of binding regions was introduced. Consequently, we focus in the summary of findings presented inon the values calculated for G asc:N , R N and D N open. In, the row 'StarMirtotal' indicates by '' that the G total score (see) supports the allele with the stronger miRNA binding stated in the underlying literature; '/' indicates 05G s total 5G w total. As aforementioned, data about estimations of copy numbers are not available for the mRNA transcripts we consider in the present study. To avoid the inclusion of irrelevant data (by averaging or thresholding), we consider a 'best case scenario' for each instance: We select a value of N in such a way that the support of the miRNA binding to the allele identified in the underlying literature source (s-case) is maximized. In case of multiple N values (for 11 instances same pattern as infor at least two N), the smallest N is selected and named inin the row 'N selection'. For the selected N, theentry is labelled as positive '', if G asc:N and D N open are positive, respectively, or R N 51:00. If the data are inconclusive (equal or close to 0.00 or 1.00), we use '/'. For example, for HLA-G we select
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
L.Day et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
0 UTR length is 779 nt. Expression levels of luciferase assays are measured for both alleles, with a stronger inhibitory effect of miR-668-3p for the G-allele. [IL-23R;rs10889677;let-7e]: The case is analyzed in Zwiers et al. (2012). The SNP rs10889677 is defined by C $ A at 3 0 UTR position 309 of NM_144701.2. The 3 0 UTR length is 851 nt. The authors study risk factors for inflammatory bowel diseases. Wang et al. (2012b) associate [IL-23R;rs10889677] with breast cancer development. Zwiers et al. (2012) use real-time PCR and luciferase assays for measuring expression levels, and the authors conclude a stronger inhibitory effect of let-7e for the C-allele. [RYR3;rs1044129;miR-367]: The case is analyzed in Zhang et al. (2011). The SNP rs1044129 is defined by A $ G at 3 0 UTR position 839 of NM_001036.3. The 3 0 UTR length is 880 nt. The authors study risk factors of breast cancer development. The authors use real-time PCR and luciferase assays for measuring expression levels. The authors observe a stronger inhibitory effect of miR-367 for the A-allele. [AGTR1;rs5186;miR-155-5p]: The case is analyzed in Haas et al. (2012). The SNP rs5186 is defined by A $ C at 3 0 UTR position 86 of NM_032049.3. The 3 0 UTR length is 888 nt. The authors analyze luciferase assays for measuring expression levels and observe a stronger inhibitory effect of
MicroRNA binding sites and metastable RNA secondary structures at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
For example, Westra et al. (2013) report that trans-eQTL SNPs are enriched within miRNA binding sites in blood cell lines studied in the article, see Figure 1 in Westra et al. (2013). Although in the present study we focus on miRNA binding within 3 0 UTRs, we also plan to look into the case where miRNA binding sites near the terminal coding region along with the presence of SNPs may affect the overall 2D or 3D structure (The authors are grateful to an anonymous referee for pointing out the potential of eQTL studies as well as the importance of miRNA binding sites near terminal coding regions in the context of miRNA bindings to metastable RNA conformations.). ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors are grateful to the anonymous referees for their careful reading of the manuscript and the multitude of valuable suggestions that helped them to improve and extend the presentation of their results. Conflict of Interest: none declared.
