Motivation: Next-generation sequencing technologies sequence viruses with ultra-deep coverage, thus promising to revolutionize our understanding of the underlying diversity of viral populations. While the sequencing coverage is high enough that even rare viral variants are sequenced, the presence of sequencing errors makes it difficult to distinguish between rare variants and sequencing errors. Results: In this article, we present a method to overcome the limitations of sequencing technologies and assemble a diverse viral population that allows for the detection of previously undiscovered rare variants. The proposed method consists of a high-fidelity sequencing protocol and an accurate viral population assembly method, referred to as Viral Genome Assembler (VGA). The proposed protocol is able to eliminate sequencing errors by using individual barcodes attached to the sequencing fragments. Highly accurate data in combination with deep coverage allow VGA to assemble rare variants. VGA uses an expectation–maximization algorithm to estimate abundances of the assembled viral variants in the population. Results on both synthetic and real datasets show that our method is able to accurately assemble an HIV viral population and detect rare variants previously undetectable due to sequencing errors. VGA outperforms state-of-the-art methods for genome-wide viral assembly. Furthermore, our method is the first viral assembly method that scales to millions of sequencing reads. Availability: Our tool VGA is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONHuman immunodeficiency virus (HIV) exhibits high genomic diversity within an infected host, which affects many clinically important phenotypic traits such as escape from vaccine-induced immunity, virulence and response to antiviral therapies (). To accurately characterize an intra-host HIV population, sequencing technologies must be sensitive enough to detect and quantify rare variants (). Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies offer deep coverage of genomic data in the form of millions of sequencing reads (). While the sequencing coverage is high enough to capture rare variants, the presence of sequencing errors makes it difficult to distinguish between rare variants and sequencing err0ors. Additionally, low viral population variability (i.e. pairs of individual viral genomes that have small genetic distance) and the presence of individual variants having low abundance complicates accessing viral diversity and assembling full-length viral variants. The full picture of viral diversity in a population remains undiscovered due to errors produced by sequencing platforms. Current sequencing technologies use different underlying chemistry and offer trade-offs among throughput, read length and cost (). While the current sequencing platforms can potentially detect point-mutations, error rates may result in false-positive single nucleotide variant (SNV) calls or wrong genome variant sequences. Computational error correction techniques are able to partially correct the sequencing error and provide an opportunity to discover highly expressed individual viral genomes, but low abundant variants remain undiscovered. Current methods () are not able to differentiate true biological mutations from sequencing artifacts, thus significantly limiting the possibility of a method to assemble the underlying viral population. In this article, we propose a method to overcome these limitations by coupling a high-fidelity sequencing protocol () with an accurate method, referred to as Viral Genome Assembler (VGA), to assemble a heterogeneous viral population. High-fidelity sequencing protocol, known as SafeSeqS, has been applied to detect rare somatic mutations, but its application on detecting rare viral mutations has been neglected. Similar to Safe-SeqS we apply a special library preparation technique that eliminates sequencing errors during the demultiplexing step. The proposed protocol attaches individual barcode sequences during the library preparation step for every fragment, then amplifies each tagged fragment. Reads are clustered according to the original fragment based on the attached barcode. An error-correction protocol is then applied for every read group resulting in a method that corrects errors inside the group and produces a corrected consensus read. Highly accurate data in combination with deep coverage allows for accurate estimation of the underlying diversity of a viral population. Importantly, the low per-base sequencing cost of the Illumina platform makes it realistic to greatly increase coverage to detect ultra-rare variants. Our sequencing protocol introduces novel challenges for virus assembly and we develop a novel assembly approach for reconstructing and estimating the frequency of a *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com large number of closely related viral variants. Our method does not rely on the availability of a reference genome. This makes our method applicable to newly emerged viruses in which genome sequences are unknown. The ability to discover rare viral variants makes our tool applicable for monitoring and quantifying an HIV population structure to dissect its evolutionary landscape and study genomic interaction. In particular, our approach allows for the discovery of rare mutations and variants that are of particular interest because of their potential influence on drug resistance and treatment failure ().
METHODS
OverviewAdvances in NGS and the ability to generate deep coverage data in the form of millions of reads provide exceptional resolution for studying the underlying genetic diversity of complex viral populations. However, errors produced by most sequencing protocols complicate distinguishing between true biological mutations and technical artifacts that confound detection of rare mutations and rare individual genome variants. A common approach is to use post-sequencing error correction techniques able to partially correct the sequencing errors. In contrast to clonal samples, the post-sequencing error correction methods are not well suited for mixed viral samples and may lead to filtering out true biological mutations. For this reason, current viral assembly methods are able to detect only highly abundant SNV, thus limiting the discovery of rare viral genomes. Additional difficulty arises from the genomic architectures of viruses. Long common regions shared across viral population (known as conserved regions) introduce ambiguity in the assembly process. Conserved regions may be due low-diversity population or due to recombination with multiple cross-overs. In contrast to repeats in genome assembly, conserved regions may be phased based on relative abundances of viral variants. Low-diversity viral populations in which all pairs of individual genomes within a viral population have a small genetic distance from each other may represent additional challenges for the assembly procedure. We apply a high-fidelity sequencing protocol to study viral population structure (). This protocol is able to eliminate errors from sequencing data by attaching individual barcodes during the library preparation step. After the fragments are sequenced, the barcodes identify clusters of reads that originated from the same fragment, thus facilitating error correction. Given that many reads are required to sequence each fragment, we are trading off an increase in sequence coverage for a reduction in error rate. Prior to assembly, we utilize the de novo consensus reconstruction tool, Vicuna (), to produce a linear consensus directly from the sequence data. This approach offers more flexibility for samples that do not have 'close' reference sequences available. Traditional assembly methods () aim to reconstruct a linear consensus sequence and are not well-suited for assembling a large number of highly similar but distinct viral genomes. We instead take our ideas from haplotype assembly methods (), which aim to reconstruct two closely related haplotypes. However, these methods are not applicable for assembly of a large (a priori unknown) number of individual genomes. Many existing viral assemblers estimate local population diversity and are not well suited for assembling full-length quasi-species variants spanning the entire viral genome. Available genome-wide assemblers able to reconstruct full-length quasi-species variants are originally designed for low throughput and are impractical for high throughput technologies containing millions of sequencing reads.We introduce a viral population assembly method () working on highly accurate sequencing data able to detect rare variants and tolerate conserved regions shared across the population. Our method is coupled with post-assembly procedures able to detect and resolve ambiguity raised from long conserved regions using expression profiles (). After a consensus has been reconstructed directly from the sequence data, our method detects SNVs from the aligned sequencing reads. Read overlapping is used to link individual SNVs and distinguish between genome variants in the population. The viral population is condensed in a conflict graph built from aligned sequencing data. Two reads are originated fromAccurate viral population assembly different viral genomes if they share different SNVs in the overlapping region. Viral variants are identified from the graph as independent sets of non-conflicting reads. Non-continuous coverage of rare viral variants may limit assembly capacities, indicating that increase in coverage is required to increase the assembly accuracy. Frequencies of identified variants are then estimated using an expectationmaximization algorithm. Compared with existing approaches, we are able to detect rare population variants while achieving high assembly accuracy.
Error correctionThe proposed sequencing is able to eliminate errors from sequencing data and produce highly accurate read sequences. It uses a high-fidelity sequencing protocol that attaches individual barcodes during the library preparation step. The barcodes are then used to identify reads originated from the same fragment, allowing to access multiple sequencing data of the same fragment. It follows that every sequenced position of the fragment would have multiple independent evidence, suitably promoting highly accurate consensus reads. By applying an error-correction procedure of the protocol, we are able to address both sequencing and PCR errors, which leads to high assembly accuracy.
Consensus constructionWe build a consensus from paired-end reads using Vicuna (). Our sequencing method should not contain any particularly low coverage region allowing reconstruction of population consensus for viral sample. In the event that Vicuna produces multiple contigs rather than a complete consensus, we use BLAST to merge contigs. We require 50 nt overlap to merge any pair of contigs. In the next step, the population consensus is used as a reference genome to map reads. Building the reference genome from actual sequencing data rather than using an annotated genome provides us with an accurate and unique mapping.
Read mappingAs with many viral population analyses, the first step of VGA is to map the reads. We map reads onto the de novo consensus using InDelFixer () with default parameters. False read alignments are filtered out using fragment length distribution inferred from the mapping data. Assuming that the fragment length follows a normal distribution (), we only keep reads with fragment length within three standard deviations from the mean. In total 1.2% of reads have been filtered out versus expected .3% according to the three-sigma rule.
Viral population assemblyThe combination of deep coverage with high accuracy provides an unprecedented opportunity for estimating genomic diversity in a viral population. The viral population assembly starts with determining pairs of mapped reads conflicting with each other in the overlapping region. Following, we construct the conflict graph G=V; E with vertices corresponding paired-end reads, i.e. V = R, and edges connecting conflicting pairs of paired-end reads. Obviously, any true viral genome corresponds to a maximal independent set in the conflict graph (i.e. a maximal set of pairwise nonadjacent vertices), although not every maximal independent set necessarily corresponds to a true viral genome. We adopt a parsimonious approach requiring to cover the conflict graph with the minimum number of maximal independent sets. This problem is equivalent to MIN-GRAPHCOLORING which is NP-hard. There exists many heuristics for solving this problem [see, e.g.based on greedy selection of a maximal independent set. Unfortunately, our attempts to build even a single viral genome failed, as it is difficult to arrange paired-end reads into a connected single path. Indeed, a greedy algorithm runs out of any possible extension after just a few steps while concatenating paired-end reads from left-to-right. Instead, we apply an alternative 'topdown' approach of recursive graph partitioning along the maximum cut (Max Cut) which has been previously successfully applied for human haplotyping (). Given a graph G=V; E, the Max Cut problem asks for partitioning of the vertices into two components V=V 1 [ V 2 maximizing the total number of edges which have one endpoint in V 1 and the other in V 2. The Max Cut problem though NP-hard is well approximated by a simple 0.5-approximation algorithm that randomly assigns vertex to one of the two components (). Our Max Cut heuristic starts with alternatively assigning left-to-right sorted mapped reads to two components and then repeatedly moves one vertex at a time from one component to another, improving the solution at each step, until no more improvements of this type can be made. Our coloring heuristic recursively partitions the conflict graph until each component becomes independent. If reads of a given color completely cover the consensus genome, then the resulted sequence is accepted as the next viral genome. Otherwise, if assembled genome contains gaps, we add non-conflicting reads from other color classes in left-to-right order in attempt to fill the gaps. If all SNV positions are covered, then a newly reconstructed viral genome is added to the set VG. Finally, the genomes whose gaps cannot be filled with the above procedure are dropped.
Viral population quantificationIn the final step of the workflow, an expectationmaximization algorithm is used to infer the relative abundances of assembled viral quasi-species similar to what is described in. We extend the previous EM and likelihood formulation to incorporate a prior probability for the viral population and compute the maximum a-posteriori estimate, rather than the MLE. Let H be a random variable over the set of viral variant genomes H =VG and let R be a random variable over the set of reads R. Let pH $Dir;. .. ;  be the prior probability of observing a given set of variants and denote p h =Pr H=h to be the probability of observing a particular variant h. The probability of observing read r 2 R is given by marginalizing over all variantsand K h is the number of reads consistent with h. We can now define the log-posterior aswhere C R is a constant and n r is the number of reads r. As this function is non-convex and difficult to optimize, we solve the easier problem of maximizing its lower-bound,where n rh is the expected number of reads r generated by variant h. The EM algorithm computes this byand subsequently maximizes the log-posterior with the MAP estimate given by
Performance of VGA on simulated dataBecause the ground truth is unknown for sequenced viral populations, simulations present a standardized way to assess the performance of viral assembly tools. The proposed high-fidelity protocol allows to correct sequencing errors, thus giving access to highly accurate sequencing data. Post-sequencing error-correction techniques are available for reads obtained by regular protocol offering the possibility to partially correct sequencing errors trading off for real biological mutations. Grinder () is used to generate reads from both the high-fidelity and regular sequencing protocol. Reads are generated from both real and synthetic viral variants with different sequencing parameters and viral expression profiles. Grinder is a state-of-the-art sequencing read simulator able to produce shotgun sequencing data from a viral population with different expression profiles. We mapped the simulated paired-end reads onto the consensus using Mosaik. The consensus was constructed using Vicuna (), a de novo assembly tool able to produce a linear consensus from deep paired-end sequencing data (see Section 2.3 for details). We use sensitivity and positive predictive value (PPV) to evaluate the quality of viral genomes assembled by VGA. We consider fully assembled viral genome without errors. Sensitivity is defined as the portion of assembled quasi-species that match true quasi-species, i.e. Sensitivity=TP=TP+FN. Positive predictive value is defined as the portion of true sequences among assembled sequences, i.e., PPV=TP=TP+FP. Additionally, we evaluate ability of our method to estimate population size (i.e. number of viral genomes in the population). Accuracy of population size prediction is defined as a ratio between estimated and true population sizes. Finally, we use JensenShannon divergence (JSD) to measure the accuracy of frequency estimation. Given two probability distributions, JSD measures the 'distance' between them, or in other words, the quality of approximation of one probability distribution by the other distribution. It is defined as the KullbackLeibler divergence from distributions P and Q to their mixture. Formally, the JSD between true distribution P and approximation distribution Q is given by the formulaand M= 1 2 P+Q. The motivation for using JSD is a consequence of KL divergence being undefined when assembly methods fail to reconstruct some variant i, hence forcing Q(i) to be 0. JSD averts this by measuring the distance to the mixture, which contains all true and called variants (TP and FP). Our first simulated study compares the assembly accuracy across different virus species. We focus on effect of read-length and throughput on assembly quality for different types of viruses. Paired-end reads of various length corresponding to high-fidelity and regular sequencing protocols are simulated from HIV and HCV populations assuming uniform and power-law distributions. A power-law distribution (i.e. frequencyAccurate viral population assembly of an individual viral genome is a power of the previous one) corresponds to a population with several dominant variants and many rare variants. The uniform distribution has equal frequencies for all viral genomes. HCV population is presented by 1739bp-long fragment from the E1E2 region of 44 real HCV sequences. HIV population consist of 10 real intra-host viral variants mixture from 1.3-kb-long HIV-1 region, which included pol protease and part of the pol reverse transcriptase (). The genomic architecture across virus species was investigated and its influence on assembly accuracy was studied. HCV virus exhibits more complex genomic architecture with lower population diversity and longer conserved regions () than HIV. Conserved regions were present in both viruses, although only HCV contains conserved regions longer then 450 bp. Conserved regions longer then the average fragment length (450 bp) may introduce ambiguity in the assembly process due to a lack of direct evidence of sub-genomes phasing across the conserved region. We performed simulated sequencing experiment where the average fragment amplification rate is 5, resulting in a five time decrease in throughput due to the consensus error correction performed by the high-fidelity sequencing protocol. Also the simulation experiments were adjusted to simulate a non-uniform amplification rate. Non-uniform amplification rate results in discarding fragments with insufficient amplification rate (53). From real studies it is known that around 10% of fragments are amplified less than three times. Sequencing errors produced by the regular protocol limited the ability of VGA to accurately assemble a viral population. All assembled variants contained large number of mismatches, additionally VGA significantly overestimated population size. As expected, short read lengths dramatically inhibit reconstruction, which is evidenced by VGA failing to produce any fulllength genomes when given 2  36 bp reads (). Because common regions for distinct HCV viral genomes are significantly longer than for HIV, it is not surprising that performance of VGA is worse on HCV datafor 3 M 2  150 bp reads simulated from 44 1739-bp-long viral genomes, sensitivity is 50%, PPV is 80%. Results on HCV data confirm that the lower mutation rate and presence of conserved regions have a negative impact on the ability to accurately reconstruct individual viral genomes. Surprisingly, increasing the read length for HIV from 100 to 150 bp yields no benefits for reconstruction accuracy suggesting that 100 bp read length is enough to distinguish between HIV viral variants with high mutation rate. Although further experiments are needed to determine optimum read length, our simulations suggest that 2  100 bp is recommended for small HIV viral populations and 2  150 bp is recommended for medium HCV population with complex genomic architecture. We separately analyzed the ability of our method to estimate the viral population size (i.e. number of genomic variants present in the population). Non-continuous coverage limits the ability of the method to assemble full-length viral variants. To evaluate the accuracy of population size estimation, we compared the true population size known from simulated data with estimated results. Continuous coverage of each individual viral genome present in the sample has a strong impact on quality of population assembly. The probability of non-continuous coverage increases dramatically for viral genomes with low abundance. Thus, the presence of coverage gaps for rare variants introduces additional challenges in the assembly process, making rare genomes unreachable by assembly tools. The number of problematic genomes can be reduced by increasing sequencing depth; however, it does not guarantee complete elimination. While complete assembly of all such genomes is unrealistic, it is still possible to estimate the number of viral genomes present in the sample (population size). The number of independent sets reported by VGA provides us with an accurate population size estimation. Intuitively,predicting the population size of a large viral population with many rare variants is more difficult than predicting for uniformly distributed or small populations (). The predicted population size may serve as an indication of insufficient coverage to detect the full viral diversity present in the sample. Deep coverage is a key for accurate estimation of underlying viral diversity. One such platform capable of offering millions of sequencing reads is Illumina HiSeq. The relatively short length of the produced reads is compensated for by sequencing the same fragment from both ends; therefore, producing coupled reads separated by a 'gap', known as paired-end read. To our knowledge, VGA is the first method scalable to millions of short paired-end sequencing reads able to produce full-length viral variants spanning the entire viral genome. We explore the influence of sequencing depth on the reconstruction accuracy for varying population structures (uniform and power-law distributions of viral genomes within the population). HIV-1 is known to have greater genetic variability than any other known virus (). The diversity among viral genomes in an HIV population can vary from 3 to 20% depending on regions (). Heterogeneous viral samples were prepared by generating viral populations from the Gag/Pol 3.4 kb HIV region. We simulated variant abundances adhering to either a uniform or power-law distribution. Not surprisingly, our simulations suggest that increased sequencing depth has a direct positive effect on the discovery of rare variants and improves the overall assembly accuracy.shows the effect of coverage and population size on assembly for reads of length 100 bp. Throughout all experiments, VGA maintained a PPV value of 100%. In addition to point mutations, genetic recombination facilitates rapid evolution and production of diverse HIV genomes. Indeed, co-infected cells may produce recombinant viral progeny at levels lower than mutation rates in an intra-patient environment (). Hence, simulated datasets must account for both possible phenomena when determining the quality of assembly. We utilize a simulation model able to integrate both point mutations and recombination in the generated viral population depending on the amount of diversity required. A mixture of 10 real intra-host viral variants from 1.3-kb-long HIV-1 form the basis population. In addition to point mutations, our simulation model implicitly produces recombinant genomes by first constructing the genotype (i.e. sequence of SNVs) for the population. A random walk is performed over this genotype as specified number of times. Any cross-over that occurs represents a new recombination between the 'left' and 'right' original genomes. Recombinations are implicitly produced, and no control is imposed over number and length of the recombination. This model produces highly recombinant data on average, posing challenges for assembly and can be used to assess assembly quality. Simulation model incorporate mutation into the process by selecting a position and nucleotide-swap uniformly at random. Simulation results () suggest that our method can accurately assemble viral population in presence of recombinations and point mutations, maintaining PPV of 100%. Finally, we evaluate population quantification accuracy, i.e. the accuracy of our method in predicting abundances of the assembled variants. Taking the results from VGA on 10 real HIV clones with 50 000 reads and 2  100 bp, the JSD was 2.93e-05 for the Power-law and 0.001 for the Uniform-based populations. This already small measure only decreases as the size of the input grows.
Performance of existing viral assemblers on simulated consensus error-corrected readsWe have evaluated the performance of ShoRAH () and QuasiRecomb () for simulated consensus error-corrected read data. ShoRAH disregards pairing information of reads, but it is scalable enough to handle up to 1 M reads. ShoRAH fails to produce full-length viral genome but reliably spans 98% of the consensus genome. It reasonably estimates the number of different viral genome, but even the most accurate ShoRAHassembled viral genome differs from the closest true 1.3-kblong viral genome in five nucleotides. QuasiRecomb is designed to handle paired-end read data and manages to produce full-length viral genomes. Unfortunately it can reliably process no more than 100 K reads. Also the number of assembled distinct viral genomes is 10200 times more than the number of true distinct viral genomes. The most accurate QuasiRecomb-assembled viral genome still differs from the closest true 1.3-kb-long viral genome in four nucleotides. Unfortunately we could not compare our method with QColors () assembly algorithm, which uses a similar conflict graph to represent viral population. A CSP solver is used by QColors for coloring the graph which may limit its scalability to high-throughput datasets consisting of millions of sequencing reads. Currently, QColors is not publicly available (Upon querying for information on obtaining QColors, the authors were informed that the original software was tightly coupled for the analyses done in its original manuscript, and is not currently available for general use.).
Performance of VGA on real HIV dataTo further test the ability of VGA to accurately assemble a diverse natural occurring population and predict variant abundance levels, we used an Illumina HiSeq HIV dataset, which consisted of 15 M 2  100 bp paired-end reads with attached barcodes. Next, the high-fidelity sequencing protocol able to eliminate sequencing errors was applied resulting in 3.2 M consensus error-corrected reads (further referred to as reads). The reads were then used to build de novo population consensus using Vicuna 1.3 (). When run on our real data, Vicuna produced four contigs of average length 1195 bp. Each contig was then run through BLAST to check for overlaps. Once overlaps were found, the contigs were assembled into a final consensus of length 4337 bp. Validation of de novo consensus. A de novo assembled consensus was compared against reference-based consensus. To produce reference-based consensus, we iteratively map reads onto the HIV reference (Gag/Pol 3.4 kb HIV region) using InDelFixer. InDelFixer iteratively changes the reference genome based on the mapping of the current iteration. Also, we used InDelFixer in single iteration mode to map reads onto the constructed de novo consensus. De novo consensus is longer (4337 bp) than the reference-based consensus (3440 bp) and contained two regions with extremely peaked coverage compared with the surrounding i335
Accurate viral population assemblyregions. Both regions were considered to be the result of technical artifacts and removed from further consideration. After removing both regions, the length of new de novo consensus becomes 3452 bp. We also filtered reads that belonged to regions with extreme coverage. Finally we compared the number of reads mapped to the reference-based consensus versus the de novo consensus. A larger amount of reads mapped to the assembled consensus, thereby highlighting the advantage of de novo procedure for consensus construction over a reference-based. From the de novo consensus, VGA assembled 32 full-length viral genomes that differ from each other in 2145 SNVs. Among known HIV sequences, Gag/Pol is the closest to the de novo consensus. Each of the 32 full-length viral genomes do not contain stop codons inside two known coding regions of Gag/Pol of length 1520 and 1820 bp, respectively. Alternatively, when VGA is applied to all 15 M original uncorrected reads, 57 distinct viral genomes are assembled among which 36 contain stop codons in the two coding regions. This shows that a regular sequencing protocol is unsuitable for viral genome reconstruction.
DISCUSSIONWe have presented VGA, an accurate method for viral population assembly from ultra-deep sequencing data. The proposed algorithm is coupled with a high-fidelity sequencing protocol able to eliminate errors from sequencing data. Deep coverage in combination with highly accurate data allows our method to accurately estimate the underlying diversity of a viral population. In particular, it makes possible to distinguish true biological mutations from sequencing errors, facilitating assembly of rare individual genomes. Our method condenses the viral population into a conflict graph built from aligned reads. To distinguish between viral variants, the conflict graph is colored into a minimal set of colors. Each color represents individual viral genomes composed from the set of non-conflicting reads. An expectationmaximization algorithm was used to estimate relative abundance frequencies of assembled viral genomes. To our knowledge, our method is the first viral assembly method that scales to millions of paired-end sequencing reads. Experiments on both real and synthetic HIV datasets generated with various sequencing parameters and distribution assumptions suggest that VGA is able to assemble diverse viral population from millions of paired-end reads. The ability of our method to maintain 100% assembly accuracy makes it suitable for clinical applications. In addition, the constant increase of sequencing depth offered by high-throughput technologies provide us with unprecedented resolution promising to increase number of discovered ultra-rare viral variants in the population.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
