As one of the most important reversible types of post-translational modification, protein methyla-tion catalyzed by methyltransferases carries many pivotal biological functions as well as many essential biological processes. Identification of methylation sites is prerequisite for decoding methy-lation regulatory networks in living cells and understanding their physiological roles. Experimental methods are limitations of labor-intensive and time-consuming. While in silicon approaches are cost-effective and high-throughput manner to predict potential methylation sites, but those previous predictors only have a mixed model and their prediction performances are not fully satisfactory now. Recently, with increasing availability of quantitative methylation datasets in diverse species (especially in eukaryotes), there is a growing need to develop a species-specific predictor. Here, we designed a tool named PSSMe based on information gain (IG) feature optimization method for species-specific methylation site prediction. The IG method was adopted to analyze the importance and contribution of each feature, then select the valuable dimension feature vectors to reconstitute a new orderly feature, which was applied to build the finally prediction model. Finally, our method improves prediction performance of accuracy about 15% comparing with single features. Furthermore, our species-specific model significantly improves the predictive performance compare with other general methylation prediction tools. Hence, our prediction results serve as useful resources to elucidate the mechanism of arginine or lysine methylation and facilitate hypothesis-driven experimental design and validation. Availability and Implementation: The tool online service is implemented by C# language and freely available at http://bioinfo.
IntroductionMany post-translational modifications (PTMs) of proteins provide the proteome with structural and functional diversity, and regulate cellular plasticity and dynamics (). Protein methylation is considered one of the most common and reversible PTMs (), which is an important element in many significant biological functions (). Meanwhile, researchers and clinicians have proved that protein methylation and their regulatory enzymes are involved in the process of a variety of human diseases such as cancer (), cardiovascular disease (), multiple sclerosis (), rheumatoid arthritis (), as well as neuroses generative disorders (). Therefore, annotation of methylation in proteomes would certainly provide very useful information or clues for drug discovery to study and analyze the mechanisms that govern these basic epigenetic phenomena. Identification of methylated sites is the first step towards to understanding molecular mechanism of protein methylation. Although there have many conventional experimental methods to identify protein methylation sites, such as Chip-Chip (), mass spectrometry (MS) () and methylation-specific antibodies (), these experimental approaches are limited to labor-intensive and timeconsuming. While in silicon prediction of methylation sites is much more desirable for its convenience and fast speed, and there have been several tools published for prediction protein methylated sites. Recently, our lab () have systematically summarized current of computational prediction methylation sites method of the past ten years. Furthermore, we have also summarized characteristic of differences among several typical tools (the detailed information in Supplementary), including MeMo (), BPB-PPMS (), MASA (), PMeS (), PLMLA (), MethK (), iMethyl-PseAAC () and GPS-MSP (). For instance,designed the first methylation sites predictor within their AutoMotif Server using regular expression technique. Subsequently,combined Bi-profile Bayes feature extraction with support vector machine (SVM) to predict arginine and lysine methylation. Based on an enhanced feature encoding scheme (composed of the sparse property coding, normalized van der Waals volume, position weight amino and accessible surface area), our lab developed a tool PMeS () to predict arginine and lysine methylation. Meanwhileincorporated protein sequence information, secondary structure and amino acid properties to identify methylation and acetylation of lysine residues in whole protein sequences.used amino acid composition (AAC) and accessible surface area (ASA) coalition SVM to identify lysinemethylated sites on histones and non-histone proteins. Most recently,adopted GPS 3.0 algorithm and built GPS-MSP (Methyl-group Specific Predictor) for the prediction of general or type-specific methyllysine and methylarginine residues in proteins. Although each of the aforementioned methods possesses its own merit and did play roles in stimulating the development of this area, they still have limitations when applied to whole proteomes and need improvement from one or more of the following aspects: (i) The benchmark dataset used by the previous investigators needs to updated by incorporating new experiment-confirmed data, because methylation data updated very quickly in recent years. For example,created MethK model just with 1306 methyllysine sites at 2013, whereas our work have found 3180 lysine methylation sites in total. (ii) The features used by the previous models were single and simple, which it is casing the performance of the several aforementioned predictors not fully satisfactory, so there is still room to improve the predictive accuracy (the detailed information see comparison with other general prediction tools in results and discussion). (iii) The third limitation is that the methylation specific classification (species or methyltransferase family) was not discussed in previous methods. The majority of existing studies except GPS-MSP disregarded the differences of species and considered all species methylation sites as generic sites to build a mixed model. However, sequences or structural patterns around the methylation sites may significantly differ in different organisms, so it highlighting necessity to develop species-specific predictors. (iv) Furthermore, some of these tools were only published as a method and did not provide a user-friendly web service or the web server does not work (). The tools with web services are useful for user to predict methylation sites when they want to experimental design and verify whether sequence is methylated, especially for large-scale predictions. Protein methylation site prediction has not been as widely studied as other types of PTM (such as phosphorylation and acetylation) due to lack of methylation data. With techniques rapidly increasing in the past few years, the growing number of methylation datasets was found in diverse species (especially in eukaryotes). For example, Lott et al. (2014) found over 800 arginine methylated proteins in an early-branching eukaryote Trypanosoma brucei.collected 6449 methylation sites with species information in 3237 experimentally validated methylated proteins in SysPTM 2.0. Protein methylation has attracted more and more attentions, there is a growing need to develop a species-specific predictor. In this work, we developed a new tool named PSSMe (prediction species-specific methylation sites) to overcome above limitations of the existing methods, which is specifically designed to predict both speciesspecific and general methylation sites. Reliable and large-scale experimental methylation sites data from multiple species were collected from several sources which used to train for building the species-specific models. In particular, our model first used a wellestablished feature selection method IG () coupled with a two stage to distinguish the importance and valuable dimension feature vector, which it is more simple and convenient comparison with other selection and optimization methods (such as the maximum relevance minimum redundancy (mRMR) method) (), The first-stage selects five features, including amino acid compositions (AAC), K-spaced amino acid pair composition, amino acids binary encoding (BE), K Nearest Neighbors features (KNN) and amino acid physicochemical property (PSP) features. The second-stage incorporates five features and finds most valuable dimension features based on information gain (IG) method, and then reconstitute a new orderly features to build the model for methylation sites prediction. After prediction of independent test dataset, the result showed that our prediction performance overall significantly enhance than other tools. Furthermore, we discussed the model of methylation in different species; the analysis result shows the following: (i) the methylation patterns are significantly different in different species. (ii) IG method can effectively select valuable dimension features and reduce redundant features for improving the prediction performance. (iii) Based on IG score, it suggests that KNN feature is important and makes a great contribution for prediction methylation sites. (iv) Finally, the web service of PSSMe supports continuous stringency adjustment to meet the various confidence requirements of user's cross-validation tests and provides better probability information for prediction results by comparison with other prediction tools.
Methods
Data collection and preprocessingMethylation is predominantly found on lysine and arginine residues, of which arginine methylation data were composed of three species: H.sapiens (human), M.musculus (mouse) and R.norvegicus (rat). And lysine methylation data were also collected from three species: H.sapiens (human), M.musculus (mouse) and the others eukaryotes (i.e. yeast, cow, sheep and so on). The data were mainly extracted from several database sources including PhosphoSite (March 1, 2015) (), UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot () (), SYSPTM (), dbPTM (), CPLM databases () as well as the relevant literatures. From the literatures in recent years, we found 287 methylarginine sites and 57 methyllysine sites which have been experimentally verified and were not collected in databases. Totally, the original dataset of methylarginine contained 3550 proteins including 7198 methylated sites, of which 3603 sites were found from human, 2931 sites from mouse and 425 sites were from rat (detailed information in Supplementary). Similarly, the methyllysine dataset contained 3180 methylated sites from 1764 lysine proteins in different species. Among them, we found 2045 methylated sites from human, 289 methylated sites from mouse, while 480 methylated sites from the other eukaryotes in all. Because methylation dataset from several sources may own a high protein sequences homology, we need cluster the protein sequences from dataset with a threshold of 30% identity by CD-HIT () to eliminate homology protein sequences. Afterward, we got the non-redundant species methylation datasets, and then randomly selected 30 arginine and lysine proteins containing methylated sites, respectively, to use as the independent data for different species model testing. The remaining 2980, 2644, 321 arginine methylation sites as well as 1741, 186, 173 lysine methylation sites of various species were used to construct our training models, respectively. Finally, numbers of methylation sites for arginine and lysine different species model training and testing are shown in Supplementary Table S3 (the detailed training methylation set in Supplementary Data S1 and Data S2).
Features extraction and optimizationAs heterogeneous features used to predict PTMs sites in silicon are often noisy and redundant leading to an adverse impact on model training, such as decreasing performance, a time-consuming train classifiers and possibly biased model prediction, thus features optimization is very necessary. In our study, a new method IG was adopted to select and optimize multi-features, which can effectively remove redundant features and significantly improve the predictive performance. In the first-stage, we selected some features from which have been evidenced good performances for prediction PTMs sites. After the preliminary evaluation testing of SVM (SVM information in Supplementary Ep1), we selected the five features which can effectively predictive methylation sites. These features are the amino acid composition (AAC), binary encoding (BE), K-spaced amino acid pair composition (K-spaced), K Nearest Neighbors (KNN) features and physicochemical properties (PSP). The detailed feature information is following (the K-spaced and BE feature information in Supplementary Ep2):Information gain measures the decrease in entropy when a given feature is used to group values of another (class) feature. The entropy of a feature X is defined aswhere [x i ] is a set of values of X and P (x i ) is the prior probability of x i. The conditional entropy of X, given another feature Y is defined aswhere P (x i j y j ) is the posterior probability of X given the value y i of Y. The amount by which the entropy of X decreases reflects additional information about X provided by Y and is called information gain IGXjY  HX  HXjYAccording to the above theory, we can draw the conclusion that the larger the value of IG, the greater the impact of the corresponding features vector for prediction methylation site.
Results and discussion
Analysis of sequence information resultsFirst, we used the sample logo to analyze sequence structural information to determine statistically significant residues surrounding methylation sites. In order to identify distinct patterns or conserved sequence motifs between methylation and non-methylation proteins, we applied Two Sample Logo tool () to generate sequence logos () for the arginine/lysine methylation sequence with three different species based on the curated datasets. From the sequence logo, the amino acid residues that significantly enriched and depleted around arginine/lysine methylation sequence were easily identified. We find methylation sequence very similar in three different species, where 'G' (glycine) is primary acid residue and tends to appear across all positions. However, there is a slight difference in three species sequence logo. For example, 'P' (proline) at position 4 only found in human and mouse sequence, whereas residue is not favored in rat sequence. In contrast, residue'P' is favored at position 3 in rat, whereas not favored in human and mouse sequence. For the lysine methylation sequence logo, in, we observed that this sequence residue is more significant difference than arginine sequence in different species. In the human sequence, 'R' (arginine) residue tends to enrich at position 7, 6, 1, 1, 4 and 8, whereas it does not appear in mouse sequence and tends to deplet at position 4 and 7 in the others eukaryotes sequence. Another example is that at position 1 and 1 the residue diverse in three species sequence, the human sequence main residue is 'R' and the others eukaryotes sequence are 'F' (phenylalanine) and 'Y' (tyrosine) residues, whereas there are significant enriched 'S' (serine) and 'G' residue in mouse sequence. The sequence logo suggested that methylation and non-methylation fragments have a considerable difference among the species sequence. Altogether, the result highlights the necessity and significance of addressing the task of precise arginine and lysine methylation site recognition by developing speciesspecific predictors. Second, we investigated the difference of the AAC between methylation and non-methylation sequence in different species. In, from left to right, the upper amino acid residues mean that enriched in methylation sequence, whereas other underside amino acids are depleted. For arginine methylation sequences, in, with a slight tendency of distinctions among different species, the overall trends are very similar. Amino acids Gly, Phe, Met, Pro and Tyr are enriched in the methylation sequences, whereas Glu, Lys, Asp, Cys, Ile, Thr, Val and Trp are depleted. However, there are also some differences in diverse species. One example is that amino acids Pro and Tyr have significant difference between methylation and non-methylation sequences favored in rat, but have no distinction in human and mouse sequences. For lysine methylation, in, AAC distinctions are pretty obvious among three different species, and the amino acid residues of enriched and depleted were also easily identified. For instance, amino acid Cys and Tyr in mouse methylation sequences are depleted, while they are enriched in other two species sequences. Furthermore, amino acids Ala, Trp, Val, Pro, Lys, Asp and Arg are enriched or depleted in human and mouse sequences, whereas in the others eukaryotes model amino acids sequences is more probable opposite. These results show that AAC were obvious distinction between methylation and non-methylation sequence, which it could be a helpful feature for methylation prediction.
Analysis of evolutionary features resultsEvolutionary information is an important characteristic of protein, in the field, KNN feature was used to quantify the evolutionary conservative information. The KNN feature has been successfully used for prediction PTM sites such as phosphorylation () and ubiquitylation () sites. KNN score measures whether the local sequence surrounding a query site is more similar to the sequences containing methylation sites in the positive set or those with non-methylation sites in the negative set. When the score greater than 0.5 means the query site is more likely to the positive set, while score smaller than 0.5 means it is more similar to the negative set. The larger the KNN score, the more similar the site is to some known methylation sites, and thus, the more likely it is a, we compared the KNN scores of methylation sites with those of non-methylation sites (due to the gap of data, we selected different k values and comparison sets; Supplementary). As can be seen in, the KNN score has significant difference among various values of k in human methylarginine and non-methylation sequences, the methylation site scores are within 0.60.7, whereas non-methylation scores are around 0.40.5. For KNN scores of three different species in methylarginine, the average KNN scores of methylation sites with different sizes of nearest neighbors are within 0.60.75 for all three organisms. For non-methylation, the average KNN scores are around 0. 350.5. The same to methyllysine, from in, we found the lysine methylation average KNN scores are within 0.50.7 for all three organisms and the average scores of non-methylation are around 0.350.5, respectively. Overall, methylation sites have larger KNN scores than non-methylation sites. These analyses show that the local sequences surrounding known methylation sites are more similar to their nearest neighbors in the positive set (excluding selfmatches) on average as expected, but the sequences in the negative set are not predominantly more similar to nearest neighbors in either the non-methylation or negative set. These similarities are not due to protein homology or the global sequence similarity, because any two proteins in our comparison datasets are either insignificant or low. Also, the result confirms that methylation-related clusters exist in regional sequences around methylation sites. For non-methylation sites, the average KNN scores are minimal, because methylationrelated sequence clusters are unlikely to exist in the negative set. Thus, the sequences in the negative set have a similar chance to find close neighbors in either the positive or negative set. In short, KNN scores capture the cluster information in the local sequence around methylation sites and hence distinguish them from the background. Therefore, KNN scores are suitable to be used as a feature for prediction methylation site. KNN feature is very effective for predicting both general and species-specific methylation sites. For methylation site predictions, KNN feature relies on similarity of local sequence substrates of a common methylation-related enzyme family to automatically distinguish whether site is methylation or not. Although most known methylation sites have no annotation about their sequence substrates of corresponding enzymes family, KNN features can still use the inherent cluster information in them. Oftentimes, one enzyme corresponds to multiple local sequence motifs, and using a single sequence profile may not be as effective as KNN, which better handles diverse sequence clusters.
Analysis of physicochemical properties resultsPhysicochemical property is the most intuitive feature applied in PTMs prediction studies. From the previous work,used solvent accessible surface area (ASA) (one of physicochemical properties) coding feature and have been evidenced PSP plays an important role for prediction methylation sites. Because the physicochemical property has a total of 544 (if we selected all PSP of features that would highly dimensional, heterogeneous, noisy and time-consuming classification of the training model), we compared the prediction accuracy of all PSP and only selected top three to define as informative features for the prediction model. As can be seen from Supplementary, one of the specific examples of informative PSP in arginine mouse model was provided. We calculated the mean values of physicochemical property 'Thermodynamic beta sheet propensity' (KIMC930101) at each position in methylation and non-methylation sequences. Interestingly, we found mean values of this property in methylation sequences is higher than in the non-methylation at all the positions, especially at the near the central sites (the positions 1, 1 and 2) the phenomenon is more remarkable. This property features could easily distinguish the methylation or non-methylation sequences, which is suitable for prediction methylation sites (compare with other PSP, this feature have higher prediction accuracy). Furthermore, the selected optimal features of PSP differed, depending on the species of interest. The detailed information of selected top three PSP in different species see Supplementary Table S3.
Analysis of feature optimization results
The features optimization resultsThe selected five features (AAC, BE, K-spaced, KNN feature and PSP) were independent coding tests for prediction methylation sites, which the performances are not fully satisfactory. However, compare with single feature, the combination of different five features would provide a more powerful predictor. If we combine all of five features that have totally 2245-dimensional features vector (detailed five features dimensional information in Supplementary). The highly dimensional features which will lead to a timeconsuming classification of the training model, some of features vector may unwanted noise and possibly biased model prediction performance. Accordingly, not all features are equivalently important for the performance of the trained model, so optimization of incorporative features is generally necessary to reduce dimensionality but keep important one. In this work, we first apply IG method to select the valuable dimension feature vectors to reconstitute a new pseudo amino acid composition feature. After first-stage of feature selection, we combined all of five features which totally have 2245-dimensional feature vectors. Subsequently, we find that the IG score have a quite different in each dimension. We know a higher IG score means that it is a more valuable vector based on the IG theories. Then we select IG score top 400 vectors from 2245-dimensional feature vectors and reconstitute it a new orderly feature (from low to high of IG score) named as the 'Final feature'. The prediction performance of used single five features and the 'Final feature' for prediction methylation sites are shown in, and we found the 'Final feature' have better prediction performance than other single feature. One of example that the accuracy of mouse lysine methylation prediction model used single five features (AAC, BE, K-spaced, KNN feature and PSP) are 66.39%, 61.02%, 67.47%, 68.01% and 65.86%, respectively (The other species of five features prediction performance detailed information in Supplementary Tables S7 and S8). While when we applied 'Final feature' for prediction, the accuracy is 81.18%. Comparing with single five features, which improved accuracy are 14.79%, 20.16%, 13.71%, 13.17% and 15.32%, respectively. The result shows that the IG method could effectively extract those important valuable dimension vectors from multifeatures for methylation sites prediction, which have significantly improvement of prediction accuracy about 15%.
Analysis of feature importance and contributionAs mentioned previously, the five features sets (AAC, BE, K-spaced, KNN feature and PSP) were selected to predict methylation sites. We do not know the five features make how much contribution and which is more importance than others. However, we adopted IG method to analyze features importance and contribution, and evaluated which dimensions features vectors are valuable to prediction model. For example, for human arginine methylation (the IG score of 2245-dimensional feature vector is shown in Supplementary), we found that IG score of KNN 5-dimensions is significantly higher than other four features dimensions vector, suggesting that KNN features play significant roles in determining the prediction performance of the model and make a great contribution to predict methylation sites. In fact, methylation histones possess highly conserved sequences in most species. The KNN feature is related to conserved residues and protein evolutionary information, which has good prediction performance in this model. In contrast, most of IG score values of K-spaced and BE features dimensions vector are low, which suggest that most of dimension features is unwanted and this two features are not importance as KNN feature for the model. We additionally discuss the constitution of finally dimensions features vector, which is various at different species model. These analyses show that the number of optimal dimensional features selected from five features was differed, depending on the species of interest. Detailed information of our results is presented in Supplementary Table S9. Taking human lysine methylation as an example, the reconstitution of 400-dimension new feature from aforementioned five features (AAC, BE, K-spaced, KNN feature and PSP), and the rations of selected dimension feature vectors belonging to the five features group are 0.7 (14/20), 0.09 (38/399), 0.16 (289/ 1746), 1 (5/5) and 0.95 (54/57), respectively. From these results, we discover that most of dimension feature vectors from AAC, PSP and KNN three features are valuable and make a contribution to prediction model, while the other two features BE and K-spaced have many unwanted or redundant dimension vectors. These suggest that compared with BE and K-spaced features, the other three features are more importance to this model. Furthermore, considering the features optimization results in different species, therefore, we expect that IG method fully consider the importance and contribution of each dimension feature vectors, which can obtain the higher prediction accuracy.
Species-specific methylation site prediction of PSSMeThe proposed PSSMe predictor trained and tested for arginine and lysine methylation has four models based on IG method optimizations features, respectively. To evaluate the performance of PSSMe for species-specific methylation site prediction, we performed a 10fold cross-validation test in each species. Sensitivity at different specificity levels in each cross-validation were calculated according to Supplementary Ep3. By taking different thresholds, then we plottediMethylPseAAC, respectively. Similarly, PSSMe lysine combined models improved the AUC values of 0.233, 0.342, 0.154 and 0.039 than MeMo, PLMLA, PMeS and MethK, respectively. What is more, we also compared with other species-specific predictor GPS-MSP, which is developed by the author of MeMo. First, in order to make the results comparable, sensitivities of GPS-MSP and PSSMe were set to 0.5. Then, we submitted species-specific independent test dataset to GPS-MSP model for prediction methylation site, and the results are shown in Tables 1 and 2. We found that comparison with other general prediction tools, prediction performances of speciesspecific models PSSMe and GPS-MSP have outperformed. Take arginine human model as an example, PSSMe and GPS-MSP achieved significantly higher AUC values than other four general tools, it is evidenced that developing a species-specific predictors is necessary. Meanwhile, comparing with species-specific prediction methylation sites, PSSMe have outperformed GPS-MSP. For example, for lysine methylation rat model, our model could more accurately predict methylation than GPS-MSP. It is show that PSSMe has good prediction performance for species-specific prediction methylation sites. The reason that PSSMe outperforms other predictors is mainly following: (i) the data sources of the experimental methylation sites for the previous tools was collected mainly from UniProtKB/SwissProt and it may bias on some special species (most of earlier methylation data were collected from human protein and only a few hundred methylated proteins). The little data may case a bias classification of the training model and are not suitable for predicting all species. However, PSSMe integrated 8100 experimental methylation sites from multiple resources, which have been accumulated the methylation data from thousands of proteins in different species. (ii) The BPB-PPMS and iMethyl-PseAAC tools have low AUC that is partly attributed to using the single feature, which could not extract fully features information from methylation sequences. In contrast, PSSMe integrated five features to ensure the complete extraction of sequence information, further conducted multifeatures selection and optimization based on IG method. Finally, analysis of each features contribution and importance found valuable dimensions feature vector to build the model for prediction methylation sites. (iii) When performing the comparisons, we used a prediction model that was trained from a dataset excluding the protein sequences in the independent test dataset. However, for comparison tools, some of the test proteins might have been included in their training processes, and thus prediction performances may be biased favorably toward these tools in the comparisons. This possibility implies that the performance improvement of over these tools might be underestimated.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
.2.1 AAC Amino acid composition feature is the most popular coding method and widely used for prediction PTMs sites (such as phosphorylation and acetylation) (Suo et al., 2012), which reflects protein sequences amino acid occurrence frequencies information. In this work, AAC is the fraction of each type of amino acid in a sequence fragment, we calculated amino acid occurrence frequencies in the sequence surrounding the query site (the site itself is not counted). There are 20 types of amino acids, and thus 20 frequencies are calculated, the sum of which is 1. 2.2.2 KNN Local sequence clusters often exist around methylation site because substrate sites of same methyltransferases usually share similar patterns in local sequence fragments (Kennelly and Krebs, 1995). We used the local sequence around a possible methylation site in a query protein and extracted features from similar sequences in both the positive and negative sets by a KNN algorithm. For example, two local sequences, s 1  [s 1 (i)] and s 2  [s 2 (i)] define the distance Dist (s 1 , s 2 ) between s 1 and s 2 as: DistS 1 ; S 2   1  X p ip SimS 1 i; S 2 i 2p  1 (1) Sima; b  Ma; b  minfMg maxfMg  minfMg (2) where p represents the length of a protein sequence; Sim, the amino acid similarity matrix, is derived from the BLOSUM62 substitution matrix (Henikoff and Henikoff, 1992); a and b are two amino acids, M is the substitution matrix and max/min{M} represent the largest/ smallest number in the matrix, respectively. 2.2.3 PSP Physicochemical property is the most intuitive feature for biochemical properties, the specificity and diversity of structure and function of proteins depend to a large extent on various properties of each of the amino acids. A large body of experimental and theoretical researches has been performed to characterize different kinds of properties of individual amino acids and represent them in terms of the numerical index (Tomii and Kanehisa, 1996). Version 9.1 of Amino Acid index database (AAindex) (Kawashima and Kanehisa, 2000) is containing total 544 amino acid indices physicochemical and biochemical properties of 20 amino acids. Furthermore, PSP has been successfully applied to predict such protein modification as phosphorylation, acetylation. Moreover, Shi et al. (2012) and Lee et al. (2014) also have shown that the feature set of PSP is one of best type of feature for predicting methylation sites. Thus, in our work, comparing the prediction accuracy of all PSP, then the top three were selected and defined as informative features for the prediction model. The detailed informative of PSP in different model is shown in Supplementary Table S4. 2.2.4 IG The second-stage is selection and optimization aforementioned five features to find the most valuable dimension feature vectors for building the prediction model. In fact, compared to the single feature, the combination of features can reflect more protein sequence information leading to a certain improvement of prediction performance. However, the combination of complex features is highly dimensional, redundant, heterogeneous and noisy, which would lead to a time-consuming practice to train classifiers and possibly biased model prediction. In this stage, we analyzed all dimension feature vectors of five features based on IG method, then distinguished the importance and contribution features. We selected this valuable dimension feature vectors to reconstitute a new orderly features which employed for methylation sites prediction. The IG method could effectively select valuable dimension feature vectors and significantly improve the predictive performance. The detailed theory of IG method is following. Prediction of species-specific methylation sites
P.-P.Wen et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
P.-P.Wen et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves and calculated the AUC as shown in Supplementary Figure S4. Three arginine methylation models of human, mouse and rat are achieved under ROC curves (AUC) of 0.846, 0.864 and 0.853, respectively. Similarly, three lysine methylation models of human, mouse and the other eukaryotes achieved AUC of 0.844, 0.856 and 0.867, respectively. From the ROC curves, we knew that those models have good confident predictions with high specificities, especially for the arginine mouse model, the prediction sensitivities reached 58% at the 90% specificity level, and 30% at the 95% specificity level. Furthermore, the AUC of models of arginine combined and lysine combined achieved of 0.851 and 0.834, respectively. The PSSMe model was testing by 10-fold cross-validation, which has stabled prediction performance. In contrast, we take a testing for crossspecies prediction for methylation sites, but the results of prediction is not fully satisfactory and achieved lower specificities and AUC scores. In summary, these justify our PSSMe general and speciesspecific predictor model have stabilization and good prediction performance. 3.6 Comparison with other prediction tools To further evaluate the performance of PSSMe prediction methylation site, we compared it with some existing widely used arginine and lysine methylation prediction tools. Although there have been reported many tools for predicting protein methylation sites since 2005, considering the web server tools whether do work or not, four general tools and one species-specific predictor GPS-MSP were selected to compare the arginine and lysine models, respectively. The comparison of general arginine methylation predictors are MeMo, BPB-PPMS, PMeS and iMethyl-PseAAC, while the comparison of lysine methylation tools are MeMo, PLMLA, PMeS and MethK. Because the training data used to build these tools were collected from different databases, the prediction performance varies greatly among them. To avoid any bias, in this work, the additional independent test dataset was applied in the cross-species prediction evaluation. We submitted each species test dataset to MeMo, BPBPPMS, PMeS and iMethyl-PseAAC tools for prediction arginine methylation site. From the results (Table 1), PSSMe achieves significantly higher AUC values than other four tools (the ROC performance comparison of our model with other tools in Supplementary Figs. S5 and S6). For arginine methylation model, AUC values of the prediction performance of PSSMe are 0.870, 0.893 and 0.978 in human, mouse and rat model, respectively. Comparing with MeMo (the AUC values is 0.683), our three model improved the AUC values are 0.187, 0.21 and 0.295, respectively. In addition to the AUC value comparison, we also calculated the MCC, sensitivity and specificity, as shown in Table 1. BPB-PPMS and iMethyl-PseAAC tools can achieve high specificity along with sacrificing sensitivity, which would case a low MCC and AUC values. PMeS have a good balance between specificity and sensitivity, but the MCC and AUC of prediction performance are not fully satisfactory. However, PSSMe not only offers good sensitivity as well as high specificity, but also have higher AUC and MCC values. One of the examples for human arginine model, the prediction performance is sensitivity of 83.3%, specificity of 91.0%, accuracy of 87.1%, MCC of 0.745 and AUC of 0.870, while other four approaches have lower values. It shows that species-specific PSSMe outperforms general tools. For the lysine methylation tools, we made a comparison of prediction to the species of human, mouse and the others eukaryotes. The performance of PSSMe and other four tools predict independent test methylation dataset are shown in Table 2. We found that MeMo and PMeS tools have high specificity meanwhile sacrificing sensitivity, the AUC and MCC are not good when prediction human and mouse methylation sites. PLMLA and MethK have a good balance of prediction performance, but comparison with PSSMe, which our prediction result is better. For example, the performances of MethK for prediction human lysine methylation are sensitivity of 72.7%, specificity of 96.9%, accuracy of 84.8%, MCC of 0.718 and AUC of 0.858, while the performances of our tool are sensitivity of 98.4%, specificity of 96.9%, accuracy of 97.7%, MCC of 0.954 and AUC of 0.969. Meanwhile, MethK have not good performances when used to predict the other eukaryotes methylated sites, while PSSMe have significantly improvement of sensitivity and AUC values for species-specific methylation site prediction. In addition, we compared PSSMe arginine and lysine combined models with other four tools for methylation sites, respectively. The detailed
Conclusion This is the study which classifies proteins into species-specific to identify potential arginine and lysine methylation sites. We not only demonstrated that PSSMe both general and species-specific models have stabilization and good prediction performance, but also showed that our models significantly improved the prediction results compared to previous mixed model. Our analysis shows the methylation patterns are significantly different in different species, and feature optimization by using IG method indicates that KNN feature is important and makes a great contribution for prediction model. Furthermore, we have developed a user-friendly web server, PSSMe, to implement the described methylation site prediction, which could be especially useful for some hypothesis-driven experiments. However, our method still has certain limitations, which are common to almost all computational prediction tools. For example, the methylation data that we have found only labeled positive data, while the negative data have no any evidenced to labeled, which may affect the prediction performance. It will be resolved in the future with techniques rapidly increasing, we will develop some novel models for specific prediction methylation sites. In conclusion, we believe that PSSMe could serve as a powerful and complementary tool for in vivo or in vitro species-specific methylation site identification. Additionally, the combination of computational analyses with experimental verification could greatly speed up our systematic understanding of the methylation mechanisms and explore the corresponding regulatory networks in living cells.
