Two methods to add unaligned sequences into an existing multiple sequence alignment have been implemented as the '-add' and '-addfragments' options in the MAFFT package. The former option is a basic one and applicable only to full-length sequences, whereas the latter option is applicable even when the unaligned sequences are short and fragmentary. These methods internally infer the phylogenetic relationship among the sequences in the existing alignment and the phylogenetic positions of unaligned sequences. Benchmarks based on two independent simulations consistently suggest that the ''-addfragments'' option outperforms recent methods , PaPaRa and PAGAN, in accuracy for difficult problems and that these three methods appropriately handle easy problems.
3145Adding sequences into existing alignmentWe had to use simulation because there is no established benchmark dataset based on actual sequences for this purpose. Thus, the assessment here is still insufficient, especially for comparing methods with different scoring systems. We cannot completely exclude the possibility that the observations just reflect the fitness of the parameter set to the simulation setting. However, we can safely compare different MAFFT options that use the same parameter set. They behaved similarly for the two independent datasets, generated by different programs, INDElible and ROSE. Thus, it is unlikely that the results are artificial because of simulation settings. In the future, benchmark datasets of actual sequences should be established for this type of problem. We did not assess the accuracy of phylogenetic placement of the fragmentary sequences. As noted previously, MAFFT does not use a user-defined tree of the existing alignment, unlike PaPaRa and PAGAN. MAFFT calculates the phylogenetic positions of new sequences in an internally constructed tree, instead of a user-defined tree. Thus, it is difficult to make straightforward assessments about the correctness of the phylogenetic position in a given tree. Tests of phylogenetic placement using alignments by different methods, including that described here, are being performed by Tandy Warnow's group (personal communication). The present results suggest the usefulness of a simple and natural algorithm for adding new sequences into an alignment. The straightforward strategy implemented as mafft-addfragments showed high performance for problems that were previously used for assessing this type of method. It can be a basis for extensions in several directions, such as specific support for NGS data, and faster and more scalable calculation.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
K.Katoh and M.C.Frith at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
