Motivation: AGO(Argonaute)-binding domains, composed of repeated motifs, in which only binary combinations of tryptophan and glycine are conserved, bind AGO proteins and are essential during RNAi-mediated gene silencing. The amino acid sequence of this domain is extremely divergent and therefore very difficult to detect. Commonly used bioinformatic tools fail to identify tryptophan–glycine and/or glycine–tryptophan motifs (WG/GW) domains and currently there is no publicly available software which can detect these weakly conserved, but functional AGO-binding segments. Results: Recently, we have developed an algorithm based on compositional analysis of the amino acid content of the domain. We have demonstrated that the algorithm can be successfully applied for the identification of the new WG/GW proteins in the Arabidopsis genome. Here we introduce Agos (Argonaute-binding domain screener), a novel universal web service for de novo identification of WG/GW domains in protein sequences. The web implementation of the algorithm contains several new features and enhancements: (i) one universal scoring matrix which allows identification of AGO-binding proteins in sequences representing all organisms; (ii) reduction of false positive predictions by improved selectivity of the algorithm; (iii) graphical interface to easily browse the prediction results; and (iv) the option to submit a DNA sequence which will be automatically translated in six frames before running the prediction algorithm.
INTRODUCTIONThe WG/GW domains recruit Argonaute (AGO) proteins to distinct components of the eukaryotic RNA silencing pathways and are strictly required for gene silencing by RNA interference (RNAi). The sequences of the domain are extremely divergent and are composed of quasi-repeated regions containing conserved tryptophanglycine and/or glycinetryptophan motifs (henceforth called WG/GW motifs), which are essential for binding multiple molecules of AGO proteins (). The hypervariable sequencesPage: 1319 13181319
AgosWG/GW protein domains and their orthologs with experimentally confirmed biological function. The sequence collection included NRPE1 (El), SPT5/KTF1 (), SPT5-like (), WGRP1 from Arabidopsis (), WAG1, cnjB from Tetrahymena thermophila (), and GW182 from fly and GW182 family-related proteins from human and other mammalians (). The calculation of scoring tables (dos and ics; see Supplementary Material for details) and selection corresponding threshold values were already explained in the previous study. Dos scoring matrix was calculated based on the frequency distribution of all 400 combinations of dipeptides present in the initial dataset of WG/GW domains and corresponding proteomes. The ics scoring table represents the properties of the group of domains selected as the initial dataset for this analysis. In contrast to the dos score, where higher values represent better candidates, values tending towards zero represent a closer compositional relationship with the reference dataset.
RESULTS
Design and implementationThe computational engine of Agos was developed in Python and the web interface is implemented in Django. The tool is designed to accept one single protein or DNA sequence in FASTA format at a time. The DNA sequence is translated in all six reading frames before applying the domain detection algorithm. The query protein sequence must contain at least one WG or GW motif to be further processed. The data are posted to a WG/GW protein identification pipeline to screen for all regions containing WG/GW domains. The availability of two scoring systems, dos and ics (see Section 2) provides a measurement of the degree of compositional compatibility of the new domains with the already-confirmed AGO-binding proteins. Program output can either be displayed in the web browser window (interactive mode) or saved to a file (text/plain output). The interactive output mode uses standard DHTML (HTML, CSS and JavaScript), and no additional plugins are required.
Output of WG/GW domain identification resultsThe output report is divided into three separate fields: 'Data info', 'WG/GW domains' and 'Sequence' (). The 'Data info' field provides basic information about the query sequence (id, description, length and number of WG/GW motifs), as well as a graphical view of the protein with marked positions for all detected potential WG/GW regions. The quality of GW domain predictions are color coded. Green blocks indicate domains that passed statistical threshold values (dos and ics). Yellow blocks label sequence regions that passed only dos score threshold. Red blocks correspond to regions having very low-compositional compatibility to the GW AGO-binding domain. The 'WG/GW domains' field provides more detailed, textual information in the form of a table listing all the predicted domains sorted according to the start position in the protein. For each domain, the index number, the start and stop positions in the query sequence, the length of the domain, the number of WG/GW motifs, dos score, P-value and ics score are shown.The HTML results view provides additional interactive WG/GW domain match viewer and feature highlighting. Moving the cursor over a match block (with JavaScript option enabled) in the graphical protein view will highlight its position in the full-length protein sequence as well as the corresponding row in the 'WG/GW domains' table.Highlighted regions are preserved as long as the user does not move the cursor over another block. The plain text output provides no web links, but is optimal for copy/pasting and corresponds to the 'WG/GW domains' field where values are tab separated. The 'Sequence' section displays the full-length query sequence.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. of WG/GW domain are generally not alignable as positional homology cannot be precisely determined. Consequently, all commonly available bioinformatic tools (e.g. PSI-BLAST, HMMER and Gibbs sampler) fail to identify the AGO-binding domains in systematic analyses. There is presently no publicly available software specifically designed for detection of these sequencedivergent, but functionally conserved AGO-binding domains. In a previous study (Karlowski et al., 2010), we demonstrated by an in silico domain-swapping simulation between plant and mammalian WG/GW proteins that the amino acid composition of the AGO-binding sites is conserved. We designed a computational method for WG/GW domain detection based on the preferences of certain amino acids found within the plant WG/GW domains. In our screen we were able to identify all of the already characterized AGOinteracting proteins in plants (KTF1/SPT5, SPT5-like and NRPE1) and mammals (GW182 family members) as well as several other candidate WG/GW domain-containing proteins. The experimental verification of one of the proteins (a putative oxidoreductase), confirmed its AGO-binding capabilities. However, several proteins identified during the screening of animal genomes represented false predictions. These fragments represent low-complexity sequences rich in amino acid located at the top of our scoring table. The presence of such proteins which most likely have no AGO-binding activity was probably the result of a limited capability of the original plant scoring matrix to distinguish between the genuine WG/GW proteins and other compositionally biased molecules. We present Agos (Argonaute-binding domain screener), a new web application for de novo identification of WG/GW Argonautebinding domains in eukaryotic proteins. To overcome the restrictions of the original method, during the development of Agos we introduced several method improvements: (i) the initial sequence dataset of both plant and animal, experimentally confirmed, AGO-binding proteins; (ii) a new scoring table for all 400 possible combinations of dipeptides (this step significantly improved specificity of WG/GW domain identification and enhanced precise the annotation of domain boundaries); and (iii) a scoring matrix which now reflects compositional differences between the domain and the whole corresponding proteome. In this way the compositional signal of the domain is specifically amplified, leading to precise detection of conserved features of the domain. 2 METHODS The detailed methodology of AGO-binding domain identification was described recently (Karlowski et al., 2010). The initial sequence dataset was extended to cover a manually selected collection of plant and animal
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
