Accurate identification of significant aberrations in cancers (AISAIC) is a systematic effort to discover potential cancer-driving genes such as oncogenes and tumor suppressors. Two major confounding factors against this goal are the normal cell contamination and random background aberrations in tumor samples. We describe a Java AISAIC package that provides comprehensive analytic functions and graphic user interface for integrating two statistically principled in silico approaches to address the aforementioned challenges in DNA copy number analyses. In addition, the package provides a command line interface for users with scripting and programming needs to incorporate or extend AISAIC to their customized analysis pipelines. This open-source multiplatform software offers several attractive features: (i) it implements a user friendly complete pipeline from processing raw data to reporting analytic results; (ii) it detects deletion types directly from copy number signals using a Bayes hypothesis test; (iii) it estimates the fraction of normal contamination for each sample; (iv) it produces unbiased null distribution of random background alterations by iterative aberration-exclusive permutations; and (v) it identifies significant consensus regions and the percentage of homozygous/ hemizygous deletions across multiple samples. AISAIC also provides users with a parallel computing option to leverage ubiquitous multicore machines. Availability and implementation: AISAIC is available as a Java application, with a user's guide and source code, at https://code.
yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.(ii) AISAIC naturally integrates BACOM and SAIC and significantly enhances the accuracy of identifying SCAs when compared with competing methods (even when compared with SAIC alone); (iii) AISAIC adopts concurrent computing techniques to take advantage of multicore/multiprocessor architecture found in most modern computers, which greatly reduces computation time, especially when handling large datasets. The AISAIC package was tested using both simulation and real datasets, and the experimental results show that the integrated application of BACOM and SAIC to clinical samples can significantly improve the power to detect significant consensus CNA regions and produce biologically plausible findings warranting further studies. Here, we describe a Java package that provides comprehensive analytical functions, a graphical user interface (GUI) and result visualization for disseminating the unified software of BACOMSAIC algorithms to the cancer research community and beyond. In addition, this open-source and multiplatform software also provides a command-line interface for users with scripting and programming needs to incorporate or extend AISAIC to their customized analysis pipelines, and offers the users with a parallel computing option using ubiquitous multicore machines and concurrent fork/join framework in Java SE 7. We apply the AISAIC package to the glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) datasets in TCGA and report various analysis results.
DESCRIPTION
Methods and softwareBACOM first detects deletion segments using established allelic-specific analysis tools comprising genotype calling, signal normalization and deletion loci detection. A Bayes classifier is then used to identify each segment's deletion type (homozygous versus heterozygous deletions) directly from copy number signals. Finally, BACOM estimates both the fraction of normal cells in a tumor sample and the cancer-specific copy number profile. As a completely unsupervised approach, BACOM allows parameters of the underlying deletion-type conditioned probability models to be readily estimated from measured copy number signals, without any knowledge of the associated deletion type. First, SAIC defines CNA units by exploiting intrinsic correlation among consecutive probes and then assigns a score to each CNA unit instead of single probes based on both the amplitude and frequency of the signals within the unit. Next, to estimate the unbiased null distribution of random background aberrations, SAIC performs permutations on CNA units that iteratively exclude detected aberrations yet preserve correlations inherent in the copy number data. Finally, SAIC identifies significant consensus CNA regions based on adjusted P-values. The AISAIC package is implemented entirely as a Java application. The illustrative flowchart given inprovides an overview of the software architecture design. The AISAIC software contains two major analytic modules (BACOM and SAIC). Through a user-friendly graphical user interface, users can easily import data, assign proper parameter values and select their preferred analysis routes via the 'BACOM', 'SAIC' or 'BACOMSAIC' options. AISAIC then takes raw data CEL files (e.g. Affymetrix SNP arrays) as its input and outputs various intermediate and exportable results to users, including normal cell fractions, deletion types (hemizygous/homozygous) and their percentages, significant consensus CNA regions and embedded gene lists. The AISAIC package offers users parallel computing capabilities, taking full advantage of ubiquitous multicore CPUs and multiprocessor machines. To enable convenient concurrent computing, AISAIC adopts the widely embraced concurrent Fork/Join framework recently introduced in Java SE 7 and implements a hierarchy of multithreads. Specifically, two threads are used to analyze two chromosomes concurrently; amplification and deletion CNAs in each chromosome are analyzed via two threads simultaneously; and multiple threads are invoked to perform parallel permutations with each focused on a subgroup of the samples.
Case study on TCGA datasetsThe AISAIC package has been tested on multiple TCGA datasets and runs successfully on both Microsoft Windows and Linux platforms. On the GBM dataset that contains 513 paired samples, the AISAIC analysis reveals biologically relevant regions that encompass many well-known oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes including MDM4, AKT3, MYCN, PIK3CA, PDGFRA, EGFR, KRAS, CDKN2A/B and PTEN, and novel consensus regions that may warrant further studies. To assess biological and clinical implications of significant consensus deletions, AISAIC also provides the frequencies of homo-and hemideletions in the sample population, e.g. CDKN2A/B exhibits high homo-deletion rates among others.displays the P-values (in log10 scale) of aberrations, where the dashed lines indicate the significance cutoff at the adjusted P-value of 0.05, and (%j%) are the rates of homo-and hemi-deletions, respectively. On the LUAD dataset (405 paired samples), the AISAIC analysis, again is highly consistent with previous reports, confirming many known cancer-related genes such as TERT, EGFR, KRAS, CDK4, CCNE1, CDKN2A/B, RB1, TP53 and CCBE1. In a comparative study on the GBM and LUAD datasets, AISAIC identifies several common genes such as EGFR, KRAS, CDK4, MDM2, CCNE1 and CDKN2A/B, as well as some
DISCUSSIONAISAIC presents a comprehensive and unsupervised approach to analyze DNA copy number aberrations in the cancer genome. AISAIC is supported by a well-grounded statistical framework and can detect homo/hemi-deletion types and rates, estimate and correct normal cell contamination, and identify significant consensus CNA regions. Tested on both simulations and TCGA datasets, AISAIC is effective at revealing novel consensus regions that harbor potential cancer 'driver' genes and enhancers. We expect that, with further development, AISAIC's methodology can be applied to other forms of genomic and epigenetic data such as DNA methylations ().
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
B.Zhang et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
