The assessment of expression and epigenomic status using sequen-cing based methods provides an unprecedented opportunity to identify and correlate allelic differences with epigenomic status. We present ALEA, a computational toolbox for allele-specific epigenomics analysis, which incorporates allelic variation data within existing resources , allowing for the identification of significant associations between epigenetic modifications and specific allelic variants in human and mouse cells. ALEA provides a customizable pipeline of command line tools for allele-specific analysis of next-generation sequencing data (ChIP-seq, RNA-seq, etc.) that takes the raw sequencing data and produces separate allelic tracks ready to be viewed on genome browsers. The pipeline has been validated using human and hybrid mouse ChIP-seq and RNA-seq data. Availability: The package, test data and usage instructions are available online at
INTRODUCTIONEach diploid cell consists of two near-identical copies of the genome. Despite the similarity of these paternally and maternally contributed genomes, they differ in certain genomic loci due to heterozygous variants such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), indels and structural variations, which can be used to find allele-specific (AS) epigenetic variations. AS events may occur everywhere, including regions devoid of heterozygous variants. However, computational tools can only focus on heterozygous loci where the allelic differences are distinguishable. AlleleSeq () is a computational pipeline for phasing heterozygous variants from trio (father, mother and child) data, constructing diploid personal genome and aligning short sequencing reads to maternal and paternal genomes. iASeq () uses a machine-learning approach to find the allelic imbalance by jointly analyzing multiple ChIP-seq datasets and by improving the AS inference using correlations among them. Allim () is a more recent AS tool for RNA-seq analysis of F1 individuals that generates a polymorphism-aware diploid reference genome from trio genomic and/or transcriptomic sequences, and corrects the residual mapping bias when measuring the allelic expression imbalance. What limits application of these tools for AS epigenomics studies is that the majority of genomic datasets are generated from single patient samples, which do not include genomic data from the parents of the patients. Also, it is not always practical or desirable to sequence multiple epigenomic marks for each patient as required by iASeq. To address these limitations, we developed a new pipeline, ALEA, for AS epigenomics analysis. ALEA takes advantage of the available genomic resources for human (The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium) and mouse (The Mouse Genomes Project) to reconstruct diploid in silico genomes for human or hybrid mice under study. Then, for each accompanying ChIP-seq or RNAseq dataset, ALEA generates two wiggle track format files from short reads aligned differentially to each haplotype.
METHODSALEA consists of the following four modules for which the processes, the input and output files and their formats are shown inA. Genotype phasing: For human samples, genotypes are typically called from whole genome-sequencing short reads accompanying the epigenomic dataset under AS study. SHAPEIT2 () is then used to phase genotypes using the publicly available reference panel of haplotypes, provided by the 1000 Genomes project (). We then use the phased haplotypes together with the original unphased variant files in the Variant Call Format (VCF) to create a phased variant file with two haplotypes containing homozygous and phased heterozygous SNPs and indels (). For mouse datasets, ALEA accepts epigenomic marks from F1 hybrid offspring whose parents are among the 17 inbred strains available from the Mouse Genomes Project (). *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
B. Diploid personalgenome reconstruction: The output of the phasing module, the phased variant file, together with the reference genome is fed into the second module () in which haplotype regions are reconstructed from the individual haplotypes. Two in silico genomes are created to be used for the optimal identification of chromosomal or AS effects. For mouse, the two in silico genomes represent the parental haplotypes, whereas for human the two genomes will essentially be a mosaic of the parental haplotypes due to the unlikeliness of true long-range phasing. The homozygous SNPs and indels do not need phasing, and they are simply assigned to both parental genomes. Although the homozygous variants are not informative for AS analyses, they may be included to investigate specific epigenomic signatures between individuals.
C. Haplotype-specific read alignment: This module aligns shortsequencing reads to the in silico genomes constructed by the previous module and detects reads that are uniquely aligned only to one of the two genomes (). Thus, all reads aligned to multiple locations of either haplotypes or aligned uniquely to both haplotypes are filtered out and only AS reads mapping to the regions containing heterozygous SNPs are detected. We provide two methods to detect the AS reads:(i) aligning the reads to a concatenated parental genome and (ii) aligning the reads to each parental genome separately. Details and comparison of the two methods are included in the Section 1 of the Supplementary Material.
D. Projection toreference genome: The fourth module () generates two haplotype-specific track files from mapped reads and projects them back to the reference genome. Owing to the existence of indels in the construction of parental in silico genomes, the coordinates of the tracks are skewed when compared with the reference genome. However, most visualization tools work based on alignment to reference genomes. Using an index created with the in silico genomes, ALEA maps the tracks back to the reference genome.
EVALUATIONWe used known imprinted genes to validate our AS method for both human and mouse, as these regions are known to show allelic differences in both expression and specific histone marks. We used our AS pipeline on human skin fibroblast RNA-seq and H3K36me3 ChIP-seq datasets generated from the same individual. These data are available for download under the Gene Expression Omnibus accession numbers GSM751277 and GSM817238. Having advance access to unpublished whole genome-sequencing data for this individual, we called and phased the genotype, reconstructed in silico genomes and generated separate read profiles for each haplotype for RNA-seq and H3K36me3 data.shows the monoallelic H3K36me3 enrichment of expressed alleles in selected humanimprinted genes. A similar approach was also applied to a recently published dataset for mouse trophoblast cells (), including RNA-seq and H3K36me3 ChIP-seq data derived from crosses between CAST/EiJ (Cast) and C57BL/6J (B6) mice. As we expected, H3K36me3 enriches the gene body of active genes and correlates with expression level of selected imprinted genes in a monoallelic manner (). The details of the quantitative analysis and validation of haplotype-specific wiggle track format files for human and mouse are described in the Section 2 of the Supplementary Material. reference genome (.fasta)Construct in silico genomesAlign to in silico genomeThe tracks show opposite haplotype-specific RNA-seq and H3K36me3 read profiles for IGF2 and PLAGL1 versus RTL1 in human skin fibroblast, consistent with the fact that IGF2 and PLAGL1 have different imprinting status compared with RTL1. (b) Slc38a4 (Mirg)-imprinted gene is paternally (maternally) expressed in mouse trophoblast cells. The SNP-poor regions are devoid of reads as expected
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
H.Younesy et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
