Motivation: Allergenicity, like antigenicity and immunogenicity, is a property encoded linearly and non-linearly, and therefore the alignment based approaches are not able to identify this property unam-biguously. A novel alignment-free descriptor-based fingerprint approach is presented here and applied to identify allergens and non-allergens. The approach was implemented into a four step algorithm. Initially, the protein sequences are described by amino acid principal properties as hydrophobicity, size, relative abundance, helix and-strand forming propensities. Then, the generated strings of different length are converted into vectors with equal length by auto-and cross-covariance (ACC). The vectors were transformed into binary fingerprints and compared in terms of Tanimoto coefficient. Results: The approach was applied to a set of 2427 known allergens and 2427 non-allergens and identified correctly 88% of them with Matthews correlation coefficient of 0.759. The descriptor fingerprint approach presented here is universal. It could be applied for any classification problem in computational biology. The set of E-descriptors is able to capture the main structural and physicochemical properties of amino acids building the proteins. The ACC transformation overcomes the main problem in the alignment-based comparative studies arising from the different length of the aligned protein sequences. The conversion of protein ACC values into binary descriptor fingerprints allows similarity search and classification. Availability and implementation: The algorithm described in the present study was implemented in a specially designed Web site, named AllergenFP (FP stands for FingerPrint). AllergenFP is written in Python, with GIU in HTML. It is freely accessible at http://ddg-pharmfac.net/Allergen FP.
INTRODUCTIONAllergy is a growing health problem of modern life. The prevalence of allergic diseases worldwide is rising dramatically in both developed and developing countries (). Allergy involves a complex series of reactions to external and internal factors, called allergens, which contribute to the development of diseases like rhinitis, asthma, atopic dermatitis and skin sensitization. Severe reactions as acute and fatal anaphylactic shock also may occur. An allergic reaction occurs when a susceptible organism is re-exposed to a specific allergen. The allergen-specific Th2 cells the surface. This finding is consistent with the fact that the innate immune system is able to detect hydrophobic parts of immunogenic proteins containing aliphatic or aromatic amino acids (). Obviously, allergenicity, like antigenicity and immunogenicity, is a property encoded linearly and non-linearly, and therefore the alignment-based approaches are not able to identify this property unambiguously. In the present study, we describe an alignmentfree method for allergenicity prediction based on amino acid E-descriptors () and auto-and cross-covariance (ACC) transformation of protein sequences into uniform equal-length vectors (). ACC was used for quantitative structureactivity relationship (QSAR) studies of peptides (), protein classification () and immunogenicity prediction (). Recently, we applied this method in combination with k nearest neighbors method to predict allergenicity (). Here, we improve the method by using a new set of amino acid descriptors and a novel descriptor fingerprint approach based on Tanimoto coefficient similarity search (). The E-descriptors for the 20 naturally occurring amino acids, defined by, were derived by principal component analysis of a data matrix consisting of 237 physicochemical properties. The first principal component (E1) reflects the hydrophobicity of amino acids; the second (E2) their size; the third (E3)their helix-forming propensity; the forth (E4) correlates with the relative abundance of amino acids; and the fifth (E5) is dominated by the-strand forming propensity. In the present study, the five E-descriptors were used to describe the protein sequences. The fingerprints in chemoinformatics are developed to describe the 2D chemical structures (). They are generated in two ways. In the most popular way, the structure of a compound is divided into substructural fragments and assembled into a binary stringif the fragment exists in the structure the corresponding string element takes 1, otherwise, it takes 0. Binary structural fingerprints are especially useful, as there are highly efficient in computer algorithms working with binary strings. Daylight has developed another approach (http://www. daylight.com/dayhtml/doc/theory/theory.finger.html). The Daylight fingerprints are generated as patterns from the environment of each atom (up to seven atoms away). Each pattern serves as a seed to a pseudo-random number generator (it is 'hashed'), the output of which is a set of bits (typically 4 or 5 bits per pattern); the set of bits is added (with a logical OR) to the fingerprint. Here, we present a novel descriptor-based fingerprint approach. The fingerprint consists of descriptors instead of structural fragments. This enlarges the area of fingerprint application outside the chemical structure description, even outside chemistry. Moreover, it allows physical and/or biological information to be included in the similarity search process. Obviously, the basic problem here is, as in other quantitative structureactivity relationship methods, the selection of proper descriptors. They could be discrete, i.e. Boolean values, e.g. the presence or absence of given physical, chemical and/or biological features. The fingerprint is binary codedwhen the given feature presents, the fingerprint takes 1 at the proper position, otherwise, it equals 0. Many descriptors have continuous values, e.g. a nuclear magnetic resonance or infrared spectra, logP, quantum chemistry-based descriptors and so forth. These descriptors also could be converted into discrete values by scaling and dividing into intervals with regular size. If a descriptor value falls within an interval, the corresponding fingerprint element takes 1; otherwise, it takes 0. Obviously, the length of the fingerprint depends on the number of intervals: as many they are, as longer is the fingerprint. The longer fingerprints are able to capture more molecular features than the shorter ones but in the same time are redundant in information. A balance between fingerprint length and information content should be found in any particular study.Allergome database (http://www.allergome.org/). The allergen proteins were searched in Swiss-Prot database (http://www. uniprot.org) and only sequences with 'evidence for the existence of protein-evidence at protein level' were selected. Duplicates were removed. The final set of allergens contained 2427 proteins. 2.1.2 Non-allergens A set of proteins from species Solanum lycopersicum (tomato), Capsicum annuum (pepper), Solanum tuberosum (potato), Triticum aestivum (bread wheat) and Oryza sativa (Asian rice) and Oryza glaberrima (African rice) was collected after search in Swiss-Prot for proteins with 'evidence for the existence of protein-evidence at protein level' and exclusion of proteins containing the key word 'allergen' in their description. The resulting set consisted of 950 non-allergens. Additionally, a set of non-allergens was collected from SwissProt to include proteins from Homo sapiens species with 'evidence for the existence of protein-evidence at protein level'. The proteins with key words 'allergen' and 'cancer' in their description as well as proteins with unidentified amino acids in their sequences were excluded. The final set of non-allergens contained 2427 proteins. The set of allergens and non-allergens used in the present study is freely accessible from AllergenFP Web site. This set could be used as a uniform reference set in future studies on allergenicity prediction as it is manually curated and contains known allergens with evidence at protein level.
DATASETS AND METHODS
Protein datasets
Presentation of protein sequences by E-descriptors and ACC transformationThe values for the five E-descriptors used in the present study to describe the protein sequences are given in. To make the length of the proteins uniform, an auto-and cross-cross covariance (ACC) transformation was used (). Auto-covariance Ajj(L) and cross-covariance Cjk(L) were calculated according to the following equations:Indices j and k refer to the E-descriptors (j  1-5, k  1-5, j 6  k), n is the number of amino acids in a sequence, index i points the amino acid position (i  1, 2,. .. , n) and L is the lag (L  1, 2,. .. , L). Short lags (L  5 U 20) were chosen, as only the influence of close amino acid proximity was investigated. A jj (L) and C jk (L) values were assigned further in the article as ACC values. The subsets of allergens and non-allergens were transformed into matrices with 25  L variables (5 2  L) each.
Descriptor fingerprints approach based on Tanimoto coefficient similarity searchIn the present study, ACC-based descriptor fingerprints were generated. The 25  L ACC descriptors were scaled by a factor of 100, divided into K intervals each and converted into 25  L  Kdigit binary fingerprints. A digit in the fingerprint equals 1, if the ACC value falls into the corresponding interval, otherwise, it takes 0. Thus, each protein has a unique binary fingerprint consisting of 25  L units and (25  L  K25  L) nulls. The fingerprints for each pair proteins were compared according to Tanimoto coefficient:where N A and N B are the number of digits in the fingerprints of structure A and structure B, respectively, and N C is the number of common digits between them. Tanimoto coefficient takes value between 0 and 1. The larger is the value, the more similar are the two structures. Thus, two structures with Tanimoto coefficient T  0.98 are much more similar than two structures with Tanimoto coefficient T  0.56.
Evaluation of performanceThe method for allergenicity prediction developed in the present study was evaluated by leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV) and by 10-fold cross-validation (10-fold-CV). In the LOOCV procedure, each protein was excluded from the dataset and compared with the remaining n-1 proteins by Tanimoto coefficient. The protein with the highest value for T(A,B) determined the class identity of the tested protein (allergen or non-allergen). In the 10-fold-CV procedure, the whole set is divided into 10 groups. Each group was treated as a test set, the remaining nine as a training set. The correctly predicted allergens and non-allergens were defined as true positives (TP) and true negatives (TN), respectively. The incorrectly predicted allergens and non-allergens were defined as false negatives (FN) and false positives (FP), respectively. Sensitivity
Web servers for allergenicity predictionThe method developed in the present study was compared to five servers for allergenicity prediction freely available in the web. These were AllerHunter, AlgPred, APPEL, ProAp and AllerTOP. AllerHunter (http://tiger.dbs.nus.edu.sg/AllerHunter) is a cross-reactive allergen prediction program built on a combination of SVM and pairwise sequence similarity (). Each proteins sequence in the training set is vectorized by performing sequence alignment and Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) against all other members of the training set. The protein sequences are represented as vectors consisted of similarity scores for each pair of proteins in the training set. AlgPred (http://imtech.res.in/raghava/algpred) predicts allergens by applying four different methods: MEME/MAST motif search, SVM-based classification of allergens and non-allergens by single amino acid composition] and by dipeptide composition [AlgPred(SVM_dipeptide), and BLAST search against allergen representative peptides (]. MEME is a tool for discovering motifs in a group of related protein sequences. MAST searches in biological sequence databases for sequences that contain one or more groups of known motifs. Single amino acid composition gives the fraction of each amino acid in a protein. Dipeptide composition is used to encapsulate the global information about each protein sequence and gives a fixed pattern length of 400 (20  20). The BLAST search is performed against a set containing 24 amino acid long peptides, so-called ARP, and findsproteins with high similarity to allergenic proteins (). The APPEL tool (Allergen Protein Prediction E-Lab) (http:// jing.cz3. nus. edu.sg/cgi-bin/APPEL) uses SVM to identify novel allergen proteins from the sequence-derived structural and physicochemical properties of a whole protein (). It is based on a statistical method and has the potential to discover novel allergen proteins. ProAp (http://gmobl.sjtu.edu.cn/proAP/main.html) is a webbased application that integrates and optimizes sequence-based, motif-based [ProAp(motif)] and SVM-based [ProAp(SVM)] allergen prediction approaches for determination of crossreactivities between potential allergens and known allergens (). The applied SVM method takes amino acid composition as protein features. AllerTOP (http://www.pharmfac.net/allertop) is the first alignment-free server for in silico prediction of allergens based on the main physicochemical properties of proteins (). AllerTOP uses a model based on amino acid z-descriptors, ACC protein transformation and k nearest neighbors clustering. The protein sequences are uploaded in plain format. The results page returns the allergen status: 'Probable Allergen' or 'Probable Non-allergen'. It also returns the k nearest neighbours in the training set. On this basis, AllerTOP defines the most probable route of exposure of tested proteins predicted as an allergen: food, inhalant or toxin.
ALGORITHMThe algorithm used in the present study is described in. Initially, the amino acids in the protein sequences were described by the five E-descriptors and the strings were transformed into uniform vectors by ACC. The derived matrix consisted of 4854 rows (2427 allergens and 2427 non-allergens) and 25  L columns. Each column was divided into K intervals and a 25  L  K-digit binary fingerprint was generated for each protein. A digit in the fingerprint equals 1, if the ACC value falls into the corresponding interval, otherwise, it takes 0. Thus, each protein has a unique binary fingerprint consisted of 25  L units and (25  L  K25  L) nulls. Tanimoto coefficients were calculated for all protein pairs in the set. A protein was classified as allergen or non-allergen according to the protein from the pair with the highest Tanimoto coefficient. The algorithm was optimized in terms of lag length l changing L from 5 to 20 with step of 5. The performances were compared by sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, ppv and F1 value (). Sensitivity initially decreases with increasing of L, reaches minimum at L  10, then increases, reaches maximum at L  15 and again decreases. Specificity, accuracy, ppv and F1 increase gradually, reach maximum at L  15 and then decrease. Thus, L  15 was chosen as an optimum value. The ACC values range from 10 to 11. Each ACC was divided into K regular intervals. Short intervals generate long fingerprints requiring long time for calculation. Longer fingerprints capture more structural information. Some of this information brings more 'noise' than 'signal'. A balance between fingerprint length and information content should be found in any particular study. In the present study, the optimal number of regular intervals was found by changing the resolution step and evaluating the algorithm performance by the parameters sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, ppv and F1 value. Six different steps were tested: 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0 and 2.5 (). Zigzag curves were generated with maximum at step 2. Only the sensitivity slightly increases at step 2.5. Thus, step 2 was selected as an optimum resolution step that results in 11 intervals (10 regular intervals with step 2 and 1 shorter interval with step 1) for each ACC. The final matrix consisted of 4854 rows (2427 allergens and 2427 non-allergens) and 4125 columns (25  15  11). Every). The LOO-CV tests gave 87% sensitivity, 89% specificity, 88% accuracy, 89% ppv, F1  0.88 and MCC  0.76. The 10-fold-CV tests gave slightly lower predictions: 85% sensitivity, 85% specificity, 85% accuracy, 85% ppv, F1  0.85 and MCC  0.70.
IMPLEMENTATIONThe algorithm described in the present study was implemented in a specially designed Web site, named AllergenFP (FP stands for FingerPrint). AllergenFP is written in Python, with GIU in HTML. It is freely accessible at http://ddg-pharmfac.net/ AllergenFP. Single protein sequence is uploaded in plain format. The results page returns the predicted protein status: 'Probable Allergen' or 'Probable Non-allergen'. It also returns the protein from the pair with the highest value of Tanimoto coefficient.
COMPARISON WITH EXISTING METHODS FOR ALLERGEN PREDICTIONAllergenFP was compared to five freely available web servers for allergenicity prediction. The set of known allergens and nonallergens compiled in the present study was used to test the servers. The results are given in. ProAp(motif) showed the highest sensitivity. It recognized 94% of the allergens in the set, followed by AlgPred(SVM_single_aa) (89%) and AllerTOP (88%). The highest specificity belongs to AllerHunter. It recognized 96% of the non-allergens, closely followed by AlgPred(ARP) (95%) and APPEL (91%). AllergenFP is the most accurate predictor identifying 88% of both allergens and non-allergens. Close to it is AllerHunter with 87% accuracy. The parameter ppv accounts for the fraction of TP among all predicted positives. Ninety-five percent of the predicted allergens by AllerHunter are true allergens. Next to it is AlgPred(ARP) with 94% ppv. F1 is a weighted average of sensitivity and ppv. AllergenFP has the highest value for F1 (0.878), followed by AllerHunter (0.858). By definition, MCC is a correlation coefficient between the observed and predicted binary classifications. AllergenFP showed the highest MCC (0.759) closely followed by AllerHunter (0.754).
DISCUSSIONAllergenicity of food proteins is a crucial problem associated with the widespread usage of new foods, supplements and herbs, many of them having known or unknown genetically modified origin. Allergenicity is a subtle nonlinearly-coded property. Most of the existing methods for allergenicity prediction are based on structural similarity of novel proteins to known allergens. Thus, the identification of a novel structurally diverse allergen could not be predicted by these methods. In the present study, we propose an alignment-free method for allergenicity prediction, based on amino acid principal properties as hydrophobicity, size, relative abundance, helix and-strand forming propensities. Proteins are transformed into descriptorbased fingerprints and compared by Tanimoto coefficient. The algorithm was optimized in terms of lag length and resolution step and cross-validated by a set of 2427 known allergens and 2427 non-allergens. It recognized 87% of the allergens and 89% of the non-allergens. The algorithm and the set of proteins used in the study were implemented in a specially designed Web site, named AllergenFP and freely accessible at http://ddg-pharmfac. net/AllergenFP. AllergenFP was compared with five freely available web servers for allergenicity prediction and showed the highest predictive ability. For example, recently Liao et al. (2013) identified a novel allergenic protein Tyr p 8 from Tyrophagus putrescentiae that cross-reacts with Der p 8 from Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus. Both proteins are not available in our database. AllergenFP identifies them as allergens with T  0.84. The descriptor fingerprint approach based on Tanimoto coefficient similarity search used in the present study to discriminate between allergens and non-allergens is universal. It could be applied for any classification problem in computational biology. The set of E-descriptors is able to capture the main structural and physicochemical properties of amino acids. The ACC transformation overcomes the main problem in the alignment-based comparative studies arising from the different length of the aligned protein sequences. The conversion of protein ACC values into a binary descriptor fingerprint is a computational novelty, described here for the first time.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
AllergenFP at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
I.Dimitrov et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
