Motivation: Pairwise local alignment is an indispensable tool for molecular biologists. In real time (i.e. in about 1 s), ALP (Ascending Ladder Program) calculates the E-values for protein–protein or DNA–DNA local alignments of random sequences, for arbitrary substitution score matrix, gap costs and letter abundances; and FALP (Frameshift Ascending Ladder Program) performs a similar task, although more slowly, for frameshifting DNA-protein alignments. Availability and implementation: To permit other Cþþ programmers to implement the computational efficiencies in ALP and FALP directly within their own programs, Cþþ source codes are available in the public domain at http://go.usa.gov/3GTSW under 'ALP' and 'FALP', along with the standalone programs ALP and FALP.
IntroductionFinding and aligning similar sequences is arguably the most fundamental task in bioinformatics. The main method for analysing biosequences (novel proteins, ancient DNA, environmental metagenomics DNA, single-molecule sequencing data, whole genomes, etc.) is to compare them to sequence databases or to each other. It is important to know whether a similarity is significant, i.e. unlikely to occur by chance alone. For gapless alignments, E-value estimation is rapid because of analytic formulas (), but for gapped alignment it has traditionally required hours to days to pre-calculate the statistical parameters for arbitrary scoring schemes and letter abundances (). Many alignment programs therefore limit users to the specific substitution score matrices, gap costs and letter abundances corresponding to the pre-calculations, with adverse consequence to the sensitivity of sequence searches (), particularly in applications [e.g. (where the limitations are inappropriate. Supplementary Table S1 compares BLAST and other alignment programs (;). BLAST does not allow scoring schemes usefully tailored to searching for remote protein homology (), remote DNA homology (), AT-rich genomes (), or bisulphite-converted DNA (). In particular, because of skewed compositions (), BLAST can yield misleading p-values relevant to the genomes of clinically important pathogens like AT-rich malaria or GC-rich tuberculosis. Several other alignment programs also allow only a limited set of scoring schemes.
Methods and featuresThe ALP and FALP software libraries can calculate E-values for any scoring scheme and letter abundances (,). In a rapid preliminary computation, ALP diagnoses whether the input parameters (the scoring scheme and letter abundances) are in or effectively too close to the logarithmic phase for computational purposes. If the computation is feasible, ALP then computes E-values in real time (i.e. in about 1 s) for most logarithmic scoring schemes, although as the input parameters approach the boundary of the logarithmic phase, its computational time lengthens. In any case, ALP simulates to estimate modified Gumbel parameters and their standard errors from the formulas in the Supplementary Materials, permitting computations of alignment E-and P-values. For shorter sequences, alignment scores deviate increasingly from a Gumbel distribution, hence several 'finite size' corrections (FSCs) have been proposed. ALP incorporates a recent FSC (). ALP allows insertion costs to differ from deletion costs. This has useful applications. For example, PacBio and nanopore DNA sequences have different insertion and deletion error rates, so accurate alignment should use different insertion and deletion costs. ALP also allows asymmetric score matrices, and different letter abundances in the two sequences. This is useful for comparing proteomes or genomes with differing compositions (). The FALP library provides similar functionality for DNA-protein alignments with frameshifts. It allows arbitrary genetic codes, and does not assume that translated DNA has typical amino acid abundances. FALP's pre-calculations are slower than ALP's (typically, minutes instead of fractions of seconds). In practice, however, FALP is much faster than the computations required when aligning modern multi-gigabase datasets.
ConclusionsThe ALP and FALP programs give researchers the ability to compute reliable statistical significances for local alignment without limiting them to particular scoring schemes or sequence compositions; the ALP and FALP libraries permit programmers to develop C local alignment tools that can compute p-values themselves. These libraries have already been incorporated in the LAST aligner (http://last. cbrc.jp) ().
Published by Oxford University Press 2015. This work is written by US Government employees and is in the public domain in the US.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
