Bisulfite sequencing allows cytosine methylation, an important epigenetic marker, to be detected via nucleotide substitutions. Since the Applied Biosystems SOLiD System uses a unique di-base encoding that increases confidence in the detection of nucleotide substitutions, it is a potentially advantageous platform for this application. However, the di-base encoding also makes reads with many nucleotide substitutions difficult to align to a reference sequence with existing tools, preventing the platform's potential utility for bisulfite sequencing from being realized. Here, we present SOCS-B, a reference-based, un-gapped alignment algorithm for the SOLiD System that is tolerant of both bisulfite-induced nucleotide substitutions and a parametric number of sequencing errors, facilitating bisulfite sequencing on this platform. An implementation of the algorithm has been integrated with the previously reported SOCS alignment tool, and was used to align CpG methylation-enriched Arabidopsis thaliana bisulfite sequence data, exhibiting a 2-fold increase in sensitivity compared to existing methods for aligning SOLiD bisulfite data. Availability: Executables, source code, and sample data are available at
Alignments using mapreads were performed against reference sequences representing the fully bisulfite converted (both Watson and Crick strands) and unconverted genomes of A.thaliana and phage lambda, while alignments using SOCS-B were performed against only the unconverted genomes. complex methylation patterns, rather than incomplete conversion. Furthermore, since the most biologically relevant methylation sites in the genome occur in dense clusters, it seems possible that the additional reads aligned by SOCS-B might be of more biological significance than those aligned with mapreads. Because of the algorithm's inherent lack of bias, SOCS-B also showed increased specificity when aligning simulated reads (Supplementary Table S2). SOCS-B alignment took 30 h using an Apple Mac Pro (dual 2.93 GHz Quad-Core Intel Xeon with hyper-threading, 32 GB RAM). Since color-space errors are fairly abundant in SOLiD reads, more reads can be aligned by allowing more mismatches, either at the expense of run time (by increasing the sensitivity) or of specificity (by increasing the tolerance). For larger reference genomes or datasets, or for higher error sensitivity, SOCS has features that facilitate distributed processing. Executable versions, source code, sample datasets, and usage instructions are available at http://solidsoftwaretools.com/gf/project/socs/.
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
