Motivation: As next generation sequencing is rapidly adding new genomes, their correct placement in the taxonomy needs verification. However, the current methods for confirming classification of a taxon or suggesting revision for a potential misplacement relies on computationally intense multi-sequence alignment followed by an iterative adjustment of the distance matrix. Due to intra-heterogeneity issues with the 16S rRNA marker, no classifier is available for sub-genus level, which could readily suggest a classification for a novel 16S rRNA sequence. Metagenomics further complicates the issue by generating fragmented 16S rRNA sequences. This article proposes a novel alignment-free method for representing the microbial profiles using extensible Markov models (EMMs) with an extended Karlin–Altschul statistical framework similar to the classic alignment paradigm. We propose a log odds (LODs) score classifier based on Gumbel difference distribution that confirms correct classifications with statistical significance qualifications and suggests revisions where necessary. Results: We tested our method by generating a sub-genus level classifier with which we re-evaluated classifications of 676 microbial organisms using the NCBI FTP database for the 16S rRNA. The results confirm current classification for all genera while ascertaining significance at 95%. Furthermore, this novel classifier isolates heterogeneity issues to a mere 12 strains while confirming classifications with significance qualification for the remaining 98%. The models require less memory than that needed by multi-sequence alignments and have better time complexity than the current methods. The classifier operates at sub-genus level, and thus outperforms the naive Bayes classifier of the RNA Database Project where much of the taxonomic analysis is available online. Finally, using information redundancy in model building, we show that the method applies to metagenomic fragment classification of 19 Escherichia coli strains. Availability and implementation: Source code and binaries freely available for download at http://lyle.smu.edu/IDA/EMMSA/, implemented in JAVA and supported on MS Windows.
INTRODUCTIONMany different techniques have been proposed for microbial classification. Most current approaches for classification are based on similarity between the organism to be classified and known correctly classified organisms. This similarity may be based on cell shape or structure, biochemical characteristics, G + C content, nucleic acid hybridization, etc. More recent techniques have been based on molecular sequence comparisons.presents an excellent review of available tools for microbial classification and emphasizes that currently available tools are not satisfactory. He argues for more algorithmic approaches. Due to the ubiquitous nature of 16S rRNA, it is often used as the sequence for comparison. Sub-genus classification is considered a challenge due to lack of resolution if only the 16S rRNA is used. Use of alternate gene markers and whole genomes have been suggested (), but 16S rRNA still retains its position as the most commonly used marker (). In fact, we show that only a small percentage of organisms or strains (2%) require markers and methods outside of the 16S rRNA. A common characteristic of most sequence-based classification techniques is the requirement for sequence alignment that is extremely computationally expensive. Initial taxonomy evaluations were done with heat-maps generated using distance matrices from multiple sequence alignments (). The alignments and tools have been recently improved using RNA secondary structures and probabilistic models in; however, reliance on subjective selection of gene copies and expensive sequence alignment may be avoided with alternative methods. This is exactly what we do in this article. Our approach uses all copies of 16S and completely avoids alignment while still achieving high classification accuracy at the species level. Statistical signatures () created from base composition frequencies offer an alternative to using classic alignment. These alignment free methods reduce complexity and processing. Lempel-Ziv (LZ) complexity () and EMM-based distance measures () look promising for whole genome phylogenies as the current methods do not scale well. However, it is desirable to avoid a resource intense all against all distance measurement in a fast growing taxonomy. Hidden Markov model-based profiles offer a solid probabilistic basis () and their application is well tailored to DNA or protein analyses. However, the base model needed to be extended for RNA. The later extensions account for co-variability of base pairs in the RNA sequences due to WatsonCrick complementarity
R.M.Kotamarti et al.(). Eddy notes that the covariance models are more suited to small length RNAs (e.g. tRNAs ) and as such for homologous search problems. This article proposes the use of extensible Markov models () to create compact classification models for sequence analysis as a more efficient alternative to any previous sequence-based technique. Use of machine learning allows EMM signatures to be automatically built. By completely avoiding alignment, the efficiency is greatly improved. The resulting EMM models (one per class) provide a compressed representative (signature) of the class. EMM () is a time-varying Markov chain, which can be viewed as a directed graph with nodes representing clusters of real-world events and arcs representing the ordering of the associated events. EMMs have been used to model many different applications in a variety of fields including future state prediction () and rare event detection (). As a bioinformatic adaptation of an EMM, EMM bioinformatic analysis (EMMBA) transforms m molecular sequences to a single EMM signature of m states. It can be considered a representation of sequence data with states representing clusters of similar sequence segments and inter-state transition probabilities representing the implicit order within the sequences. The salient features of our classification approach include:@BULLET High classification accuracy [based on Bergey's Manual (] even at the species level. @BULLET Creation of a new EMM to create Profile graphs () for each species using all of its 16S rRNA copies. @BULLET No alignment of sequences is required. A quasi alignment is obtained as a direct byproduct of the EMM graphs themselves.The quasi-alignment technique also makes EMMs suitable for classification using metagenomic sequences. The rest of this article is organized as follows: Section 2 derives an equivalent Markov formulation of sequence learning. Section 3 describes the method used to confirm or question the classification of an organism and introduces an extension to the KarlinAltschul statistics in order to incorporate a log-odds (LODs) score matrix to aid in statistical defense of a classification. In Section 4, 10fold cross-validation tests, comparison to RNA database project (RDP) classifier and sub-genus classification results are presented to illustrate the performance of EMM. Finally, Section 5 presents future direction for EMM and concludes the article.
MODEL CONSTRUCTIONThe occurrences of letters or base compositions {A, C, U, G} of an RNA sequence provide frequency information. The occurrences of all patterns of bases of length l generates an l-mer frequency representation for a sequence (). We use the notation F(S) to represent a transformation function acting on m 16S rRNA sequences of an organism and G = (V ,E) representing a directed graph of V nodes and E edges. The vertices are also referred to as nodes and states of the EMM graph to improve readability. Mathematically, EMM generation can be expressed asthe numerical representations of equal-sized segments along a 16S sequence, which are used in building an EMM signature. Signature building starts with a start state; as each NSV is processed, it is compared to the existing states of the model. If the NSV is not found to be close enough (per a squared Euclidean threshold) as in the case of NSV 1, a new state (1) is created with the new NSV as its first cluster member; otherwise, the new NSV (as in the case of NSV 3) is simply added to the matching cluster state node (state 1). When all NSVs are processed, the model building process is finished.Where is the operator to integrate new sequence segments into a model being built. F(S) is further expressed in terms of nested functions F and F * as follows:In Equations (2)(4), the functions F, F and F* are numerical summarization functions that convert molecular sequences to oligomer count form. The function F collects m 16S rRNA sequences S being transformed and applies the F transformation function. The function F converts a single sequence to k equalsized segments and applies the function F * on each segment S i. The function F * converts a sequence segment to a vector v of counts with each count representing one of the oligomer variants. Such vectors are referred to as Numerical Summarization Vectors (NSVs) and the size of an NSV is given by 4 l , where l is oligomer length. Finally, extends the directed graph, i.e. sequence signature as shown in, by clustering each NSV generated by the F function into a new or an existing node of the graph and appropriately updating the arc information. Initially, the signature graph is empty. A squared Euclidean distance function dist and a threshold  are utilized to determine clustering of NSVs in a node. The function can be further expressed by the following algorithm: given that the V vertices of EMM graph also represent the nodes of clusters of similar NSVs and with V c representing the current state, for each NSV v i in F(S),(1) Find the closest match, i.e., the nearest node V j to the NSV v i .(
Quasi-alignment methodswhere the closest match, referred to as quasi alignment, which is defined to exist when the node whose centroid is at a minimal distance from the NSV v i is found. The threshold  is selected such that segments which are very similar are clustered together. The current state of an EMM graph is always the last-matched node. The current state changes when a new NSV matches to another state or results in creation of a new state. An arc is added/updated whenever the current state changes. Adding an arc involves updating the arc probability. The state resets to the start state for every new sequence.shows the EMM build operation graphically. In this section, we formulated the EMM build operation as a transformation problem, which is suitable for compressing sequences into a signature. The transformation function is a compression function. Considering m sequences of k segments each, there are mk data points. Suppose an EMM is built with L states. Due to clustering, mk  L. Typically, we choose clustering criterion such that mk L, which results in compression. Aggregation of EMMs into a single EMM called profileEMM is how the signatures for higher taxa such as genus or class are created. For each EMM that is to be aggregated to a profileEMM, the centroids of nodes, which are simply the average vectors of the NSVs assigned to them, are used as input NSVs for the model building. For example, if a species EMM has 20 states, there will be 20 average vectors used as NSVs for building a higher level, i.e. genus model.
METHODSIn recent decades, several effective taxonomic analysis techniques have been proposed and are in use. Lilburn and Garrity, 2004 present a heat-map visualization technique that examines and corrects for any inconsistencies in the microbial taxonomy. The process has been recently improved in the areas of alignment and sequence selection (). The central process for generating the heat-map is described as follows:(1) Pick the longest 16S rRNAs for a genome with the most conserved homologue positions.(2) Perform multiple sequence alignment for all the representative 16S rRNA sequences at those positions.(3) Pick a pairwise distance estimation method and create a distance matrix.(4) Apply hierarchical clustering to generate heat-map visualization for the resulting phylogenetic taxonomy. Alignment-free methods exist that can compute a reasonable distance matrix (). The former requires more computational resources to exhaustively determine short unique substrings, but the latter is faster, works more efficiently, avoids the single copy selection issue by combining them and also provides a valid distance metric. Once a distance matrix is available, the algorithm Self Organizing Self Correcting (SOCC) can automate the process of spotting and correcting for taxonomic errors; however, this is easily done in case of EMM by directly considering the ranked list of models. In later publications (), the manual process of visual examination for taxonomy errors was substituted with a more automatic, iterative distance matrix manipulation. The algorithm SOSC uses a statistical basis to shuffle elements of the distance matrix in a multi-pass scheme to reorganize sequences into similar clusters. The final step of heatmap generation and visualization is replaced with an iterative distance matrix manipulation algorithm. Using the data mining direction taken by, we propose building classification models instead of relying on computing an all-against-all distance matrix. By utilizing EMM signatures of the 16S sequence profiles of organisms, we prevent discarding potentially useful copies of the 16S rRNA thus eliminating the subjective sequence selection process. Furthermore, we propose a Markov transition probability-based classification rank score aided by reports of statistical significance to assess the taxonomy. The task of assessing membership involves considering each member, measuring its degree of membership in a potential host community represented as a profileEMM, and then calculating its statistical significance. A member may either be an individual organism with all its copies of 16S rRNA or a higher taxon such as genus. Highlights of the proposed method are:(1) Evaluate a taxon against all of the communities to which it could potentially belong, which generates a rank order.(2) Consider the highest ranking community as the best classification for the taxon.(3) A taxonomic anomaly is identified if the highest ranking community is not consistent with the observed placement in the published microbial taxonomy (). Next, formal notation will be given for the above. Given an EMM e q as a member taxon signature to be classified against one of T communities represented by EMMs e t , where t = 1,2,...,T , the evaluation of e q against a profileEMM of e t is given by the function r(e q ,e t ), where r computes a rank measure. The profileEMM e t with the highest rank is considered the community to which e q belongs. We will introduce the terms difference score and transition presence probability to explain classification. The former is derived as the sum of differences in individual LOD scores of states when a match is found between a query state and a model state. The latter implies a non-zero value if the model includes a transition arc that connects matched state and the current state. The classification is represented by the notation t as follows:where r(e q ,e t ) measures how similar e q is to the e t as belowrepresent the difference score and the transition presence probability, respectively, for the quasi alignment < s k ,s k > which is defined as a pair of member-model states with the least-squared Euclidean distance. The value for a transition probability is 1, if the arc < s k1 ,s k > is present in the profileEMM e t. If there is no such arc, a penalty value ln(1/|e t |) is used. The denominator computes the score adjusted to highlight the difference in a quasi alignment and the rank measure function generates higher values for smaller difference scores. Scoring quasi alignments and computing P-values are described next.proposed a LODs score for scoring alignments along with a theorem supporting a Gumbel extreme value distribution of LOD scores. Extending the KarlinAltschul statistics, quasi alignments can also be scored with LOD scores by use of dynamically built score matrices for each EMM signtaure (). This has become necessary since the alignment basis used in Karlin and Altschul (1990) deals with a substitutive environment, where the aligned base pairs that are different constitute a substitution. Since EMM uses the count form of bases and not the bases directly, its quasi-alignment context deals with comparing numerical vectors of oligomer counts and the EMM score matrix reflects the LOD scores for occurrences of specific oligomer patterns.describes an algorithm for dynamically building a score matrix for each profileEMM and adjusting it in the context of a member taxon to compute the key Gumbel distribution parameters such as  and K. The algorithm is quite involved and the reader is referred to earlier work by the authors (); a brief summary of it is presented here for completeness:(
R.M.Kotamarti et al.(2) Adjust the scores when assessing membership using the individual probabilities of the bases in a member's sequence(s).(3) Fit a Gumbel distribution by computing the parameters  and K using numerical methods at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ IEB/ToolBox/C_DOC/lxr/source/tools/blast.c.Let v k and v k be the numerical vectors of a quasi alignment (closest squared Euclidean match) < s k ,s k >. Let X be a score matrix, i.e. a score array of size |v k |. The scoring of quasi alignments is computed as a difference score d q, which is the weighted Manhattan distance, where k = 1,2,...,|e q | and |e q | is the number of states in the member EMM e q , as follows:where j loops over all oligomer combinations (64 for a 3-mer basis) and X j is the LOD score for j-th pattern. For example, for a 3-mer basis, a pattern like 'ACU' is associated with a numeric value in the vectors asThe difference scores obtained from scoring quasi alignments are then assessed for significance. Once again, referring to the KarlinAltschul statistics, P-value is computed using the Gumbel distribution framework. However, unlike in classic alignment scoring of local alignments where perfect alignments generate maximum scores, quasi-alignment statistics of using difference scores generate scores around zero for near alignments. Using  and  to represent mean and SD, when samples are drawn from two different distributions ( 1 , 1 ) and ( 2 , 2 ), the difference distribution formed from the differences of samples is characterized). When samples are drawn from the same distribution, the resulting mean of the difference distribution becomes zero and the variance is doubled in value as characterized by ( d = 0, d =  2 2 ). KarlinAltschul statistics for classic alignment are interested in the one-sided tail probabilities because perfect alignments do not follow the null hypothesis of randomness. In fact, the high scoring local alignments fall outside a confidence threshold in the right-side tail. However, in our case, difference scores could fall on either side of zero and the tail probability supporting the alternate hypothesis becomes one minus the area under the cumulative distribution function corresponding to the interval d and +d, where d =|d q| of the difference distribution. Adapting KarlinAltschul P-value, given K,  as the distribution parameters and |e q | representing the number of quasi alignments, we get the following:The smallest difference score among those of all quasi alignments is the best base line P-value for the member. This, however, can be further improved to take into account other significant alignments as well. Given a 95% confidence interval, the quasi alignments with d  d t are considered significant where d t corresponds to the 5% threshold in the difference distribution characterized by  = 0 and . We propose the following adaptation of the KarlinAltschul statistics to obtain a P-value for the difference distribution.where y 2 = K|e q |e  (+d) and y 1 = K|e q |e  (d). h is the number of quasi alignments that are significant. If h = 1 indicating that there is only one significant quasi alignment, the P-value reverts to Equation (1). Though normal distributions are most popular, we opted to use the difference Gumbel distribution due to the conservative P-values it appears to generate (). Each evaluation by rank measure function generates several data points for closer analysis in the event of unexpected classification that is required for revisions in taxonomy. The values reported include 1P-values, EScore, BitScore, inverted difference score, the best quasi alignment that is the alignment with the smallest difference score and the total number of quasi alignments that exceed 95% confidence threshold. The E-Score and BitScore are analogs for the 1P-values for an outcome (). Our proposed method for taxonomy verification requires the use of all available relevant genomic data, which is typical of a taxonomic classifier; as such, to eliminate bias, we will include a 10-fold cross-validation experiment in Section 4 which systematically separates the training and the test sets in assessing the predictive power of EMM. Besides confirming a taxonomic placement with a statistical significance declaration, our proposed method identifies ambiguities in taxonomy.
EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSISIn this section, we comparatively analyze the introduced methods using the 16S rRNA sequences. Since the distance matrix method is the primary basis on which the Bergey's manual is maintained, we will exclude this method in the comparison to eliminate bias in classifier accuracy. Any deviations from the Bergey's manual are identified as possible candidates for revision. Due to space limitations, only the highlights of genus and sub-genus level EMM LODs classifier are described; authors present a detailed 10-fold cross-validation example for EMM-based classification of microbial strains into phylogenetic classes in. The 16S rRNA database utilized in this analysis is derived from the NCBI Microbial Complete Genome Database at http://www.ncbi .nlm.nih.gov/genomes/lproks.cgi. The sequences were extracted from the annotated whole genome sequence files using keyword searches. From these data, a new database was built that consists of individual files, one per microbial organism, in FASTA format. The original dataset was derived from the NCBI as of August 2009 and consists of 782 organisms each with multiple 16S sequences where applicable. There were several cases of missing genus or even class information. Since this type of information is used for verifying the topological accuracy, such data are used only for testing unknown sequence detection. The final database consisted of 676 organisms. For comparison, we considered the legacy clustering-based method of using the heat-map/SOCC method and a leading classification method based on a naive Bayes classifier.summarizes the three methods including EMM with regards to operations performed in preprocessing, training and analysis (confirm/deny) phases. The space and time complexities are summarized in. Our approach only takes O(MK 2 ) for space and O(N +NK +M 2 ) for time, N is the number of sequences, M the number of models (or classes) and K the number of equal-sized segments. These are much less than the prevailing methods. Details are provided in Supplementary Material. We performed five experiments, using l = 3, i.e. 3-mer pattern for generating counts, to validate our approach. Selection of l = 3 was found to be sufficient for taxonomic verification and triplets are convenient when working with DNA sequences as well, as they map to amino acids. The experiments are: (i) perform 10-fold crossvalidation for classification of organisms into genera of the phylum Proteobacteria and comparatively analyze classification errors for known/unknown sequences; (ii) classify all genera and species of the existing microbial taxonomy; (iii) classify strains of Bacilli; (iv) classify E. coli fragments; and (v) compare EMM and LZ complexity methods for phylogeny. The results and descriptions follow:
Quasi-alignment methodsof 5 classes, 129 genera and 351 organisms. EMM signatures are first generated for all the genera of the phylum, and then also for all the organisms using all the available 16S rRNA copies. As expected, space efficiency is achieved as shown in. Second, the dataset is randomly divided into 10 partitions. Third, leaving one partition at a time as the test partition, the remaining nine partitions are used as the training data from which models for genera are generated. Next, the test partition, i.e. the organismal signatures from the test partition are evaluated against all the models and the best classification is generated. Misclassifications are counted and those for which no models exist are discarded. We found the classifications to match 84% on average for genus and 100% for class.shows the accuracy breakdown by each of thetaxonomic analysis under various methods: complexity is detailed for each method by major operation where L is the length of a sequence, N is the number of sequences, M is the number of models (or classes) and K is the number of equal-sized segments. Multiple sequence alignment is by far the most expensive operations in space and time. Naive Bayes classifier () uses an 8-mer, which could theoretically require 4 8 feature attributes, but optimal design is assumed due to lack of detailed information. Reduced space complexity of O(MK) for EMM is possible in case of classification algorithms since transition information is not used. 10-fold runs. Also shown is the comparative analysis between the naive Bayes classifier () and the EMM classifier inusing three partitions representing worst, best and moderate performance by EMM. The partitions were structured into multiple files of required format prior to using the naive Bayes classifier implementation of the RDP 2.2 classifier. Unlike EMM, the original distance matrix and the RDP classifier methods require selection of a single 16S rRNA copy among the many found in some strains. To the best of our knowledge, these selection procedure details are not published; as such, we used a random selection when selecting a single copy. The misclassifications for both initially also counted the cases where there is no model for the genus being classified. Lack of models for some is due to low cardinality of a particular genus as it is very common to encounter a genus with a single member only. Therefore, if a single member genus is in a test partition, there would be no corresponding training model and the best a classifier could do is to find the closest one which would still count as a misclassification. Errors due to lack of models are adjusted and the remaining classification errors, also shown,
R.M.Kotamarti et al.are analyzed further as follows.also shows the genera that are found as misclassified by either method or both. It is interesting to note that EMM finds a more reasonable classification, justifiable using DNADIST-based distance, for both Geobater and Haemophilus strains than suggested by the RDP classifier as well as Bergey's manual. It is equally interesting to point out that there are significant local alignments between Rizhobium strains and the near cousin Ochrobactrum though a global-aligned DNADIST analysis confirms Bergey's manual. Since any taxonomy is simply based on the convention chosen and not necessarily reflective of a particular biological fact of interest, the current separation of the two Rizhobium strains and Ochrobactrum remains interesting. Unlike, the RDP classifier, normalized LOD scores used by EMM in identifying such areas of interest is perhaps useful. We will consider how both methods handle unclassified sequences next which is useful for classifying sequences from strains for which the complete genome is yet to be determined. We added 17 test strains from several archaea and bacteria phyla to analyze classifier response. The EMM classifier reported a zero base P-value for 12 of them indicating immediate conclusion that the sequences are of unknown origin. When the same was tested with the RDP naive Bayes classifier, only the best possible matching taxa are reported since the training set does not include any of the test phyla. This means that RDP classifier operation did not appear to detect novel sequences. On the contrary, the EMM LODs classifier provides a modified rank function output which detects the novel sequences 100% though the P-value derivative appears to detect 70% only. However, when they were input to the online RDP classifier, the correct classifications were determined. This is most probably due to the fact that the training set for the online version already includes all known and available sequences. From a taxonomic classification stand point, it is a common practice to build models with all the available genomic information and provide a query service for sequences known or unknown as input by a user. This is exactly the case with the RDP classifier that works based on the existing classifications and the models. However, it does not handle sub-genus classification. We take this useful concept to subgenus level in the following experiments where all the available 16S rRNA information is used in building the classification models.
Experiment 2: classification of all genera and species.Since sub-genus levels are considered difficult to differentiate and the naive Bayes classifier available online at Ribosomal Database Project 2 does not classify below genus level, we extended our test to verify species level in addition to the genus of the published microbial taxonomy. The EMMs are built first for all genera, species and strains. Evaluation of each strain against all available species models generated high-ranking classifications. Of these, all strains were classified correctly for genus level. With the exception of 12 strains, all strains were also classified under the correct species. For all correct classifications, we found them to be significant at 95%.shows that the 12 misclassifications are, in fact, due to presence of exact copies of the 16S rRNA sequences. For example, the strains Bordetella parapertussis 12822 and B. bronchiseptica RB50 have the identical set of 16S rRNA sequences and as such both species models attained the first rank position for them resulting in ambiguity.experiments so far, we have used all available 16S rRNA sequence data. This test involves testing a single fragment of one of the gene copies of the 16S rRNA. Since EMMs are built using segmented sequences of fixed size, flexible segment boundaries that allow overlapping was utilized. Overlapped segments result in redundant counting of l-mers since two successive segments are the same except that the second one is shifted by a base pair. This helps in finding the quasi alignment between a fragment starting at any position and an EMM during the evaluation step. We believe this to be ideal for handling the well-known binning problem in metagenomics. However, true alignment-free metagenomics will require EMMs built for all the available relevant sequence data. This is deferred as future research. For this test, strain models are re-generated as parent models with overlapped segments. The fragments are created by taking a 16S rRNA sequence of each of the 19 E.coli organisms and discarding the first 500 bp of the first 16S rRNA sequence. The remaining 1000 bp are segmented as 80 bp and multiple of these 80 bp segments are used to create a test fragment. These fragments were evaluated and all were correctly classified against their species, i.e. E.coli. Depending on the location of the fragment, the accuracy ranged between 70% and 100%.) and the EMM counter part () methods were compared using 20 strains (92 16S rRNA sequences) of the most diverse phylum Burkholderia. While both methods generate the same phylogeny, the EMM method completed in <5 min, whereas the LZ complexity method took over 8 min to generate the distance matrix. Whole genome level comparison remains to be done.
Quasi-alignment methods
CONCLUSIONIn this work, we expanded on the alignment-free alternative to using classic alignment methods and statistics in sequence analysis. With the goal of improving data representation and complementing classification with significance, we explored profile models for predicting microbial taxonomy. Though 16S rRNA is the marker of choice for the majority of microbial classification, its heterogeneity, due to multiple copies of the gene, usually requires a method to select some and discard others based on some criteria. Our proposed sequence analysis approach uses all the available sequence copies of 16S rRNA of a microbial organism by reducing similar sequence regions into fewer nodes in the model. In this work, we showed that a compact model that includes the complex intra-sequence order can be built using an EMM (). Such compact models are called EMM signatures and transforming organisms with all their 16S rRNA sequences to EMM signatures creates a signature library. The library can then be used for homology assessment within each taxa hierarchy to derive member significance. Four experiments were carried out to demonstrate the space compression and classification accuracy down to strain level. In all, except the lowest classification levels, i.e. species and strain classifications, the current classifications and those by our method are in perfect agreement. We showed, for species level, 12 ambiguities that occur due to the heterogenity issues of the 16S rRNA; however, achieving 98% accuracy () with identification of ambiguities that require multi-locus methods is reasonable. Furthermore, same technique applied at strain level, i.e. when diagnostic identification is attempted, either identifies a single strain or a small number of strains that share one or more exact copies of the 16S rRNA. The rank function output offers feedback for immediate correction in case of taxonomic placement errors, which could auto-update profile models thus eliminating the need for a distance matrix-based correction. Future work will address this. Several approaches for curative analysis of microbial taxonomy based on the 16S rRNA are in existence, but all of them either require extensive multi-sequence alignment and/or do not use all of the available sequence information. Yet, new approaches are emerging proposing the use of the whole genome () and/or other markers such as RecA, RPOB, 23s rRNA, etc., () in order to improve clarity across species. We have shown in our article that by using improved statistical signature methods, classification, significance analysis and homology assessment can be performed effectively with less memory and computation.
The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org 2235 at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
