Reflecting its continuously increasing versatility and functionality, the popularity of the ape (analysis of phylogenetics and evolution) software package has grown steadily over the years. Among its features, it has a strong distance-based component allowing the user to compute distances from aligned DNA sequences based on most methods from the literature and also build phylogenetic trees from them. However, even data generated with modern genomic approaches can fail to give rise to sufficiently reliable distance estimates. One way to overcome this problem is to exclude such estimates from data analysis giving rise to an incomplete distance data set (as opposed to a complete one). So far their analysis has been out of reach for ape. To remedy this, we have incorporated into ape several methods from the literature for phylogenetic inference from incomplete distance matrices. In addition, we have also extended ape's repertoire for phylogenetic inference from complete distances, added a new object class to efficiently encode sets of splits of taxa, and extended the functionality of some of its existing functions. Availability: ape is distributed through the Comprehensive R Archive Network: http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ape/index. html Further information may be found at
NEW FEATURESAn attractive feature of distance-based phylogenetic reconstruction is that a tree can be constructed in a relatively short amount of time. Thus, there has been considerable interest in developing these methods both from complete and incomplete distances. As an alternative to the NJ, BIONJ and FastME methods mentioned above, which all take complete distances as input, we have added the triangles method () as triangMtd to ape. Some versions of these methods for incomplete distances exist in the form of BIO-NJ*, NJ* (), and the triangles method for incomplete distances () which we have also added to ape as bionjs, njs, and triangMtds, respectively. One way to deal with incomplete distances is to first restrict attention to a subset of the data for which complete distance information is available, and then to somehow fit the remaining data into the phylogenetic tree constructed from that subset. This is the philosophy underpinning, for example, the triangles method. An alternative to this is to directly estimate the missing distances from the data without first constructing a phylogenetic tree. Two methods that rely on this idea are the ultrametric and the additive procedure (), respectively, which we have implemented in ape as ultrametric and additive. As a partial response to the criticism that supertree reconstruction methods only use tertiary data (i.e. phylogenetic trees obtained from sets of distance matrices), consensus distance matrix approaches have been introduced in the literature. Starting from several overlapping taxa sets, each with complete distance information, this boils down to finding ways to compute the distance between any two taxa that are in the union of all taxa sets but not in the same set. A tool that allows one to do this is the superdistance matrix (SDM;) method which we have incorporated into ape as SDM. It should be noted that, as proposed by, our implementation returns not only the consensus distance matrix for an input dataset, but also the matrix of associated variances. Although, any standard tree building method could potentially be used to reconstruct a phylogenetic tree from a consensus distance matrix, some specialized methods have been developed which is also take its associated variance matrix into account when building the tree. An example of such a method is minimum variance reduction (MVR;) which we have added to ape as mvr, as well as, in the form of mvrs, its extension MVR* to incomplete distances (). To take advantage of a combinatorial description of a phylogenetic tree in terms of a collection of weighted splits, i.e. weighted bipartitions of the tree's leafset (see, e.g.,), we have developed a new class, bitsplits, to represent this type of object. The need for such a class arises in the context of, for instance, supertree reconstruction where one aims to combine a collection of trees (e.g. gene trees) into a parental tree which, in a well-defined way, represents the given trees. By contrast to the consensus tree method in ape, the taxa sets of the trees do not need to be the same, and may only be overlapping. Due to, among other things, noise in the data, it is in general too much to hope for that the given trees will fit together nicely into a parental tree. To help with this, we have developed the function is.compatible, which allows one to quickly check if a collection of splits is compatible (i.e. they can be observed in the same tree), and, as treePop, a weighted version of Meacham's tree popping method () which allows one to construct a phylogenetic tree from a collection of weighted splits (see, e.g., Semple and Steel, 2003 for details). Another advantage of this new class is that it will ease the development of further distance-based methods such as the refined Buneman trees method () which relies on computing such collections. To interface the new class with other functionalities in ape, we wrote the function as.bitsplits allowing one to convert from the already existing prop.part class.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
