Because cancer has heterogeneous clinical behaviors due to the progressive accumulation of multiple genetic and epigenetic alterations, the identification of robust molecular signatures for predicting cancer outcome is profoundly important. Here, we introduce the APPEX Web-based analysis platform as a versatile tool for identifying prognostic molecular signatures that predict cancer diversity. We incorporated most of statistical methods for survival analysis and implemented seven survival analysis workflows, including CoxSingle, CoxMulti, IntransSingle, IntransMulti, SuperPC, TimeRoc and multivariate. A total of 236 publicly available datasets were collected, processed and stored to support easy independent validation of prognostic signatures. Two case studies including disease recurrence and bladder cancer progression were described using different combinations of the seven workflows. Availability and implementation: APPEX is freely available at http:// www.appex.kr.
INTRODUCTIONThe identification of robust molecular signatures that predict cancer patient outcome is profoundly important because cancers have heterogeneous clinical courses even if they have similar clinicopathological characteristics. By using prognostic molecular signatures, cancer patients may be treated more effectively. For example, the Oncotype DX breast cancer assay is now used in the clinic to predict the clinical behavior of breast cancer patients (). Various software tools supporting cancer genomics studies have been reported. Most of these studies provide a database platform for searching disease-associated genes and target drugs (), whereas only one system provides a software environment for handling a user's own cancer genomics data with clinical information to determine a significant prognostic signature (). Beyond software toolkits for cancer research, many investigators use commercial programs or script language, such as SPSS, Matlab or R, for advanced statistical analysis. However, there are few suitable Web-based analysis tools that help researchers develop gene signatures. For many oncology investigators, doing proper statistical analyses using publicly available tools can be a daunting task. In addition, most genome-wide analysis tools are not equipped with tools for identifying prognostic signatures by survival analysis. Here, we constructed APPEX, a Web-based software platform to help researchers in the efforts to identify prognostic signatures from genomics data. APPEX is designed to be easy to use and flexible, and it is freely available for advanced statistical survival analyses. A user-friendly graphical interface similar to a desktop application is provided so that users can easily handle their own data on APPEX even if they are not familiar with statistical analysis packages. In addition, APPEX contains 4200 publicly available datasets directly applicable on the system so that users can easily validate newly identified signatures in independent patient cohorts.
METHODS
Analysis methods incorporated in APPEXThe APPEX system currently contains four independent statistical approaches for identifying and estimating a signature associated with cancer outcome, i.e. the Cox proportional hazard model (), an in-trans correlation approach (), SuperPC () and time-dependent ROC curves (). Details for their methodologies are available in the Supplementary Methods.
Collection and processing of public datasetsWe have collected 236 public datasets containing continuous numeric intensity data (i.e. mRNA expression, methylation, genomic variation and non-coding RNA profiles) and patient follow-up information from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) and incorporated them into the APPEX. The public datasets were normalized using quantile normalization. To handle data generated from heterogeneous experimental platforms, we considered a combination of unique probe IDs and gene symbols as gene-identifying criteria. Therefore, APPEX processes intensity values with probe IDs and determines gene annotations with gene symbols. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Implementation and system architectureBasically, APPEX was implemented with JAVA. To provide user-friendly and active interfaces, the Google Web toolkit (GWT, ver. 2.5.1) and GWT extended (GXT, ver. 3.0.1) frameworks were used. Data exchange between clients and the APPEX server is controlled by a GWT remote procedure call. All statistical analysis methods in APPEX were implemented using R (ver. 3.0.1) with Bioconductor plugins (ver. 2.12). To handle multiple time-consuming jobs concurrently, the Quartz framework was used (ver. 2.1.6). To handle public datasets from the NCBI GEO and user analysis history, the MySQL database server was used (ver. 5.5.11) (Supplementary).
RESULTS
Web-based bioinformatics toolVarious analysis methods designed to be easily accessible to investigators without bioinformatics or statistics expertise are available at the APPEX Web site (). APPEX consists of two parts: the APPEX analyzer, which determines signatures associated with cancer outcome, and the public dataset explorer, in which a user explores previously published cancer patient cohorts and directly applies them to the APPEX analyzer (Supplementary). APPEX currently provides seven independent workflows for searching a signature (). For user convenience, we defined a short name for each analysis method: CoxSingle, CoxMulti, SuperPC, IntransSingle, IntransMulti, TimeRoc and Multivariate. Although each workflow has its own statistical model, they all have identical execution flows (Supplementary). When accessing the APPEX analyzer, users select one of the seven tools by clicking a button (Supplementary). Next, a simple copy and paste action or file upload is performed to submit a user's own data to the APPEX server. If there is a history of previous analyses, a user may choose one of them. Parameters of each analysis are then configured, and when the analysis is completed, information about how to access the result is delivered to a user's e-mail address. Details of seven analysis workflows and APPEX operating policy are available in the Supplementary Results.
Public patient cohortsCurrently, we have collected 236 cohorts from the NCBI GEO and constructed a database for users to explore. When a user chooses one of the datasets in the APPEX dataset explorer and clicks an analysis method, the APPEX analyzer will apply the data to an analysis method selected by the user (Supplementary). The generated file is automatically saved in the user's storage area and is accessible at a later date.
Prognostic signatures identified by APPEXTo validate the APPEX utility, we demonstrate practical examples of the APPEX application including the novel finding of a prognostic and predictive signature in bladder cancer. We describe two important cases of cancer prognosis: disease progression and the recurrence of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer. Detailed explanations of examples are provided in the Supplementary Results.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CONCLUSIONS Because two or more combined approaches are frequently needed to obtain a practical signature consisting of a small number of genes, we suggest practical guidelines for selecting APPEX workflows in Figure 1. APPEX may be the best choice when users try to discover significant novel factors to predict diverse behaviors of cancer. Funding: This work was supported by grants from the stem cell (2012M3A9B4027954) and genomics (2012M3A9D1054670) program of the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning and a KRIBB Research Initiative grant. Conflicts of interest: none declared.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
S.-K.Kim et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
