Motivation: We study a stochastic method for approximating the set of local minima in partial RNA folding landscapes associated with a bounded-distance neighbourhood of folding conformations. The conformations are limited to RNA secondary structures without pseudoknots. The method aims at exploring partial energy landscapes pL induced by folding simulations and their underlying neighbourhood relations. It combines an approximation of the number of local optima devised by Garnier and Kallel (2002) with a run-time estimation for identifying sets of local optima established by Reeves and Eremeev (2004). Results: The method is tested on nine sequences of length between 50nt and 400nt, which allows us to compare the results with data generated by RNAsubopt and subsequent barrier tree calculations. On the nine sequences, the method captures on average 92% of local minima with settings designed for a target of 95%. The run-time of the heuristic can be estimated by O(n 2 Dνlnν), where n is the sequence length, ν is the number of local minima in the partial landscape pL under consideration and D is the maximum number of steepest descent steps in attraction basins associated with pL.
INTRODUCTIONThe method presented in the article targets sampling algorithms designed for RNA secondary structure prediction and pathway analysis that employs in one way or another features of the underlying free energy landscape. For this type of algorithms, knowledge of metastable states (local minima) in the vicinity of intermediate conformations can be of advantage in speeding up the folding simulation. Here, the term sampling algorithm covers any type of random walks, Markov processes and kinetic or co-transcriptional folding simulations applied to RNA secondary structure prediction. Simulations of kinetic folding based upon the master equation dp u (t)/dtare feasible only for short sequences due to the large number m of folding conformations (), even when executed on parallel computing systems (p u (t) is the probability that the folding process is in conformational state u at time t and the k uv are the transition rates from state u to state v). A standard setting for values k uv is * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
given by k uvwhere G w is the free energy of conformation w. The results from numerical simulations of short sequences provide valuable information about transition rates at different folding stages and the stability of helices, hairpins, various types of loops and pseudoknots. The data can then be incorporated into coarse-grain models of folding. In an attempt of reducing the ensemble of conformations,combine the master equation and the analysis of free-energy landscapes where kinetic moves are based on the addition and deletion of entire helix stems. The method further develops the analysis of kinetic moves based upon the exchange of entire helices as presented by).pay particular attention to structures with pseudoknots and how to overcome the problem of kinetic traps consisting of rapidly exchanging states., instead of completely unwinding two overlapping helices, devise a strategy (arm-by-arm exchange) that requires only a partial melting of the initial helix during the transition to the new metastable state. Prior knowledge of metastable states (local minima) in the vicinity of the current structure could be helpful in executing such transitions and in identifying pathways between such states. The exchange of entire helices is also the basic neighbourhood move analysed by. For structure prediction with pseudoknots,recently devised a fast algorithm that runs in O(n 2 ) time and utilizes base pairing probabilities instead of changes in free energy values. Lorenz and Clote (2011) comprehensively study the computation of the partition function over the set of local minima in energy landscapes induced by addition and deletion of single base pairs. The authors devise an algorithm that runs in O(n 3 ) time and requires O(n 2 ) space. The underlying energy model is the Turner nearest neighbour model () without dangles, and the algorithm is an extension of McCaskill's algorithm () that accounts for locally optimal structures by additional terms in the recursion scheme. Based upon computational experiments over randomly generated RNA sequences, the number of locally optimal structures is estimated to be roughly the square root of the total number of feasible structure of a given length. A new method for approximating the partition function over all secondary structures has been recently presented by. The method employs the WangLandau algorithm (, b) for approximations of the density of energy states and is less restrictive in regard to local interactions than dynamic programming applied to secondary structure prediction. An overview of methods for simulations of kinetic folding is given byand is also part of the detailed
S.Sahoo and A.A.Albrechtsummary on progress in RNA secondary structure prediction by Schuster (2006). A variety of methods has been proposed for simulations of kinetic folding based upon the addition, deletion and shift of single base pairs.introduced the shift move, which is a combination of a base pair removal and a base pair addition where one position remains invariant. The shift move aims at the simulation of 'defect diffusion' reported by, which denotes a process where, for instance, the position of a bulge in a helix may move along a helix as the result of rapid base pair formation and dissociation. The transition rates k uv between neighbouring conformations are calculated according to the symmetric rule k uv = exp (G v G u )/2RT .present details of the Kinwalker tool along with simulation results on 12 RNA sequences with a length ranging from 115nt to 1492nt. The underlying method generates secondary structures by combining building blocks that correspond to thermodynamically optimal substructures. The optimal substructures are calculated by standard dynamic programming. An important step in the execution of Kinwalker is to identify the energy barrier between two locally optimal conformations. The tool utilizes a modification of the MorganHiggs heuristic (), which is designed to find a direct folding pathway of minimum height between two secondary structures. Most of the total run-time of Kinwalker is spent on this particular task. The authors report a good agreement of folding simulations with experimentally verified folding pathways, and the same applies to calculated folding times and corresponding values predicted in the literature.propose a new framework for the analysis of time-variable landscapes. The underlying idea is to model the impact of external triggers (ligand binding, nucleolytic cleavage, RNA elongation) and environmental changes (temperature) at folding dynamics as small but discrete changes in energy landscapes. The authors associate macrostates with attraction basins of local minima in energy landscapes, see also. For any two local minima, a 'transition state energy' is defined that equals the energy level at which their associated macrostates (attraction basins) merge in the barrier tree of the landscape induced by individual conformations (microstates). The transition rate between macrostates is then determined similar to the abovementioned k uv , where the energy values involved are the transition state energy (which is the saddle height between u and v) and the free energy of the locally optimal structure v. The timevariable landscapes are represented by sequences of barrier trees and associated sets of macrostates. The transitions (changes) between successive barrier trees and sets of macrostates are calculated by solving a master equation for population densities of macrostates. The master equation is determined by the aforementioned transition rates between macrostates. Since the transition rates between macrostates are time independent for a given barrier tree, the complexity of solving the master equation is significantly reduced within this specific framework. Applications to an RNA thermometer, to co-transcriptional folding and a specific type of refolding are briefly discussed. The concept of macrostates in the context of RNA folding is also studied in a recent paper bywhere new sampling techniques for macrostates are proposed.) utilize methods from motion planning developed for robotics for computing folding pathways. The conformational space is approximated by a graph (roadmap) that connects conformations according to a distance metric defined by the difference in base pairs. The analysis of the roadmap and subsequent computation of folding pathways invokes the master equation.present a tabu search algorithm for finding folding pathways of minimum height between two secondary structures. The algorithm employs a weighted fitness function that tries to balance between low free energy and the distance to the target structure. At each step, a base pair that minimizes the fitness function in the 1-distance neighbourhood is added or removed, and this base pair is kept in a tabu list for a certain number of steps. The weight attached to the distance measure is decreased, if the current step leads to a decrease in the distance to the target structure. The distance weight is increased, if the distance to the target has not been improved for a number of iterations, and with the increased weight the procedure is restarted from the structure found so far to be closest to the target. The evaluation on 18 structures (riboswitches) demonstrates the competitiveness of the approach in finding near-optimum pathways. We study a procedure for approximating sets of locally optimal structures that can be integrated into simulations of kinetic folding or computations of folding pathways between secondary structures. A major motivation is the analysis of metastable RNA secondary structures in the context of microRNA target predictions. Recent prediction tools incorporate information about the strength of secondary structures and subsequent duplex bindings, seeand the literature therein. The likelihood of bindings is usually related to minimum free energy secondary structures. Knowledge about metastable states (local minima) could provide a more comprehensive analysis of potential duplex bindings, in particular, if co-transcriptional folding and the differences in concentrations of mRNA and microRNA are taken into account (). Our procedure is designed for the analysis of partial landscapes pL that cover only a small subset of the entire conformation space. Such pL can be defined, for example, by neighbourhood relations where the number of neighbourhood transitions (addition or deletion of base pairs) is bounded by a constant. The proposed method consists of two major steps: first, the number  of locally optimal structures within pL is approximated by using a stochastic procedure devised by. Secondly, the value of  appr is taken as an input into an approximation formula established byfor the number W (pL, appr ) of repeated runs of steepest descent within pL out of randomly selected conformations, where W (pL, appr ) ensures with a certain high probability that all locally optimal structures are covered. The procedure is tested on sequences of length up to 400nt by using data generated by RNAsubopt () and barriers implementations () taken from the Vienna package ().
APPROACHWe consider combinatorial landscapes L =defined by the set of conformations C, the neighbourhood relation N and the fitness function f : C  R. The conformation space C is attached to an individual RNA sequence (usually identified by an accession number) and consists of secondary structures produced by RNAsubopt with standard settings, i.e. no isolated basePage: 525 523530
Approximation of local minima in partial RNA folding landscapespairs and at least three nucleotides in loops. The neighbourhood relation N is defined by three operations for single-step transitions S  S  N S :(i) Addition of one or two base pairs: a single base pair is added, if an existing helix is extended; two base pairs are added, if an unpaired position admits such and extension and does not lead to an extension of a helix by two base pairs; the addition must ensure that the condition for the minimum loop size is not violated.(ii) Deletion of one or two base pairs: a single base pair is deleted as part of a helix, if at least two adjoined base pairs remain; otherwise, two base pairs are deleted.(iii) Shift of base pair: for positions u < v < w, an existing base pair [u,v] is substituted by, if the resulting structure belongs to C.The neighbourhood N S covers all conformations that can be generated by a single application of Op-I, Op-II or Op-III from S. We note that by definition the secondary structure S itself belongs to N S. For a graphical presentation of the three operations, we refer the reader to,Finally, the fitness function f : C  R is defined as the free energy E : C  R calculated by the program RNAeval (). Within a given L, the distance d(S,S ) between two secondary structures (conformations) S and S is defined by the Hammingdistance, i.e. if # bp-S bp-S is the number of base pairs common to S and S , then d(S,S ) = # bp-S +# bp-S 2# bp-S bp-S . The method proposed in the present paper aims at small subsets of C, or partial landscapes pL, defined by an intermediate SC and all S C with d(S,S )  k that are generated from S by subsequent executions of single-step transitions without violating the distance bound, where k is a constant such that the number of conformations in this vicinity of S is of 'manageable' size. A simple but key procedure in our approach is the steepest descent algorithm. For SC, the following steps are executed within L:), then u := u+1 and return to (ii), otherwise terminate.
We follow Garnier and Kallel (2002) and Reeves and Eremeev(2004) by assuming that only a single S = S u+1 from N S u minimizes the fitness function f (S) = E(S). In general, there is no guarantee that this holds for energy landscapes induced by RNA secondary structures. If the partial functionffunction functionf : N S  R always produces a single minimum, then the steepest descent procedure is deterministic and leads to a partition of L into attraction basins A u of local/global minima, u = 1,...,, where A u A v =,  u=1 A u = L, and  is the total number of local minima, including the global minima. The steepest descent procedure terminates at the local minimum that defines the attractions basin, i.e. in terms of C, A u consists of all S for which (ii) and (iii) terminate at the local minimum m u , u = 1,...,.
GarnierKallel methodWe briefly describe the approach devised by Garnier and Kallel for the problem setting called 'inverse problem' (). Let  u := |A u |/|C| denote the normalized size of attraction basin A u. Garnier and Kallel (2002) assume a parameterized random distribution of the normalized sizes z =  u of attraction basins with the density function p  defined bywhere >0 and (s) :=  0 e t t s1 dt is the Euler function. The density function p  , i.e. the parameter , is approximated by a sampling method over attraction basins. Let M := {S 1 ,S 2 ,...,S M }C denote a set of randomly selected secondary structures. For each of the S u , the steepest descent procedure is executed, which leads to S u  m v , if S u belongs to the attraction basin A v spawned by m v. By SD(m v ) = MA v we denote the set of conformations from M where steepest descent terminates at m v , v = 1,...,. The set M together with steepest descent identifies a set of local minima denoted by LM(M) := {m| size of SD(m) > 0},and we set lm(M) := |LM(M)|. Furthermore, let B j := {SD(m)| size of SD(m) = j} denote the set of sets SD(m) that have the same size j. As inwe setBy this definition,  j is the number of local minima 'visited' by exactly j out of M =|M| conformations after steepest descent. By definition of lm(M) we then haveOn the other hand, the number M of initial conformations can be expressed bySupplementaryillustrates the particular values for the case of  = 4 and M = 7. Let  j, denote the expected value of  j under the assumption that the normalized sizes  of attraction basins A are distributed according to p  defined in (1).established the relationfor j = 1,...,M. In Equation (6), the value of  is unknown, but we note that for  = M/r, r > 0, a fixed value of M, and appropriate approximations of the-function, the  j, can be approximated according to Equation (6) as functions of (M,j,,r). Such a parameterized representation enables us to connect the computed values  j, =  j, (M,r) to the observed values  j. Given the sequence of pairs ( j, ; j ), j = 1,.....,M, the task is to identify a value for  that provides a best fit of the  j, to the
S.Sahoo and A.A.Albrechtobserved values  j .propose the  2-test for approximating , which leads to minimizingwith respect to . Since in our approach we have chosen a parameterized representation for the  j, from Equation (6), we have T  = T  (r) and for minimizing T  (r) we execute a simple search procedure min(T  ) with an outer-loop running for r [r min ;r max with stepsize  r and an inner-loop running for  [ min  max with stepsize  . The output is denoted by out =[T  (r);;r], with outbeing the minimum T  (r) found within the given range (assuming the output is unique, otherwise for the maximum  for the same T  (r) and maximum r, respectively). The procedure min(T  ) searches for a global minimum within a grid of size. It is important to note that the  j, (M,r) involved are independent of the particular problem. Therefore, for given M, fixed j and, all values can be pre-calculated and stored in a matrix of size. Typically, the selection of r-values will be such that r min < 1 and r max > 1. To make the calculation (approximation) of the  j, (M,r)-values numerically stable, the minimum value of  will be chosen as  min = 0.1. For example, for r min = 0.25, r max = 2.5,  r = 0.1,  min = 0.1,  max = 2.5 and   = 0.01, the size of the grid is only 5400, i.e. 5.3 kb memory locations are required. (For a comparison to MathWorks' ga-optimizer, see Section 2 in Supplementary Material.) We denote the value of r = outreturned by out =[T  (r);at the end of procedure min(T  ) by r appr. For the set of randomly selected conformations M := {S 1 ,S 2 ,...,S M }, the approximation of the number of local minima provided by the GarnierKallel method can then be chosen by settingThus,  appr = out, the values of  j, (M,r) are pre-calculated and require only a small memory space. Theoretically, mem-sp has to be multiplied by M, since j = 1,...,M. However, the  2-test usually takes into account only a fraction of the values computed for the stochastic model, which in our case are the  j, , see also Section 6 in. This is due to the fact that small values in the denominator in Equation (7) can distort the quality of approximations obtained by the first major terms. There are different rules for adapting the  2-test to the individual problem under consideration. Based on preliminary computational experiments, we have decided to include into the actual minimization of T  (r) only summands with  j,  1.0, which is at the lower end of recommended values. Consequently, only a relatively small number of  j, has to be taken into account, which is denoted by J(M) (for the sequences considered in the present paper, J(M) is in the range of small double-digit numbers). (For a detailed analysis of  j and basin sizes, see Section 3 in Supplementary Material.)
ReevesEremeev estimationReeves and Eremeev (2004) study the problem of how many trials of steepest descent are required for detecting with high probability all local minima in a given landscape. In other terms, the authors provide a lower bound for the size of M that ensures (with a certain confidence) the detection of all local minima. The ReevesEremeev estimation involves the number of local minima. That is why we first try to estimate the number of local minima by the GranierKallel method, and then we apply the lower bound provided by Reeves and Eremeev (2004). The ReevesEremeev estimation is derived from a step-by-step analysis of the increase of the number of detected local minima. We assume that already k local minima have been detected. Let W k denote the expected number of randomly chosen structures with subsequent execution of steepest that need to be processed for an increase to (k+1) detected local minima. Reeves andpropose the following geometric distribution for W k :The overall number W of trials can then be estimated bywhich implies for the expected value and the variancewhere g  0.58 is the EulerMascheroni constant. Both approximations provide the lower boundThe factor c  is a coefficient associated with the assumption that Equation (13) is valid with confidence  (or in terms of percentages). Based on numerical simulations, Reeves and Eremeev (2004) suggest c  = 1.83 for  = 95%.
RESULTS
Approximation of local minima in partial RNA folding landscapesapproximation of the number of local minima is verified against the values calculated by the barriers implementation (), which requires to invoke the RNAsubopt program () with an exponentially increasing number of structures for an increasing distance to the global minimum. The sequences were chosen rather randomly, with some of them being highly ranked (but not yet validated) in microRNA target predictions by MicroCosm (miRanda) (). However, we tried to design a test set that contains sequences with varying ratios of the size of the subspace versus the number of local minima within this subspace, including one sequence with a very 'rugged' partial landscape close to the minimum free energy conformation.
Approximating the number of local minimaFor a given 3 UTR S (= linear sequence without base pairs), we generated the RNAsubopt output with a certain energy difference E above the minimum free energy conformation. The offset E was chosen in such a way that the subsequent barriers application produced a number of local minima roughly in the region of 1000. The set of conformations produced by RNAsubopt with E is denoted by S E. The selection of M := {S 1 ,S 2 ,...,S M }S E is then executed in the following way:(0) Initialize M = M 0 >> 0. The selection of M 0 is a crucial task. A potential guideline for selecting M 0 is presented in more detail in Section 3.3.(1) S E (S) is partitioned into S and S with |S ||S E (S)|/3 (and therefore |S |2|S E(2) Out of S , M secondary structures are randomly selected. The Steps (1) and(2) are specific to our evaluation procedure. In general, during a search-based landscape analysis, M  3M independent runs are executed for a fixed number K of neighbourhood transitions with a subsequent selection of M terminal conformations with higher energy values. The K transitions per run can be performed, for example, within a neighbourhood (Hammingdistance sphere) d(S 0 , S)  k of the starting conformation S 0. Furthermore, in order to support a relatively fast run-time, for a given M only one set M is selected. To counter-balance deviations caused by random selections, the number of local minima is calculated in two ways, which is further explained in Steps (7) and (9). The next steps relate to the application of the GarnierKallel method and are independent of our particular evaluation method:(3) For each S u M steepest descent is executed according to (i),and (iii), where for each intermediate S the neighbourhood N S is computed by applying Op-I, Op-II and Op-III.(4) The set LM(M) from Equation (2) is identified.(5) The values  j from Equation (3) are calculated for j = 1,...,J(M)., then M := M+M 0 and go to Step (2). Alternatively, if the initial M 0 is small and  1 / 2 >> 3, the increase of M can be chosen as M := 2M.Step (6) indicates (in the general case of unknown ) whether M is too small for exploring the (partial) landscape under consideration. Moreover, the step contributes to the numeric stability by avoiding small  in outof min(T  ). Finally,  appr is calculated:(7) We set M := J(M) j=1 j j. M is the number of initial conformations S u actually involved in the  2-test; cf. Equation (7).is executed on M and Equation (8) is applied to M and M (both with r appr = out).The final output  appr is determined in the following way:The two cases A and B are the result of a large number of testruns for different (3 UTR) and different settings of M. If M > M/2, there are fewer local minima that attract many elements of M (and are represented bythe random selection M is a 'good choice' within pL. If M  M/2, only a relatively small part of M actually participates in min(T  ). Since we want to avoid repeated runs on different random selections M, we establish a relation between M and M by settingstraightforward setting of weights is w = M/M and w = 1, which leads to the expression in Case B. The results are summarized in. We emphasize that the data were generated by arbitrary runs for each of the sequences. The setting corresponds to the case that the heuristic is used as a subroutine in search-based folding simulations. In such simulations, it is not desirable to optimize approximations of  by a statistical analysis over a larger number of runs for the same value of M. On the other hand, we noticed that repeated runs for the same M with R < 3 can produce improved approximations, especially if a particular run results in R < 2, which then corresponds to relatively small values of T  and out>> 0.1. However, none of the runs presented inresulted in R < 2 and all M > M/2 (Case A) with all outclose or equal to 0.1. In this sense, the data fromseem to represent an ordinary scenario and do not display specific positive features. (Large values of M are analysed in Section 5 Supplementary Material.)the smaller M, the second run was executed in order to demonstrate the observation that a further increase of M not necessarily improves the quality of the approximation. The observation complies with the data reported by. The analysis of this effect, which could be attributed, for example, to increased  j with  j,  1.0 and j > 2, will be a subject of further research. The same applies to the selection of M from the upper energy level, where a combination of two runs for the same M, one for a 'horizontal' selection and the second for a 'vertical' selection, could potentially improve the approximation. The value of fromis defined by := (| appr |/) 100%. When taking the first run with R  3 for each of the sequences from, the average value of is equal to 38.5%. The average value of for M-runs with lowest value of T  is 36.2%. As expected, the ratio |S E |/ has an impact on the quality of approximations: for the two sequences with (3 UTR) = 98 and the sequence of length 79, the ratio is particularly large, and the corresponding M-runs with R  3 all produce <10%. The sequence NM_024482 with the smallest value of |S E |/ produced the worst value.
Page: 528 523530
S.Sahoo and A.A.Albrecht
Approximating sets of local minimaThe value of  appr is used for the approximation of W from Equation (13). The preceding procedure on M already identified a subset of local minima LM(M), and lm(M) is the size of the subset of local minima, cf. Equations (2) and (4). Therefore, we select only W sub :=W M pairwise different conformations S v from the corresponding set S E , where S v =S u for each S u M is required. The resulting set of W sub conformations is denoted by W, and as before, after executing steepest descent, we set LM( W) := {m| size of SD(m) > 0} and lm(are not necessarily disjoint. Hence, we set lm  := |LM( W)LM(M)|, and the total size lm fin of LM fin = LM( W)LM(M) is then given by lm fin = lm(The corresponding results are shown in. The value of the approximation rate A fin is defined by A fin := ( appr /) 100%. The sequences NM_000363 and NM_172109 are left out due to the large value of W sub. The ratio W sub /|S E | is quite large for four sequences (between 0.85 and 0.998) and 0.34 for three sequences (between 0.21 and 0.34). As mentioned at the beginning of the current section, the test set was designed to contain sequences with a 'rugged' energy landscape within the selected subspace. For example, for NM_024482 we have for both ratios the maximum values |S E |/ = 7.85 and W sub /|S E |=0.998. However, the three sequences with 0.21  W sub /|S E |0.34 (as well as the sequence considered in Section 3.3 with a much smaller ratio) produce only slightly worse results with an average of 89%. The maximum deviation below the targeted 95% approximation rate is for NM_002584 with 7.8%, and the average deviation below 95% is 4.2%, with one sequence above 95%.
Approximations within a partial landscape pLFor the 3 UTR of NM_002410 with (3 UTR)=50, we executed both heuristics for a bounded-depth neighbourhood induced by the secondary structure S = .........(((..((......((..........))......)))))... with seven base pairs and E(S)=0.7kcal/mol. The minimum energy is E min (3 UTR)=17.6 kcal/mol. The bounded-depth neighbourhood is defined byWe selected k =5, and the setting E = 40 is the default value for RNAsubopt. The size of N 5 S is 296 331, and the number of local minima within this set is 1000. The total number of local minima within {S |S S 40 &E(S )  10.00kcal/mol} is 1247. The maximum energy of a local minimum that belongs to N 5 S is +7.10kcal/mol, whereas the minimum energy is 12.9kcal/mol. The operations OP-I, OP-II and OP-III were executed only within N 5 S and the number M of conformations relates only to minima within this Hamming-sphere. The results for M =1500 and M = 3000 are displayed in. In both cases, we have R  3. For M =1500, the value of  is overestimated by 10.8%. For the subsequent run with W sub = 9494 initial conformations, the approximation rate is equal to A fin = 96.2%. Adding the results for NM_002410 to the results from Tables 1 and 2, we obtain an average value of for R  3 of 36%, and with respect to minimum values of T  the average value of 33.9%. The average approximation rate is then slightly > 92%, which deviates from the target by 3%.
Page: 530 523530
S.Sahoo and A.A.Albrecht
DISCUSSIONFor the 11 sequences we analysed in the present paper, the Garnier Kallel method not only produced estimations within the same order of magnitude of the true number of local minima (calculated by RNAsubopt and barriers), but also with an average deviation of 36% (in most cases overestimation); the estimations of the number of local minima seem to be a useful input to the subsequent approximation of the entire set of local minima. On the nine sequences with a sufficiently large size of the partial landscape, the estimations and parameter settings provided by Reeves and Eremeev (2004) have led to an average approximation rate of 92% for a target rate of 95%, which we see as a confirmation of the Reeves Eremeev method and a justification for the entire approach. The results were achieved for sequences with varying ratios of the size of the partial landscape versus the number of local minima within the subspaces. An open question is the secure selection of the initial sample size M 0. A potential way for solving this problem could be based on good approximations of the number of secondary structures that constitute the Hamming-sphere around a particular structure under consideration. The increase of the sample size in case of  1 / 2 >> 3 can be organized in different ways. For example, when starting with a relatively small M 0 , a sample size of 2 t M 0 in step t provides a rapid increase that could lead within a few steps to at least  1 / 2  3 (additionally, one could then search backwards between 2 t1 M 0 and 2 t M 0 additive steps for better values of T  where the current M-run still complies with  1 / 2  3). On the other hand, for a given sequence length n and a fixed radius it might be possible to devise standard rules for initial settings of M 0 , which could result in a very small number of M-runs. Another line of further improvements could be the combination of the data from two runs for the same value of M, with one run for a 'horizontal' selection of samples (high free energy within the partial landscape) and the second run for a random selection over all conformations obtained by M random walks of length K within the partial landscape. Here, one would need to establish rules of how to determine the approximation from two different sets of values for M and outtaken together with the current value of M.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
