ArchSchema is a Java Web Start application that generates a dynamic 2D network of related Pfam domain architectures. Each node corresponds to a different architecture (shown as a sequence of coloured boxes) and indicates whether any 3D structural information is available in the PDB. Satellite nodes can show either the UniProt codes or the PDB codes of proteins having the given architecture. Search options allow search by UniProt code or Pfam domain identifier, and results can be filtered by domain, organism, or by selecting only proteins in the PDB. Availability: ArchSchema can be freely accessed at
INTRODUCTIONDomains are the fundamental evolutionary building blocks of proteins (), some occurring particularly frequently, allowing the assembly of myriad proteins from a modest stock of units (). A given sequence of domains defines a protein's domain architecture. Many different proteins, in terms of sequence and/or function, can have the same, or very similar, architectures. The Pfam database () identifies protein domains on the basis of sequence alignments, hidden Markov models and manual curation. It can list all the architectures containing any domain and, in turn, all sequences belonging to any of these architectures. There are several other resources that exploit the Pfam data, focusing on domain architectures. PfamAlyzer () provides a graphical user interface that allows searches for domain patterns, listing the architectures that match. CDART () and DAhunter () both identify homologous proteins based on the similarity of their domain architectures. The web server d-Omix () can show static 2D graphs of similarities in domain architectures for a user-submitted set of protein sequences. Here, we describe ArchSchema that shows related Pfam domain architectures as a dynamic graph rather than as a list of matches. It provides a clear 2D visualization of how the architectures are related. A further advantage over other methods is that it flags any * To whom correspondence should be addressed. nodes which have associated 3D structural information in the Protein Data Bank, PDB ().), and nearest-neighbours are joined by edges, as described in the program's online documentation.
METHODS
RESULTSArchSchema can be launched from the ArchSchema home page (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/archschema) or from links within PDBsum. It can also be downloaded and installed locally for use when needed.shows an initial ArchSchema graph for human CBLC protein (UniProt code CBLC_HUMAN), a signal transduction protein, which has no structures in the PDB. The protein consists of four Pfam domains and its domain architecture is indicated by the larger node with a grey background at the centre of the graph. This is termed the 'parent architecture'. The graph contains 18 related architectures in all, each having one or more of the parent's four domains; 11 of the architectures contain all four domains. Details are provided in a 'data panel' () that lists all the domains on the graph in descending order of their frequency. One can pan and zoom around the graph using click-and-drag operations and can 'switch on' satellite nodes to show either the UniProt sequences associated with each node (), or the PDB codes of structures belonging to each node (). Where there is a huge number of additional nodes, only 50 are shown and are coloured pink to indicate a particularly popular architecture. The lengths of the edges joining the nodes can be adjusted using a slider bar, while another slider bar allows you to prune the outer nodes in very large networks. Clicking on a node of interest in the graph lists its UniProt sequences in the data panel. These are hyperlinked to the UniProt database and, any that have 3D structures in the PDB, are hyperlinked to PDBsum. This provides a means of tracking down protein structural information from related domain architectures.For example, the red line in topmost node inindicates that one or more 3D structures of the first four domains existprecisely the four domains of our CBLC_HUMAN protein.
Example: human CBL-C protein
Page: 1261 12601261
ArchSchema
Refining the searchA search panel, in a separate tab, allows you to refine your search or to start a new searchperhaps to further explore any of the architectures on the current graph. If the parent sequence contains several different domains, you can search for architectures containing any one, or more, of these domains. You can filter the search by restricting it to a specific organism. And finally, you can limit the search to just those proteins for which there is structural information in the PDB.
Excessive dataIn some cases, the initial search may return a vast number of related architectures. For example, the human tumour suppressor protein BRCA1 returns 2379 architectures that contain at least one of its two Pfam domains, corresponding to 10 361 different UniProt protein sequences. This would be far too much data to easily make sense of if displayed at once. Thus, ArchSchema uses two strategies to focus on the most interesting part of the network whenever the number of architectures exceeds 150. First, the PfamB domains in all the architectures are replaced by a single dummy domain, code PB000000. In the case of BRCA1_HUMAN, this 'collapses' the number of unique architectures to 954. These are further filtered according to their computed similarity to the parent architecture. Only the closest 150 architectures, or thereabouts, are retained and shown on the plot.
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [12:49 13/4/2010 Bioinformatics-btq119.tex]
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
