Identifying chemical probes or seeking scaffolds for a specific biological target is important for protein function studies. Therefore, we create the Annotated Scaffold Database (ASDB), a computer-readable and systematic target-annotated scaffold database, to serve such needs. The scaffolds in ASDB were derived from public databases including ChEMBL, DrugBank and TCMSP, with a scaffold-based classification approach. Each scaffold was assigned with an InChIKey as its unique identifier, energy-minimized 3D conformations, and other calculated properties. A scaffold is also associated with drugs, natural products, drug targets and medical indications. The database can be retrieved through text or structure query tools. ASDB collects 333 601 scaffolds, which are associated with 4368 targets. The scaffolds consist of 3032 scaffolds derived from drugs and 5163 scaffolds derived from natural products. For given scaffolds, scaffold-target networks can be generated from the database to demonstrate the relations of scaffolds and targets. Availability and implementation: ASDB is freely available at http://www.rcdd.org.cn/asdb/with the major web browsers.
IntroductionMedicinal chemists, phytochemists and chemical biologists are seeking novel chemical scaffolds or probes for a specific biological target (mainly a protein). Therefore, great attention has been paid in developing methods and resources to discover new chemical scaffolds or probes associated with biological targets. In the high-throughput synthesis and screening campaigns, privileged scaffolds were identified () to establish structure activity relations (SAR) for further property and activity optimizations. Small chemical scaffolds have been studied for many years (), and resulted in many scaffold-oriented techniques including scaffold hopping (), virtual screening (), and diversity-oriented synthesis (). Bemis and Murcko are the pioneers in chemical scaffold concept ().used the scaffold concept to classify compounds and measure molecular diversity. Bajorath and colleagues studied scaffolds and activity cliffs relations (), scaffolds and activities (). These scaffold related studies generated new needs for chemical scaffold resources. Shen and coworkers developed a scaffold database for scaffold hopping studies (). To systematically study current chemical scaffolds associated with biological targets, we created an annotated scaffold data base (ASDB). ASDB collects chemical scaffolds derived from the major databases for medicinal chemistry or chemical biology. The scaffolds have been) databases, and can be retrieved through structural query or text query tools. To demonstrate scaffold-target and scaffold-scaffold relations, ASDB provides a network viewing tool to present the database search hits.
Methods
Data and the protocol for deriving chemical scaffoldsRaw data were extracted from the ChEMBL_20 () databases. The raw data were processed with the following protocol: (i) removing counter ion moieties; (ii) filtering compounds in ChEMBL_20 for activity (IC 50 , K i , K d ) thresholds that were greater than 10 lM; (iii) deriving scaffolds with the scaffold classification approach; and finally, (iv) converting the scaffold data into InChI, InChIKey (scaffold identifier), SMILES, and MOL2 formats by means of the OpenBabel program (O'). The protocol was written in the Golang language. The flowchart of the process is depicted in.
Web-based database implementationASDB is a relational database implemented in MySQL technology and, can be accessed through a web browser using the browser/server framework, and the ChemDoodle web component (web.chem doodle.com/) as a 2D molecule editor and 3D chemical structure viewer. Four types of queries (structure query, substructure query, 2D similarity and 3D similarity query) are provided for a user to access the ASDB. An online scaffold-target network can be dynamically generated and viewed in ASDB using D3.js (d3js.org/). Technologies for creating ASDB are summarized in Supplementary Table S1.
Results and discussion
ASDB statisticsCurrently, ASDB collects 333 601 scaffolds, which are associated with 4368 targets and, contains 491 208 scaffold-target relations. 3032 scaffolds come from drugs; 5163 scaffolds come from natural products. 641 scaffolds were derived from natural products, and experimentally validated as bioactive scaffolds. 174 of the 641 scaffolds were associated with drugs. 4546 natural product associated scaffolds are not annotated with any bioactivity or biological target. These scaffolds are unexplored chemical diversity for chemical biology or medicinal chemistry studies (Supplementary). 38% of targets are associated with 05 scaffolds. 77% of targets are associated with 050 scaffolds. 93% scaffolds are associated with less than five targets (Supplementary). This data indicates that most targets are biologically unexplored and most scaffolds are either selective or biologically unexplored. 23% targets are associated with 50500 scaffolds suggesting these targets have been significantly explored, and the related scaffolds can be privileged chemotypes () (Supplementary).
Web interfaceASDB can be accessed through web browsers. The 'Search' button at the menu bar provides two options for a user to access ASDB scaffolds. The first option is the text query, which can be used to search the target name, UniProt ID or ChEMBL ID. The second option is structure query, which allows a user to conduct full structure search, substructure searches, and 2D or 3D similarity searches. Users can draw a structural query with ChemDoodle, set hit criteria, and get combined search hits. There is a limit to avoid an undesirable amount of hits. The 'Service' button at the menu bar can display a scaffold-target network based upon your scaffold search results. The scaffold-target network is associated with a scaffold list or target list (UniProt IDs or CHEMBL IDs).
Case studiesTwo case studies for target fishing and new scaffold exploring using ASDB are provided in Supplementary materials.
ConclusionsChemical scaffold concept is extensively studied, although it is still controversial. ASDB provides a platform for scientists to explore novel scaffolds or chemical probes for pharmaceutical innovations and chemical biology studies. The scaffold concept is also related to fragment-based drug discovery (FBDD). Chemical scaffolds or fragments are associated with biological targets per se, and deserve to have a systemic resource for further explorations.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
