The Atlas of UTR Regulatory Activity (AURA) is a manually curated and comprehensive catalog of human mRNA untranslated regions (UTRs) and UTR regulatory annotations. Through its intuitive web interface, it provides full access to a wealth of information on UTRs that integrates phylogenetic conservation, RNA sequence and structure data, single nucleotide variation, gene expression and gene functional descriptions from literature and specialized databases. Availability: http://aura.
INTRODUCTIONThe 5 and 3 untranslated regions (UTRs) are the portions of an mRNA located at each side of the coding sequence. UTRs contain information for post-transcriptional regulation of mRNA, including transport, stability, localization and access to translation, and hence they largely determine the fate of mature mRNAs in the cell (). Such events are mediated by hundreds of trans-acting factors: primarily RNA binding proteins (RBPs), associated with all cellular mRNAs to form ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNPs), but also noncoding RNAs, of which the microRNA (miRNA) class has a clear functional role. The experimentally determined sequence and structure binding constraints of UTRs vary widely between and within RBPs and non-coding RNAs, and the regulatory interactions are globally characterized by extreme complexity, since a regulator can bind to multiple UTRs in multiple sites and vice versa. Moreover, the mRNA transcis interaction network undergoes remarkable plasticity, since the fate of an mRNA is determined by its temporally and spatially dependent association to several regulators (). Unraveling the molecular code behind this sophisticated process is the key for: (i) understanding to what extent cell programs are regulated by the degree of mRNA abundance, localization and translation; (ii) deciphering how malfunction of trans-acting factors or mutation of target sites is at the root of some severely altered cellular phenotypes; (iii) identifying novel therapeutics aimed at modulating mRNA dynamics in the window between transport and translation. With this aim, a growing number of * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. studies, both mechanistic and systems-based, provide information on factors binding to UTRs. Nevertheless, integration of these data and annotation of UTRs in genome browsers are lacking or insufficient. The Atlas of UTR Regulatory Activity (AURA) fills this gap with unprecedented richness and coverage, by collecting and combining human UTR annotation and binding data from several sources.
DESCRIPTION AND USAGEThe increasing centrality of post-transcriptional regulation among gene expression studies is witnessed by the recent release of several specialized databases. RBPDB focuses on trans-acting proteins by collecting semi-manually curated literature data about RBPs and their demonstrated or predicted binding motifs (); Transterm is a regulatory sequence database that aggregates heterogeneous lists of cis-acting motifs relevant for post-transcriptional regulation (); starBase and CLIPZ store primary data of transcis interactions obtained by nextgeneration high-throughput technologies (). In addition, more specialized resources allow the user to search and analyze a limited number of particularly well-known regulatory elements in greater detail (e.g. AREsite,). Unlike these catalogs, AURA is designed to be a comprehensive and centralized warehouse of human UTR mapped annotations, both in terms of regulatory macromolecules and their site of binding. AURA records non-redundant, direct and experimentally assessed interactions of RNA binding proteins and microRNAs with human UTRs. It contains an updated set of annotated human UTRs (except those <5 bases) from the UCSC Genome Browser (GRCh37/hg19 assembly), experimental literature data (1041 publications) and consolidated information from several specialized databases, including miRTarBase (), miRecords () and the aforementioned AREsite and RBPDB resources. Currently, it covers 127 523 human UTRs, corresponding to 63 138 transcripts encoded by 19 364 protein coding genes. An extensive comparison between AURA and related resources can be found in File S2 in Supplementary Material. AURA is developed according to the convention that an RBP is a protein showing a reviewed RNA binding domain, and according to the rule that whenever positional data on mRNA regulatory binding sites are made available, the coordinates of each binding site are evaluated against the current genome annotation to verify the site lies within or overlaps the spliced UTR of a transcript.the interacting partners. Furthermore, the assessment of an interaction between an RBP and an UTR is improved by the cross-reference to the Protein Human Atlas database (). A high-level schema of the database can be found in Supplementary.
SearchTo account for the observation that a transcript can interact with multiple RBPs as well as an RBP can interact with multiple transcripts, AURA exhibits an intuitive interface through which the user can query a 'target locus' or a 'trans factor', respectively. The former query returns a list of genes whose HGNC gene symbol or synonyms contain the searched term; each gene in the list is annotated with its functional description, synonyms and UTRs. Furthermore, an exonintron map of the UTRs is provided in order to allow proper discrimination between the different transcripts of a gene. On the other hand, the latter query results in a disambiguation list where all the trans-factors, whose names or synonyms contain the searching term, are shown. To select the trans-factor of interest, the user might benefit from genes' short descriptions and functional summaries. Upon selection, AURA returns the list of its target UTRs. These UTRs can be grouped by gene ontology (GO) slim categories (http://www.geneontology.org/GO.slims.shtml) or by chromosome mapping. Furthermore, the user can filter the results by selecting a combination of supporting experimental evidences.
UTR viewSelected UTRs are shown in an 'UTR view', consisting of two standard elements: @BULLET The textual header containing: the chromosomal position and length of the spliced UTR, the HGNC name and UniProt description of the gene the UTR belongs to, and the link to the HPA database. Also shown are the overall conservation, which is the mean PhastCons single nucleotide conservation score for the UTR (), and the corresponding transcript half-life according to a transcriptome-wide stability measurement (). @BULLET The AURA sequence browser, based on the JBrowse architecture (), contains all the annotations related to a specific UTR, i.e. multiple tracks annotating the UTR by evolutionary conservation, single nucleotide variation and cis-regulatory binding sites. The 'Conservation' track displays the score calculated for each nucleotide in the UCSC 46 species alignment (). In the 'SNP' track, AURA integrates the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) recorded in the dbSNP database (), allowing the user to combine with the other annotation tracks to look for variations of potential impact in post-transcriptional regulation. The 'RBP' track contains the RBP binding sites, whereas the 'miR' track contains the microRNAs binding sites. Two further tracks are provided to show the trans-factors for which only partial information is available. The 'unknown mRNA location' track denotes the trans-factors known to bind a transcript without any further mapping information. Instead, the 'unknown UTR location' track indicates the trans-factors whose UTR binding site is unknown. All the annotations in the tracks are clickable: whenever the user clicks on an annotation, a description page containing binding sites and cross-references is shown. In this view, the minimal energy predicted secondary structure () together with the color-coded nucleotide phylogenetic conservation, SNP locations and transfactor binding sites of the selected UTR can be optionally drawn through VARNA (). Furthermore, AURA provides the user with multiple ways of grouping gene expression results retrieved from the Gene Expression
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Atlas (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/) and related to the gene locus of the selected UTR. Results are reported in tables where a row corresponds to a condition, whereas the columns, in order, show the number of times the gene was observed to be up-or downregulated with respect to its mean expression value and the significance of the measure (log 10 P-values). In case of trans-factor search, a joint table containing gene expression experiments for both the gene coding for the trans-factor and the gene bearing the bound UTR is shown. Moreover, significant differences in common between regulator and target are highlighted to emphasize possible correlations or anti-correlations between them. Annotations concerning an UTR can be extracted in textual format through the UTRCard feature; furthermore, the whole MySQL database can be downloaded from a dedicated page. A last way of mining the data contained in AURA is through the AURA Mart, which is available at the website and provides all query functionalities offered by the well-known BioMart platform (http://www.biomart.org).
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
