Contact:
Response@BULLET Please note that the datasets we have used inhave been used in several prior works as benchmark datasets. Please see, and many others. These datasets were not chosen to skew the results. To ensure fairness it is a standard practice to use the same benchmark datasets to compare different algorithms. This is exactly what we have done. @BULLET For datasets D1 and D5, Deorowicz et al. claim that the results reported inare incorrect. To ensure the correctness we have rerun our program for the aforementioned datasets and got exactly the same results we have reported in. Thus the claim of incorrectness is inappropriate. We have uploaded HG18 and YH (please see Section 2) datasets so that anyone can verify the correctness of the reported results. @BULLET Deorowicz et al. say: 'First, the cited paper incorrectly reported 'NA' for the GDC algorithm in these two cases.' Here Deorowicz et al. refer to datasets D1 and D2. The fact is that GDC was not able to compress the single chromosome of the D1 and D2 datasets within 2 h. We stopped GDC after 2 h. Here again the use of the word 'incorrectly' is not appropriate. We have uploaded the programs GDC byand iDoComp bythat we have used to compare with ERGC (please see Section 2). @BULLET The use of KOREAN genomes as the references was not intentional. For instance we have used hg18 in the D1 dataset as the reference. @BULLET Deorowicz et al. claim that 'The KOREAN genomes differ from the other ones in that they contain both lower and upper case letters.' It is not the case. For example in D4 and D5 both thecompression, we don't have the option of making such changes. If we do so, we lose information and such an algorithm will be a lossy compression algorithm! @BULLET Sequencers employing the state-of-the-art sequencing technology produce genomic sequences that contain both lower and upper case letters. Cases of letters carry important information in the context of molecular biology. In the UCSC genome database, genomes HG17 to HG38 all contain both upper case and lower case letters. Moreover ERGC is not restricted to A, C, G, T and N characters. There are several other valid characters that are used in clones to indicate ambiguity about the identity of certain bases in the sequence. It is not uncommon to see these wobble codes at polymorphic positions in DNA sequences. ERGC can handle virtually every character in the genomic sequences. Furthermore, ERGC is an order of magnitude faster than GDC or iDoComp on an average. @BULLET We have run our software tool on different datasets (please, see
DatasetsThe datasets and programs we have used can be found in the following sites: HG18: drive.google.com/folderview?id0B4boAFd04Xu1UjZyTWZne GdWWEk&uspsharing YH: drive.google.com/folderview?id0B4boAFd04Xu1bjBFRlQzc3 VyWXc&uspsharing Programs: drive.google.com/folderview?id0B4boAFd04Xu1SlZBLUQtQ 1dwbUE&uspsharing
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
