Motivation: Determination of the binding affinity of a protein– ligand complex is important to quantitatively specify whether a particular small molecule will bind to the target protein. Besides, collection of comprehensive datasets for protein–ligand complexes and their corresponding binding affinities is crucial in developing accurate scoring functions for the prediction of the binding affinities of previously unknown protein–ligand complexes. In the past decades, several databases of protein–ligand-binding affinities have been created via visual extraction from literature. However, such approaches are time-consuming and most of these databases are updated only a few times per year. Hence, there is an immediate demand for an automatic extraction method with high precision for binding affinity collection. Result: We have created a new database of protein–ligand-binding affinity data, AutoBind, based on automatic information retrieval. We first compiled a collection of 1586 articles where the binding affinities have been marked manually. Based on this annotated collection, we designed four sentence patterns that are used to scan full-text articles as well as a scoring function to rank the sentences that match our patterns. The proposed sentence patterns can effectively identify the binding affinities in full-text articles. Our assessment shows that AutoBind achieved 84.22% precision and 79.07% recall on the testing corpus. Currently, 13 616 protein–ligand complexes and the corresponding binding affinities have been deposited in AutoBind from 17 221 articles. Availability: AutoBind is automatically updated on a monthly basis, and it is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONDetermination of the binding affinity is essential for quantifying the protein interactions with other bio-molecules. For example, actually estimating the proteinDNA-binding affinity is an important step * To whom correspondence should be addressed. in understanding the regulation mechanisms of cells (). In the field of drug design, the binding affinity of a ligand to a given protein target is used to judge whether this ligand can be considered as a potential drug candidate. Several databases of proteinligand-binding affinities have been proposed, including Ligand-Protein Database (LPDB) (), Protein Ligand Database (PLD) (), PDBbind (), Binding MOAD (), AffinDB () and BindingDB (). These databases depend on structure databases () and require much time and cost for the manual inspection of the literature. Until September 2011, more than 21 million articles indexed contain the descriptions of binding affinity in the MEDLINE database. The time-consuming manual extraction cannot timely accommodate the astonishingly increasing number of full-text articles. Therefore, there is an immediate demand for automatic extraction of protein ligand-binding affinities. Information Retrieval (IR) is a computational technique aiming at extracting information from the literature without manual intervention (). Summarization is a widely seen IR application in various areas, which can automatically compile extractive summaries that include the important aspects of full-text articles (). In the biomedical field, this technique is used to generate gene annotations () and to search bio-images (). In recent years, IR has been used to extract biological entities of interest and their relationships (). For example, 'activate' and 'interact' are two common relation terms that connect molecule entities. This technique has been applied to proteinprotein interactions (), pathway networks () and drug interactions (). However, so far there have been only a few studies that attempted to extract biological values or parameters. For example, SpasicSpasic et al. used terminology concept to index and select literature, then a score function was implemented to rank the retrieved articles by relevance of parameters for kinetic modeling of yeast metabolic pathways ();used a rule-based approach to collect kinetic information of enzymes (). In general, the experimental procedures or results described in fulltext articles are hard for researchers to re-use (). The fact that comparisons with events, values and parameters are usually recorded in a more flexible way in the literature makes the). In this article we describe the construction of AutoBind, an automatic information extraction system dedicated to protein ligand-binding affinity. Our system includes four patterns to identify candidate sentences describing proteinligand-binding affinity and a scoring function to rank the identified sentences for extracting binding affinities. We applied AutoBind on the primary citations of all entries in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). Many primary citations contain multiple affinities corresponding to different experimental conditions, such as wild-type and mutated proteins, but only one represents the actual binding affinity of the crystal structure. In this study, we focused on the affinity corresponding to the structure in each primary citation since 1996, whose full-text references can be easily retrieved. Finally, the extracted proteinligand-binding affinities and the corresponding complex structures were organized as a public database named AutoBind. Note that AutoBind in this article refers both the extraction algorithm and the database. The extraction algorithm is completely automatic. However, the binding affinities deposited in the database have been approved manually, in order to refine them and eliminate possible errors and inconsistencies. On the other hand, all the reported performances (in Tables 36 and Sections 4.1 and 4.2) were evaluated on the results obtained before the manual approval. In short, this article presents an automatic extraction algorithm to expedite constructing and maintaining a database, but the database construction was not fully automatic. The AutoBind database currently contains 13 616 proteinligand complexes. To our knowledge, this is the largest collection of protein-binding affinities. The database will be updated regularly.
BINDING AFFINITY RECORDIn this section, we describe the definition of a binding affinity record in this study, which frames the data that AutoBind extracted. The binding affinity is a measure of the effectiveness of a compound in connecting other molecules. It is thermodynamically quantified as dissociation constant (K d ), inhibition constant (K i ) or half maximal (50%) inhibitory concentration (IC 50 ). The detailed definitions of these measures can be found in the Supplementary Data. We carried out an analysis on a set of full-text articles collected from the PDBbind database (), denoted PDBbind_corpus, where the actual binding affinities as well as the associated proteinligand complexes were known. In this corpus, we observed that a description of a binding affinity has four major objects: @BULLET <PROTEIN>: functional polypeptides or macromolecules. @BULLET <LIGAND>: the meta-ions and small organic/inorganic ions and organic solvent molecular. @BULLET <EVENT>: the interaction/relation between the protein and ligand. @BULLET <VALUE>: binding affinity.Example 1 shows an example of describing protein-binding interaction and their binding affinity, where all the four objects (italicized) appeared in the same sentence.However, authors frequently use variable writing styles to make the articles fluent. Example 2 shows a description of proteinligand binding without precisely describing the <LIGAND>.Therefore in this study we have relaxed the requirement widely used in previous studies that an effective description of a relation between two entities must contain both entities (). However, if only considering the sentence of Example 2, it is difficult to know the ligand. In AutoBind, the PDB TITLE, which was written by the author of the structure to describe the main molecules in the structure, is adopted to overcome this problem. The PDB TITLE corresponding to Example 2 (PDB ID: 3CTR) is 'Crystal structure of the RRM-domain of the poly(A)specific ribonuclease PARN bound to m7GTP'. The protein and ligand names are PARN and m7GTP, respectively. Thus, AutoBind can restore the missing ligand name in Example 2 to m7GTP. It is worthwhile to note that an article may contain multiple descriptions of binding affinities but some of them correspond to ligands not of interest. The biologically relevant ligand in this work is defined as (i) non-covalently bound to the protein and (ii) formed an unambiguously complex with the protein. However, in some cases, two ligands bind together inside the same binding site on the protein. In such cases, experimental measurement of the binding affinity of each individual ligand becomes much more complicated. In a PDB file, there could be some biologically irrelevant ligands [e.g. GOL (glycerol) in PDB entry 3GBA, where glycerol was added to the solution as a cryoprotectant] that were crystallized along with the main molecules. In the TITLE records of the 1486 PDB entries of the PDBbind_corpus, only 58 do not describe the biologically relevant ligands and none of them describes biologically irrelevant ligands. Thus in practice, we resorted to the TITLE record in a PDB file, which was written by the author of the structure to describe the main molecules in the structure, to identify the biologically relevant ligands. For example, Examples 3 and 4 are two descriptions of proteinligand-binding affinity in the same primary citation of a complex structure (PDB ID: 2HAW; PMID: 17095506). Example 3 describe the affinities of PPase binding with Mg 2+ and Mn 2+ ions, both of which are not the ligand of interest for family II PPase.In this study, Example 4 was treated as an effective binding affinity and was collected in AutoBind; while Example 3 was not.
MATERIALS AND METHODSThe PDB release in September 2011 contained 76 114 entries from 32 986 primary citations, which are the original published articles of the affinity measurement for the corresponding proteinligand complex. We collected 17 221 articles whose full text is publicly accessible. The binding affinities of 1586 articles of the 17 221 primary citations were annotated in the PDBbind database release of September 2011. We named the 1586 full-text articles as PDBbind_corpus and adopted the corresponding binding affinities as a gold standard to evaluate the performance of our automatic extraction method. We used 100 articles from PDBbind_corpus to construct the four patterns (see Section 3.2.2) and used the remaining 1486 articles as the testing corpus. The workflow of constructing AutoBind is shown in. In automatic extraction phase, it includes three major stages: (i) text preprocessing, (ii) sentence extraction and (iii) sentence ranking. AutoBind also provides a friendly web-based interface for users to query and view the identified binding affinity. The details of each stage inare described in the following subsections. The last subsection describes a naive extraction algorithm we implemented as a comparison baseline.
Text preprocessingAutoBind first splits full text into sentences and marks the protein and ligand names in sentences using named entity recognition (NER). We used a protein name recognizer, NLProt (), and a lexicon, UniProt (), to recognize protein names. If a term is (i) recognized as protein name by NLProt or (ii) identical to a protein name/synonym in UniProt, it is marked as a protein name. Namely, AutoBind used the union of the results of NLProt and UniProt as the protein names. Similarly, we used a compound name recognizer, OSCAR4 (), and a chemical molecules databases, PubChem (), to recognize ligand names. As protein recognition, the union of the results of OSCAR4 and PubChem was used as the ligand names. The detailed information about the used NER tools can be found in the supplementary data. To solve the problem of name variants, including orthographic variation (e.g. 'EBNA3', 'EBNA-3' and 'EBNA 3'), Greek alphabet letter (e.g. 'p38 alpha' and 'p38 ') and extra words (e.g. 'TRAM' and 'TRAM protein'), AutoBind converted Greek alphabet letters to the corresponding English letters and removed three specific words 'protein', 'gene' and 'product'. Abbreviation discrimination is another critical problem in NER (). In AutoBind, if a name is followed by a parentheses-surrounded term, this term is dynamically labeled as an abbreviation to that name. The protein and ligand abbreviations are considered identical to the protein and ligand names in the following stages. Frequently, there are multiple binding affinities in a full-text article that, for example, correspond to the binding under different experimental conditions or the binding of the wild-type and mutated proteins. To identify the target protein and ligand of the extracted article, however, is difficult and requires much domain knowledge. Examples 3 and 4 in the previous section demonstrated that the title of the complex structure is a sentence well describing the crystal structure. In this study we focus on the affinity corresponding to the crystal structure and adopted the PDB TITLE to make the step of selecting protein and ligand in an article automated. Therefore, we also used NER to recognize protein and ligand names in the PDB TITLE. The recognized names were used to select binding affinity records later. The benefit of this strategy is that the extracted binding affinity is guaranteed to have a corresponding proteinligand complex structure.
Sentence extraction
Trigger detectionTrigger is usually a noun, noun phrase (NP), verb or verb phrase (VP), used to detect relation or event between entities in a sentence (). Setting a collection of triggers is a useful practice to rapidly filter large sentences in a full-text article before deeper parsing. AutoBind defined two types of triggers to detect <VALUE>, T value , and <EVENT>, T event .shows the 19 T value andshows the seven T event identified by examining PDBbind_corpus manually. Each word in T event stands for all its morphological variations. In AutoBind, <VALUE> is more precisely defined by four components: trigger, sign, value and unit, such as 'K d = 26 M' ('K d ': trigger; '=': sign; '26': value and 'M': unit). The four components are not required to be consecutive (e.g. 'shows a K d value of 0.77 M' in PMID: 18596699 is a valid <VALUE> in AutoBind). To simplify the following steps, AutoBind rearranges <VALUE> to its compact form as follows:(1) Identify the position of T value in the sentence.(2) Extract the words from the position of T value to the first encountered unit term (mM, M, nM and pM).(3) If all of trigger, value and unit are present in the extracted words, AutoBind rearranges them into the form of 'trigger = value unit'.Here we use the sentence 'We first showed that Ap5G is an efficient inhibitor of EcGMPK, with an IC 50 of about 0.5 M'Event word Inhibit (ion, ed, ive) + with/at Bind(s/ bound(s) + with/at/to Interact (ion, ed, ive, ved) + with/at/to Mutant + with/at/to Complex + with/to Activat (ion, e, ed) React (ion, ed, ive) + with/at/on an example. The trigger 'IC 50 ' is first identified. Then 'IC 50 of about 0.5 M' is extracted and parsed. The final <VALUE> in this example is rearranged as 'IC 50 = 0.5M'.
Pattern matchingAfter trigger detection, the remaining sentences that contain triggers are matched to the following patterns. The four patterns were based on manually reviewing 100 articles randomly selected from the PDBbind_corpus. In each of the pattern-based sentence patterns listed below, a symbol '-' indicates a word gap that can be filled with any number of words within the sentence. A token followed by a symbol '?' indicates that the token is optional.Pattern 1 accommodates for a typical description of a protein combined with a small molecular. The <P/L> (short of <PROTEIN>/<LIGAND>) indicates the protein/ligand names recognized by NER, <EVENT> indicates triggers recognized by T event and <VALUE> indicates triggers recognized by T value. A specific rule for the patterns containing two <P/L>s is that one must be <PROTEIN> and the other must be <LIGAND> with no order restrictions. BEV (to be verb) or PREP (preposition) connects <PROTEIN> and <LIGAND> to <VALUE>. Example 5 describes that lumazine synthase binds with riboflavin, where the binding affinity evaluated by the dissociation constant (K d ) is 1.2 M. Example 6 shows an example where <LIGAND> appeared before <PROTEIN>. Pattern 2 is designed to identify descriptions of passive form. In this pattern, <EVENT> is in between <PROTEIN> and <LIGAND>, and <VALUE> is at end of the sentence.Pattern 3 accommodates sentences where <PROTEIN> and <LIGAND> are connected with a BEV or PREP rather than <EVENT>.The design of Pattern 3 is distinct to previous IR studies requiring a verb to link two entities (). However, we observed that some sentences contain binding affinities even without any T event (Example 8).Pattern 4 is a commonly observed writing style which describes the result (<VALUE>) first and then the details (<P/L>s and <EVENT>). Example 9 is an example of this pattern. <EVENT> in sentences of this pattern is not used to connect entities and could be omitted.
Pattern 4 <VALUE>-PREP-<P/L>  <EVENT/BEV>?Example 9 The K i values of 44 and 220 M<VALUE> for/PREP (S)-and (R)-propranolol<LIGAND>, respectively, show that the (S)-form binds<EVENT> almost as strong as the natural product cellobiose, whereas the binding of the (R)-form is about 5 times weaker. (PMID: 11114249)
Sentence rankingThe sentences extracted from a full-text article in the previous stages were denoted S = C {S i } , where s i is the ith extracted sentence matching at least one of the defined patterns. In this stage, AutoBind ranks S with a scoring function shown below. In evaluation, a successful extraction is counted if it is retrieved in the three highest ranked sentences. The experimental results shown in the next section reveal that the correct binding affinity appeared in the top three sentences in 79.07% articles.where  is the number of distinct protein and ligand names in all extracted sentences in the article,  is the set of protein and ligand names in the corresponding PDB TITLE, f i measures the overlap of protein and ligand names of S to the corresponding PDB TITLE, e i is the number of protein and ligand names ins i and g i is the ratio of entities in s i that are also in the corresponding PDB TITLE. In other words, f i measures the correlation of the article to the PDB TITLE, g i measures the correlation of s i to the PDB TITLE, while F i is the sum of the two measures. The final score, F i , is the sum of f i and g i .
Co-occurrence methodAs AutoBind is the first automatic extraction system dedicated for protein ligand binding affinity, we implemented an algorithm that simply identifies sentences containing both the target protein and ligand. This algorithm, named sentence-level co-occurrence method in other studies (), was adopted as a comparison baseline.shows that AutoBind could extract sentences containing the correct binding affinity with 84.22% precision and 79.07% recall, where the P-value of the Wilcoxon signed ranked sum test () to the baseline is < 1E 10 (the evaluation metrics are explained in the Supplementary Data). Comparing with AutoBind, the low recall of the co-occurrence method is mainly due to requiring both protein and ligand to appear in the sentence. The results indicate that more than half of the binding affinity articles describe the correct binding affinities in sentences not containing either the target protein or ligand. This reveals the importance of relaxing the requirement of the presence of entities in the proposed patterns. An analysis of the errors of AutoBind and a discussion of the limitation of AutoBind can be found in the Supplementary Data.
BENCHMARKING
Evaluation of binding affinity extraction
Evaluation of NERThe NER module of AutoBind was actually a union of a dictionaryand a learning-based method (see Section 3.1 for details). In this experiment, we compared the performance of the dictionarybased method, the learning-based method and their union (denoted Hybrid in the context). The results of NER performance for protein and ligand names are shown in Tables 4 and 5, respectively.shows that using both techniques outperformed the protein recognition performance over those using individual techniques. The P-values show that the differences of NLProt to UniProt and Hybrid were relatively significant than the difference between UniProt and Hybrid. Namely, the good performance of Hybrid came mainly from UniProt with a little Hybrid came mainly from UniProt with a little help from NLProt in protein recognition. Thisenhancement was also observed in ligand recognition (). The P-values show that the differences of Hybrid to the two individual methods were significant. Namely, combining PubChem and OSCAR4 significantly helps ligand recognition. In both protein and ligand name recognition, the dictionary-based methods achieved better precision than that using learning-based methods. On the other hand, dictionary-based methods may have many false negatives because some new compound names have not been collected in the adopted dictionary. For example, ligand recognition using PubChem had lower recall than that using OSCAR4. This problem was relatively moderate in protein recognition (comparing NLProt and UniProt in) since the catalogue of proteins is more mature than that of ligands. Our results concur with previous studies that hybridizing both techniques enhances recognition performance (). The next question is whether the improvement of hybridizing dictionary-and learning-based techniques in entity recognition benefits the performance of affinity extraction. Many studies that used IR technologies to extract biomedical information, e.g. proteinprotein interaction () and protein phosphorylation (), observed that a large amount of incorrect extractions were owing to the poor recognition of protein entities. Many incorrect words or phrases tagged as entities will largely increase the false-positive extractions and reduce the entire extraction performance. We carried out an evaluation of the binding affinity extraction using the dictionary-based, the learning-based and the hybrid method. The experiment shows the hybrid recognition scheme used in this study can effectively improve the performance of binding affinity extraction. The results are shown in. Note that the precisions, recalls and F-scores inare the performance of affinity extraction, namely comparable with those in, and should not be compared with those in Tables 4 and 5. The results reveal that accurate NER is critical to affinity extraction. This conclusion is similar to the study of. Furthermore, the P-values show that the differences of Learning to Dictionary and Hybrid were relatively significant than the difference between Dictionary and Hybrid. The results in Tables 4 and 5 suggest that the relatively small difference between Dictionary and Hybrid was due to the small difference in protein recognition.
Comparison with other databasesDuring the past decade, several proteinligand binding affinity databases were published, in which all of the collected data were based on manual reading (). Except PDBbind, other databases are rarely updated. AutoBind contains 13 616 proteinligand-binding affinities of which 6217 were automatically extracted (45.66%) and 7399 were curated by experts. It contains almost twice binding affinities compared to other databases of similar data. The guideline of AutoBind to the experts can be found in the Supplementary Data. Furthermore, AutoBind is updated every month. The higher update frequency is achieved by the automatic extraction system that alleviates manual loading. For each update, the newly released structures and the primary citations will be automatically downloaded from PDB and PubMed. The processing binding affinity extraction of each article takes 1 min in average using an Intel Xeon 2.5 GHz processor. Additionally, we adopted AutoBind early release version (updated on September 2011, 11 897 affinities were collected) to carry out a simple test to estimate the time needed for a biologist to review and record binding affinity data from protein structure-related articles. Our curators took 20 days to confirm the 5160 automatically extracted binding affinities while took about 3 months without the assistance of the automatic system to extract the other 6737 binding affinities. This reveals the importance of automatic extraction, which facilitated manual curation, hence drastically reducing the required time.
CONCLUSIONThis work presents a new automatic system, AutoBind, for extracting protein-binding affinity from literature. Overall, our automatic extraction method collected almost twice binding affinities compared to other databases of similar data. The automatic extraction process contains four NER methods for protein and ligand names, four sentences patterns for sentence extraction and a ranking method to pick sentence that correctly describes binding affinities. The experimental results show that hybridizing multiple NER methods improved the performance of binding affinity extraction. These sentence patterns can quickly identify candidate sentences that may contain a protein-binding affinity. These patterns were designed to ensure minimal false negatives for, as shown in the experimental results, high extraction recall. Finally, the proposed ranking method ensures minimal false positives for high precision. The rank-based design facilities the following manual checking step. Biologists can start from the highest ranked sentences and stop immediately after a correct sentence is found. The entire system significantly reduces the extraction time while preserving the quality of the extracted binding affinities.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
