Motivation: The plethora of information that emerges from large-scale genome characterization studies has triggered the development of computational frameworks and tools for efficient analysis, interpretation and visualization of genomic data. Functional annotation of gen-omic variations and the ability to visualize the data in the context of whole genome and/or multiple genomes has remained a challenging task. We have developed an interactive web-based tool, AVIA (Annotation, Visualization and Impact Analysis), to explore and interpret large sets of genomic variations (single nucleotide variations and insertion/deletions) and to help guide and summarize genomic experiments. The annotation, summary plots and tables are packaged and can be downloaded by the user from the email link provided. Availability and implementation: http://avia.abcc.ncifcrf.gov.
INTRODUCTIONWith the advances of next-generation sequencing technology, many laboratories and research groups generate huge amounts of sequencing data and face common challenges of identification, managing and interpretation of genomic variations. Recent surveys () of software tools supporting basic computational steps of variation analysis present a comprehensive picture of the different options for analysis and help to identify the best practices in the field. The variety of the variation analysis pipelines is indicative of how each research group incorporates its own goals and expertise. Some of these pipelines are available as web-based applications wANNOVAR (), VARIANT (), Interpretome (), CRAVAT () and snpEff () and can be used by a wider research community to facilitate genomic research. We have developed an interactive web-based tool, AVIA (Annotation, Visualization and Impact Analysis), to explore and interpret large sets of genomic variations generated by high-throughput genomic experiments such as exome capture, whole-genome sequencing and targeted re-sequencing projects. AVIA was implemented by adopting the ANNOVAR () framework and Circos () visualization options, with an emphasis on interactive annotation and visualization capabilities and a modularized structure that allows facile extension of the pipelines with new tools and databases as they become available. AVIA provides a basic functional impact assessment of small indels and single nucleotide variations based on their proteincoding capacity and/or position-associated ability to affect known non-coding regulatory elements and genomic features. Several of AVIA's workflows allow functional annotation and variant filtering options, tumor-normal comparisons and identification of population-specific variants. Interactive features of AVIA's interface permit exploratory analysis that can focus on selected gene sets or whole-genome data, with flexible visualization options and resubmission of a previously established workflow for the analysis of new datasets. A comprehensive tutorial posted on the AVIA site (http://avia.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/apps/site/tutorials) can guide users from a 'Quick-start' example to more rigorous analytical options.
TOOL DESCRIPTIONAVIA's general workflow is based on the coupling of a comprehensive annotation pipeline with a flexible visualization method (). This overview includes four major steps, starting with the user submitting a variation file, through annotation and visualization modules and ending with reporting of the results.
Annotation modules and workflowsWe leveraged the ANNOVAR framework for assigning functional impact to genomic variations. AVIA expands ANNOVAR's capabilities in three different directions: by annotation content, parallelization of data processing and implementation of new predictive options. First, we extended ANNOVAR's list of reference databases [RefSeq, UCSC, SIFT (), Polyphen2 (), Encode (), etc], with additional databases both from recent publications by the scientific community (Supplementary) and from our in-house-developed databases. The framework was further extended by allowing the addition of third-party annotation databases provided by the user, advancing available filtering options and supplying access to ethnicity-specific-derived subsets of the Complete Genomics (CG) set of 69 genomes. Second, the original framework was adjusted to allow parallel computations of large lists of variations by subdividing the input set of variations into multiple subsets and querying multiple *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
yPresent address: Simons Foundation, New York, NY 10010, USA.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com databases simultaneously. This feature allows for results to be returned to the user in a timely manner (515 min for 23 million mutations for the CG dataset, depending on server load). Finally, we added the ability to incorporate new analysis tools, thereby expanding the predictive capabilities of the pipeline beyond the static annotation databases ('MiRSNP' workflow). The pipeline has been divided into workflows reflecting different approaches to the annotation of large lists of genomic variations. The first workflow, 'Feature Annotation,' provides annotation of all variations in the input list according to the databases selected by the user. The second workflow, 'Cascade filtering,' allows the gradual reduction of the number of the resulting variations by filtering all variations identified at each annotation step associated with a user's selected database. If more complex analysis is required, it can be explored using AVIA's 'Advanced workflow,' which allows comparison between variations of two input genomes, making it a useful tool for sample comparisons (tumor versus normal, affected versus unaffected, child versus parent and sample versus sample's ethnicity-specific population genome). The annotation results are reported in tabular format, summary diagrams and as tracks in whole genome circular views generated by the Circos application (example result files are available as Supplementary).
Interactive visualization with CircosAVIA is focused on gene-related impact assessment. Individual Circos tracks showing, e.g. the distribution of genes with variations of specific functional effects such as non-synonymous variations, frame shifts, variable micro RNA target sites or variations in 5'UTR-located G-quadruplexes can be produced. Users can also choose to include additional precomputed genomic tracks from a select list into the Circos images. Alternatively, users may choose to display only part of the data focusing on user-provided gene lists, genomic regions or default sets of genes provided at AVIA's Web site [COSMIC (, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways (). After the selection of the tracks/analysis of interest, users can aggregate the selected tracks in one signature plot: AVIA will produce a main Circos configuration file with the data corresponding to all selected individual tracks, and the new aggregated plot will be generated in several minutes depending on the amount of traffic on the server.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CONCLUSION AVIA provides fast and comprehensive analysis of large sets of genomic variations in a user-friendly accessible manner. The main features of the current version are its interactive options for analysis, visualization and speed. The workflows can be easily configured to address a user's annotation questions and developed workflows can be used in new analyses. Many current software tools are focused on the analysis of the protein-coding variants, leaving most of the other types of variants beyond the scope of the analysis. In the future, we are planning to expand the AVIA's palette of non-coding impacts evaluated by the tool, including identification of both 'gain' and 'loss' of function regulatory variations.
H.Vuong et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
