Bimodal patterns of expression have recently been shown to be useful not only in prioritizing genes that distinguish phenotypes, but also in prioritizing network models that correlate with proteomic evidence. In particular, subgroups of strongly coexpressed gene pairs result in an increased variance of the correlation distribution. This variance, a measure of association between sets of genes (or proteins), can be summarized as the bimodality of coexpression (BiC). We developed an online tool to calculate the BiC for user-defined gene lists and associated mRNA expression data.
INTRODUCTIONRecently, a number of techniques have emerged to identify subsets of genes exhibiting bimodal patterns of gene expression, as these distinguishing features are highly suggestive of molecular switches (). While many of these approaches attempt to identify the modes of expression represented by a single gene with respect to two phenotypes (), the modes of expression among sets of genes can also be informative and can be evidenced by bimodal patterns of coexpression. Bimodal coexpression patterns arise among biologically related gene sets whose members have stronger mRNA correlations, ||, with each other than with unrelated genes. As these highly related gene sets will have both large positive and large negative values of , their correlation pattern has greater variance than the correlation distribution of unrelated gene sets (which is centered around  = 0), andtook advantage of this fact to calculate a property which they call the 'Bimodality of Coexpression' (BiC). Using a non-parametric approach, they have previously shown that the BiC can be useful in evaluating the strength of association between a hypothetical signaling network and an experimentally observed set of proteomic targets. In this context, a high degree of coexpression also suggests which genes
AlgorithmFirst, mRNA coexpression (Pearsons correlation coefficient) and standard t-statistics are calculated for all genes in the array. These two parameters are then used to compute the 'active' coexpression (), based on user-specified case and control labels. Active coexpression is calculated as the product of a gene coexpression (measured by ) and its differential expression (measured by a t-statistic), thus making the analysis dependent on a two-group comparison. The active coexpression matrix relating a given gene list g i to a target list g t (g i , g t  S and g i = g t , where S is the set of all genes on the microarray) is then transformed into vectors and its empirical cumulative distribution function (CDF) that we call F i,t ; the CDF for the active coexpression matrix relating g i to the remainder of the genes on the array, S, is also calculated (F i,S ). It should be noted that, in, g i represented the set of genes in a candidate signaling network and g t represented an associated set of proteomic targets. The sample deviation is calculated as the difference of the two CDFs. In short, the bimodality of coexpression,  i between g i and g t is the difference of the secondmoments of the two empirical distributions, where negative values of  i represent more correlation than expected (with significant values of  i on the order of 110 4 ). We calculated the significance of  i by generating  rand from randomly selected set of candidate targets (1000 such sets of cardinality equal to that of g t ). Then, for the null hypothesis that the coexpression pattern between g i and g t is random, the P-value represents the probability of attaining at least a value of | i | via stochastic, i.e. non-biological, generation of random targets. g i and g t cannot be equal, and increasing overlap between g i and g t will increase  i. When multiple candidate lists, g i , are being tested,  i allows one to prioritize the hypothesized lists (or networks) by the strength of their mRNA coexpression with an experimentally defined target set, g t .
BiC: Bimodality of Coexpression
Web serverThe first step of the BiC web interface requires the user to upload gene expression data in the SOFT format as defined by GEO () ().This allows the user to submit both user prepared files, as well as files downloaded directly from the GEO repository. The uploaded arrays are required to be prenormalized (e.g. via Robust Multiarray Averaging). The user must then upload one or more gene lists (i.e. networks), g i and a single target list, g t against which the bimodality of each gene list will be calculated. In the second step, the user can filter the samples. This allows the user to remove samples that are not relevant to the analysis without editing the data files (). The filtering is done using basic Boolean expressions with respect to sample characteristics in the data files, e.g. sample_characteristics_ch fields in SOFT-formatted sample file. During the third step, the user is asked to label samples as either case or control (). Finally, the job is queued and the user is presented with the console output of the job progress (). The results are then displayed in the console output and emailed to the user (). BiC was primarily developed in Python and the Django framework. To increase speed and handle memory more effectively, the more resource-intensive processes were implemented in C. BiC also implements a queuing system, to handle both large jobs and high traffic.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. in the candidate signaling network may act as controllers, or master modulators (Babur et al., 2010), of the expression patterns seen in the proteomic experiment. We have developed an online interface to calculate the BiC for a user-defined set of genes using corresponding mRNA expression data to test models of interaction between these lists. The web interface developed accepts individual experiments in simple omnibus format (SOFT), the standard format for Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (Barrett et al., 2009). As the BiC metric can use experimental omics data to evaluate candidate in silico network models, the newly developed web interface will be of great value in prioritizing network models for further biological evaluation. 2 IMPLEMENTATION The starting point to calculate the bimodality of coexpression is two or more gene (or protein) lists provided by the user; as suggested by Bebek et al. (2010), one of these lists can be the set of genes posited by a model of a signaling network of interest, and the other list a set of proteomic targets. Through a simple and intuitive interface, BiC calculates the bimodality of coexpression () between these two lists by generating coexpression distributions from a given mRNA gene expression experiment, and a P-value based on two-group comparisons.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CONCLUSION We have developed a tool for the analysis of mRNA gene expression data in the context of two user-defined gene lists. The web application uses the mRNA correlation between the gene lists to calculate a parameter called the bimodality of coexpression, or BiC. This new tool linking user-defined gene lists or networks with global experimental measurements provides a way forward in evaluating the functional value of candidate networks, pathways or gene lists. BiC accepts experimental measurements in the widely used GEO SOFT format utilized by publicly available datasets, and it is freely available to the academic community and simple to use. Funding: National Institute of Health (grants P30-CA043703, UL1RR024989 and P01-DE019759). Conflict of Interest: none declared.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
