Motivation: Biological pathways play a key role in most cellular functions. To better understand these functions, diverse computational and cell biology researchers use biological pathway data for various analysis and modeling purposes. For specifying these biological pathways, a community of researchers has defined BioPAX and provided various tools for creating, validating and visualizing BioPAX models. However, a generic software framework for simulating BioPAX models is missing. Here, we attempt to fill this gap by introducing a generic simulation framework for BioPAX. The framework explicitly separates the execution model from the model structure as provided by BioPAX, with the advantage that the modelling process becomes more reproducible and intrinsically more modular; this ensures natural biological constraints are satisfied upon execution. The framework is based on the principles of discrete event systems and multi-agent systems, and is capable of automatically generating a hierarchical multi-agent system for a given BioPAX model. Results: To demonstrate the applicability of the framework, we simulated two types of biological network models: a gene regulatory network modeling the haematopoietic stem cell regulators and a signal transduction network modeling the Wnt/b-catenin signaling pathway. We observed that the results of the simulations performed using our framework were entirely consistent with the simulation results reported by the researchers who developed the original models in a proprietary language. Availability and Implementation: The framework, implemented in Java, is open source and its source code, documentation and tutorial are available at http://www.ibi.vu.nl/programs/BioASF.
IntroductionThe National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) has defined a biological pathway as 'a series of actions among molecules in a cell that leads to a certain product or a change in a cell' (http:// www.genome.gov/27530687). Biological pathways play a key role in most cellular processes including metabolism, gene expression regulation and signal transduction. According to Pathguide (http://www. pathguide.org) (), there are more than 500 resources, including databases, in which biological pathway data are stored in various data formats. To increase the uniformity of pathway data from different sources, make biological pathway data exchangeable, and increase the efficiency of computational pathway research, a community of researchers have defined BioPAX (Biological Pathway Exchange): a semantic-web based standard language to specify biological pathway models at the molecular and cellular level (). A biological pathway specified in the BioPAX language is called a BioPAX model. Currently, the most comprehensive biological pathway databases, including Pathway Commons (), KEGG (), NCI/Nature PID (), Reactome (), WikiPathways (), and NetPath (), provide pathway descriptions in BioPAX format. Since the introduction of BioPAX, the BioPAX community has provided various tools: Paxtools () for reading and writing BioPAX models, Validator () for validating a BioPAX model to see whether or not it complies with the BioPAX specification, Pattern Search for enabling the search of specific topological structures in a BioPAX model () and ChiBE () for visualizing BioPAX models in the standard Systems Biology Graphical Notation (SBGN) () format. Although simulation of biological pathway models makes it possible to achieve an adequate level of understanding of pathway models, a generic software framework for simulating biological pathway models specified in BioPAX has not been available to date. We address this omission by introducing BioASF (BioPAX-based Agent-oriented Simulation Framework). BioASF is different in a number of ways from the existing simulation frameworks for biological pathways handling qualitative regulatory and signaling pathway models. These frameworks are mostly based on either Petri-nets or process calculi. In a Petri-net, a place can represent molecules such as genes, proteins or complexes, and a transition can represent their interactions. Firing of a transition leads to consuming substrates and creating products. The execution is constrained by the weight of an arc, which connects a place with a transition. An example of a Petri-net based simulation framework is Cell Illustrator (). In process calculi, a communicating process represents molecules, a communication event represents an interaction and a state change represents a modification of the molecule. An example of a process calculi based simulation framework is Bio-PEPA (). Note that because the focus of the simulation frameworks that are based on the Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) () is mainly the dynamic simulation of quantitative models, we do not mention these frameworks in this paper. One important difference between Petri-net and process calculibased frameworks and BioASF is the language used to specify pathway models. In a typical Petri-net based simulation framework, a pathway model is specified in various proprietary languages in which molecules are assigned to places and molecular interactions are assigned to transitions. In a typical process calculi-based simulation framework, a pathway model is specified in a language containing terms such as actions and synchronizations. This language is primarily meant for specifying performance models of computer and communication systems. On the contrary, BioASF uses a standard language (BioPAX) for specifying pathway models. Another important difference between the mentioned frameworks and BioASF is the type of network they build during simulation. Both Petri-net and process calculi-based frameworks use intrinsically flat networks and the nature of the network nodes is very generic (places and transition nodes in a Petri-net and processes and reaction nodes in process calculi). In BioASF the network nodes have a natural semantic meaning, are organized hierarchically, and the network exhibits a high degree of modularity. BioASF gets its modularity from BioPAX in which biological entities are defined in a hierarchical fashion, providing natural modularity for model developers. Moreover, in BioASF, there is a clear distinction between the biological network model and simulation execution model. The biological network model in BioASF is represented as a network in which nodes are biological entities (such as proteins, genes, biochemical reactions, regulatory interactions), interconnected via welldefined properties and according to the constraints defined in the BioPAX language. Note that BioPAX is a specification language and it does not provide any execution semantics. In order to simulate BioPAX models, BioASF provides the simulation execution model (see Appendix). The simulation execution model is represented as a network in which nodes are agents controlling the execution of their corresponding biological interactions in the biological network model. The simulation execution model enforces three types of constraints during a model execution: (i) constraints defined in BioPAX, (ii) constraints defined by simulation rules and (iii) constraints defined by analysis rules. Hence, BioASF explicitly requires the corresponding inputs. The explicit specification of these separate inputs enhances the reproducibility and consistency of the modeling procedure. For example, from a biological viewpoint, a protein cannot be translated from another protein. RNA is translated into proteins. BioPAX respects this constraint. The constraints provided by BioPAX disallows a template reaction interaction (an interaction that polymerizes its product based on a template, and is used for specifying transcriptions, translations and replications) to accept a protein or small molecule as its template. BioPAX requires the template to be either an RNA (for specifying translations) or DNA (for specifying transcriptions and DNA replications). However, due to intrinsically very generic nature of nodes in Petri-net (and also process calculi) frameworks, it is possible to define a node representing a protein and accidentally use this as a template for a transcription, translation, or a replication reaction.depicts the different inputs and the output of BioASF. A BioASF user provides biological network data specified in BioPAX, a list of initial concentration values of the physical entities, simulation rules indicating how biological interactions should be performed, and analysis rules indicating how the simulation results over time are interpreted and analyzed. Based on these inputs, BioASF automatically generates a hierarchical multi-agent system where each agent in the system is a goal-directed and autonomous entity responsible for executing a BioPAX interaction and pathway. Throughout the simulation, the result of the execution of a BioPAX interaction influences the behavior of the agents and makes changes in the concentration of physical entities in the environment. During the simulation, it is possible to query BioASF about the current simulation data such as number and type of executed interactions and concentration level of physical entities. The following sections elaborate in more detail on the internal components, organization and various features of BioASF.
The BioPAX languageThe BioPAX language is based on the Ontology Web Language (OWL) (), which is a description logic language intended to augment the current web with formalized knowledge in order to make information on the web machineprocessable.depicts the BioPAX core concepts and their hierarchical relationships. Two main core concepts of the BioPAX language are pathway and interaction. A pathway is defined as a series of interactions demarcated by biologists in order to group interactions for certain biological reasons. A pathway can contain sub-pathways and interactions. An interaction represents a biological relationship among biological entities. A biological entity can be an interaction, pathway, gene, or physical entity (such as protein and DNA region). Interactions can transform one or more physical entities to others (conversion interactions) or control and regulate other interactions (control interactions). Interactions can be shared between different pathways (). There are four types of conversion interactions: (i) biochemical reaction representing a conversion in which molecules of physical entities undergo covalent modifications, (ii) complex assembly representing a conversion in which either a set of physical entities aggregate to from a complex or a complex is disassembled into its constituents, (iii) degradation representing a conversion in which a macro-molecule is degraded into its elementary units and (iv) transport representing a conversion in which a physical entity changes its sub-cellular location (). BioPAX defines three types of control interactions: (i) catalysis representing an interaction in which a physical entity increases the rate of a conversion interaction, (ii) modulation representing an interaction in which a physical entity modulates a catalysis interaction and (iii) template reaction regulation representing an interaction in which a physical entity (such as a transcription factor) regulates the expression of a macro-molecule from a template macro-molecule (such as a DNA region) (). These BioPAX core concepts together with the BioPAX utility concepts and language properties form the BioPAX meta-model. The basic idea behind BioASF is to associate an agent to each BioPAX pathway and BioPAX interaction in order to manage the execution of them. Note that execution of pathways and interactions change the concentration of physical entities in the environment. Additional agents are needed for managing the biological environment and analyzing changes in it. By representing execution managers as agents, we can base our framework on multi-agent technology. The challenge is to find a suitable communication pattern between different types of agents, as pathways are related to other pathways and interactions, and interactions are also related to other interactions and biological entities. We have formally specified all different types of agents, their inputs and outputs and their communications in mathematical set notation (see Appendix).
Architecture of the frameworkThe framework is based on the principles of the discrete event systems (DES) theory () and the multiagent systems (MAS) () paradigm. Similar to a discrete event system, the various components of the framework cooperate with each other to perform a function by utilizing discrete events. Each component manages a number of discrete states, and the state transition depends on the occurrence of discrete events. Corresponding to a multi-agent system, each component of the framework is represented as an agent which is autonomous, exhibits goal-directed behavior, and operates according to its own rules.shows the event-based cooperation of different agents of the framework that realize a biological simulation. A simulation is started by activation of the Analysis Agent that in turn activates the Environment Agent. This agent loads the initial concentrations of all relevant physical entities (such as proteins and small molecules) from a storage. After environment initialization, the Analysis Agent activates the master pathway agent (MPA). MPA is responsible for bootstrapping the simulation and controlling all top-level pathway agents. Pathway agents in the framework are organized in a hierarchical fashion, with the MPA at the top of the hierarchy. There is also a hierarchical relationship between a pathway agent and interaction agents. Hence, both subpathway agents and interaction agents belonging to a pathway are considered the pathway's children. The MPA activates all top level pathway agents each of which in turn activates its immediate subpathway agents and its interaction agents. An activated pathway agent is now ready to listen to events coming from its children. After the activation of an Interaction Agent is completed, the activated Interaction Agent subscribes itself to any changes in the concentration of particular physical entities published by the Environment Agent. An interaction agent receiving such an event checks its simulation rules to see whether the required condition for performing its associated BioPAX interaction can be met. For example, a biochemical reaction with two participants, each requiring a certain stoichiometry can only be performed if the concentrations of both participants are equal or higher than their stoichiometric value. Besides, if this biochemical reaction is controlled by a catalysis interaction then it must be checked to see whether the catalysis interaction has already occurred and whether its effector (i.e. its result) is available. As soon as the condition is met, the Interaction Agent performs its associated BioPAX interaction and sends its effector to the Environment Agent. At the same time, the Interaction Agent sends an event to its parent Pathway Agent. An example payload of such an event is a report indicating whether or not an interaction has occurred. The Pathway Agent integrates such reports received from its children and sends one integrated report to its parent. Finally, the MPA integrates all reports from the top level pathway agents and informs the Analysis Agent about the situation regarding the execution of all interactions. Consequently, Analysis Agent utilizes its analysis rules to store simulation results, examine environmental changes (e.g. changes in the concentration of physical entities), combine the current simulation results with the previous ones and initiate a new cycle of simulation with new initial concentrations.
Artifacts of the frameworkOne of the important features of the framework is that it is able to generate pathway and interaction agents from a BioPAX model, and there is no need for users to write code for these agents. This feature is realized by utilizing various artifacts. Note that in software engineering, an artifact is a physical piece of information such as a data file, source code file and library file that is used or produced during a software development process. We use this terminology to explain different software elements of the BioASF framework depicted in.We make a distinction between meta-model artifacts and model artifacts. Meta-model artifacts are related to theGeneration which takes as its input the BioPAX OWL individuals, parses the input by utilizing the PAXTools library (), and produces a specific multi-agent system which is an extension of the meta-level generic multi-agent system. Moreover, BioASF also generates a storage containing the concentration of all physical entities (such as proteins, complexes, small molecules) that are part of a BioPAX model.
Flexibility of the frameworkThe framework offers flexibility on the following four aspects: simulation rules, simulation modes, analysis mechanisms and scalability. BioASF allows users to define their own simulation rules, choose their proper simulation mode, incorporate their own analysis mechanisms and run simulation in a single or multiple Java Virtual Machine (JVM). The following four paragraphs briefly explain these aspects. Obviously, it is impossible to have a one-size-fits-all set of rules governing all types of simulations. Each simulation requires its specific rules. For example, the authors in () propose a Boolean model of regulatory interactions to get insights into the functioning of the segment polarity gene network in Drosophila. In their model, they represent mRNA or protein by a node and the interactions between them by a directed edge. The state of each node is determined by a Boolean function which is highly specific for each node and it does not follow a generic pattern. Another example is the network model of the cell cycle regulatory network of fission yeast (). In the yeast cell cycle network, similar to the previous example, the nodes of the network are genes, and each node is assigned a binary value. Differently to the previous example, this value is determined by a generic rule for all nodes, except for a few nodes. However, this generic rule is highly specific for the regulatory processes that control the cell cycle in fission yeast. Simulation rules are thus determined by the type of a biological network under study, the goal of an experiment and the experimental data. Our framework provides welldefined programming interfaces that can be used to integrate specific simulation rules with the remaining parts of the framework.BioASF supports three modes of simulations: synchronous (), asynchronous () and maximally parallel (). The key difference between these modes is whether or not interaction agents within one execution step execute independently from each other. In synchronous mode, all interaction agents consume/produce physical entities simultaneously, and consumption/production of physical entities by one interaction agent has no influence on the other interaction agents. In asynchronous mode, interaction agents consume/produce physical entities in different times such that a physical entity produced by an interaction agent is immediately available for other interaction agents. Hence, they compete for consumption of the shared physical entities. In maximally parallel mode, interaction agents compete for consumption of physical entities but the production of one interaction agent is not immediately available for other interaction agents within the same execution step. Each experiment requires its own approach for analyzing simulation results to get insight into the behavior of the model under study. For example, in an in silico experiment for cell fate determination of C. elegans during vulval induction, the simulation results are used as variables for specific scoring functions to assign to a cell the fate corresponding to the highest scoring function (). In another in silico experiment for studying the behavior of the regulatory network of 11 haematopoietic stem/progenitor cell genes, the simulation results are used to find the steady state of the model by computing the terminal strongly connected components of the state space of the model (). These examples show that different analysis mechanisms may be used in each experiment. Our framework provides well-defined programming interfaces for integrating specific analysis mechanisms with the remaining parts of the framework. Since a BioPAX model may contain multiple pathways each consisting of a large number of interactions, running simulation of such large models on one JVM (i.e. on one machine) can cause considerable problems. Therefore, BioASF provides two types of communication among agents: local communication using the Java observer and observable pattern (where a Java object (observable) maintains a list of its dependents (observers) and notifies them automatically of any state changes) and remote communication using the messaging system Apache ActiveMQ (where agents are distributed across a network and communicate with each other through queuing and publish/subscribe mechanisms).
ResultsIn order to validate BioASF, we have simulated two different biological network models in BioASF: a gene regulatory network modeling the haematopoietic stem cell (HSC) regulators () and a signal transduction network modeling the Wnt/b-catenin signaling pathway (). Both original models have been developed in Petri-net. We first made BioPAX models for both networks, used the BioASF's plugin to express the interaction rules required by the models, plugged the corresponding analysis module in BioASF, prepared the initial concentration values for the physical entities occurring in the models, generated Java code for all agents and finally ran the simulations. We observed that the results of the simulations performed using BioASF were similar to the results reported by the researchers in. In the following sections, we give a brief explanation of the simulations and show the results.
Gene regulatory simulation
Model descriptionHaematopoiesis has long served as a model process for studying stem cells and represents the best characterized adult stem cell system. Transcriptional regulation is a key factor controlling haematopoiesis. In (), the authors build the first comprehensive regulatory network model based on the systematic curation of 11 fully validated regulatory elements linking together 11 transcription factors, all of which are active in early haematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. All 11 regulatory elements included in the model have been previously published and studied extensively using DNA/protein-binding assays, as well as reporter gene assays of wildtype and mutant elements. The direction and value of each of the regulatory interactions are also known with certainty. Moreover, proteinprotein interactions curated from the literature were included. The resulting network was modeled as logical interactions encoding the activating and/or inhibitory links, including the specific combinations in which particular interactions occur.
BioPAX representationWe considered the gene regulatory network controlling haematopoiesis as a BioPAX pathway and defined a BioPAX model.shows the graphical representation of the BioPAX model in SBGN format. In the model, we represented the gene product definitions for all genes used in the network as the BioPAX Protein, the transcription of the genes as the BioPAX TemplateReaction and the regulatory role of the transcription factors in the transcription as the BioPAX TemplateReactionRegulation. For example, as shown in, TmpReg-PU1-GATA1-GATA1 regulates (inhibits) the transcription of GATA1 (TmpReac-GATA1) through its controllers PU1 and GATA1.
Simulation rulesFor the simulation of the haematopoiesis model, we extracted a number of simple rules from the description of the original in silico experiment (), and plugged them in BioASF. We recognized three categories of rules: template reaction regulation rules, template reaction rules and degradation rules.These rules determine whether or not a BioPAX interaction should be performed during the simulation. A template reaction regulation interaction can be performed if the concentration values of its inputs (i.e. all of its controllers) are higher than zero. After performing this interaction, the concentration value of its output is increased by one by the environment agent. There are two conditions which must be fulfilled before a template reaction interaction can be performed: (i) the template reaction regulation interaction regulating the template reaction interaction must already have occurred, and (ii) the concentration value of the output (i.e. product) of the template reaction interaction in the environment must either be zero (in case, the control type is ACTIVATION) or one (in case, the control type is INHIBITION). After performing this interaction, the concentration value of its output is either increased or decreased by one by the environment agent, depending on the control type of its regulator. According to the degradation rules, the output of a template reaction interaction is degraded if the concentration value of one of its inputs in the environment is either zero (in case, the control type is ACTIVATION) or one (in case, the control type is INHIBITION). As the firing of an interaction in the haematopoiesis Petri-net model has no impact on the other interactions, within one execution step, this model was simulated in BioASF in the synchronous mode.
Model analysisFor the analysis of the simulation results of the haematopoiesis model, we created an analysis module in Java and plugged it in BioASF. This module initially constructs the state space graph of 2048 nodes each containing a bit vector of size 11, initiates the concentration value of all gene products (0 or 1) at the beginning of each simulation step for each state, utilizes BioASF to execute one simulation step, and updates the graph based on the simulation results. In line with the original in silico experiment (), at the end of the simulation, after the graph was completely built, the terminal strongly connected components (TSCC) of the state space are computed in order to identify the attractors which represent the biological steady states. As reported by the original in silico experiment, we found three TSCCs: the TSCC-1 containing one state that corresponds to a nonhaematopoietic cell, the TSCC-2 containing one state that closely resembles a mature erythrocyte, and the TSCC-3 containing 32 states that match the expected pattern for haematopoietic stem cells, as shown in.
Signal transduction simulation
Model descriptionWnt/b-catenin signaling is highly conserved in all animals and is important for embryonic development and stem cell maintenance in adults. WNT ligand stimulation leads to inhibition of an important destruction complex that degrades CTNNB1 (b-catenin). This leads to CTNNB1 accumulation and translocation to the nucleus, where it binds TCF/LEF and activates transcription of WNT target genes. In, the authors build a Wnt/b-catenin signaling model based on interactions, well established in literature. Signaling is initiated by the binding of external WNT ligand to the receptor, FZD, and the co-receptor, LRP. Dishevelled (DVL) and AXIN bind the intracellular tail of FZD. AXIN, APC, CK1 and GSK3 form the destruction complex. CTNNB1 is constitutively produced and either binds the destruction complex for degradation or translocates to the nucleus, where it activates transcription of WNT target genes.shows the graphical representation of the BioPAX model for the Wnt/b-catenin signaling pathway in SBGN format. In the BioPAX model, we used a number of BioPAX classes including DnaRegion (for specifying the genes such as ctnnb1), ComplexAssembly (for the formation of a complex from a number of proteins such as the formation of the destruction complex from AXIN, APC, CK1 and GSK3) and Degradation (for specifying the degradation of CTNNB1).shows a part of the BioPAX model in which the complex assembly interaction CmpAsm-TCF-LEF-CTNNB1 uses CTNNB1 and TCF-LEF to create the TCF-LEF-CTNNB1 complex. This complex plays the role of transcription factor in the template regulation interaction TmpReg-TCF-LEF-CTNNB1-TARGET, which regulates (activates) the transcription of the WNT target genes. In order to slow down the rate of the complex assembly interaction and the transport of CTNNB1 from the nuclear to the cytoplasm, we used the BioPAX Stoichiometry class.
BioPAX representation
Simulation rulesSimilar to the haematopoiesis simulation, for the simulation of the WNT/b-catenin model, we extracted a number of rules from the description of the original in silico experiment (), and plugged them in BioASF. We recognized three categories of rules: template reaction regulation rules, template reaction rules and conversion rules. The conversion rules are applicable for all complex assembly and degradation interactions. We also defined a generic rule which determines whether or not an interaction is allowed to be executed. According to this rule, an interaction might be performed if the stoichiometries of all participants of an interaction are equal or higher than the available concentration values of the participants. In keeping with the Petri-net formalism, the stoichiometry of a participant is assumed to be one if it has not been specified.Another generic rule is that the concentration value of the output of an interaction is increased by one by the environment agent, after the interaction was performed. The changes in the concentration value of the input of an interaction depend on its type. The concentration values of the inputs of the template reaction regulation and template reaction interactions are decreased by one, and the ones of the conversion interactions are decreased by the stoichiometry of their participants. As the firing of an interaction in the WNT/b-catenin model leads to the consumption of its input physical entities and they are not any more available for other interactions, within the same execution step, this model was simulated in BioASF in the maximally parallel mode.
Model analysisSimilar to the gene regulatory simulation, for the analysis of the simulation results of the WNT/b-catenin model, we created an analysis module in Java and plugged it in BioASF. This module initially populates the pre-defined concentration values of all proteins, complexes and genes, creates a file for writing the results of the simulations, utilizes BioASF to execute one simulation step, and writes the CTNNB1 levels in the file. In line with the original in silico experiment (), the model is simulated with initial WNT levels ranging from 0 to 5 over 100 steps. The simulation for each initial WNT level is repeated 50 times and the CTNNB1 levels for each step is stored in a file. Finally, an R module uses this file to calculate, for each initial WNT level, the mean CTNNB1 level for each step over the 50 simulations and plots these. The BioASF simulations closely resemble the increase in the CTNNB1 levels from the original Petri-net simulations, as shown in. Similar to the original simulations, we observe four different CTNNB1 levels in response to the initial WNT levels (05): a horizontal line in response to the WNT levels of 02, and three oblique lines with three slopes in response to the initial WNT levels of 35.
DiscussionWe introduced here a simulation software framework, called BioASF, for simulating biological pathway models specified in BioPAX. We demonstrated the applicability of BioASF by simulating models of haematopoiesis and Wnt/b-catenin signaling, which reproduced the results reported by the researchers who developed the original models. These two models had already been developed in our group and therefore the exact data of the original in silico experiments (initial concentration, simulation and analysis rules) wereavailable. The availability of this data is required in order to compare the simulation results of BioASF with the results of the original ones. Although obtaining such input data to compare modelling frameworks may be difficult, particularly when originating in other groups, we feel that the clarity of BioASF and its explicit input requirements safeguard sound simulation of pathway models developed by other groups. The main advantages of BioASF are: (i) ability to directly simulate pathway models specified in the standard language for pathway descriptions (i.e. BioPAX), (ii) support for hierarchical (nested) pathway simulations, (iii) inherent scalability because of using agent technology, (iv) extensibility by providing pluggable architecture, (v) provision of flexibility to the biological model developers by enforcing the separation of concerns principles (i.e. a clear distinction is made among biological model, execution model, simulation rules and simulation result analysis) and (vi) formal specification of the execution model in mathematical set notation. The current BioASF limitations are: (i) disability to simulate differential equations, (ii) required rules can only be specified in Java and (iii) no user interface for starting/stopping/debugging simulations. This makes the framework well suited for developers, but not yet easily accessible to biologists. Nevertheless, the web-site includes an extended tutorial to help non-expert users getting started. As mentioned in Section 2.4, each simulation requires its specific rules on pathway and interaction levels, governing execution of a pathway or interaction. In BioASF, these rules currently are specified in Java, which negatively influences the framework's usability and deployability. The preferred way would be to express simulation rules in a rule language such as Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) () and relate these rules to the biological interactions in BioPAX models. This is similar to the approach taken in the Semantic Markup for Web Services (OWL-S) () where the pre-conditions of an OWL-S service can be expressed in a rule language. In this way, both biological models and simulation rules can be provided by the same users (e.g. biomedical researchers). The BioASF framework can be used in different scenarios. For example, the framework can be used for model calibration. In this. The CTNNB1 (b-catenin) levels for initial WNT levels from 0 to 5 simulated 50 times over 100 steps using BioASF and Petri-net (), respectively BioASF i67 scenario, a BioPAX model can be visualized in SBGN and shown to users. Users can define break-points and watch-points on pathways and interactions, similar to the debugging of application codes. When a break-point is hit, users can then inspect the concentration value of the related physical entities and they can change these values during the simulation in order to influence the simulation results and consequently adjust their model. Another possibility would be to use BioASF as a tool for measuring the fitness of individuals in the population in a genetic programming experiment. The purpose of such an experiment would be to automatically generate biological pathways based on a combination and integration of gene expression data, protein-to-protein interaction data, existing pathway data, gene ontology data and triplets representing other biological data. Our future work will be focused on these items.
V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. i60 This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com Bioinformatics, 32, 2016, i60i69 doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw250 ISMB 2016 at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
1 0 1 1 0 TSCC-3 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 TSCC-3 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 TSCC-3 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 TSCC-3 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 TSCC-3 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 TSCC-3 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 TSCC-3 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 TSCC-3 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 TSCC-3 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 TSCC-3 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 TSCC-3 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 TSCC-3 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 TSCC-3 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 TSCC-3 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 TSCC-3 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 TSCC-3 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 TSCC-3 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 TSCC-3 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 TSCC-3 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 TSCC-3 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 TSCC-3 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 TSCC-3 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 TSCC-3 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 TSCC-3 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 TSCC-3 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 TSCC-3 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 TSCC-3 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 TSCC-3 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 TSCC-3 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 TSCC-3 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 TSCC-3 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 i66 R.Haydarlou et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
R.Haydarlou et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
