Motivation: Increasing quantity and quality of data in transcri-ptomics and interactomics create the need for integrative approaches to network analysis. Here, we present a comprehensive R-package for the analysis of biological networks including an exact and a heuristic approach to identify functional modules. Results: The BioNet package provides an extensive framework for integrated network analysis in R. This includes the statistics for the integration of transcriptomic and functional data with biological networks, the scoring of nodes as well as methods for network search and visualization. Availability: The BioNet package and a tutorial are available from
INTRODUCTIONIntegrated analysis of microarray data in the context of biological networks such as proteinprotein interaction (PPI) networks has become a major technique in systems biology. The primary objective is the identification of functional modules (significantly differentially expressed subnetworks) within large networks. This can be achieved by computing a score for each node in the network reflecting its functional relevance. Subsequently, a network search algorithm is required to find the highest scoring subgraph. In fact, this problem has been proven to be NP-hard (). Various heuristic approaches have been proposed, most of them inspired by the seminal work fromthat used a simulated annealing heuristic to identify highscoring subgraphs in integrated networks. Recently, we have devised an algorithm (heinz, heaviest induced subgraph) that computes provably optimal and suboptimal solutions to the maximal-scoring subgraph (MSS) problem in reasonable running time using integer linear programming (ILP) (). In extension to this, we present an R package for (i) integrating multiple P-values obtained from different experiments, (ii) scoring the nodes of the network by a modular scoring function, (iii) calculating
APPLICATIONWe apply our package to gene expression data from diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) and survival data () with a human PPI network based on human protein reference database (HPRD;respectively. Then we aggregate both P-values by the second-order statistics using BioNet.We now fit a BUM model to the distribution of aggregated P-values and score the nodes using an FDR threshold of 0.001.The exact search algorithm can be started from R by runHeinz if the CPLEX library is installed (). Alternatively, the fast heuristic search algorithm (runFastHeinz) often delivers a close approximation. Finally, the resulting modules can be visualized in 2D or 3D.BioNet captures an interaction module that has been described to play major biological roles in the GCB and ABC DLBCL subtypes (). The combination of biological and clinical data with PPI networks generates a meaningful biological context in terms of functional association for differentially expressed, survival-relevant genes.
> data(dataLym
>
>
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. provably optimal and suboptimal solutions to the MSS problem, (iv) calculating high-scoring solutions with a novel heuristic, and (v) 2D and 3D visualization of network solutions, see also Figure 1. 2 DESCRIPTION The BioNet package provides a comprehensive set of methods for the integrated analysis of gene expression data and biological networks. P-values are distributed uniformly under null hypotheses. Therefore, as a first step, multiple P-values derived from the analysis of different experiments (e.g. t-test or regression models) can be aggregated using a uniform order statistics (aggrPvals) (Dittrich et al., 2008). The resulting distribution of combined P-values can be considered as a mixture of signal and noise, where the signal component is modelled to be Beta(a,1) distributed (Pounds and Morris, 2003). The model fit can be verified by the provided diagnostic plots (plot.bum, hist.bum). By fitting a beta-uniform mixture (BUM) model (fitBumModel), the maximum-likelihood estimates for the mixture model can be obtained. These parameters are subsequently used to score the nodes of the network (scoreNodes, scoreFunction). The adjusted node score is given by (a1) log(x)log((FDR)) , where  denotes the threshold for a given false discovery rate (FDR). The optimal and heuristic solutions of the MSS can be calculated by runHeinz, runFastHeinz. Bioconductor data structures and classes (Gentleman et al., 2004) of the graph packages graph, RBGL as well as igraph are supported (Carey et al., 2005; Csardi and Nepusz, 2006). Networks can be imported and exported in different formats, allowing a smooth data exchange with standard network analysis tools like Cytoscape (Shannon et al., 2003).
The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org 1129 at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [10:55 23/3/2010 Bioinformatics-btq089.tex]
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
