Motivation: It is now well established that microRNAs (miRNAs) play a critical role in regulating gene expression in a sequence-specific manner, and genome-wide efforts are underway to predict known and novel miRNA targets. However, the integrated miRNA–mRNA analysis remains a major computational challenge, requiring powerful informatics systems and bioinformatics expertise. Results: The objective of this study was to modify our widely recognized Web server for the integrated mRNA–miRNA analysis (MMIA) and its subsequent deployment on the Amazon cloud (BioVLAB-MMIA) to be compatible with high-throughput platforms, including next-generation sequencing (NGS) data (e.g. RNA-seq). We developed a new version called the BioVLAB-MMIA-NGS, deployed on both Amazon cloud and on a high-performance publicly available server called MAHA. By using NGS data and integrating various bio-informatics tools and databases, BioVLAB-MMIA-NGS offers several advantages. First, sequencing data is more accurate than array-based methods for determining miRNA expression levels. Second, potential novel miRNAs can be detected by using various computational methods for characterizing miRNAs. Third, because miRNA-mediated gene regulation is due to hybridization of an miRNA to its target mRNA, sequencing data can be used to identify many-to-many relationship between miRNAs and target genes with high accuracy. Availability and implementation: http://epigenomics.snu.ac.kr/ biovlab_mmia_ngs/
INTRODUCTIONmiRNAs are small (1924 nt) single-stranded non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression by specific targeting mechanism to mRNA molecules via complementary sequence pairing. Due to their critical implication in post-transcriptional regulation and impact on the developmental process, a number of (microRNA) miRNAmRNA integrated analysis tools have been developed. MAGIA () uses miRNA mRNA expression profile matrices as input and provides gene set analysis and miRNA target prediction. DIANA-mirExTra () accepts gene sets and computationally compares miRNA-associated motifs. miRGator (provides pre-compiled public resources with browser interface to navigate data. However, several limitations exist for these and other existing tools, including the following: (i) support only microarray or sequencing data but not both; (ii) require preprocessing or manual data compiling step; (iii) demand cumbersome installation procedures with interdependent tools and databases; (iv) run on limited computational resources that are not capable of handling large datasets. Here we present the next-generation sequencing (NGS) data-compatible BioVLABMMIA-NGS, an updated version of our array-based miRNA mRNA integrated analysis system mRNAmiRNA analysis (MMIA) (3 FEATURES Workflow: In BioVLAB-MMIA-NGS, the integrated analysis workflow begins with extracting differentially and (or) significantly expressed miRNAs (DEmiR) as in our previous published methodology (). To identify miRNAs and their expression level, we adopted the miRDeep ((), and the quantifier module measures expression levels based on read counts. Quality control and adaptor clipping processes are performed if necessary. Significance of expressed miRNAs is tested and visualized by DESeq () based on read count measures. Differentially expressed mRNAs/genes (DEG)s are extracted by using the TophatCufflinks pipeline () with junction aligning based on the RPKM measure. Statistical significance is visualized by cummeRbund (). For microarray data, DEGs and DEmiRs are detected by Limma package (). Once DEGs and DEmiRs are extracted, the next step, miRNAmRNA combined analysis, is performed. For the combined analysis, we used miRNA target prediction algorithms/databases, TargetScan (), PITA (), miRSVR () and PMTED (), as well as negative correlations between miRNAs and mRNAs, to extract DEGs targeted by DEmiRs. Gene set analysis is performed using extracted DEGs. Gene sets are automatically submitted to DAVID () to provide functional annotation and clustering, BioCarta and KEGG () pathways mapping, and disease association.shows BioVLAB-MMIA-NGS workflow.User interface: BioVLAB-MMIA-NGS keeps the user-friendly Web-based interface for sample information, analysis options and parameters, and computing nodes. To provide extended analysis interface, we integrated IGV () for visualizing the alignment results with zoom in/out functionality with annotation tracks and Cytoscape () for illustrating identified miRNAmRNA target networks. By using JAWS, IGV and Cytoscape automatically visualize the results; manual installation and data handling processes are not required. A Web page summarizing all the results helps the users to view and further investigate the data.
APPROACH To perform integrated analyses between miRNA and mRNA using NGS data, we completely redesigned the MMIA Web server. BioVLAB-MMIA-NGS uses sequencing data to directly measure miRNA and mRNA expression levels on a genome scale and accurately detect changes in quantity based on read count. The system accepts raw sequencing data as input without requiring any preprocessing steps. By using RNA-seq and small RNA-seq data, not only can BioVLAB-MMIA-NGS predict novel miRNA candidates, it can also extract new information about miRNA targeting of intragenic regions, exons and introns as well as 3 0 UTRs, which have recently been used in the integrated analysis in plants (Meng et al., 2013). Furthermore, to completely remove the burden of manually installing additional analysis tools, BioVLAB-MMIA-NGS adopts Java Web start (JAWS), a single click JAVA application deployment technology. Moreover, to support large NGS data analysis, the preprocessing and computational processes in BioVLAB-MMIA-NGS moved data to Amazon cloud and peta-scale super computing system called MAHA (http://www.etri.re.kr/eng/res/res_ 06020402.etri).
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
System: The information system architecture has also adopted several important changes. The analysis begins from the Web interface, and the graphical workflow composer shows progress status. In addition, BioVLAB, the cloud infrastructure used in our previous system, has been completely rebuilt using Apache Airavata (http://airavata.apache.org/), generating a highly flexible and extensible three-layered BioVLAB-MMIA-NGS architecture. Moreover, BioVLAB-MMIA-NGS now supports human, mouse and rice genomes. Funding: This work was supported by the IT R&D program of MSIP/KEIT. [10038768, The Development of Supercomputing System for the Genome Analysis], by Next-Generation BioGreen 21 Program [PJ009037022012]; Rural Development Administration, Republic of Korea, and by Next-Generation Information Computing Development Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (No.NRF2012M3C4A7033341). Conflict of interest: none declared. REFERENCES Alexiou,P. et al. (2010) The DIANA-mirExTra web server: from gene expression data to microRNA function. PLoS One, 5, e9171. Anders,A. and Huber,W. (2010) Differential expression analysis for sequence count data. Genome Biol., 11, R106. Betel,D. et al. (2010) Comprehensive modeling of microRNA targets predicts functional non-conserved and non-canonical sites. Genome Biol., 11, R90. Cho,S. et al. (2013) miRGator v3.0: a microRNA portal for deep sequencing, expression profiling and mRNA targeting. Nucleic Acids Res., 41, D252D257. Friedl ander,M. et al. (2011) miRDeep2 accurately identifies known and hundreds of novel microRNA genes in seven animal clades. Nucleic Acids Res., 40, 3752. Goff,L. et al. (2012) cummeRbund: Analysis, exploration, manipulation, and visualization of Cufflinks high-throughput sequencing data. R package version 2.4.1, http://bioconductor.org/packages/2.11/bioc/html/cummeRbund.html.
H.Chae et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
BioVLAB-MMIA-NGS at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
