Motivation: When processing gene expression profiles or other biological data, it is often required to assign measurements to distinct categories (e.g. 'high' and 'low' and possibly 'intermediate'). Subsequent analyses strongly depend on the results of this quantization. Poor quantization will have potentially misleading effects on further investigations. We propose the BiTrinA package that integrates different multiscale algorithms for binarization and for trinarization of one-dimensional data with methods for quality assessment and visualization of the results. By identifying measurements that show large variations over different time points or conditions, this quality assessment can determine candidates that are related to the specific experimental setting. Availability and implementation: BiTrinA is freely available on CRAN.
IntroductionIn the context of analyzing biological data, such as gene expression profiles, it is often necessary to identify those genes, transcripts or proteins that display prominent variations over time or across different experimental conditions. This can be required to preselect more interesting candidates for subsequent analyses or to reveal data applicable for further approaches, such as Boolean network modeling. This can be achieved by categorizing the data to a small number of distinct groups and assigning validities to this categorization. For simplicity, we will focus in the following on binarization schemes and mention trinarization as their extension in the next section. Binarization is the process of partitioning data into two groups and assigning a single value to each. It can be seen as a special case of discretizing a continuous signal into a k-valued signal with x 1 <. .. < x k , for k  2 (and k  3 for trinarization) (). The most common approach is to binarize measurements according to a threshold, such as the mean value (), a quantile () or more elaborate estimation techniques as described byor Hopfensitz et al. (2012). A threshold can also be learned from external information (). One commonly assigns the value 0 to the data points below the threshold ('low') and 1 to those above ('high'). The aim of any such binarization method is to find the most appropriate threshold. Binarization is often part of data preprocessing on which further analyses strongly depend. For example, gene expression data from time series must be binarized for the reconstruction and simulation of Boolean networks (see, e.g.,). Only then can these networks model gene regulation by representing each gene as a binary variable illustrating the two states 'active' and 'inactive'. In addition to being an important prerequisite to various analyses, binarization and trinarization can also be used independently to extract information. It can, for example, serve as an unsupervised method to reveal patternsshowed that binarized signals can be utilized for prototype-based classification. Tuna and Niranjan (2010) demonstrated that the generalization ability of support vector machines is not declined by binarized gene expression profiles. However, knowledge about data, which cannot be reasonably represented by two groups (i.e. data that is 'not well binarizeable') can give valuable hints about the processes that lead to it, like noise or gradients. Nevertheless current implementations of available binarization algorithms (e.g.) regardlessly impose an inappropriate separation into two groups and are not able to identify this additional 'don't know group'. We propose the R package BiTrinA, which is the first to provide multiscale approaches for binarization, trinarization and reliability assessment.
Functionality and application
FunctionalityThe BiTrinA package implements three binarization and three trinarization algorithms for one-dimensional data with integrated statistical binarizeability and trinarizeability tests and provides visualization functions to analyze the results. All binarization algorithms are based on thresholding a real-valued signal x according to a threshold t f x  I x!t :Here I  denotes the indicator function. The first binarization approach is based on k-means clustering (), which heuristically minimizes the sum over the squared distance of the data points to their respective cluster center. It can be seen as a Gaussian mixture model restricted to isotropic local covariance matrices. The k-means algorithm is typically initialized randomly and applied with restarts to avoid suboptimal results. For binarization, the number of clusters k is set to 2. The binarization threshold divides the data points of these two clusters. Hartigan's dip test for unimodality () is used to rate the binarizeability of the input data. The sample's binarizeability (actually its multimodality) is estimated by the distance of the sample distribution F from the class of unimodal distributions U:Furthermore, multiscale algorithms (BASC A and BASC B;) are provided. These algorithms compute a series of step functions to obtain a robust binarization threshold (see). An initial step function is obtained by rearranging the values of the input vector in increasing order. Then, step functions with fewer discontinuities are calculated sequentially. BASC A determines these step functions in such a way that each minimizes the Euclidean distance to the initial step function. Let S n be the set of all step functions with exactly n discontinuities. An optimal quantization of f 2 S N1 by a step function with n steps (1 n < N  1) is defined asThe distance jjf  s n jj 2 is the approximation error of a step function s n with n steps regarding the original function f. BASC B constructs step functions using a scale space approach. Bessel kernels with different smoothing factors r are applied to the first derivative of the step function Dx, yielding smoothed derivativesHere, I n denotes the modified Bessel function of order n. Based on these derivatives, smoothed step functions are constructed andselected. For each step function, the strongest discontinuity is determined. For both multiscale algorithms, the binarization threshold is defined as the median of these strongest discontinuities. A bootstrap test is used to evaluate the robustness of this threshold across the series of functions. A significant P-value indicates that the variation of the location of the strongest discontinuity across the step functions is low, i.e. the binarization threshold does not change over multiple scales and the computed binarization is of good quality (). For trinarization, the package also provides, apart from k-means with k  3, extensions of the BASC algorithms for the Trinarization Across multiple SCales (TASC). The TASC algorithms discretize a continuous signal into three values,where (t 1 , t 2 ) with t 1 < t 2 being a real-valued tuple of thresholds. TASC A or TASC B inherit their optimization strategy from the corresponding BASC algorithms. They select candidate tuples according to their achieved mean discontinuity for each optimal step function. The final thresholds (t 1 , t 2 ) can be seen as the median tuple of all selected candidates. The stability of these thresholds can again be assessed by a bootstrap algorithm.
ApplicationThe following illustrates the application of the BiTrinA package and its statistical tests on gene expression data. We binarized, and trinarized, a dataset containing gene expression measurements (4028 genes, 67 time points) of the developmental stages (embryonic, larval, pupal and adult) of Drosophila melanogaster (). We utilized the BASC B algorithm. After correction for multiple testing (FDR < 0.05), 252 of the 4028 genes are statistically significant according to BASC's test for binarizeability. A heatmap of the binarized signals can be found in. As an example,illustrates the binarization of the Rhodopsin 3 gene, which is a photoreceptor of the eye. It can be observed that expression remains low throughout the first three developmental stages but then peaks in the adult stage. This is properly reflected by the binarization, which achieves a highly significant P-value of P < 10 10 for this gene. An interesting question with respect to this illustration might be whether the statistical assessment of binarizeability can provide an indication which of the measured genes are involved in the developmental process. That is, can the statistical test identify genes whose binarized measurements somehow reflect the known developmental phases? Statistical evidence indeed suggests that there is a significant association between the concordance of measurements with the developmental stages and their binarizeability (see Supplementary Material). This shows the practical relevance of the proposed quality assessment for the identification of potentially interesting candidate genes for further investigation. We also performed crossvalidation classification experiments on the binarizeable and trinarizable signals that indicate that indeed the quantized information is sufficient for the categorization of the developmental stages (). The mean accuracy of a linear support vector machine () only declined by about 0.71% for BASC A and the TASC algorithms, and 2.24% for BASC B while utilizing only 27.94% (BASC A), 5.74% (BASC B) and 56.71% (TASC A), 18.18% (TASC B) of all features. In terms of accuracy they outperformed the k-means algorithm (10 restarts) that achieved a maximum mean accuracy of 93.58%, with utilizing only 0.41% of all available features.
ConclusionMany analyses require a quantization of data and thus depend heavily on this procedure's results. However, not all data are well binarizeable or trinarizable, and current implementations do not include methods to assess the applicability of the original data for such a method. Our R package BiTrinA integrates statistical testing procedures that are capable of assessing the binarizeability and trinarizability, and consequently the quality of discretizing of biological data. As such, the approaches can be used to identify candidate measurements that may be relevant for further analyses.Note: The mean accuracy of a linear support vector machine (one-versus one, majority vote) and the mean percentage of binarizeable features together with their absolute numbers are shown (FDR < 0.05, best values in bold).
Funding
BiTrinA
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
C.M ssel et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
