Motivation: Transmembrane β barrel proteins (TMBs) are found in the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria, chloroplast and mitochondria. They play a major role in the translocation machinery, pore formation, membrane anchoring and ion exchange. TMBs are also promising targets for antimicrobial drugs and vaccines. Given the difficulty in membrane protein structure determination, computational methods to identify TMBs and predict the topology of TMBs are important. Results: Here, we present BOCTOPUS; an improved method for the topology prediction of TMBs by employing a combination of support vector machines (SVMs) and Hidden Markov Models (HMMs). The SVMs and HMMs account for local and global residue preferences, respectively. Based on a 10-fold cross-validation test, BOCTOPUS performs better than all existing methods, reaching a Q3 accuracy of 87%. Further, BOCTOPUS predicted the correct number of strands for 83% proteins in the dataset. BOCTOPUS might also help in reliable identification of TMBs by using it as an additional filter to methods specialized in this task. Availability: BOCTOPUS is freely available as a web server at: http://boctopus.cbr.su.se/. The datasets used for training and evaluations are also available from this site.
INTRODUCTIONTwo types of transmembrane proteins are known to exist, -helical membrane proteins and transmembrane  barrel proteins (TMBs). The former class has been the major focus of computational methods, as they are known to constitute 2030% of a typical proteome (). However, TMBs are worthy of attention as they play an important role in the translocation machinery of both inner and outer membrane proteins in bacteria, chloroplast and mitochondria. Moreover, TMBs are involved in transport of molecules, voltage gating, membrane anchoring, pore formation and are also candidate molecular targets for development of antimicrobial drugs and vaccines (). However, the number * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of solved TMB structures in PDB is limited, since they are difficult to crystalize; consequently, better computational methods for the topology prediction of TMBs are needed. Such a predicted topology can function as a template for experimental investigations and can further aid in elucidating the structure and function of putative TMBs. TMBs typically consist of a central pore region made up of anti-parallel  strands and residues in the  strands follow a strict dyad repeat pattern (). The general construction principles of TMBs () have been employed for the topology prediction and genome-wide identification of TMBs. However, the low number of known TMB structures and a less prominent hydrophobicity profile pose problems in the development of computational methods for the identification and topology prediction of TMBs. The computational methods in the realm of TMBs can be divided into two parts (i) methods that aim to identify TMBs from genomic data and (ii) methods that predict the TMB topology assuming that the given sequence is a putative TMB. The first group consists of a variety of methods including methods that combine statistical propensities and C-terminal pattern identification (), empirical scores (), K-nearest neighbor methods (), SVMs (), Neural Networks (), Hidden Markov Models (HMM) (), amino acid composition () and secondary structure element alignments (). The HHomp method for the identification of TMBs employs HMMprofile comparison and is based on the observation that almost all -barrel OMP have a common ancestry (). Methods aiming at the prediction of topologies include HMMbased methods such as PRED-TMBB (), TMBHMM () and PROFtmb (), SVM-based methods such as TMBETAPRED-RBF (), neural network-based methods such as TMBpro () and methods based on statistical potentials such as transFold (). PROFtmb (), TMBETA-NET () and PRED-TMBB () also predict the topology of the identified TMBs. A comparison and evaluation carried out indicated that HMM-based methods outperform methods based on other types of machine learning (). Here, we present an improved topology predictor for TMBs named BOCTOPUS. BOCTOPUS is based on the ideas used in twoPage: 517 516522
BOCTOPUSrecently developed methods for the topology prediction of -helical membrane proteins; MEMSAT-3 () and OCTOPUS (). BOCTOPUS uses a combination of SVMs to predict the local structural preferences for a residue, and a HMM model to create a topology model for a protein. Based on a 10-fold cross-validation test, BOCTOPUS predicted the correct number of transmembrane  strands in 30 out of 36 TMBs in the dataset and achieved an overall Q3 accuracy of 87%. The primary use of BOCTOPUS is topology prediction of TMBs with the assumption that all input sequences are TMBs. However, we show that BOCTOPUS can reduce the number of false positives when it is used along with specialized methods for TMB identification such as BOMP () or PSORTb ().
METHODS
Training datasetA non-redundant dataset was obtained from the OPM database (). The dataset was homology reduced at 30% sequence identity resulting in 36 TMB structures. Development and training of the SVMs and HMMs used in BOCTOPUS was performed based on 10-fold crossvalidation. To further avoid influence by distantly related homologs, the training was performed in such a way that all proteins belonging to the same OPM family were put together in the same cross-validation set. All residues in the dataset were annotated as either 'I' (inner-loop), 'O' (outer-loop) or 'M' (transmembrane  strand) based on the coordinate of the C atoms and membrane boundaries obtained from the OPM database (). Here, residues located within the membrane boundaries but do not belong to a transmembrane -strand are labeled as 'I' or 'O' based on the location of the initial residue. The annotated dataset is available from the web server.
Training BOCTOPUSThe architecture of BOCTOPUS consists of two layers (). The first layer consists of three SVMs that predict the local preferences for a residue to be in a particular location. The second layer consists of an HMM model that predicts the topology. The dataset was divided into 10 sets such that proteins belonging to the same super-family were in the same set. During the training, nine sets were used to test the performance on the 10th set. In contrast to what has been done in most earlier studies, this cross-validation was maintained throughout the entire pipeline.
Input featuresThe input feature for BOCTOPUS is a positionspecific scoring matrices (PSSMs) obtained using PSI-BLAST version 2.2.18 (). Here, default parameters and three iterations of searching the non-redundant nr-database, obtained from the NCBI website in July 2010, was used. The log-odds value in the PSSM was transformed into a PSSM profile by dividing all number by 10 such that they lie between 1.0.
SVMs trainingThree SVMs, as implemented in the libsvm interface in the R e1071 package were trained to determine the preference of each residue to be in the 'I', 'O' or " M " regions. Radial basis and linear kernels, different windows sizes in the range of 1 31 were tried (Supplementary Material). The optimal window size was determined based on the highest Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) ().
Optimization of the HMMs'IOM-profile' generated from the probabilities produced by the three SVMs was used as the input for training different combinations of HMM parameters. HMMs used in BOCTOPUSare implemented in the modhmm package () and the HMM architecture is shown in. The HMM describing the global topology consists of a pre-barrel stage (P) describing the region before the first transmembrane -strand is detected. Further, a TMB is defined by four different states each representing the inner-loop, outer loop and the up and the down strands (). The up and down strand states can handle -strands in the range of 615 residues. To be consistent with structural properties known from the available 3D structures, all protein topologies start in the 'P' or 'i' state and end in the 'M' (down strand) or 'i' state. The emission scores for the states are the probabilities obtained from the respective SVMs. Based on the emission scores, the most likely topology is predicted using the Viterbi algorithm. The transition probabilities between states are set to 1.0 to make the final predicted topology dependent only on the SVM output values and the HMM architecture, but not on the distribution of topologies in the training dataset. Thereby fewer parameters need to be optimized. The emission scores for the 'I', 'O' and 'M' states are directly set to the probability scores obtained from the respective SVMs. However, to accommodate for the variable length of large outer-loops, small inner-loops and pre-barrel (defined as the region before the first transmembrane beta-strand) part of the sequence, we found that it was necessary to optimize the three states with self-loops. These three states are shown in bold letters I, P and O with a self-loop (). The four parameters tested per-state are the weights for 'I' and 'O' emissions in determining the emission score and the transition probability to go to the next state or self-loop. Each parameter was tested for values in the range 01 with a step size of 0.1. Initially, the four parameters for each state (i.e. I, P, O) were optimized separately, keeping the parameters of the other two states fixed at 0.5 using the same cross-validation scheme as when optimizing the SVMs. The best performing HMM parameters were chosen based on the correct number of predicted strands on the training set. The best HMM parameterspobtained for I and O states were then combined and IO-optimized HMMs were obtained. IO-optimized HMMs were then
S.Hayat and A.Elofssoncombined in all possible combinations with parameters obtained for the P state.
Global topology prediction based on cross-validated modelsAs mentioned above, for each round, training was performed on nine sets, and the remaining set was used for testing. First 'IOM-profiles' were generated for proteins in the test-set using SVMs trained only on the training sets. However, as thousands of parameters provided identical (and perfect) results on the training set, the topologies of the proteins in the test-set were then determined by using a subset of these top performing HMMs (for details see Supplementary Material). For the final evaluation, 10 000 HMMs were randomly selected from a pool of the top performing HMMs to predict the topology of the proteins in the test sets.
EvaluationFor per-residue accuracy performance Q2, Q3 and segment overlap (SOV) () were used. Q2 is defined as the two-state (membrane/notmembrane) prediction accuracy. Q3 is defined as the three-state prediction accuracy for i, M, o states. In addition, the number and location of the predicted strands was used to evaluate the performance per-protein. A protein was defined to have a correct predicted topology when the number of predicted strands is correct and each predicted strand overlaps with at least two residues with the observed strand. It should be noted that all results for BOCTOPUS are based on the 10-fold cross-validation and are reported as an average of a randomly selected set of 10 000 among the top performing HMM parameters.
TMB identificationThe ability to identify TMBs was tested on a non-redundant (at sequence identity 50%) representative dataset of 14 232 PDB entries obtained from Freeman and Wimley (2010). Here, a protein was assigned as a TMB when the number of strands predicted by BOCTOPUS is larger than a given number (typically 8). Methods such as BOMP (), PSORTb () and tmbetaNet () have also been tested in combination with BOCTOPUS for the identification of putative TMBs.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Residue-level prediction accuracyBOCTOPUS is a two stage computational method for the topology prediction of TMBs. In the first stage, three different SVMs are trained to distinguish between -strand/not -strand, inner-loop/not inner-loop, outer-loop/not outer-loop regions. Different window sizes ranging from 1 to 31 were tested (). The optimal window size was determined based on the MCC values such that no statistically significant improvement was gained on further increasing the window size. Based on this criteria, window size of 31, 19 and 21 was chosen for i, o and M SVMs, respectively. P-values for determining the statistical significance of change in MCC values with increasing window size are given in the supplementary information. This window size was maintained in all cross-validation sets; however, the SVMs were trained separately in each training set. For each residue, the probabilities obtained from the individual SVMs are used to generate an 'IOM-profile', which are fed into the HMM stage to produce the final prediction. When calculating the accuracy measures using the SVMs alone, each residue is assigned to the region with the highest probabilityin the 'IOM-profile'. The Q2, Q3 and SOV scores for BOCTOPUSSVM are 90, 85 and 75%, respectively (). The Q2 and Q3 scores compete favorably with earlier methods, which have Q2 scores 85% and Q3 scores up to 82%. However, the SOV score is much lower than these methods, as most of the strands predicted are too short.
Topology prediction using BOCTOPUSIn BOCTOPUS, the SVM predictions are used as input into a HMM-like model to obtain the final prediction. This step increases the per-residue accuracy in particular as measured by Q3 and particularly SOV (). It should be noted that, as many parameters performed equally well in the optimization of the HMMs, the predictions of the 10 test-sets shown here are the average performance of a randomly selected set of 10 000 among the top performing HMM parameters. The SOV score (92%) of BOCTOPUS is higher than any of the earlier methods. BOCTOPUS Page: 519 516522 BOCTOPUS) classified 2qomA as a non-TMB protein.predicts the correct number of strands on average for 30.1 out of 36 proteins (). Further, BOCTOPUS predicted on average 25.4 of these proteins with correct topology. Here, a topology is defined as correct when the number of predicted strands is equal to the number of observed strands and all predicted strands overlap the observed strand.shows the topology and correct number of strands distribution for BOCTOPUS run on a randomly selected set of 10 000 among the top performing HMM parameters. As shown, almost 65% of the 10 000 HMMs tested can predict the correct number of strands for >30 out of 36 proteins (). In, the most frequent incorrect predictions are shown. The top six are proteins for which the number of strands was predicted correctly but at least one predicted strand does not overlap with its observed location. In 9 of 12 cases, the errors can be attributed to overpredictions in the pre-barrel state (); whereas, for 1a0s_A and 2mpr_C, one long outer-loop is predictedshorter than observed, resulting in one predicted strand to be shifted. BOCTOPUS underpredicts the number of strands in two proteins (2vqi_A and 1e54_E). These two proteins are also missed by PROFtmb and TMBETAPRED-RBF that show the second highest accuracy on our dataset (). For 2vqi_A, BOCTOPUS misses two strands at the C-termini, in 3prn_C, Strands 10 and 11 are always missed and for 1e54_E only 12 of 16 observed strands are predicted correctly.
Multi-chain TMB topology predictionMulti-chain TMBs are TMBs whose barrel composes of -strands from different chains. Such multi-chain TMBs were not discussed in Section 3.2 because the grammar of multi-chain TMBs differs from that of single-chain TMBs (). For example, TOLC protein from Escherichia coli (1tqq_A), Drug-Discharge Outer Membrane Protein, OprM from Pseudomonas aeruginosa (1wp1_A), Multidrug Resistance (VceC) protein from Vibrio cholerae (1yc9_A) have very long inner-loops. A comparison of different prediction methods on multi-chain TMBs shows that none of the methods, including BOCTOPUS, can predict Page: 520 516522Column 6 the strand ids for predicted predicted strands that do not overlap (OV) with the observed location is shown. Column 7 shows the frequency of the most common error among the all mispredictions. the correct topology for more than one or two of these proteins (). Given the role played by these atypical TMBs as toxins (), further investigation of them in the future will be important.
S.Hayat and A.Elofsson
The BOCTOPUS web serverThe BOCTOPUS web server uses amino acid sequence as input and generates TMB topologies as output.shows an example output from the BOCTOPUS topology prediction pipeline. The lines show the per-residue probabilities for i, M and o regions, respectively. The horizontal bars represent the predicted global topology.
TMB identification based on BOCTOPUS predictionsAlthough BOCTOPUS is best suited for topology prediction and it initially assumes all input sequences to be putative TMBs, we tested its ability to discriminate between TMBs and non-TMBs in a dataset from Freeman and Wimley (2010). Here, a protein is assigned as TMB if the number of predicted strands is larger than a given number N.shows the TMB identification results for different methods combined with BOCTOPUS. The results for the negative set are presented as an average of 10 separate BOCTOPUS runs. For the proteins that are known to be TMBs (positive set), the topology prediction results are taken from the cross-validation test as descried above. Further, the results for PSORTb and other methods mentioned here are obtained from the respective web servers and the inherent homology was not eliminated in prediction. Inis the case when sequences are predicted as TMB and the number of predicted strands is  4 or 8, respectively. Five (out of 48) TMBs in the dataset () are toxins and not classified to be transmembrane proteins by OPM () and PDBTM () and therefore were excluded from the analysis. Six multi-chain TMBs are included in TMB identification analysis. Highest MCC is obtained by PSORTb + BOCTOPUS(8), where six of the eight FNs are multi-chain TMBs. of non-TMB proteins predicted as TMB shows that the regions predicted as TM -strands are enriched in -strands. Based on DSSP assignment for secondary structure, regions predicted as 'M' have 38.6% residues in -sheets versus 10.3% for 'I' and 'O' residues. The methods specialized in identification of TMBs (for example: BOMP, tmbetaNet and PSORTb) are better at identifying TMBs than BOCTOPUS (). The number of false positives for these methods vary between 53 for PSORTb to 2311 for tmbetaNET. However, when these methods are used together with BOCTOPUS, such that a protein is first predicted by a TMB identification method and then checked by BOCTOPUS if the number of strands is  4 or 8, the number of false positives is reduced without a large decrease in sensitivity. The highest accuracy is obtained when combining PSORTb with BOCTOPUS(8). The number of false positives is reduced from 53 to 16 with eight losses in TPs. Accordingly, the MCC value increases from 0.61 to 0.75 (). Six of the eight misclassified TMBs are multi-chain TMBs. This is due to the fact that multi-chain TMBs generally consists of 24 -strands per chain. The other two TMBs misclassified as non-TMBs are Toluene transporter TbuX (3bry_A) and Lipid A deacylase PagL (2erv_A).
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CONCLUSION Here, we present an improved topology predictor for TMBs named BOCTOPUS that combines local per-residue predictions with global preferences. BOCTOPUS is based on ideas previously implemented for the topology prediction of HMPs where different residue preference scores derived from sequence profiles are combined to predict the global topology (Jones, 2007; Viklund and Elofsson, 2008). BOCTOPUS is benchmarked on a non-redundant dataset with 36 TMBs with known 3D structure. Based on a 10-fold crossvalidation test, the prediction accuracy of BOCTOPUS is higher than earlier methods both when measured on a per-residue and a per-protein basis. BOCTOPUS predicts the correct number of strands in 30 of 36 (83%) TMBs and obtains the correct topology for 70% TMBs in the dataset. We also show that when BOCTOPUS is combined with dedicated TMB identification methods such as BOMP (Berven et al., 2004), PSORTb (Yu et al., 2010) and tmbetaNet (Gromiha et al., 2005b), it can reduce the false positive detection of TMBs. However, the performance in multi-chain TMBs is far from perfect indicating that the correct prediction and identification of such proteins is not a solved problem.
