Motivation: Despite much dynamical cellular behaviour being achieved by accurate regulation of protein concentrations, messenger RNA abundances, measured by microarray technology, and more recently by deep sequencing techniques, are widely used as proxies for protein measurements. Although for some species and under some conditions, there is good correlation between transcriptome and prote-ome level measurements, such correlation is by no means universal due to post-transcriptional and post-translational regulation, both of which are highly prevalent in cells. Here, we seek to develop a data-driven machine learning approach to bridging the gap between these two levels of high-throughput omic measurements on Saccharomyces cerevisiae and deploy the model in a novel way to uncover mRNA-protein pairs that are candidates for post-translational regulation. Results: The application of feature selection by sparsity inducing regression (l 1 norm regularization) leads to a stable set of features: i.e. mRNA, ribosomal occupancy, ribosome density, tRNA adaptation index and codon bias while achieving a feature reduction from 37 to 5. A linear predictor used with these features is capable of predicting protein concentrations fairly accurately (R 2 ¼ 0:86). Proteins whose concentration cannot be predicted accurately, taken as outliers with respect to the predictor, are shown to have annotation evidence of post-translational modification, significantly more than random subsets of similar size P50:02. In a data mining sense, this work also shows a wider point that outliers with respect to a learning method can carry meaningful information about a problem domain.
INTRODUCTIONThe analysis of high-throughput experimental data has played a dominant role in biological research over the last decade or so. Advances in instrumentation, coupled with our ability to archive and share data, have revolutionized the way one approaches biological problems, more at a systems level than at the individual component level. Terabytes of data from thousands of experiments at the transcriptome, proteome and metabolome levels are now available along with metadata corresponding to the primary scientific question. There is, however, a massive skew in the amount of interest shown across the above omic scales, gene expression measurements made with microarray technology being highly dominant with respect to the other two. The rapid take-up of this technology by the experimental community, the monotonic reduction in cost of arrays and the early establishment of data archiving initiatives () have led to a large community-wide focus on the transcriptome. Functional inference about co-regulated genes or genes along a signalling pathway (), disease state classification focusing at the molecular level subtypes (), subspace projections () and the reconstruction of regulatory networks () have been a number of notable success stories with transcriptome-level studies. However, the transcriptome itself can, at best, give an approximate picture of cellular state and function. Useful biological phenomena such as dynamic cellular function and differential spatiotemporal behaviours arise from quantitatively and precisely regulating protein levels. Such behaviours arising from protein-level regulations have been modelled extensively by mathematical and computational models. Examples include controlled progression through the cell cycle (), transcription delay-driven oscillations () and spatial selectivity in morphogenesis (). Several authors have evaluated the correlation between mRNA measurements and the corresponding protein measurements () and report varying levels of correlation.have developed a machine learning-based predictor of protein concentrations, which takes a different approach to previous research. In addition to mRNA levels, they construct a dataset with several properties of mRNAprotein pairs and train a linear predictor to predict protein levels. They carry out a greedy feature selection procedure to select a subset of relevant features. By this process,achieved a correlation of 0.76 between the true concentrations and the corresponding linear predictions. Their greedy feature selection approach selects three input features as relevant predictors:(i) mRNA levels; (ii) tRNA adaptation index (tAI); and (iii) evolutionary rate (ER), determined by rate of evolution of a gene by comparison with orthologous in other organisms. Data-driven models have been used extensively in the analysis of genomic data. Clustering, classification and time series analysis of microarray data have been carried out by several authors. Probabilistic approaches such as coupled mixture model with clustering () and Bayesian model () on transcriptomic and proteomic expressions investigate the relationship between these measurements. An approach that has not attracted much usage in genomic data *To whom correspondence should be addressed. analysis is novelty detection, in which one builds a statistical model of normal data and tests these against newly arriving abnormal data. The basic premise in such an approach is that when a data-driven model is applied to data, examples (or subsets of data) on which the model fails will also be informative. We build on this notion and, by seeking to develop a predictor of protein concentrations in the same spirit as in previous work (), identify mRNAprotein pairs that are novel with respect to the performance of such a predictor. We construct a data-driven linear predictor of protein concentrations, using as input mRNA concentrations and other proxy variables that can potentially regulate protein levels. Once we construct such a predictor, we look for systematic errors made by the predictor; i.e. we hypothesize that those mRNAprotein pairs for which construction of a data-driven predictor is difficult and also predicted protein abundance is lower than the measured abundance, are likely candidates for post-translational regulation. This follows from the fact that the input features used in constructing a regressor have no information pertaining to post-translational modifications (PTMs). Post-translational regulation of proteins is important in many biological processes. For example,demonstrate significant response variations at the translational level, decoupled from the transcriptional level, of mammalian cells under various stimuli. O'show that animal and plant cells have prominent post-translational contributions to timekeeping with respect to biochemical oscillations. Further, powerful computational models are also being applied to correcting measurements of post-translationally modified proteins (). PTMs are known to be triggers of intracellular proteolytic degradation (). In vivo stability of proteins can be substantially influenced by specific amino acid substitutions. PTMs such as phosphorylation and acetylation can act as proxies for such mutations by attachments at specific local sites, increasing the susceptibility of the protein to proteinase action (). Localized PTMs, such as methylation, can be equivalent to site-specific amino acid substitutions, affecting the degradation rate of proteins ()., reviewing PTMs, suggest that glycosylation (glycoprotein) and N-link acetylation influence protein stability. They also claim modifications caused by isopeptide bond formations with members of the ubiquitine family can be implicated in protein turnover, post-translationally. Swaney et al.'s (2013) study shows that phosphorylation machinery can be regulated by ubiquitination. Further, motif information on determinants of protein stability and degradation under PTMs is often available. The presence of PEST motif sequences located in flexible regions accelerates degradation under phosphorylation (). N-terminus segments act as degradation signals in cellular proteins. Thus, N-actelylation with N-acetyltransferase segments is directly involved in protein degradation process (). D and KEN Box motifs signal the anaphase promoting complex machinery that leads to ubiquitination and subsequent protein degradation (). The previously mentioned are observations we will exploit to confirm that proteins found by our novelty-detection framework are likely candidates for post-translational regulation of their concentrations (see Section 3). This article makes two contributions to data-driven modelling at the transcriptomeproteome interface. First, the linear regression with sparsity inducing regularization (LASSO) method can identify features that are relevant to a prediction problem. This, in the context of computational biology problems, is an alternate approach to the often used greedy forward selection of features. The accuracy of prediction of protein concentrations shows improvement over previous efforts at this problem. Second, model failures carry useful information, and this is demonstrated by identifying genes whose predicted protein concentrations are outliers () with respect to predictions obtained by a global regression. These are confirmed by checking functional annotations.
METHODS
Data preparationSeveral datasets were combined together using the open reading frame (ORF) and gene names to generate our final dataset. mRNA abundance data for Saccharomyces cerevisiae were downloaded from. We used PaxDb () to find the relevant protein abundance data, which was developed by integrating four datasets ().), gene length, ribosomal occupancy, proteins per second, ribosome density, relative translation rate and mRNA half-live are used as new features in our study. When these different datasets are put together, and some data are filtered for missing values and low mRNA abundances (log expression of 1), we obtained feature values and protein concentrations for 1895 proteins, which was the dataset we worked with.
Sparse regressionFeature selection is a key step in regression problems. For technical reasons, it is usually beneficial to reduce the dimensionality of the space, thereby avoiding the curse of dimensionality, which states that the amount of data needed to reliably estimate probability densities grows exponentially with dimensions. Further, by selecting a subset of features, we are likely to improve our ability to explain useful aspects of the problem domain. The search for a subset of features has combinatorial complexity and greedy searches such as sequential forward selection and backward deletion are commonly used (). For the protein concentration prediction problem,used greedy forward selection. This approach is particularly weak when there are correlated features in the input data. We chose the alternate approach of sparsity inducing regularizers embedded within the estimation of linear regression, also known as LASSO (), to achieve feature selection. This l 1-regularized regression has attracted much interest in recent literature and has the appealing property of easy implementation via convex programming (). The objective function minimized is as follows:where X is the input matrix of covariates, y is the response vector and w is the weight vector of unknowns. controls the amount of regularization, and with the l 1 norm constraint determines the number of non-zero terms in w, i.e. sparsity of the solution. We used the CVX package within a MATLAB environment for optimization of the sparse regressor and, after observing a histogram of the resulting weight values, centre clipped the weights at 0.2 to arrive at the sparse solution. To evaluate uncertainties in estimates, we constructed 1000 bootstrapped samples of 500 genes each from the data and estimated the sparse regressor over 20 values of in the range 01000. Average number of features selected () shows a stable region over several orders of magnitude of , from which a stable feature set is selected.
Development of protein abundance predictorThe protein abundance predictor is a linear predictor, based on the five features selected by the LASSO method, obtained by minimizing the following:Data were partitioned into five groups at random. With each of the groups retained as test data, linear models were estimated from the remaining four groups pooled together. Thus, all predicted values of protein concentrations from which outliers were detected (see Section 3) were on out-of-sample predictions. Predictors were developed with the five features selected by LASSO, the set of three features from previous work () and with all 37 features as input. Neural net: We also implemented neural network predictors to confirm any non-linear relationships between the variables and output protein concentrations. For this the neural network toolbox in MATLAB was used with stochastic gradient descent optimization of a multi-layer perceptron neural network with 10 hidden units ().
PTM annotation checkWe looked for outliers being post-translationally regulated by observing the functional annotations at two levels. At the first level, we used UniProt database (), which is crossreferred by the PaXDb () where we obtained our initial protein abundances. Several databases were used to carry out the finer level annotation check. EMBOSS explorer epestfind database () was used to detect PEST motifs of the proteins with phosphorylation modification. N-termini segments of acetylation were obtained by NetAcet 1.0 database (). D and KEN box motifs, which accelerate ubiquitination, were detected using GPS-ARM 1.0 toolkit ().
RESULTSSparse linear regression selects a compact set of features relevant for predicting protein concentrations accurately. Further, outliers with respect to the predictor we constructed, for whom the predicted protein concentration  ^ P was greater than the measurement (P), contained significant over-representation for proteins annotated with keywords of PTMs.
Feature selectionIn implementing l 1-regularized regression, the choice of regularization term is crucial.(A) shows the variation in average number of retained features, as a function of. We note that the number of features selected does not reduce linearly. Instead, there is a stable region, over three orders of magnitude of (0.001 and 1) in which five features are selected, suggesting that this dataset consist of five dominant features. To confirm this, we constructed several datasets of similar size with uniform random numbers and carried out such sparse regressions. We found the monotonic reduction in the number of features selected, also shown in(dashed line), on the random regression problems had no stable region of a constant number of features retained. Across the 1000 bootstrap samples (see Section 2), six combinations of feature subsets (containing 6, 5, 5, 6, 4 and 4 features) were frequently identified as relevant for the prediction. The corresponding frequencies are shown in. We note that feature set identified as set 3, consisting of five features, appears significantly more number of times than any of the others. This set consisted of the following features: mRNA, ribosomal occupancy, ribosome density, tAI and codon bias. This differs slightly from Tuller et al.'s (2007) study that identified mRNA, tAI and ER as relevant features. We find that in addition to mRNA and sequence derived features, measurements relating to translational efficiency (ribosomal density and occupancy) are also significant. This is to be expected because translation efficiency directly influences the quantity of protein synthesized ().Codon bias refers to differences in the frequency of occurrences of synonymous codons in coding DNA and evolutionary origins of codon bias has been investigated by. The role of such evolutionarily accrued biases in encoding on protein concentrations has been noted previously (). tAI might have a similar role, being related to the codon adaption index for a gene (). In a study on the human proteome,directly associate tAI with translational efficiency.
Protein abundance predictorWith the five features we selected by l 1-regularized regression, protein abundances were predictable to a higher level of accuracy by a linear predictor than either simply looking for correlation with mRNA levels or by the features identified in Tuller et al.'s (2007) work. Our best five features gave a correlation of r 2  0:86 between predicted and true values, whereas the combination of mRNA, tAI and ER, identified in Tuller et al.'s (2007) work, gave only r 2  0:80. Using all 37 features also achieved r 2  0:80 on unseen (cross-validated) data, which is lower than our five feature accuracy. Thus, in various combinations of tests the five features selected from regularization turned out to be superior. Performing prediction on neural net non-linear model gave only r 2  0:82 for our feature set and r 2  0:79 for the three feature combination from previous work. When the neural net was trained on all 37 features, the accuracy of prediction dropped drastically to r 2  0:69. Thus, similar to the observation made by, there is no significant advantage in using a non-linear model to this prediction task. As ER was not selected as a dominant feature in our feature selection model, we examined the prediction performances by progressively adding our five features and then including ER as a sixth feature. As shown in, the inclusion of the five features monotonically improved prediction results (this happens to be true for any order in which they are taken), but when ER was taken as an additional feature, the results dropped to r 2  0:80. ER as the only feature achieves a correlation of r 2  0:46 with protein concentrations. Similar to adaptation indices, the role of ER as a predictor of protein concentration is merely an empirical observation noted by researchers (e.g.), but the precise molecular mechanism of regulation remains unknown.shows a scatter plot of the predicted protein concentration  ^ P against the true concentration (P) from which we detected outliers, points that are furthest away from the regression line (shown as solid line). When we select the top 50 outliers, 48 of them were found to be in the upper half of the graph where P5 ^ P, i.e. the measured concentration is smaller than what the global regression predicts from mRNA level information. To confirm that proteins for which P5 ^ P are likely candidates for post-translational regulation, we carried out an analysis using functional annotations at two levels: (i) at a coarse level, PTMs are a primary requirement for regulation and (ii) at a finer level, PTMs coupled with information about protein stability determinants (motifs) are stronger indicators of posttranslational regulation (i.e. Phosphorylation  PEST motifs, Acetylation  N-termini segments and Ubiquitination  D or KEN Box motifs). At both levels, we looked for over-representation of annotations within the outlier set when compared with random subset of same size.
Post-translational regulations
Level 1: coarse level PTM analysisForty-two proteins among the 48 outliers (upper half) were recognized as being subject to PTMs and are shown in. Neither of the proteins found as outliers in the lower half of the scatter plot had this property. To estimate a level of confidence in the PTM keyword overrepresentation in the outlier set, we used 1000 random samples of proteins of size 50 and constructed a Gaussian distribution of the number of PTM proteins found in these sets. The resulting distribution had mean and standard deviation of 34.286 and 3.576, respectively. From this the claim of over-representation of PTM proteins among the outlier subset can be made at significance of P  0:02. As is usual in biomedical research of this kind (), if we take a P  0.05 as a threshold of. Performance of l 1-regularized regressor, adding features one at a time. Addition of our mRNA, codon bias, ribosomal occcupancy, ribosome density and tAI, which identified by l 1-regularization feature selection process, monotonically increased the accuracy in each step. However, addition of evolutionary rate reduced the overall accuracy of the predictoraccepting a hypothesis of interest, our suggestion that proteins in P5 ^ P outlier set are post-translationally modified is supported. We also checked 50 outliers from the Tuller et al.'s (2007) three feature set predictor for significance of over-representation of PTM proteins. Thirty-seven proteins were identified with PTM annotations, giving P  0.22. When we took 50 outliers directly from a scatter plot of mRNA and protein levels, the number of PTMs detected was 35, corresponding to a P  0.42. We also looked at various cut-off levels at which an mRNA protein pair could be called an outlier with respect to the global predictor. Setting cut-offs to extract 1, 2.5 and 5% of the data as outliers, we repeated the above exercise and obtained P-values. These are shown in. With our five feature predictor, the top 100 outliers containing over-represented post-translationally modified proteins are at a higher level of significance than for the top 50 outliers detected from Tuller et al.'s (2007) three feature predictor (P  0.17 and P  0.22, respectively). This further confirms that the ranking of data arising from our five input predictor is more informative.
Level 2: finer level PTM analysisAt this level of probing annotations of the outlier set of proteins, 37 of the 50 had PTM with motif information. The corresponding confidence level, computed similarly to the level 1 check, achieved P510 12. For predictors with Tuller et al.'s (2007) feature set and for simply considering mRNAprotein scatter plot to pick outliers, the finer level annotation that gave higher levels of confidence in over-representation (P  0.0017 for 26 proteins and P  0.042 for 22 proteins, respectively). When we changed the cut-off levels to 1 (20 proteins) and 5% (100 proteins) of the data defined as outliers, we obtained confidence levels of P  10 12 and P  0.001, respectively. We note that this level of checking annotations information, i.e. incorporating PTMs with motif information that influence protein stability, gives higher levels of confidence in support of our hypothesis. Thus, in all checks carried out comparing available annotation information, we can conclude that the outlier set of proteins are more likely to be regulated post-translationally. Further, PTM detection ability of our predictor (by looking at the outliers) outperformed in both annotation checks. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis: We also subjected the 50 outliers to GO enrichment analysis using Gene Ontology Enrichment Analysis Software Toolkit (GOEAST) (ZhengNote: 1000 random trials were used in each case. and). Thirty-seven GO annotations were found in the outlier set, four of which were common to 430 genes (GO:0044444, GO:0009058, GO:1901576 and GO:0032991), and were found in cellular component and biological process categories. We also observed that our outlier set is enriched for ribosomal proteins with 14 GO terms relating to the ribosome. Role of ribosomal proteins: Ribosomal genes are known to undergo intense transcriptional activity coupled with efficient translation (), followed by several PTMs such as methionine removal, N-terminal acetylation, N-terminal methylation, lysine N-methylation and phosphorylation (). As our outlier set of 50 proteins contained 23 ribosomal proteins, we evaluated the effect of the dominance of ribosomal proteins on out methodology. Though several of the ribosomal proteins in the dataset had high expression levels, their distribution was not significantly different from the remainder. We repeated the entire analysis after removing the 155 ribosomal proteins from the dataset. With the reduced set, when we took 50 outliers (3%) 42 had PTM annotations at the level 1 of our check P  0.02 and P  36 had PTM annotation at the level of P510 12. This confirms that the dominance of ribosomal proteins did not unduly influence the methodology. Analysis of protein half-life: We checked if the prediction ability had any systematic variability that was influenced by protein half-life, i.e. concentrations of rapidly degrading proteins likely to be under-quantified. We compared absolute and squared errors of our predictor against protein half-lives published byand found no significant correlation. Of the 50 outliers we detected, protein half-life data were available for only 26 proteins, and they showed no systematic behaviour.
Discussion and conclusionIn this work, we have shown that by constructing a machine learning based predictor of cellular protein concentrations, based on the corresponding mRNA levels and other features pertaining to transcription regulation, we can identify, as outliers, proteins that are likely candidates for post-translational regulation. Of the proteins we identify as outliers, proteins that are annotated as being subject to PTMs are significantly overrepresented than in any random subsets of similar size. We will not be able to get a perfect ranking in which all post-translationally regulated genes come on top. This is because a gene being annotated as being subjected to PTM, need not be modified under all conditions, several such restrictions are condition specific and for richer experimental data will be required to give a complete picture. Two generic points also need to be mentioned in closing. First, when fitting a data-driven model in the analysis of highthroughput data, outliers or model failures can carry useful information. Unlike previous authors who focused on the correlation between mRNA and protein levels, and on building accurate protein concentration predictors, our method, by looking at model failures, extracts potentially useful information about how these proteins may be regulated. This is an example of a wider point about the use of machine learning in computational biology; i.e. the purpose, unlike in building a voice recognition or finger-print recognition system where performance is measured in terms of accuracy of classification, in biology what we require is to cut down the space over which experimental work needs to be carried out to confirm biological function, PTMs in our case. Ultimately though, proof of biological function is confirmed in wet-laboratory experimental findings. What machine learning can offer is to find a reliable reduction in the space over which such experimental explorations need to be carried out. Second, the dataset we put together is synthesized from several different experiments carried out by different authors in different laboratories. Though all the experiments correspond to a particular organism (S.cerevisiae) growing under well-defined (exponential growth) conditions, there is bound to be variability in the data resulting from the fact that the different measurements were not taken from identical laboratory conditions. It is difficult to quantify the effect of such variability in the results we report. Conflict of Interest: none declared.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Post-translational regulation at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Y.Gunawardana and M.Niranjan at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
