Human single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chips which are used in genome-wide association studies (GWAS) permit the genotyping of up to 4 million SNPs simultaneously. To date, about 1000 human SNPs have been identified as statistically significantly associated with a disease or another trait of interest. The identified SNP is not necessarily the causal variant, but it is rather in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with it. CandiSNPer is a software tool that determines the LD region around a significant SNP from a GWAS. It provides a list with functional annotation and LD values for the SNPs found in the LD region. This list contains not only the SNPs for which genotyping data are available, but all SNPs with rs-IDs, thus increasing the likelihood to include the causal variant. Furthermore, plots showing the LD values are generated. CandiSNPer facilitates the preselection of candidate SNPs for causal variants. Availability and Implementation: The CandiSNPer server is freely available at http://www2.hu-berlin.de/wikizbnutztier/software/ CandiSNPer. The source code is available to academic users 'as is' upon request. The web site is implemented in Perl and R and runs on an Apache server. The Ensembl database is queried for SNP data via Perl APIs.
INTRODUCTIONWhole-genome genotyping has become established in medical, biological and agricultural research to elucidate the genetic basis of phenotypic traits such as disease or economically important features. Typically, the result of a genome-wide association study (GWAS) consists of a list of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with P-values that characterize the strength of association with the phenotype under investigation. Further analysis is necessary to associate a significant SNP with a gene or to decide if a significant SNP is a candidate for a causal variant for a disease or just in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with it. A causal variant is a genomic locus that has a direct qualitative or quantitative effect on the phenotype. SNPs can alter a protein directly (non-synonymous SNPs, stop gained or stop lost SNPs, frameshift SNPs or SNPs in splice sites) or they can influence gene expression if they are located in regulatory regions. SNAP () proved to be a valuable tool for the analysis of SNPs that are in LD with a significant SNP, but has the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. shortcoming that only SNPs that are present on SNP chips of the major genotyping platforms are considered. The main motivation to develop CandiSNPer was that much more human SNPs are known than systematically genotyped within the HapMap project or included on the major genotyping platforms. These SNPs represent potential candidate SNPs for causal variants, although they will not be observed directly as significant SNP in a GWAS. The number of reference SNPs (rs-SNPs) is currently 17 804 034 (dbSNP build 130; genome build 36.3), of which 6 573 584 are validated. In the Caucasian population, 4 030 774 SNPs were genotyped by the HapMap project () (release #27, February 2009) and 4 million SNPs can be typed, for example, with Illumina's HumanOmni1-Quad BeadChip. Thus, restricting the search for the causal variant of a phenotype to SNPs present on a genotyping chip or to HapMap SNPs would mean to neglect three-quarters of all known SNPs. To simplify the maintenance of CandiSNPer and to guarantee upto-dateness genotype and SNP data are retrieved from the Ensembl database during runtime. This is at the cost of a response time that is higher than if primary data were stored locally and LD was precomputed.
METHODSFor a given SNP (termed start-SNP) that was found significant in a GWAS, all HapMap-SNPs of a certain population in a flanking region of user-defined length (default: 300 kb up-and downstream) are fetched from the Ensembl database. r 2 and D are calculated between these SNPs and the start-SNP. The first and last SNP on the flanking region with an r 2 (or D , respectively) value above a user-defined threshold (default: 0.2) are considered as start and end, respectively, of the LD region around the start-SNP. Next, all SNPs with rsIDs in the LD region are listed with basic annotation: functional class, position, r 2 and D with the start-SNP, nearest gene and distance to it as well as the difference between observed and expected conservation score (). Hyperlinks to the SNP and the gene are provided in a HTML list. A plot showing r 2 or D for all HapMap SNPs in the flanking region versus the chromosomal position is generated for download in five formats. The positions of non-HapMap SNPs are indicated as ticks on the x-axis. The user can assign colors to the data points so that SNPs belonging to different functional classes can be distinguished. Runtime for one start-SNP is 5 min for a set of 100 individuals and 3000 SNPs. The CandiSNPer web interface is programmed in HTML/Perl CGI (v 5.8) code, running on an Apache web server (v1.3.37). Graphics are created by R (v 2.6.2).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Analysis of significant SNPs in intergenic regionsIntergenic SNPs are SNPs that are located at least 5 kb up-or downstream of a gene. In general, they are not associated with agene and not located in a known regulatory region. We applied CandiSNPer to all 545 intergenic SNPs which were at present found in the Caucasian population significantly associated with a phenotype ().lists the number of cases in which LD regions around these SNPs host SNPs of functional classes that are deemed as strong candidates for a causal variant. In almost half of the cases at least one candidate SNP is located in the LD region around a significant intergenic SNP. In more than half of the cases, however, no such candidate SNP could be identified. This suggests that the identification of causal variants will remain a hard problem.
A.O.Schmitt et al.
Example: analysis of an intergenic SNPs associated with LDL cholesterolAs an example, we studied all SNPs that are in the LD region of rs562338, an intergenic SNP 21 kb downstream of APOB on chromosome 2 that was found to be associated with LDLIf more than one functional class was attributed to an SNP only one is given. D is given if genotypes were available, else they were denoted NA. CS, conservation score; non.syn. cod., non-synonymous coding. Some variables are not shown because of limited space. cholesterol ().. They can have an effect on the functioning of the genes they are located in. The frameshift and stop gained SNPs are even likely to have a severe effect on the 3D conformation of the protein that APOB is coding for.
The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [11:07 5/3/2010 Bioinformatics-btq068.tex]
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
