Motivation: Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy is one of the most versatile tools to study protein folding and to validate the proper fold of purified proteins. Here, we aim to provide a readily accessible, user-friendly and platform-independent tool capable of analysing multiple CD datasets of virtually any format and returning results as high-quality graphical output to the user. Results: CAPITO (CD Anaylsis and Plotting Tool) is a novel web server-based tool for analysing and plotting CD data. It allows reliable estimation of secondary structure content utilizing different approaches. CAPITO accepts multiple CD datasets and, hence, is well suited for a wide application range such as the analysis of temperature or pH-dependent (un)folding and the comparison of mutants. Availability:
INTRODUCTIONThe past 20 years have witnessed a dramatic growth of the number of high-resolution protein structures deposited in the protein data bank (PDB:). The progress in structural biology has been driven by developments in recombinant protein expression technology, as well as by advances in methodology, data analysis and bioinformatics. Escherichia coli is, so far, the most widely used host for structural studies, which in turn require significant amounts of recombinant protein. Before resource-intensive detailed structural and functional studies, it is extremely helpful, if not essential, to validate the proper fold of purified recombinant proteins and one of the most versatile tools to study protein fold(ing) constitutes circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. Compared with X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, the structural information obtained from CD is limited. However, CD spectroscopy carries a number of advantages: it is a wellestablished label-free technique requiring comparably small amounts of material, and a short time is necessary for assessing structural parameters of proteins like secondary structure, conformational changes, (un)folding and interactions (). A broad range of mathematical methods have been devised to extract structural information from CD spectra to provide for an estimate of the secondary structure composition of proteins via multilinear regression (), singular value decomposition (), ridge regression (), principal component factor analysis (Pribic`Pribic`, 1994), convex constraint analysis (), neural network-based analysis () and the self consistent method (), respectively. All these methods are based on the assumption that the CD spectrum of a given protein represents a linear combination of basis spectra. Different secondary structural elements give rise to bands characteristic in wavelength and intensity ().The CD spectrum of a given protein can be represented by the molar ellipticity  l as a function of wavelength l, where f n is the fraction of each secondary structure n, and S ln is the ellipticity at each wavelength of each nth secondary structural element (). The sum of all fractional weights P f n is equal to 1 in constrained fits. The quality of the output of the aforementioned methods relies on the availability of a reference database of CD spectra of proteins whose 3D structure is known (). With the advent of the Protein Circular Dichroism Data Bank (PCDDB), a public repository for far ultraviolet (far-UV) and synchrotron radiation CD spectral data and their associated experimental metadata, the number of publicly available CD spectra increased enormously (). In the PCDDB, each entry contains sequence and experimental information for the respective protein and includes the PDB code for proteins of which 3D structures are available. During the recent past, different web services () or programmes () for analysing of CD data and estimating secondary structure content became available. Recently, Janes and co-workers () launched the tool DichroMatch for matching spectra against reference data. Here, we describe a novel web server-based tool combining different methods for estimating secondary structure content and analysing far-UV CD data based on a selected set of far-UV CD data as available from the PCDDB.
METHODS
CD Data collection and processingLysozyme (chicken), cytochrome C (horse),-amylase (sweet potato) and carbonic anhydrase II (bovine) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich at the highest purity available. Recombinant ubiquitin (human) was provided by Thomas Seiboth (FLI Jena) and the 1 immunoglobulin-binding domain of protein G (GB1) was expressed and purified as described (). All proteins were dissolved in 50 mM borate (cytochrome C,-amylase and carbonic anhydrase II), pH 7.5, or exchanged into pure water (lysozyme, ubiquitin and GB1) using NAP-5 columns (GE Healthcare). The protein concentrations were in the 10 mM range and verified spectrophotometrically at 280 nm with extinction coefficients calculated using ProtParam (http://web.expasy.org/protparam/). CD spectra were collected on a JASCO J-710 CD spectropolarimeter at 4 C in a 1 mm quartz cuvette. The instrument was calibrated with D-10-camphorsulphonic acid. Each CD spectrum represents the average of 10 accumulated scans at 100 nm/min with a 1 nm slit width and a time constant of 1 s for a nominal resolution of 1.7 nm. Data were collected between 185 and 260 nm with the appropriate buffer and solvent background subtraction. No further zeroing was applied (after background subtraction) because none of the six proteins we used for the experimental part exhibited, for our chosen 10 mM concentration range, a CD between 260 and 320 nmas tested in preliminary experiments. We tested a whole range of scan rates and time constants and did not notice significant changes in CD and the outcome of the CAPITO analysis.
Reference datasetsFor this study, we used the PCDDB dataset of October 2012 as a wellcalibrated, wide wavelength range reference dataset containing a large number of proteins, which effectively cover a large combination of secondary structures and fold space (). That database does not include structures of oligopeptides. From this dataset, only entries linked to an existing PDB code were selected. For multiple entries referring to the same PDB code, only the spectral data recorded at the lowest temperature were used. Our selected dataset contains 107 entries (Supplementary). Note that for each PCDDB entry, the values for , 3 10 and-helix are summarized as helical (h),-strand (b) also includes-bridge and bonded turn, bend, loop and irregular are combined as irregular (i), respectively. In addition, as reference for significantly unfolded and pre-molten globule states, 95 datasets containing the CD values for l  200 and 222 nm were used as published ().
CAPITO inputSpectral data in millidegrees or mean residue CD extinction coefficient () or mean residue ellipticity (), respectively, can be submitted in different data formats as text (txt) file: AVIV 60DS, Aviv, Aviv CDS, BP () and Jasco. Example files are available through the CAPITO web page. The user also has the possibility to manually enter or copy/paste spectral data, where wavelength and CD data are separated by a blank or a tab stop with one wavelength per row. In addition, it is possible to upload CD data collected with either smaller or larger step size than 1 nm. The default input data dimension is in millidegrees. Following input of additional experimental parameters such as protein concentration, cuvette pathlength and the number of amino acids, millidegrees are converted to either mean residue CD extinction coefficient ( in M 1 cm 1 ) or mean residue ellipticity ( in deg cm 2 dmol 1 ). Optionally, the amino acid sequence can be submitted as one-letter code for prediction of secondary structure using an implemented Chou-Fasman-algorithm ().
CAPITO outputCAPITO provides for the spectral data converted into either  or  as a graph (for review see). In addition, the spectral values at 200 versus 222 nm are plotted for an estimate of the folding state of the protein in question. The prediction of the secondary structure elements is realised via extraction of information from a calculated set of basis spectra and a matching-based approach as described later in the text. Of all CD spectra in our reference dataset, the three curves best matching the submitted query are plotted as well. All graphs can be downloaded as high-quality portable network graphic (png) files.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONOne of the most widely used applications of CD is the estimation of protein secondary structure content from far-UV CD spectra. Not only the relative proportion of secondary structure (e.g. helical,-strand and others) provides for a characteristic contribution to the far-UV CD spectrum of a protein but also aromatic and sulphur-containing side chains, the length of-helices and the twist in-sheets (). A large reference dataset is necessary to cover all these features for analysis. In principle, the number of CD spectra in a reference dataset defines the number of structural features that can be determined. Based on considerations of Hennessey and Johnson (1981) and), the number of different secondary structural elements significantly depends on the shortest wavelength used in a CD spectrum. For example, a lower spectral limit set to 190 nm reduces information content so that three to four different structural elements can be safely predicted. As using lower wavelengths might be impractical, in particular for biochemists, we restrict the evaluation of the CD data entered into CAPITO to three structural elements: the combination of , 3 10 and-helix as helical content (h),-strand (b) also includes-bridge and bonded turn, bend and loop are included in the structural feature irregular (i), respectively.
Reference dataset derived basis spectraThe optical activity of individual secondary structural elements is assumed to be additive and can be expressed as given inEquation (2). At any particular wavelength l, the sum of f 0 s is equal to 1 and all f 0 s ! 0 for a constrained approach.If the relative proportion for the secondary structural elements is known (from an X-ray or NMR spectroscopy-based protein structure) and the corresponding CD spectrum is at hand, it is possible to calculate the ellipticity for any given wavelength within the range of the CD spectrum. The least-square method was used for solving the f 0 s from a system of equations for our reference dataset. Solving the matrix [] by least-square fitting for each selected protein j in the reference dataset, a calculated  h, b, i for each secondary structure element, is returned over the wavelength range of 180240 nm (Supplementary).  for each secondary structure element is plotted inagainst the wavelength.
With this approach, we derived three basis CD spectra (helical,-strand and irregular) using our reference dataset. For the helical basis spectrum, the presence of one positive band at 194 nm and two major negative bands at 210 and 222 nm are most evident. This is consistent with basis CD spectra derived by others (;). The-strand basis spectrum is characterized by a less intensive positive band at 197 nm and a negative band at 217 nm. A negative band at 197 nm and a weak positive band at 223 nm are features of the irregular basis spectrum. The irregular structure closely resembles that of polypeptides in extended poly-L-proline II-like structures (). Also the irregular structure fits well the CD curve for poly(Pro-Lys-LeuLys-Leu) n in salt-free solution as model compound for unordered conformation (). A plot overlay of different basis spectra in comparison with those calculated in this work are given in the Supplementary Data (Supplementary Figs S1S3). In a simple model, the ellipticity of one secondary structure content is related to certain wavelengths. For identifying wavelengths best representing secondary structure content, a constrained approach was performed. With the three basis spectra ( h, b, i ) as derived from solving the aforementioned matrix], every possible combination of f 0 swith the boundary condition [Equation (5)] was calculated using Equation (2). f h, b, i  0:00, 0:01, 0:02,. .. , 1:00 4Subsequently, the minimum of the square difference between the calculated  cal and the observed molar ellipticity  obs in the reference dataset was determined. This was carried out for all proteins of the reference dataset for each wavelength in the range of 180240 nm. For each wavelength, the best matching combination of f 0 s was plotted against the experimental f values to assess the correlation between calculated and experimental data points, and a linear regression analysis was performed (Figs 2 and 3). For a perfect correlation, the actual slope of the linear regression of the auto-correlation would be one, and the closer the slope is approaching unity, the higher the quality of the prediction of secondary structure elements for a given wavelength. The results of the linear regression analysis are plotted against the wavelength. Maxima for the prediction of secondary structure contents are found for helical at 220 nm, for-strand at 206 nm and for irregular at 199 nm, respectively (). To extract information about the secondary structure content from a CD curve, the three basis spectra ( h, b, i ) as derived from matrixwere used in Equation (2) at defined wavelengths as follows. For prediction of the helical content, the calculated molar ellipticity of a pure helix  h at 220 nm was used. By varying the f h , f b and f i], with the constraint that the sum of the f 0 s is equal to one], the difference between the calculated and the observed  220nm of a query protein was minimized. The f h resulting from this solution represents the helical content of the respective query protein. The whole procedure was then independently repeated at 206 nm, and the resulting f b at this wavelength is considered as the predicted-strand content. The irregular content (f i ) was calculated at 199 nm in the same manner. In summary, for the prediction of the content of each of the three secondary structure elements, Equation (2) is used. Based on the maxima found in the linear regression analysis aforementioned (), as a measure for the accuracy of prediction, the programme extracts helical content at. For all of the proteins in the reference dataset, the secondary structure content was calculated, and the resulting slope of the linear regression of the auto-correlationas a measure of accuracy of the predictionis plotted against the respective wavelength. Calculated CD spectra for a content of 100% helix ( helical ),-strand ( strand ) and irregular ( irregular ), respectively, based on the solution of the matrix [] and using all 107 proteins in the reference dataset (Supplementary) 220 nm,-strand at 206 nm and irregular at 199 nm only (neglecting the respective contributions of the other two elements at those wavelengths). Hence, the sum for the three secondary structural elements can differ from 100%. Based on the calculated secondary structural content, optionally a theoretical CD curve can be back calculated and plotted against the query curve, and the goodness of fit between the two curves is presented as normalized root-mean-square deviation (NRMSD) (Supplementary Equation S1) to the user, where an ideal fit would approach an NRMSD of zero (). To evaluate the quality of the model, a cross-validation was carried out. For each reference protein in the dataset, the secondary structure content was calculated as described earlier in the text and compared with deposited data within the PCDDB. This prediction was repeated for all spectra within our reference dataset. The calculated secondary structure contents are plotted against the actual values (). From this, it becomes evident that this procedure delivers a reliable estimate of helical,-strand and irregular secondary structure content for a given protein. As illustrated in, the cross-validation provides the most accurate results for helical secondary structure. Only 7 of 107 validated proteins are beyond the margin of 20% deviation. The prediction of-strand secondary structure is somewhat less accurate than for helical content and shows that eight proteins of our reference dataset are not within the range of 20% deviation. Irregular structures (neither helix nor-strand) adopt a wide range of backbone angles exhibiting CD spectra of heterogeneous character. This hampers the accurate estimation of such secondary structure elements. With our approach, only four proteins of our reference dataset are not in the range of 20% deviation for the prediction of irregular structures. The irregular structure content in our reference data is not spread over the range observed for helical or-strand content. In such a situation, outliers have a more significant influence on the linear regression, resulting in a slope further away from approaching unity. This approach appears somewhat less accurate in comparison with other methods [SELCON3 (), CDSSTR () or CONTIN (),], but the results and their validation strongly suggest that the input of measured values at three wavelengths (220 nm for helical, 206 nm for-strand and 199 nm for irregular) are sufficient to describe the information contained within a given CD spectrum.
Matching-based prediction: nearest-neighbour and area difference methodUnder the general assumption that proteins with similar secondary structure content give rise to comparable CD curves, we tested alternative prediction methods. If the reference dataset effectively covers a large combination of secondary structures and fold space, matched reference proteins should comprise the actual secondary structure content of a query protein. To test this hypothesis, we used two methods to evaluate a query CD spectrum against our reference dataset. For either method, the query CD spectrum is compared with each CD spectrum of the reference dataset. As standard pattern recognition method, we used a k-nearest-neighbour algorithm () in the following two approaches. For the nearest-neighbour approach, for each wavelength within the range of 180240 nm, the 25 best matching reference curves defined by closest proximity were determined. Here, proximity is defined as the 1D distance between the query and the reference CD spectra at each wavelength. Subsequently, the frequency (N) of a given reference protein among the 25 nearest neighbours to the query protein is used for ranking. To assess the lowest area difference (AD), the best matching reference curves for the range of 180240 nm were selected. AD was defined as shown in Equation (6).AD (in deg cm 2 dmol 1 nm) represents the CD curve area difference between query (Q) and the reference (Ref) protein, where  Q, l is the molar ellipticity of the query protein at wavelength l, and  Ref, l is the molar ellipticity of the protein i in the reference dataset at the same wavelength l, respectively. In extension of the rotational strength approach presented by, the AD approach here evaluates in 1 nm steps over the wavelength range l the difference in area between a reference and a query curve rather than the area of a given CD curve per se. It, hence, also includes an (although indirect) evaluation of the shape of the query CD curve. The AD output provides the best ranked CD reference curves with the smallest area difference. The NRMSD (Supplementary Equation S1) between the best matching reference CD spectra and the query CD spectra is calculated and shown for comparison. AD and NRMSD are always calculated over the same wavelength range as provided by the query dataset. However, the NRMSD is neither used for matching nor for ranking of identified hits. To validate our approach for extracting structural information by matching query and reference CD spectra an auto-correlationwas performed. For this purpose, single-reference spectra were removed in turn from the reference dataset, and matching was performed with the remaining spectra against the structure content as derived from the removed spectrum. The structural contents of the three best matching reference proteins are combined to give a range for f h , f b and f i. In this approach, the secondary structure content of a protein in question is not defined by single calculated value but by a range of secondary structural content derived from the three best matching reference proteins. This prediction was repeated for all the spectra within the reference dataset.depicts the cross-validation for the structural content predicted by the nearest-neighbour method (a) and by the area difference method (b), respectively. Both methods deliver a reliable and comparable estimate of helical,-strand and irregular content for a given protein. Only a few outliers in the prediction of helical and-strand content are not within the margin of 20% deviation. Surprisingly, for irregular content, all validated proteins fall within the boundary of 20% deviation. The range of secondary structural content present in the three best matches covers in most cases the actual content of the query protein. A consequence of this is that an increasing number of protein structures in the reference database will further restrict the range covered by the three best matches and, hence, lead to an increased accuracy of the secondary structure content for a given protein as predicted by CAPITO.
Validation by protein identification and comparison with other programmesWhitmore et al. (2011) mentioned the idea of identifying proteins based on their CD spectral characteristics, i.e. if a protein is deposited in a database, it should be possible to identify this protein based on its CD curve. Here, we recorded CD spectra of freshly prepared solutions of six different proteins (see Section 2) and processed the recorded CD data with the CAPITO web server. Our reference dataset contains five (-amylase, carbonic anhydrase II, cytochrome C, lysozyme and ubiquitin) of six of the selected proteins used here. As seen in(and also Supplementary), our matchingbased prediction allows for the identification of proteins present in a reference dataseteven under buffer conditions slightly different from the ones in the reference dataset. All tested proteins were identified as indicated by the best score (and Supplementary).Note: The CD spectra of the indicated proteins were recorded and processed. The resulting data are analysed with different programmes. Helical content is represented as h,strand content as b and irregular as i. SELCON3 (), CDSSTR () and CONTINLL (variant of CONTIN () are provided in the CDPro software package ().. d For CAPITO, the result on the basis of spectra-based method is given. In parenthesis, the range of the three best hits is provided based on the area difference method. e Secondary structure content obtained through the PDB website using the PDB ID 1UBI (ubiquitin), 193L (lysozyme), 1HRC (cytochrome C), 1FA2 (-amylase), 1V9E (carbonic angydrsae II, CA-II) and 2LGI (1 immunoglobulin-binding domain of protein G, GB1), respectively. For K2D3 and PDB, the helical and-strand contents were subtracted from 100 to calculate the irregular content. All values are given as percentage. Of note: SELCON, CDSSTR, CONTINLL and K2D2 are used by DichroWeb (). Here, we have used the most recent versions of these packages for comparing their results with the results returned by CAPITO.To compare our method of secondary structure prediction, we used our recorded and processed spectra to a selection of other available programmes and web services (). The results () were compared with secondary structure assignments deposited in the Protein Data Bank, which in turn are based on the DSSP programme (). A standard set of reference CD data was tested to compare the accuracy of CAPITO with other available programmes. The standard set consisted of 16 proteins and poly-L-glutamic acid (). CAPITO returns a good correlation coefficient for the helical and-strand secondary structure elements found in the X-ray structure of the 16 test proteins (). As most programmes that rely on a protein dataset, CAPITO is not suitable for evaluating helical and-strand conformation content for long homopolymeric peptides such as poly-L-lysine, as our reference dataset does not include such homopolymers.
Monitoring protein folding under different conditionsDifferent folding states of polypeptide chains are characterized by specific shapes of their far-UV CD spectrum. For example, unfolded polypeptides or proteins containing mainly irregular structural elements show a spectral minimum in the vicinity of 200 nm and an ellipticity close to zero in the vicinity of 222 nm. Helical proteins show a characteristic double minimum at 222 and 208 nm and an intensive maximum near 195 nm (). The 'double wavelength' plot ( 222 versus  200 ) as described () allows the direct visualization of the folding state of a protein for different conditions (e.g. temperature, pH, buffer type and ionic strength). Here, we use this plotting routine within CAPITO to carry out an assessment of the GB1 folding state as a function of temperature. As shown in(lower panel) from the double wavelength plot, it can be concluded that GB1 shows a well folded state at lower temperatures,. Experimental validation: (a) a CD spectrum of-amylase (sweet potato) was recorded and analysed with CAPITO (black curve). As an example, the graphical output for the area difference method is shown. The best-matching CD spectra of the reference dataset are-amylase (blue), the second best alkaline phosphatase (green) and the third best hit peroxidase C1 (red), respectively. (b) Recorded CD spectra for GB1 at different temperatures. Upper panel: CD curve for the starting temperature of 4 C is depicted in black, other temperatures as indicated in the inset. CD spectrum of GB1 after heat treatment and cooled down to 4 C (GB1 a.HT) is shown in orange. Lower panel: CD values at l  200 nm plotted versus the values at l  222 nm to deduce the folding state of GB1 at the respective temperatureswhich is stable even at higher temperatures. At 80 C, a transition from the native folded state to the molten globule is observed. The temperature shift from 80 C to 90 C changes the GB1 fold from a molten globule towards a pre-molten globule state. This observation is consistent with the previous determined midpoint of denaturation at $75 C (). Although, this does not replace a detailed analysis (e.g. melting curve), it allows for a quick and coarse estimation of a transition point enabling analysis of unstable proteins, which may not withstand a time-consuming detailed analysis.
CONCLUSIONWe have developed CAPITO, a novel web server-based analysis tool for interpreting CD spectra. It allows the simultaneous evaluation of multiple datasets. Hence, it is suitable for the investigation of a protein in question under different conditions (temperature, pH, buffer solvent and mutations). Our approaches (basis spectra and matching-based method) to extract secondary structure information from a CD spectrum take advantage of a recent significant increase in the availability of well-calibrated far-UV CD spectra linked to available tertiary structures. The accuracy of our methods in predicting-helical,-strand or irregular content is reliable compared with other frequently used programmes or web services. In summary, we here provide a freely accessible, user-friendly and robust tool for the analysis of CD spectra.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTThe authors are grateful to G. Peiter and F. Haubensak for help with the IT infrastructure.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
C.Wiedemann et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CAPITO at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
