The CRISPR/Cas or Cas9/guide RNA system is a newly developed, easily engineered and highly effective tool for gene targeting ; it has considerable off-target effects in cultured human cells and in several organisms. However, the Cas9/guide RNA target site is too short for existing alignment tools to exhaustively and effectively identify potential off-target sites. CasOT is a local tool designed to find potential off-target sites in any given genome or user-provided sequence , with user-specified types of protospacer adjacent motif, and number of mismatches allowed in the seed and non-seed regions.
INTRODUCTIONCas9/gRNA (guide RNA), or Cas9/single guide RNA, a customized type of clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat/CRISPR-associated (CRISPR/Cas) system, has recently been used for effective gene targeting in many organisms and cultured cells (). This system is easy to design and engineer; only a single short gRNA, which contains 20-nt region reverse complementary to one strand of the target DNA (the protospacer) with an-NGG motif in 3 0-end (the protospacer adjacent motif, PAM) of the target site, has to be synthesized for a particular target site. The same Cas9 nuclease can be used universally; this notably reduces the cost of both time and labor, promoting the broad and rapidly developing application of this system (). However, the specificity of Cas9/gRNA needs careful evaluation. For example, Cas9/gRNA seems to have considerable offtarget effects in cultured human cells () and in several organisms (). In vitro experiments suggest that the PAM type could influence the cleavage activity: the-NGG type of PAM shows the highest activity, PAM of-NAG comes second and PAM of-NNGG shows the weakest activity. Mismatches in different regions of the protospacer in the target site also have different effects: a mismatch in the region of the first 12 nt adjacent to the PAM (called the seed region) may cause a notable reduction of the cleavage activity of Cas9/gRNA, whereas mismatches in the other region of the protospacer (the non-seed region) have a much weaker effect (). An approach to identify potential off-target sites in any given genome or other sequence is necessary to evaluate the off-target effects of Cas9/gRNA in vivo. An online tool used for Cas9/ gRNA target design also supports the prediction of certain potential off-target sites (); however, neither a detailed scoring algorithm nor an adjustable option is available in this tool, and only a few genomes can be searched for target or off-target sites. Other online tools, TagScan () or Pattern Match (http://viewer.shigen.info/medakavw/patternmatch/), are available to search for regions in some commonly used genomes or only in the medaka genome, with up to two mismatches. On the other hand, widely used heuristic alignment tools like BLASTN and BLAT are not designed for exhaustive searching for short nucleotide sequences (as short as 20 nt). In addition, the variable types of PAM with random nucleotides also need to be considered during the search for potential offtarget sites. Here, we report CasOT, a downloadable and open-source tool designed to identify potential off-target sites of given Cas9/ gRNA targets or target pairs in any user-specified sequence or genome, with several tunable parameters like PAM type and the mismatch number in the seed (up to 46 nt) and non-seed regions (Supplementary Material S1).
IMPLEMENTATION AND FEATURES
Single-gRNA searching modeCasOT is a Perl script and can run locally in Windows, *nix and Mac OS systems. Three searching modes, single-gRNA, pairedgRNA and target-and-off-target, are provided. In the singlegRNA mode, users are required to provide (i) an input FASTA file including individual 2133-nt target sites (1830-nt protospacer plus the PAM-NGG in the 3 0-end), (ii) genome sequence files to search for off-target sites or any user-specified sequence and (iii) (optional) a genome annotation file (Ensembl GTF format) for determining whether the potential off-target sites are located in exons. Links to public sequences and *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. annotation files for several widely used genomes are available at the CasOT Web site. Users can specify several parameters for the search, including the allowed level of PAM type (four levels are available), and the maximum number of mismatches allowed in the seed region (06 are available, but allowing 5 or 6 mismatches needs a large computer random access memory; two by default) and in the non-seed region (no limit by default). The program reads the input target sequences and divides them into PAMs, seed regions and non-seed regions. A pool is built to contain all possible 12-nt sequences similar to the seed regions and their reverse complementary sequences, with mismatches no more than that allowed by the user-specified option. The genome sequences or other user-provided sequences are scanned nucleotide-by-nucleotide to identify whether any 12-nt fragment appears in the pre-built seed pool. If found, adjacent genomic sequences of the fragment are extracted and additional test steps are executed to check whether the PAM type and mismatch number in the non-seed region match the userspecified options. If all criteria are met, the position and strand of the fragment in the genome or sequence are recorded. Then the detailed information of potential off-target sites, including locations, sequences, PAM type, numbers and detailed description of mismatches, is output as separate files corresponding to each target site. If the annotation file is provided, the gene ID and gene symbol are output appended to the off-target information when this site is located in an exon (Supplementary Material S4A). A statistic file to count the types of potential off-target sites is also output.
Paired-gRNA searching modeA new strategy for gene targeting using two gRNAs (pairedgRNA) instead of a single gRNA was recently reported to reduce off-target effects; in this system, the Cas9 protein is mutated from its original nuclease form to a nickase form (). With the guidance of a single gRNA, the Cas9-nickase only cleaves one strand of the double-stranded DNA and leaves a single nick, which is precisely repaired by the cell repair mechanism and does not cause mutations in general. For the purpose of gene targeting, the Cas9nickase and a pair of gRNAs are used to generate two nearby nicks located in opposite strands within a short distance; this can mediate a double-strand break and subsequent mutagenesis. In the paired-gRNA searching mode of CasOT, most of the input and supporting files and the options are similar to the single-gRNA mode, except that the two target sequences in each pair in the input FASTA file must share the same name with different suffixes '_#F' and '_#R' (). An additional option is supported in this mode where users can specify the maximum distance allowed between the two potential offtarget sequences (100 nt by default). The search results for each individual gRNA are output similarly to the single-gRNA mode; and pairs of the potential off-target sites located in opposite strands of the same chromosome within the allowed offset are output as another file (, Supplementary Material S4B).
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
.3 Target-and-off-target searching mode Sometimes it is necessary to design Cas9/gRNA target sites and search for potential off-targets of these sites sequentially. The target-and-off-target mode of CasOT accepts a sequence 51 kb and searches for candidate target sites first. Two parameters for this step can be specified by users: the allowed length range of the protospacers of the sites (1830 nt; 1920 nt by default) and the allowed type of sites [only-NGG PAM is required, or a G in the first position (5 0-end) for the T7 promoter is required as well]. Then the identified candidate targets are used to search for potential off-target sites in the given genome or sequence, similar to the single-gRNA searching mode. 3 CONCLUSION We present CasOT, the first exhaustive tool to accurately identify potential off-target sites in any user-specified genome or other sequence with flexible options in an acceptable period of time (Supplementary Material S3). Further description of its usage is available in Supplementary Material S2 and the webpage of this tool.
CasOT: a Cas9/gRNA off-target searching tool at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
A.Xiao et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
