Huge amount of metagenomic sequence data have been produced as a result of the rapidly increasing efforts worldwide in studying microbial communities as a whole. Most, if not all, sequenced metagenomes are complex mixtures of chromosomal and plasmid sequence fragments from multiple organisms, possibly from different kingdoms. Computational methods for prediction of genomic elements such as genes are significantly different for chromosomes and plasmids, hence raising the need for separation of chromosomal from plasmid sequences in a metagenome. We present a program for classification of a metagenome set into chromosomal and plasmid sequences, based on their distinguishing pentamer frequencies. On a large training set consisting of all the sequenced prokaryotic chromosomes and plasmids, the program achieves ∼92% in classification accuracy. On a large set of simulated metagenomes with sequence lengths ranging from 300 bp to 100 kbp, the program has classification accuracy from 64.45% to 88.75%. On a large independent test set, the program achieves 88.29% classification accuracy. Availability: The program has been implemented as a standalone prediction program, cBar, which is available at
INTRODUCTIONOne of the major challenges in analyzing a metagenome lies in the reality that metagenomic data are generally very complex in terms of their composition, often consisting of sequence fragments from numerous genomes possibly from different kingdoms (). While analyses of a metagenome as a whole could definitely reveal useful information about a microbial community, more detailed analyses generally requires the binning of the metagenomic sequences into multiple taxonomical groups according to some criteria (). There have been a number of published computer programs designed to bin metagenomic sequences into multiple groups, each of which consists of sequences from the same taxonomical group (; * To whom correspondence should be addressed.), e.g. from the same genera. Another important metagenome binning problem that has not been well addressed by metagenome sequence analysts is to separate chromosomal from plasmid sequences. This problem is important because sequence features associated with various classes of genomic elements in chromosomal and plasmid genomes are generally different (); hence separation of these two classes of sequences is the prerequisite to accurate computational identification of such genomic elements. For example, identification of genes in chromosomal and plasmid sequences represents two different problems even when they are from the same organism, since their di-codon frequency biases in coding versus noncoding regions, the basis for computational gene finding, could be substantially different (). For genome sequencing projects, this has not been a general problem since plasmids have been typically extracted using alkaline lysis () or removed using nuclease () so they can be sequenced separately from chromosomal sequences. However, microbial community sequencing projects typically do not separate chromosomes from plasmids in advance due to various technical reasons. So the sequenced metagenome is generally a mixture of chromosomal and plasmid sequences, hence raising the needs to computationally separate them. Here, we present the first computer program for classification of a given metagenome into chromosomal and plasmid sequences, based on observed differences in their pentamer frequencies. Using the pentamer frequencies collected from 881 completely sequenced prokaryotic genomes, including both chromosomal and plasmid sequences, we have trained an sequential minimal optimization (SMO)-based model () to separate chromosomal from plasmid sequences, which achieved consistent accuracies at 90% in our 10-fold cross-validations (10FCVs) on our training data, on an independent testing dataset and on the simulated metagenomes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
F.Zhou and Y.XuWe calculated the frequencies of each k-mer and its reverse complement (considering each such pair as one entity) on the whole sequences from both sets. The collection of 512 frequencies for each genome sequence is called its k-mer profile, which is used as the input of the classification models. We have used the classification tool provided in the Weka package () to train our classifier. We chose k = 5, due to its significant improvement in the overall accuracy, as described in details in the Supplementary Material. We have used the following measurements to evaluate the classification accuracy of a model: sensitivity (Sn), specificity (Sp), the overall accuracy (Ac) and the Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) (). In addition, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) is also used to measure the overall performance of a prediction model. The detailed definitions of the aforementioned measurements can be found in the Supplementary Material. We conducted the 10FCV on the dataset Training and All. We studied whether the model has consistent prediction performance on an independent dataset Testing, by training the model on the dataset Training. We also tested our model on simulated metagenome sequences, as discussed in the Supplementary Material.
RESULTSWe have tested five types of classification approaches, namely C4.5 decision tree, Bayes Network, Support Vector Machine, SMO and Nearest neighbor, for solving our classification problem. The results of our three evaluations, as described above, on the five approaches are listed in. On the 10FCVs on the Training dataset, four out of five algorithms, except for Bayes network, worked well with the overall accuracy better than 83% and the SMO approach has the highest performance in all the performance measurements with overall accuracy 91.82%. On the Testing dataset, the performance of the trained classifier dropped slightly as shown in, and the SMO approach remains the best performer with Ac = 88.29%. Using the 10FCVs on the combined Training and Testing set, the SMObased classifier has approximately the same level of performance accuracy, still the best among the five. The 90% AUC-value strongly suggests that the SMO-based classifier is accurate and robust. Some bacteria harbor chromids, whose lengths are between those of chromosomes and plasmids (). cBar predicted 84.85% of them as chromosomes, due to their similarities in the nucleotide compositions to the host chromosomes (). A few other validations, including the comparison with a BLASTbased strategy, can be found in the Supplementary Material.
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
