The atomic structures of protein–protein interactions are central to understanding their role in biological systems, and a wide variety of biophysical functions and potentials have been developed for their characterization and the construction of predictive models. These tools are scattered across a multitude of stand-alone programs, and are often available only as model parameters requiring reimple-mentation. This acts as a significant barrier to their widespread adoption. CCharPPI integrates many of these tools into a single web server. It calculates up to 108 parameters, including models of electrostatics, desolvation and hydrogen bonding, as well as interface packing and complementarity scores, empirical potentials at various resolutions, docking potentials and composite scoring functions. Availability and implementation: The server does not require registration by the user and is freely available for non-commercial academic use at
INTRODUCTIONProteinprotein interactions are involved in most cell processes, and their structural and functional annotation is essential to understand biological and pathological phenomena and to develop new therapeutic approaches. The increasing volume of experimental data on proteinprotein interactions at the molecular level offers many opportunities for functional characterization and the construction of predictive models based on properties arising from structure, such as interface geometry, hydrogen bonding, electrostatics and desolvation energy, which act as an intermediate layer between structure and function (). Indeed, the selection and combination of structure-based potentials within a learning framework have been used for many tasks, often beyond their original development purpose, such as the prediction of binding affinity (), kinetics (), mutational effects (), interface design (), proteinprotein docking () and the detection of hotspots (), with many further possibilities remaining to be explored (). Although many tools have been developed to calculate structural properties, some of which are available online (), their availability and ease of use are an impediment, often requiring the installation of stand-alone programs with different library dependencies, reimplementation of models for which only parameters are given and reformatting of pdb files. Thus, there is a need to consolidate these methods into a single implementation. Here, we present CCharPPI, a web server, which gathers together a large number of these functions, including those on which many of our previous models were based, into a single easy-to-use interface.
THE WEB SERVERCCharPPI incorporates many parameter calculation tools into a single web application, which is freely available for academic non-commercial use. Up to 108 intermolecular parameters are calculated for the input proteinprotein interface/s, including 43 potential functions, which have been reimplemented (), as well as terms calculated with 11 stand-alone programs () and 4 packages: FireDock (), PyRosetta (), SIPPER () and PyDock (). A detailed list of individual parameters is given online (http://life.bsc.es/pid/ccharppi/ info/faq_and_help#descriptors). Users can easily calculate descriptors of interest using a clear workflow. There are three different input sources: a protein databank ID code for automatic retrieval, an uploaded complex in PDB format, or a compressed batch job file for analysing multiple interfaces, for instance, those derived from docking predictions. The web front end acts as user input source and makes results available for display and download. The back end polls for queued projects and schedules jobs for parallel execution. The distribution of descriptor values can be visualized by clicking the descriptor name on the results page. For comparison, values are shown against a background distribution pre-calculated using a set of diverse non-redundant *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
yThe authors wish it be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors. complexes of known affinity (), with the relationship between affinity values and the pre-calculated descriptor values indicated by a scatter plot. Two pre-calculated datasets are available from the website. The first consists of the structural affinity benchmark (), a set of 144 complexes with experimentally determined affinity. The second consists of 157 wild-type complexes and 2731 unique mutations in the SKEMPI database (), as modelled using FoldX (). Computational time for calculating all descriptors is typically 55 min and took 515 min for the largest complex tested (the FAB/influenza haemagglutinin, PDBid 2VIS). Calculations are quicker when executed in parallel using the batch mode, with the 157 wild-type and 2731 unique mutants in the SKEMPI set taking 18 h to complete, and the 144 complexes in the structural affinity benchmark completing in 1 h 20 min. The server has been tested on major browser for MacOS, Ubuntu 12.4, Windows 7 and Windows 8.
CONCLUSIONSIn conclusion, we have brought together many different methods for characterizing proteinprotein interactions, and provide precalculated descriptors for two datasets, one of which is also used to provide a visual comparison of uploaded complexes with complexes of known affinity. The ease with which these descriptors can be calculated can accelerate the prototyping of reproducible predictive models, allow users to mix and match different functional forms to model physical phenomena, find new terms for their scoring functions and characterize their complexes of interest. For researchers interested in local execution or incorporation into their own software, all scripts and code are available on request. We intent to expand the pre-calculated datasets, as well as the features as new methods become available.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThe methods implemented have come from many laboratories, and the authors would like to thank all those who have made their parameters, code and software available, and for clarifying questions regarding licencing.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
I.H.Moal et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CCharPPI web server at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
