Cancer is the leading cause of death worldwide. Screening anticancer candidates from tens of millions of chemical compounds is expensive and time-consuming. A rapid and user-friendly web server, known as CDRUG, is described here to predict the anticancer activity of chemical compounds. In CDRUG, a hybrid score was developed to measure the similarity of different compounds. The performance analysis shows that CDRUG has the area under curve of 0.878, indicating that CDRUG is effective to distinguish active and inactive compounds. Availability: The CDRUG web server and the standard-alone version are freely available at http://bsb.kiz.ac.cn/CDRUG/.
INTRODUCTIONCancer causes millions of deaths per year. Screening candidates from natural or synthetic compounds is an efficient way for cancer drug discovery (). In the past decades, tens of millions of chemical compounds have been deposited in the public database (). Discovering anticancer compounds from this huge database through experimental methods is expensive and time-consuming (). Although the National Cancer Institute (NCI) has been screening the anticancer compounds for tens of years, only 1% ($70 000) compounds were tested for screening anticancer compounds (). Therefore, a rapid and effectively computational method is required for prediction of anticancer activity of chemical compounds. Here, we constructed a web server, termed Cancer Drug (CDRUG), to predict the anticancer activity of given compound(s). CDRUG uses a novel molecular description method (relative frequency-weighted fingerprint) to implement the compound 'fingerprints'. Then, a hybrid score was calculated to measure the similarity between the query and the active compounds. Finally, a confidence level (P-value) is calculated to predict whether the query compound(s) have, or do not have, the activity of anticancer.
METHODSTo predict the anticancer activity of chemical compounds, we first constructed a benchmark dataset, which contains two subsets, active and inactive dataset. The active dataset consists of 8565 anticancer compounds, whereas the inactive dataset includes 9804 compounds. All of the datasets are from NCI-60 Developmental Therapeutics Program (DTP) project (). The detailed method of constructing benchmark dataset can be found in Part I of Supplementary Material. Second, we used a novel molecular description method, termed as relative frequency-weighted fingerprint (RFW_FP), to calculate the compound 'fingerprints'. RFW_FP was calculated as follows:RFW FPi  Biti  F active i F inactive i 1 where i represents ith Daylight pattern or fingerprint. In Daylight theory, each compound contains more than one and less than 1024 patterns or fingerprints. RFW_FP(i) is ith relative frequency-weighted fingerprint. Bit(i) is calculated by Pybel (O'), a python wrapper of Openbabel (O'); if the compound has ith fingerprint, Bit(i)  1, else Bit(i)  0. F active (i) and F inactive (i) are the frequency of ith fingerprint in the active and inactive compounds, respectively. is the amplifying factor. In this study, was optimized as 4.0 (Supplementary). Third, the relative frequency-weighted Tanimoto coefficient (RFW_TC) between two compounds was calculated as follows:where RFW_TC(m,n) is the relative frequency-weighted Tanimoto coefficient between two compounds (m and n). S m and S n are the sum of relative frequency-weighted fingerprints in compound m and n, respectively. S mn is the sum of the common relative frequency-weighted fingerprints between two compounds. Fourth, a hybrid score (HSCORE), based on both the RFW_TC and the MinMax Kernel (KMM) (), was calculated to measure the similarity between two chemical compounds. HSCORE was calculated as follows:HSCOREm, n  RFW TCm, n  KMMm, n  3 where HSCORE(m,n) is the hybrid score between two compounds (m and n). KMM(m,n) is the MinMax kernel () between two compounds and is calculated by jCompoundMapper (), a Java API for molecular kernel theory (). Finally, for each query chemical compounds, the maximum HSCORE between the query and the active dataset (8565 compounds) was calculated. Then the P-value, based on the maximum HSCORE, was calculated. Because the maximum HSCORE is not 41.0, and because the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. maximum HSCORE of the inactive compounds have a generalized extreme value distribution (Supplementary), we can calculate the P-value as follows:px  F1:0; , ,   Fx; , ,   4 where p(x) is the P-value at the maximum HSCORE of x; F(x;m,,) is the cumulative function of generalized extreme value distribution. Using the maximum likelihood method ('fgev' function in R 'evd' package), we estimated the location parameter m of 0.094, the scale parameter of 0.063 and the shape parameter of 0.302. To implement the performance of CDRUG, 20 runs of 5-fold cross-validation method (Part II in Supplementary Material) were used to calculate the area under the curve (AUC). Four non-hybrid methods (including Daylight Tanimoto coefficient, RFW_TC, Tanimoto Kernel and MinMax kernel) and six hybrid methods were used to test the performance of the CDRUG (Part V of Supplementary Material).
DESCRIPTION OF CDRUGCDRUG uses a novel weighted method (RFW_FP) to implement the molecular fingerprints, and it then uses a hybrid score to measure the compound similarity. The result shows that CDRUG outperforms other methods (P510 13 , t-test) (and Supplementary Figs S4 and S5). When non-hybrid methods were used, MinMax kernel obtained the best performance with the AUC of 0.865. But when the hybrid methods were used, the AUC of CDRUG increased to 0.878. CDRUG can hit $65% positive results at the false-positive rate of 0.05 (Supplementary Figs S4 and S5). These results indicated that the CDRUG is effective to predict anticancer activity of the chemical compounds. CDRUG is rapid. It accepts one or more compounds to implement a prediction. A query with 120 compounds requires $35 s, whereas a query with 1000 compounds only requires $4 min. Therefore, CDRUG can be applied to both case-study and large-scale prediction. CDRUG is user-friendly. The only requirement of CDRUG is the SMILE(s) () of the query compound(s). The result contains the query compound(s), the matched compound(s), average GI50 value of the matched compound(s), the maximum HSCORE and the P-value. CDRUG also predicts whether the query compound(s) have or do not have the activity of anticancer. The results are categorized as highly possible, possible and less possible depending on the P-value, and they are coloured by green, black and grey, respectively ().
CONCLUSIONCDRUG web server provides an effective, rapid and user-friendly interface to predict anticancer activity of chemical compounds.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
