Gene expression data are typically generated from heterogeneous biological samples that are composed of multiple cell or tissue types, in varying proportions, each contributing to global gene expression. This heterogeneity is a major confounder in standard analysis such as differential expression analysis, where differences in the relative proportions of the constituent cells may prevent or bias the detection of cell-specific differences. Computational deconvolution of global gene expression is an appealing alternative to costly physical sample separation techniques and enables a more detailed analysis of the underlying biological processes at the cell-type level. To facilitate and popularize the application of such methods, we developed CellMix, an R package that incorporates most state-of-the-art deconvolution methods, into an intuitive and extendible framework, providing a single entry point to explore, assess and disentangle gene expression data from heterogeneous samples. Availability and Implementation: The CellMix package builds on R/BioConductor and is available from http://web.cbio.uct.ac.za/ renaud/CRAN/web/CellMix. It is currently being submitted to BioConductor. The package's vignettes notably contain additional information, examples and references.
GENE EXPRESSION DECONVOLUTIONThe vast majority of gene expression data is generated from biological samples that are composed of multiple cell or tissue types that contribute to different extents to the global gene expression, according to their relative proportions. Heterogeneity in sample composition is commonly acknowledged as a major confounder in classical gene expression analysis such as differential expression analysis, specially in clinical studies (). In this context, being able to disentangle the effects due to cell-specific expression and/or varying proportions provides finer insights into the biological processes of interest, by enabling the data to be explored at the cell-type level. Gene expression deconvolution receives constant interest in bioinformatics research, with new methodologies published regularly (). Although all methods apply to global expression data, they differ in the type of auxiliary data they required, such as cell proportion measurements/estimates, cell-specific signatures or sets of marker genes. Having a standardized and unified interface for running a variety of deconvolution methods that can adapt to most common data settings would therefore be useful and help popularize computational deconvolution. To facilitate the application and development of gene expression deconvolution methods, we developed an R package called CellMix, whose principal objectives are to provide (i) implementations of some common methods; (ii) easy access to real auxiliary and benchmark data, and especially marker gene lists; (iii) utilities for assessing results and developing new methods. This article briefly describes the main features of the CellMix package and illustrates its capability with some concrete examples. More examples, as well as thorough documentation, references and implementation details are available in the package's vignettes.
THE CellMix PACKAGE: OVERVIEWThe CellMix package builds on the Bioconductor project () and the NMF package () to provide a flexible general framework for gene expression deconvolution methods. It defines a rich programming interface around three internal extendible registries dedicated to deconvolution methods, marker gene lists and benchmark datasets, respectively.
Deconvolution methodsCellMix provides access to a range of seven gene expression deconvolution methods, in such a way that they can easily be applied to commonly available data, via a unique interface function called ged. In particular, we implemented a default method selection scheme, which chooses a sensible deconvolution method based on the type of input and auxiliary data that are provided (See section 'Algorithms' on the package's webpage for details on each available method).
Cell signatures and marker gene setsIn the context of gene expression deconvolution and sample heterogeneity in general, marker genes constitute a critical asset. For example, they can provide cell-specific signals that can be used to estimate cell-specific signatures and/or cell proportions or detect cell-type-related differential expression (). The CellMix package includes a set of eight marker gene lists, compiled from previous studies and public databases, and provides many convenient filtering or plotting functions for such type of data. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
yPresent address: Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute ofMoreover, it implements a flexible general pipeline to convert gene identifiers, including across platform or species, which greatly simplifies the use of both marker genes and datasets from one study in another.
Benchmark datasetsCellMix ships with a curated repository of 11 public datasets compiled from a variety of published studies on cell/tissue-specific gene expression or deconvolution methods. These datasets were chosen because they contain not only global gene expression from mixed samples but also data such as cell-type-specific signatures and/or measured mixture proportions for each sample, making them ideal for developing and validating deconvolution approaches. Each dataset can be loaded in a single call, which applies a pre-processing pipeline to the originalnormalizeddata, downloaded from public repositories. In particular, data relevant for deconvolution are extracted from sample annotations and processed into single data objects, from which mixed/pure sample expression profiles and/or cell proportions can be easily retrieved.
EXAMPLE: BLOOD SAMPLE DECONVOLUTIONThe dataset GSE20300 contains gene expression data (on Affymetrix HGU133Plus2) of whole-blood samples from stable and acute rejection pediatric kidney transplant, for which Complete Blood Count (CBC) data are available (). The following code estimates these proportions using an optimized set of immune cell-type signatures (on Affymetrix HGU133A/B) () and produces the scatter plot in. Both these data are available in the CellMix package. Importantly, sensible probeset mapping or joint data transformation and normalization are transparently handled via acustomisablepre-processing pipeline. To our knowledge, this is the first time these data have been used in this way. The ease with which the results are generated highlights the usefulness of the CellMix package.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
EXAMPLE: WORKING WITH MARKER GENES In this example, we illustrate how CellMix simplifies working with marker genes lists. The consistency of expression profiles from four transformed immune cell lines contained in dataset GSE11058 (on Affymetrix HGU133Plus2) (Abbas et al., 2009) is graphically assessed using the marker gene list from HaemAtlas, which contains markers for eight immune cell types derived by Watkins et al. (2009) in an independent study (on Illumina Human V2). The following code generates the heatmap in Figure 1. This shows the expression profiles of the HaemAtlas marker genes that are most highly expressed in the cell lines on the columns (50 marker genes per cell type). Rows are scaled into relative expression separately (i.e. sum up to one). The row annotation columns on the left-hand side highlight the cell line in which each marker is expressed at the highest level. They show that some markers are highly expressed by cell types other than their own, which suggests either an altered expression profile of these cell lines or an inadequacy of these markers for this particular dataset. 5 CONCLUSION The CellMix package provides a comprehensive set of functionalities that together facilitate the exploration, assessment and deconvolution of gene expression data generated from heterogeneous biological samples. It integrates multiple tissue/cell-specific gene databases, a set of curated benchmark public gene expression datasets and most of the state-of-the-art deconvolution algorithms into a single unified framework. The package is designed to be intuitive and extendible, as well as to integrate well with standard R/BioConductor packages. Being suitable for both data analysis and algorithm implementation, such a toolbox will hopefully help and encourage researchers to explore gene expression data at the cell-type level, as well as to develop new deconvolution methodologies. Funding: C.S. is funded by Science Foundation Ireland (grant number 07/SK/M1211b). R.G.'s work at the Technion is supported by the Lady Davis fellowship. Conflict of Interest: none declared.
R.Gaujoux and C.Seoighe at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
