Motivation: Cancer genomes are characterized by the accumulation of point mutations and structural alterations such as copy-number alterations and genomic rearrangements. Among structural changes, systematic analyses of copy-number alterations have provided deeper insight into the architecture of cancer genomes and had led to new potential treatment opportunities. During the course of cancer genome evolution, selection mechanisms are leading to a non-random pattern of mutational events contributing to fitness benefits of the cancer cells. We therefore developed a new method to dissect random from non-random patterns in copy-number data and thereby to assess significantly enriched somatic copy-number aberrations across a set of tumor specimens or cell lines. In contrast to existing approaches, the method is invariant to any strictly monotonous transformation of the input data which results to an insensitivity of differences in tumor purity, array saturation effects and copy-number baseline levels. Results: We applied our approach to recently published datasets of small-cell lung cancer and squamous cell lung cancer and validated its performance by comparing the results to an orthogonal approach. In addition, we found a new deletion peak containing the HLA-A gene in squamous cell lung cancer. Availability: The CGARS program package is available for download at http://www.translational-genomics.uni-koeln.de/scientific-resources/ Documentation and examples are available together with the package. Contact
INTRODUCTIONRecently, several algorithms to identify significant copy-number alterations from array-based high-throughput data (e.g. Affymetrix SNP arrays or array CGH) have been proposed (). All of these methods have in common that the occurrence of different levels of tumor purity and ploidy are barely taken into account. Especially in the case of patient-derived tumor samples, the admixture of nonneoplastic cells is an uncontrollable experimental variable, often leading to large differences in tumor purity throughout the dataset. An additional feature of cancer genomes is that some tumors exhibit diverting levels of genome ploidy (triploid, tetraploid, etc.). Both, low tumor purity and higher genome ploidy lead to a decrease of inferred copy-number amplitudes (). By using rank sums, we propose a novel copy-number-analysis method that automatically accounts for these different levels of purity and ploidy. We applied this approach to published datasets of small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) () and squamous cell carcinoma (SQ) () and finally validated detected regions of copy-number alteration by comparing the results with those derived from a GISTIC analysis ().
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATIONThe general idea behind our method is to transform raw copy numbers into ranks. Probe sets in locations of common germ line copy-number variations are removed. Rank sums for each genomic location are then computed, smoothed and statistically evaluated. These key steps are schematically shown in. A detailed general description of the CGARS algorithm including all mathematical details is given in the Supplementary Material.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONTo validate our method and to test its performance, we analyzed published datasets of 63 SCLC () and 146 SQ () tumor samples and compared the resulting data with an analysis using GISTIC (). We observed that CGARS consumed substantially less computation time and memory than GISTIC on the same computational infrastructure [CGARS: 101s, 2.6GB (SCLC) 264s, 5.6GB (SQ); GISTIC: 289s, 9.1GB (SCLC) 397s, 9GB (SQ)]. Almost all identified high-confidence peaks of copy-number alteration are highly consistent between the two approaches (and Supplementaryand Tables S1 and S2). Together with previously published copy-number analyses on SCLC and SQ () this result supports the validity of our approach. In case of the SQ dataset, we identified seven highly significant amplification peaks (containing genes: CCND1, CCNE1, MYC, FGFR1, EGFR, SOX2 and KRAS) and three deletion peaks (containing genes: LRP1B, CDKN2A and PTPRD) consistently detected by GISTIC and CGARS (). Most discordant regions identified by either method are broad lesions (Supplementary). Focal copy-number alterations only identified by GISTIC include KIAA1841, MTMR3 and PARD6G; the link of these genes to SQ is currently unclear. Among the regions identified only by CGARS are peaks *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com containing MYCL1 and PTEN; both regions appeared altered upon visual inspection of the data analyzed as well as in an independent dataset (Supplementary). Using CGARS we were further able to identify a previously unappreciated deletion peak region at 6p21.33 containing the HLA-A class I major histocompatibility gene (Supplementary). In addition, HLA-A is frequently subjected to loss of function mutations in SQ (). Thus, identified deletions matched the mutation spectrum in the same tumor type and is therefore supporting the notion that HLA-A is a biologically relevant gene in SQ. Finally, to demonstrate that CGARS is not over-calling copynumber aberrations, we analyzed our recently published dataset of 70 pulmonary carcinoids ()a tumor that is particularly silent in copy-number space. Besides a single broad deletion peak located at 11p11, none other significant copynumber aberration were detected, suggesting that CGARS is indeed not over-calling copy-number data. In summary, we formulated a new copy-number-analysis method and tested its performance by comparing the results with an orthogonal approach. Our approach yields robust results, is computationally inexpensive, and is highly flexible. Furthermore, we identified a new deletion-peak region containing HLA-A; a gene that is also frequently mutated in SQ. Our methodology may thus offer a valuable addition to existing approaches since its flexibility enables the possibility of exploring datasets under various aspects.rank sums. Upper and lower copynumber quantiles are then defined and ranks falling into the upper quantile (red bars) are separately analyzed from those that are situated in the lower quantile (blue bars). Each genomic location is represented by two bars indicating the multiple quantile selection. Ranks outside either quantile (white bars) are not considered for the subsequent analysis. Next, rank sums are computed for each genomic location and maximized (amplifications) or minimized (deletion) over the multiple quantiles (blue and red stars). These extremal rank sums are then subjected to a smoothing procedure. Statistics of smoothed rank sum profiles are finally computed to determine significant copy-number alterations, here shown by bars exceeding the dashed horizontal line (level of significance). (B) Results obtained from CGARS and GISTIC based on the SQ dataset. As main parameters we chose for CGARS: uq  0.25, 0.05 (upper quantile), lq  0.35, 0.25 (lower quantile), and for GISTIC: ta  tb  0.4 (copynumber threshold). Vertical dashed lines indicate the significance level of 1% and putative target genes in the proximity of the copy-number peaks are shown in parentheses
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Conflict of Interest: R.K.T. and M.P. are founder and shareholder of Blackfield AG, a company focused on cancer genome diagnostics and cancer genomics-based drug discovery. M.P. received consulting fees from Blackfield AG. R.K.T. received consulting and lecture fees (Sanofi-Aventis, Merck, Roche, Lilly, Boehringer Ingelheim, Astra-Zeneca, AtlasBiolabs, Daiichi-Sankyo, MSD, Puma, Blackfield AG) as well as research support (Merck, EOS and AstraZeneca).
X.Lu et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
