ENSEMBLE is a computational approach for determining a set of conformations that represents the structural ensemble of a disordered protein based on input experimental data. The disordered protein can be an unfolded or intrinsically disordered state. Here, we introduce the latest version of the program, which has been enhanced to facilitate its general release and includes an intuitive user interface, as well as new approaches to treat data and analyse results. Availability and implementation: ENSEMBLE is a program implemented in C and embedded in a Perl wrapper. It is supported on main Linux distributions. Source codes and installation files, including a detailed example, can be freely downloaded at
INTRODUCTIONA detailed understanding of biology requires structural and dynamic information for the proteins in the cell and their dynamic excursions for enzymatic and other functions, as well as their interactions, both transient and long-lived. There has been an explosion of structural and dynamic information on folded protein states that has coincided with the development of computational tools for incorporation of experimental data into algorithms to describe the dominant conformations populated by stable proteins [CNS (), XPLOR-NIH () and CCP4 (. However, unfolded and intrinsically disordered states have not been extensively characterized, although they are highly relevant to both normal and pathological function. Knowledge of unfolded states is important for understanding protein stability, and these states are required to traverse the membrane and are involved in aggregation or degradation in many diseases (). Intrinsically disordered proteins often mediate regulatory protein interactions and can act as entropic springs or steric gates, as well as aggregate in disease (). Descriptions of the ensembles of highly heterogeneous conformations within disordered states are thus required for correlating dynamic structure with function. A number of algorithms to calculate such ensembles have been developed (). Our ENSEMBLE approach () was created to facilitate the incorporation of a large number of different types of experimental data into the generation of structural ensembles of disordered protein states. ENSEMBLE makes use of a switching Monte-Carlo algorithm to choose, from a large set of conformations, an ensemble for which the in silico back-calculated data fit all available experimental data. Since its first version (), we have developed a more robust algorithm, enhanced the sampling of conformational space and expanded the types of experimental data used. Applications of ENSEMBLE to the unfolded state of the drkN SH3 domain () and the intrinsically disordered states of the cell cycle protein Sic1 () and various protein phosphatase 1 regulators () have also been described. Importantly, using crossvalidation and synthetic experimental restraints calculated from simulated ensembles, we demonstrated that ENSEMBLE is capable of accurate modeling of the secondary structure, molecular size distribution and tertiary contacts of disordered proteins, if sufficient data is incorporated; tertiary structure, in particular, is highly dependent on the number of distance restraints used (). Most recently, we have significantly improved the user interface and the stability of the program. Thus, we are now making the first official distribution (version 2.1) available online at http://abragam.med.utoronto. ca/JFKlab.
GENERAL SCHEMEENSEMBLE currently accommodates ten different types of data (modules), primarily from nuclear magnetic resonance experiments [chemical shift, residual dipolar coupling, J-coupling, R 2 relaxation rate, paramagnetic relaxation enhancement, paramagnetic relaxation enhancement ratio, nuclear Overhauser effect, solvent accessibility and hydrodynamic radius (angle X-ray scattering. R h can also be obtained from size exclusion chromatography or dynamic light scattering. The expected observables for each type of data are back-calculated for each conformer of a large set of input structures within the specific module for this data type, in some cases using external programs ShiftX (), HYDROPRO () and CRYSOL (). The algorithm that governs ENSEMBLE is more efficient when searching for best-fitting structures within a set containing 55000 conformations. Obtaining a reasonable sampling of the theoretical conformational space for disordered proteins, however, is not possible with such a low number of structures. ENSEMBLE may be used for a variety of protein conformational states including folded statesalso inherently dynamic, in which case this pool may be large enough. This led us to construct a Perl wrapper, which is split into parts (see Supplementary Material). Conformer management: A large set of structures, called the initial soup, is populated by structures provided by the user (e.g. structures from simulations) and/or regularly replenished with conformers generated by TraDES (;). We found that at least 100 000 structures in the initial soup is sufficient for conformational sampling. The C core of ENSEMBLE acts on a subset of the initial soup conformations, called the initial pool, containing randomly selected structures from the initial soup. Each conformer can be selected multiple times, but the algorithm favors conformers that have been selected fewer times. The initial pool is prevented from becoming larger than 5000 conformers by periodic removal of those that do not contribute to fitting the experimental data. To increase sampling of conformational space, selected structures of the currently best fitting ensemble can be slightly randomized with TraDES and added to the initial soup and initial pool. The selection process: The C core of ENSEMBLE performs the selection of an ensemble from all conformers present in the initial pool. Each module is assigned a weight that determines its importance in the scoring function. A module fits the experimental data when its score is lower than a threshold value automatically determined by ENSEMBLE, reflecting the back-calculated data for the selected conformers matching the experimental data. The module weights are changed and ENSEMBLE is run again until all modules fit the experimental data. The user can also incorporate restraints incrementally. The final ensemble analysis: Once the selected ensemble fits all the experimental data, this final ensemble is analyzed. ENSEMBLE includes a set of scripts for analysis (C C distances, radius of gyration, secondary structure distribution) and management of binary structure and data files generated by the program. These will be expanded in the future. The release of this version of ENSEMBLE provides tools that can be broadly used to enhance the understanding of structural and dynamic properties of disordered proteins and their correlations with biological function and disease.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Characterization of disordered proteins at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
