Motivation: In the era of network medicine and the rapid growth of paired time series mRNA/ microRNA expression experiments, there is an urgent need for pathway enrichment analysis methods able to capture the time-and condition-specific 'active parts' of the biological circuitry as well as the microRNA impact. Current methods ignore the multiple dynamical 'themes'—in the form of enriched biologically relevant microRNA-mediated subpathways—that determine the functionality of signaling networks across time. Results: To address these challenges, we developed time-vaRying enriCHment integrOmics Subpathway aNalysis tOol (CHRONOS) by integrating time series mRNA/microRNA expression data with KEGG pathway maps and microRNA-target interactions. Specifically, microRNA-mediated subpathway topologies are extracted and evaluated based on the temporal transition and the fold change activity of the linked genes/microRNAs. Further, we provide measures that capture the structural and functional features of subpathways in relation to the complete organism pathway atlas. Our application to synthetic and real data shows that CHRONOS outperforms current subpathway-based methods into unraveling the inherent dynamic properties of pathways. Availability and implementation: CHRONOS is freely available at
IntroductionIn the last decade, pathway-based approaches have become the first choice in complex disease analysis for gaining more delicate biological insights and have enabled the comprehension of the higherorder functions of the biological systems (). In parallel, the increasing number of time course experiments has opened new avenues for pathway analysis to unravel the dynamic features of the interdependencies among a cell's molecular components leading to deeper characterization of the functional, molecular and causal relationships among apparently distinct phenotypes (). Toward this direction, few approaches have considered the dynamic aspects of pathways () and, to our knowledge, no method has been developed to deal with their context-dependent and systematic temporal variations.The first generation of pathway-based approaches related expression data to pathways by examining the entire pathway and wellestablished methods in this category are GSEA () and SPIA (). The next generation shifted the focus toward subpathways (local areas of the entire biological pathway), which represent the underlying biological phenomena more accurately, and have emerged as even more targeted and contextspecific molecular candidate communities for the treatment of complex diseases (). A representative example is the Subpathway-GM method which identifies key metabolic subpathways based on information from genes and metabolites by searching for similarities of signature nodes within the pathway structure (). Another relevant method is the topology enrichment analysis framework (TEAK) () which extracts linear and non-linear subpathways and scores them using the Bayes Net Toolbox to fit a context-specific Gaussian Bayesian network for each subpathway. However, these approaches do not take the temporal aspects of pathways into consideration and ignore possible perturbations on intermediate time points. Moving forward, timeClip combines dimension reduction techniques and graph decomposition theory to explore and identify the portion of pathways that is mostly time-dependent (). Although the temporal variation of the pathway is explored so as to identify the most time-dependent subpathway, information about the regulation between nodes is not included and the exact time period a subpathway is active is not provided. In parallel, nowadays genome-wide expression studies of the endogenous non-coding small RNAs (microRNAs) have given a strong impulse to the comprehension of cell regulatory mechanisms (). Recent studies have examined the microRNA (miRNA) regulation upon pathways by showing that the perturbations on pathways does not necessarily occur at the overall level but more likely at specific areas of the topology (subpathways) (). Toward addressing these challenges, we introduce the timevaRying enriCHment integrOmics Subpathway aNalysis tOol (CHRONOS) which detects significantly enriched miRNA-mediated subpathways per time point from paired miRNA/mRNA time series expression profiles (). Our key assumption is that during the time course, different subareas of the pathway topology are active and the transitions of subpathway activity at time t depend solely on time t  1 (). We illustrate the enhanced performance of CHRONOS over other state-of-the-art subpathwaybased methods based on synthetic time series expression data. Finally, we evaluate our method on a publicly available time series microarray dataset () which investigates the transcriptional changes of miRNA and mRNA expression levels over time after activation of the Janus kinase/Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Jak/STAT) pathway by interferon-gamma stimulation (IFN-g) of melanoma cells. Our results show how timeevolving subpathway analysis generates new robust and dynamically context-rich biological hypotheses that complement those generated by other classical bioinformatics pipelines.
Materials and methods
CHRONOS framework
User inputTime series expression data from paired mRNA/miRNA experiments are required as input; of note, CHRONOS is applicable in case only the mRNA expression data are available. Twelve common gene label systems are supported, such as EntrezGene ID, UniGene ID, Refseq mRNA ID, HGNC ID, Ensembl Gene ID, based on the web-based data mining tool BioMart (). Also,Converting pathway interactions and miRNA target interactions into a bilayer genegene/miRNA-gene network. (C) Extraction of linear and non-linear subpathways from each pathway; candidate miRNA regulators for each subpathway are defined based on cumulative hypergeometric distribution. (D) Based on user's data input, i.e. paired time series mRNA and miRNA expression data, the miRNA-mediated subpathways are evaluated based on two scoring schemes which manage to encapsulate the fold changes in expression and the temporal aspects at the level of interactions as well as the flow of information imposed by the pathway topology. (E) The top-scoring subpathways can be further examined for enrichment in any user-defined set of 'interesting genes' based on cumulative hypergeometric distribution. Information regarding structural and functional aspects of subpathways is provided via three subpathway-adapted graph-based measures: the subpathway degree (subDEG), the betweenness centrality (subBC) and the subPathness mature miRNA Ids as reference are obtained by miRBase database (http://www.mirbase.org/) (Supplementary text 1). We denote that the terms 'gene', 'mRNA' and their encoded 'protein' are used interchangeably in this article.
Data retrievalAll available organism-specific pathway maps, both metabolic and non-metabolic, are downloaded from KEGG pathway database (). miRNAmRNA interactions (micronome) are downloaded from miRecords () which integrates the predicted targets of eleven established miRNA target prediction tools (Supplementary text 2). Validated interactions are downloaded from miRecords and DIANA-TarBase ().
Converting pathways to genegene networksAll KEGG metabolic and non-metabolic pathways are converted to directed genegene networks based on information in KGML files (Supplementary text 3 and), without compromising the structural topology of the pathway. In parallel, the biological assumptions set prior to conversion can be adapted according to the study under investigation; similar tools lack such flexibility. KEGG pathway entry elements representing genes (type  'gene') may correspond to single or multiple gene products containing most likely gene families or genes with similar biochemical function. Similarly, entries named 'group' usually include multiple gene products representing protein complexes. To tackle this, these entries are expanded into separate nodes by rewiring the incoming and outgoing links of the entry (Supplementary) (). Optionally, these entries can be considered (user-defined) as single nodes by unifying the corresponding gene products for downstream analysis (). The chemical compounds (type  'compound') are omitted from the graph and the pathway structure is preserved by connecting the nodes in cases a compound (or hash of compounds) acts as a bridge in-between (Supplementary) (). Another major issue is the categorization of the multiple KEGG supported relations among entries with regard to their biological interpretation. We define three kinds of relations; 'activation' is translated as enhancement of gene regulation, 'inhibition' as suppression and 'unknown' with ambiguous definition. Of note, the user can define a fourth kind of relation named 'no interaction' so as to exclude specific relation types while focus on those of interest. In addition, CHRONOS allows the user to define the single/multiple relation types and directionality that characterizes an interaction (Supplementary). Also, with regard to metabolic pathways, genegene relations are constructed either by accounting all enzymeenzyme (type  'ECrel') relations () or/and by extracting all metabolites participating in reactions as substrate or product () (Supplementary text 3 and). An indicative example about pathways conversion to genegene network is provided in Supplementary.
miRNA-mediated subpathway extractionLinear and non-linear subpathways are extracted from the gene gene pathway network. The former are comprised of genes in linear cascades with an in-house computationally fast approach (Supplementary text 4), while the latter contain highly connected gene communities. Notably, our extraction process is highly advantageous over other similar methods in terms of capturing into subpathways the maximum number of nodes present in the KEGG pathway maps (called hereafter 'node coverage') (and Supplementary). As linear subpathways, we consider all ordered linear sequences of gene interactions from biologically meaningful start-nodes to end-nodes. In this case, the start-nodes have no incoming interactions and the end-nodes have no outgoing interactions. For a given genegene pathway network, the subpathways are obtained by searching all possible paths between start-nodes and end-nodes (Supplementary text 4 and Figs. S6S8). Regarding non-linear subpathways, the biological assumption is that the functional similarity between two genes increases as their distance in pathways decreases (). Under this notion, we aim to find subpathways in which all genes have a neighbor with a common functional role. For this, we detect non-linear subpathways at each pathway map by adopting the k-clique concept used in social network analysis (). A k-clique is a subgraph where the distance between any two nodes is no greater than k. In our default settings, every 2-clique is a non-linear subpathway (Supplementary text 5 and Figs. S9S11). The micronome layer above each subpathway is constructed based on miRecords and TarBase by searching for miRNAs targeting the respective gene members. A miRNA is considered as a potential regulator of a subpathway if its targets are significantly enriched in the relevant subpathway members. Enrichment analysis is performed based on cumulative hypergeometric distribution:where we suppose that the user input list has G genes, and l genes are included in the subpathway. D is the number of the miRNA target genes and d those included in the subpathway (). miRNAs with P < 0:05 are regarded as candidate regulators. The final miRNA regulators of a subpathway are defined later during scoring process (see later Section 2.1.6).
Interactivity scoring schemesThe core component of CHRONOS is two scoring schemes which manage, first on interaction and later on pathway level, to encapsulate the fold changes in expression and the temporal aspects at the level of interactions as well as the flow of information imposed by the pathway topology. The change in the expression level of a gene is adequately controlled by measuring its fold change activity (relative to a control condition). Under the perspective of pathway networks, it is crucial to examine fold change in expression at the level of edges when referring to interacting genes. To accomplish this, CHRONOS uses the Fold Change Interactivity FCI score [] based on two multivariate logistic functions, which capture pairs of nodes with high absolute fold change values and with high positive or negative correlation (). The fold activity score of the corresponding interaction e at time t for two connected nodes i,j is:where f t i and f t j are the log 2-fold change values of nodes i and j, respectively. C; K denote the parameters controlling the shape of the multivariate logistic distribution, and T is a shifting parameter. An indicative example of FCI score is provided in Supplementary. Over the course of the activation of a pathway there exist multiple time-varying topological 'themes', i.e. time-/conditionspecific enriched biologically relevant subgraphs, that determine the output of the topology (). Under this notion, we employed a model rooted in Markov dynamics for analyzing the interactivity dynamics among nodes based on the dynamics of their expression changes (). To accomplish this, we introduce the Time-Varying Interactivity TVI score arising from a probabilistic generative model. Initially, we define the pathway interaction graph with V nodes (genes) and E edges (interactions) as G  V; E. x t v is the fold change expression level for gene v 2 V at time t and w t e is the interaction strength of e 2 E at time t. Weight w can take values in the range w  f2; 1; 0; 1; 2g and represents the interaction strength and higher values correspond to increasing degrees of positive correlation of the interacting genes. The probability of the fold change expression levels for genes i and j at time t , conditioned on the interaction strength w t e , is calculated as:where Zw ! t  is the normalization constant. It is assumed that the weights evolve according to the Markov property, thus the probability of the transition from state w ! t1 at time t  1 to state w ! t at time t is:From the earlier equations, we obtain the TVI t e score for each interaction e 2 E at each time t which is(Supplementary text 6). Interactions with TVI t e  f2;0;2g indicate that the fold changes of the corresponding genes of interaction e at time t  1 and t, are strongly negatively correlated, uncorrelated and strongly positively correlated, respectively. Similarly, interactions with TVI t e  f1; 1g indicate weak negative and weak positive correlation, respectively. The two aforementioned scoring schemes are unified into the Interactivity Score IS after accounting for the KEGG pathway interaction trends. More specifically, we defined two consecutive criteria before unifying FCI and TVI scores. First, we check if the two scores agree in terms of sign. Second, if the first criterion is fulfilled, we check if the interaction trend sign [() for 'activation' and () for 'inhibition'] agrees with the sign of the scores. In case of agreement, the two scores are added multiplied by two weightingWith rhomb, we refer to all enriched subpathways and with square to the subset that is regulated by at least one miRNA. The maximum number of (miRNA-mediated) subpathways was observed at time 48 h. (F) (Application to real expression data) Bar plots visualizing per time point the percentage of enriched non-metabolic subpathways that belong to the top scoring 25% (of the total pool of subpathways) with regard to the structural and functional measures (subDEG, subBC, subPathness). As shown, the majority of enriched subpathways displayed at 48 h the highest value in all three metrics factors [e.g. IF FCI > 0 AND TVI > 0 AND interaction trend > 0 THEN IS is calculated based on; in case the first and/ or second criterion is not fulfilled the IS is set to zero (e.g. IF FCI < 0 AND TVI > 0 THEN IS  0, IF FCI < 0 AND TVI < 0 AND i nteraction trend > 0 THEN IS  0). Notably, in the case of 'unknown' interactions, the second criterion is not checked since the interaction trend cannot be unambiguously determined. For interaction e at time t, IS is calculated as: IS t e  a  jTVI t e j  b  jFCI t e j ;where a; b are weighting parameters indicating the percentage of contribution of TVI and FCI score, respectively. With these criteria, we promote, first on interaction and later on pathway level, the interactions among nodes that simultaneously change in terms of expression in each time point and these changes accord well with the constraints imposed by the topology. miRNA-gene interactions are also examined in similar manner [Equation(5)] as previous to identify miRNAs correlated to their target genes () during time. Notably, for these interactions the type of relation is not well-defined since, according to literature evidence, miRNAs mainly exhibit suppression effect but in many cases can also exhibit activation effect (). For this reason, we selected to ignore the type of relation to avoid biasing the scoring process in favor of the suppressor type of relation.
Time-varying enriched miRNA-mediated subpathwaysMoving forward from interaction to pathway level, subpathways are evaluated based on the IS since we search for simultaneously context-and time-specific subpathways, whose expression changes in specific time points accord well with the flow of information as provided by the subpathway structure. Hence, subpathway score subscore is calculated as the summand of all involved ISs divided with the number of subpathway interactions, so that the scores among subpathways are comparable. For a subpathway with N gene members and N  1 interactions at time t, subscore is:where IS t e is the Interactivity Score of interaction e at time t. Further, via cumulative hypergeometric distribution the enrichment of a subpathway in any user-defined set of 'interesting genes' (e.g. list of differentially expressed genes (DEGs), list of disease-related genes, etc.) can be examined. In detail, the statistical significance is calculated based on Equation (1) where G is the user-defined gene set, D the number of user-defined set of interesting genes, l all the genes involved in the subpathway and d the interesting genes included in the subpathway. Also, the false positive (FP) discovery rate of P results is reduced by providing false discovery rate (FDR) corrected P-values (q-values). Subpathways with subscore > 0:4 in at least one time point and q-value < 0.05 (in case a set of 'interesting genes' is provided) are considered enriched. The subscore threshold was determined by setting a FDR of 1% cutoff on the results derived from 100 permutations; in each permutation a small fraction of subpathway interaction scores changed and subpathway scores were recomputed (). Similarly, for the micronome layer, the involved candidate interactions are evaluated based on Equation (5) and the miRNAs whose relevant interactions achieve IS > 0:4 are considered as final regulators. This threshold (0.4) was determined by setting a FDR cutoff of 1% on the results derived from 100 permutations; in each permutation a small fraction of miRNAmRNA interaction scores within the boundaries of a subpathway changed and average scores were recomputed.
Subpathway structural and functional measuresCHRONOS accounts for the interpathway dependencies and as such provides information about the position of the subpathways in the complete pathway atlas. This zoom-out overview of subpathways can assist significantly when the goal is the monitoring of the signal propagation. In our tool, subpathways are considered as single nodes, called meta-nodes, upon which known established topological metrics are adapted. In detail, we calculate the subpathway degree (subDEG) and betweenness centrality (subBC) so as to capture the local and global structural aspects of each subpathway, respectively (Supplementary). Moving forward, it is crucial to examine the functional aspects of pathway topologies. When dealing with the organism map, it is preferable to view pathways as modules defined not only through structural measures but also through biological criteria that discriminate the mechanisms among pathways. Under this notion, we introduce subPathness () which measures the degree to which a subpathway serves as bridge () among the different pathways of an organism (Supplementary text 7).
CHRONOSoutput CHRONOS is a computationally fast approach (Supplementary) and outputs a ranked summary of the final results. The (miRNA-mediated) subpathways are exported in serial alignment based on their subscore [] and FDR corrected P-values (q-values). The (miRNA-mediated) subpathways per time point are exported separately for each type of pathways (metabolic and nonmetabolic) and for each type of extraction (linear and non-linear) accompanied by the graph-based metric values (subDEG, subBC, subPathness). KEGG pathway map links and circular plots () are also available for each subpathway per each time point (Supplementary Figs. S16S19).
Generating synthetic networks and synthetic expression dataSynthetic networks and synthetic expression data were generated to run a simulation performance analysis of CHRONOS and other similar tools (Section 3.1). Random graphs were generated as biological pathway networks by using two closely related model graphs, the Erdo sRnyi and Edgar Gilbert. These graphs were built with N  500 nodes with rewiring probability P  0.9. Synthetic gene expression values per time point were generated either with time-dependent up/down regulation or with no change over time relevant to a control state (log 2-fold change difference 1, 1 and 0, respectively). In addition, the up/down regulated expression profiles were categorized according to the duration of their regulation. These categories correspond to the up/down regulated gene expressions in (i) all time points, in (ii) half time points (early or late) and in (iii) one time point. For each category, a synthetic network model was constructed with 60% of nodes set as up/down regulated and the rest as non-regulated. Nodes were randomly drawn from a normal distribution and Gaussian noise with zero mean and standard deviation (SD  0.2) was added.
mRNA/miRNA time series expression data of IFN-g-treated melanoma cellsWe applied CHRONOS on two real time series mRNA and miRNA datasets after stimulation of human A375 melanoma cell line with IFN-g (). The datasets contain samples either left untreated (control) or stimulated with human IFN-g at specific time points. Datasets are available at ArrayExpress (www.ebi.ac.uk/ arrayexpress) under accession numbers E-MEXP-3544 and E-MEXP3720, respectively. The datasets were normalized with the Robust Multi-array Average (RMA) method in MATLAB environment and probes referring to the same Entrez Id were averaged. Also, 6,777 Entrez Ids were mapped onto KEGG human pathways (accessed May 2015) and 4048 onto our extracted subpathways. For downstream analysis, only the matching samples among mRNA and miRNA were kept, i.e. 0, 3, 12, 24, 48 and 72 h (the Janus kinase inhibitor I second control samples were excluded). Also, limma R package () was used to identify significantly (with FDR < 0.05) DEGs and miRNAs (DEMs) by comparing in each time point the expression of IFN-gtreated samples versus untreated controls; the DEMs common with those identified in (), were used as input to CHRONOS. Of note, CHRONOS was run including all genes mapped to KEGG pathways and to alleviate a more comprehensive evaluation of our results relative to the results of the original study (), the CHRONOS output subpathways were examined for enrichment in DEGs (used as 'interesting genes' for the calculation of q-values) so as to obtain those subpathways that are most relevant.
Results and discussion
Application of CHRONOS to synthetic datasetThe performance of CHRONOS in capturing the time-varying 'themes' underlying the pathway topology was evaluated relative to other similar methods (TEAK, timeClip, Subpathway-GM and DEAP) based on a synthetic dataset.illustrates four expression patterns assigned to the nodes of a genegene network descending from the human KEGG metabolic pathway maps (nonmetabolic pathways and miRNAs were not included since their analysis is not applicable in all methods). All tools were applied on 100 independent synthetic network models and the 100 top ranking subpathways were considered as reliable for downstream analysis. To overcome the different subpathway topologies identified by each method, we assessed the performance (precision, recall, F1-score) based solely on the unique nodes included in the 100 top ranking subpathways. The up-/downregulated and non-regulated genes included in final results were defined as true positives and FPs, respectively. As false negatives were defined the up-/downregulated genes belonging to the corresponding perturbed pathways which were not included in the final subpathways. The boxplots of(see also Supplementary) illustrate that CHRONOS outperformed TEAK, timeClip, Subpathway-GM and DEAP in all types of regulation with statistical significance (two-sided Wilcoxon signed rank test, P-value < 0.01) with the highest efficiency achieved in the one time point regulation case. These observations point out that CHRONOS succeeds into realizing the main goal of a time series experiment, that is to zoom into the time-specific phenomena of a pathway () that are not attainable using current subpathway-based approaches. An important feature in subpathway analysis is the ability to exploit the maximum number of nodes present in pathway maps ('node coverage'). We chose to test CHRONOS subpathway extraction efficiency only against TEAK and Subpathway-GM since these two methods provide both an approach for converting KEGG KGML pathway files into biologically concise genegene networks and an approach for subpathway extraction. The node coverage in the extracted subpathways was examined in both real and synthetic networks based on the human KEGG pathway maps and Erdo sRenyi and Edgar Gilbert model graphs, respectively. CHRONOS outperformed the other two approaches both in real () as well as in synthetic networks (Supplementary) with statistical significance (two-sided Wilcoxon signed rank test, Pvalue < 0.01).
Application of CHRONOS to real dataand tumorigenesis via NFjB signaling (). RIG-I and Ras signaling related subpathways vanished at 24 h; induction of RIG-I in response to IFN-g was found in epithelial cell lines () while the signaling initiated by activated k-ras affects the IFN/STAT signaling pathway and controls the responsiveness of cancer cells to interferons (). Finally, TGF-beta signaling related subpathways appeared only at 48 h; evidence has shown that IFN-g induces expression of SMAD7 which in turn inhibits the TGF-b-induced activation of the activating Smad3 and of TGF-b-responsive genes (). Similarly, we observed significant temporal transformations in the micronome layer with many miRNAs appearing or disappearing as regulators of the active subpathways. Based on the circular plots of, we argue that the miRNA effect is present from the early time point (3 h) compared with the observations of the initial study where miRNAs are mostly involved in later time points (); however, it is evident that the regulatory effect is concentrated on specific pathways at the early time points whereas at 48 h is scattered upon multiple pathwaysprobably through the hub-/bridge-subpathways (for the remaining time points see also Supplementary). CHRONOS has the explanatory power to offer focused serial temporal snapshots of the mechanisms perturbed under specific conditions with resolution up to every single time point and offers a holistic view of the dynamics of molecules participating in multiple subpathways and in many cases multiple pathways. We comment on the signaling neighborhood around indicative interesting genes involved in biological functions highly related to the mechanisms investigated in this experiment (cell adhesion, apoptosis, immune response and cell cycle) which were described by transcriptional regulatory network motifs consisting of feed forward loops (FFLs) involving transcription factors, miRNAs and joint targets (). Intercellular adhesion Molecule 1 (ICAM1) was found in subpathways belonging to 'leukocyte transendothelial migration' and 'cell adhesion molecules' pathways with the majority being active at 12 and 24 h and few of them under miRNA control at 12 and 48 h (time point 24 h was observed in the initial study); IFN-g has been shown to facilitate lymphocyte adhesion to endothelial junctional regions enabling so the transendothelial migration (). RelA/NF-kB complex acts as transcription factor and it was found in subpathways descending from 16 distinct pathway maps with most activity observed at 3, 12 and 48 h and miRNA regulation at 24 h (time point 24 h was observed in the initial study). TP53 (tumor protein 53) acts as transcription factor and it was found in the subpathways descending from eight pathway maps with most activity and miRNA regulation observed at 48 h (time point 48 h was also observed in the initial study). One indicative exemplar pathway involving this gene is 'MAPK signaling'; IFN-g controls tissue damage by deflating MAPK pathways that enhance the transcriptional activity of AP-1 proteins essential for the expression of matrix metalloproteinases whose inhibition limits tissue destruction (). BCL2L1 (Bcl-2-like protein 1) was found in the subpathways descending from four pathway maps (mostly in Jak-STAT signaling) with most activity and miRNA regulation observed at 3 and 12 h (time points 48 and 72 h were observed in the initial study). CCND1 (cyclin D1) was found in the subpathways descending from 13 pathway maps, mainly in prolactin, JakSTAT and focal adhesion signaling, with most activity and miRNA regulation observed at 48 h (time point 72 h was observed in the initial study). The discrepancies between methods are explained by the limitation of KEGG topology in terms of the number of pathway annotated genes and by the fact that only differentially expressed molecules are used in () and the inferred transcriptional regulatory network motifs are related to signaling pathways but the latter refer mostly to the targets of FFLs. As such, our method is complementary and can serve as a push forward step for unraveling more about the dynamics of 'crossroad' molecules involved in many cases in multiple downstream signal propagationroutes not only under the umbrella of gross signaling pathways with unclear in many cases definitions and boundariesbut on the more finite context-rich scale of subpathways.
ConclusionCHRONOS is a computationally fast and efficient approach for scanning the complete pathway topology to track the time-/contextspecific biologically enriched subpathways along with their time-/ context-specific miRNA regulators. The method and the supporting R package are flexible by allowing the user to intervene and adapt all discrete phases to the needs of the study under investigation. CHRONOS can assist significantly in complex disease analysis by enabling the experimentalists to acquire a more realistic time-varying dynamical view of the involved perturbed mechanisms.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
A.G.Vrahatis et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
IFN-g production is highly related with tumor progression and prognosis and IFN-g is the most important endogenous mediator of immunity and inflammation and plays a key role in macrophage activation, inflammation, host defense against intracellular pathogens and T helper 1 cell responses (Hu and Ivashkiv, 2009). IFN-g, apart from activating the Jak-STAT pathway, has been shown to cross-regulate multiple signaling pathways driven by endogenous or exogenous factors. Moreover, several miRNAs were found to be dynamically regulated after stimulation with IFN-g (Schmitt et al., 2012). In general, our time-varying analysis showed significant reranking of subpathways during time evolution and in Supplementary files S2S5 we provide the full list of the enriched (miRNA-mediated)-subpathways (subscore > 0.4 and q-value < 0.05) per time point. In Figure 2E, the timeline of (miRNA-mediated) nonmetabolic subpathway frequency distribution points out 48 h as the peak of activity (see also Supplementary Fig. S24); this observation agrees with the findings of the original study where no significant alteration of the mRNA levels was observed after 48 h although this analysis differs conceptually from our approach; it is focused mainly on differentially expressed molecules and evaluates them through functional, pathway, upstream regulator analysis and regulatory loop identification (Nazarov et al., 2013). Moreover, when evaluating the subpathways in terms of the structural and functional measures (subDEG, subBC, subPathness), we observed that at 48 h (Fig. 2F) the majority of enriched subpathways acquired high scores indicating so that at this time point several hub-and bridges-subpathways take over that in turn propagate and scatter quickly the signal to multiple signaling pathways (see also Supplementary Figs. S14, S22 and S25). Regarding Jak-STAT signaling, we observed that the related subpathways (in all time points) represent the 10.5% of all enriched non-metabolic subpathways with the majority being active at 3 and 12 h, in accordance with the observations of the original study, with most subpathways regulated at 3 h by miR-105 (other regulators: miR-18a, miR-19b, miR-149, miR-29a). In parallel, we run TEAK, timeClip, Subpathway-GM and DEAP on the gene expression data and compared Jak-STAT and other indicative pathways whose timeline is discussed in (Nazarov et al., 2013) and verified that CHRONOS is efficient not only in capturing more information about the active pathways but also in specifying the exact time period of activity (sup plementary Table S3). To illustrate the performance of CHRONOS into capturing time-specific enriched topological 'themes', which in other case would be neglected or implicated in the whole time period by other current similar methods, we selected few indicative non-metabolic exemplar pathways that underwent severe transformations in response to IFN-g during time course. Toll-like receptor signaling related subpathways were not active at 72 h; it has been shown that IFN-g enhances TLR-activated signaling, promotes NF-kB activation and induces transcription factors necessary for the expression of TLR-responsive genes (Hu and Ivashkiv, 2009). Also, most of the TNF-signaling related subpathways were enriched at 24 h and no active subpathway was found at 72 h; evidence has showed that IFN-g and TNF-a synergistically induce mesenchymal stem cell impairment CHRONOS
