CLARE is a computational method designed to reveal sequence encryption of tissue-specific regulatory elements. Starting with a set of regulatory elements known to be active in a particular tissue/process, it learns the sequence code of the input set and builds a predictive model from features specific to those elements. The resulting model can then be applied to user-supplied genomic regions to identify novel candidate regulatory elements. CLARE's model also provides a detailed analysis of transcription factors that most likely bind to the elements, making it an invaluable tool for understanding mechanisms of tissue-specific gene regulation. Availability: CLARE is freely accessible at http://clare.
INTRODUCTIONGene regulatory elements play a primary role in transcriptional regulation, a process required for the proper execution of various genetic programs. Proteins called transcription factors (TFs) recognize and bind specific regulatory elements on the DNA, leading to the activation or repression of a target gene. Identification of these regulatory elements is therefore important for understanding the regulatory mechanisms involved in the development and functioning of an organism. Experimental approaches such as ChIP-Seq or ChIPchip can help identify regulatory elements on a genome-wide scale by profiling a TF of interest or a coactivator like p300 or CBP that colocalizes with active enhancers (). However, these methods are restricted by the number of TFs that can be profiled, the efficacy of antibodies, experimental noise, and the number of cell types that can be tested. Furthermore, these methods are usually unable to identify regulatory regions bound by an unknown TF. As a result, computational methods for identifying TF-binding sites and regulatory elements are rapidly gaining groundfor a review]. Few tools, however, are easily accessible online and convenient for molecular biologists who are not interested in getting through the hurdles of installing and maintaining software. Here, we present CLARE (Cracking the LAnguage of Regulatory Elements), a web interface * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Author.for the method that we recently developed to predict regulatory elements active in a specific tissue or biological process (). CLARE is written in Perl and runs on a Linux platform. Our computational method has been shown to identify mammalian heart enhancers with validation rates similar to those obtained with ChIP-Seq experiments (). CLARE is freely accessible online at http://clare.dcode.org.
SYSTEM OVERVIEWRegulatory elements active in a particular tissue or biological process are likely to be bound by a common set of TFs; by either activators (in case of enhancers and promoters) or repressors (in case of silencers) present in the nucleus. Consequently, binding sites of these TFs should be statistically overrepresented in bound regulatory elements. CLARE exploits this notion in a model that describes regulatory elements based on a weighted linear combination of TFbinding sites.illustrates the workflow of the CLARE web server.
CLARE inputThe only input required from the user is a set of sequences of regulatory elements in FASTA format. Optionally, the user can also enter a set of sequences to serve as controls and a query sequence to search for putative regulatory elements.
Modeling regulatory elementsCLARE proceeds in three main steps:
Creating a control setIn absence of a user-supplied control set, CLARE will construct one that is length-and GC-balanced with respect to the input set of regulatory elements. This ensures that CLARE does not train purely on the GC content that is, in general, different between non-functional regions and functional regions. The server-side control set is sampled from the non-coding portion of the human genome.
Feature mappingEach sequence from the input and control sets undergoes a transformation into a feature vector, with features describing the occurrence of putative TF-binding sites. For this purpose, each sequence is scanned using tfSearch [(), seewith known motifs from the TRANSFAC (), JASPAR () and UniPROBE () databases as well as the top 10 overrepresented motifs among the regulatoryPage: 582 581583
L.Taher et al.elements discovered de novo using a Gibbs sampler [implemented in PRIORITY ()].
Model trainingThe problem of separating known regulatory elements from background sequence is posed in the form of linear regression, with the goal of learning the weight of each feature. CLARE uses LASSO () that returns an L1regularized solution to the problem. This ensures a small number of weights have a non-zero weight, the assumption being that most motifs are not part of the biological process under consideration, and are therefore irrelevant for classification.
CLARE outputAfter the job is completed, results are reported in a web-based table. CLARE provides three primary outputs:
Relevant featuresCLARE returns a bar graph displaying the weights of the features that are finally selected. A large positive (negative) weight implies that the respective feature is positively (negatively) correlated with the input set and negatively (positively) correlated with the control set.
Classifier performanceThe classifier performance is assessed by 5-fold cross-validation. The average receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and the area under it are reported.
PredictionsCLARE returns a score for each of the candidate regions supplied by the user, indicating the likelihood of the sequence being a regulatory element. A basic protocol for the utilization of CLARE is given in the Supplementary Materials. A typical CLARE job for input sets with up to a few hundred sequences is completed in <30 min. However, the run-time of CLARE is highly dependent on the number and size of input sets, and can run into hours for sets on the order 1000 sequences (Supplementary Materials). This is primarily due to the de novo motif discovery and LASSO.
Published by Oxford University Press 2012. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CASE STUDY: ENHANCERS REGULATING FOREBRAIN EXPRESSION As a test case, we used CLARE to predict sequences with forebrain enhancer activity in the human genome. The model was trained with 49 human sequences that were validated for forebrain enhancer activity in transgenic mouse assays (Visel et al., 2009). The classifier achieved an area under the ROC curve of 0.83, suggesting it can effectively distinguish forebrain enhancers from background sequences. The training sequences were extracted from a larger dataset comprising 2453 p300 ChIP-Seq predictions in the genome of developing mouse embryos. After mapping the mouse peaks to the human genome, we selected a 2 Mb region in the human genome with the largest amount of p300 ChIP-Seq peaks for enhancer prediction. This region, on chromosome 5, encompasses the gene ZNF608, which is associated with Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (Liu et al., 2009), characterized by slow growth before and after birth, intellectual disability and skeletal abnormalities. Thirteen-percent of the windows evaluated in this locus scored positively, comprising regions overlapping with all ChIP-Seq peaks (Supplementary Materials). These predictions also show significant overlap with regions conserved in chicken and mouse, with foldenrichments of 2.4 and 1.5, respectively (P <0.05), suggesting that they are functional and may therefore have clinical relevance (Loots and Ovcharenko, 2007). The datasets and results are available online at: http://clare.dcode.org/index.php?id=example. 4 CONCLUSIONS CLARE is a novel web server, capable of predicting regulatory elements and functional TF-binding sites starting from a collection of known regulatory sequences. Detailed advantages of CLARE are listed in the Supplementary Materials. Briefly, this tool can aid in prioritizing genomic regions and TF-binding sites for further experimental validation. Ultimately, this should improve the functional annotation of the non-coding portion of the genome, and our understanding of the mechanisms controlling gene regulation in eukaryotes. Funding: This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine. Conflict of Interest: none declared.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
