Motivation: The precise identification of functionally and structurally important residues of a protein is still an open problem, and state-of-the-art classifiers predict only one or at most two different categories. Result: We have implemented the classifier CLIPS-4D, which predicts in a mutually exclusively manner a role in catalysis, ligand-binding or protein stability for each residue-position of a protein. Each prediction is assigned a P-value, which enables the statistical assessment and the selection of predictions with similar quality. CLIPS-4D requires as input a multiple sequence alignment and a 3D structure of one protein in PDB format. A comparison with existing methods confirmed state-of-the-art prediction quality, even though CLIPS-4D classifies more specifically than other methods. CLIPS-4D was implemented as a multiclass support vector machine, which exploits seven sequence-based and two structure-based features, each of which was shown to contribute to classification quality. The classification of ligand-binding sites profited most from the 3D features, which were the assessment of the solvent accessible surface area and the identification of surface pockets. In contrast, five additionally tested 3D features did not increase the classification performance achieved with evolutionary signals deduced from the multiple sequence alignment. Availability: CLIPS-4D is available as a web-service at http://www-bioinf.uni-regensburg.de.
INTRODUCTIONAn important goal of computational biology is the comprehensive annotation of proteins, which requires to predict a function and to identify all crucial residues. To assign function to a query sequence, BLAST () and other, more sensitive, algorithms of sequence comparison () are of utmost value. However, these methods are per se not capable to identify residues, which are critical for function or stability; thus, alternative approaches are needed. One technique is the mapping of known functional sites based on a sequence alignment (), which is named homology transfer. Alternatively, if the 3D structure of a query is available, algorithms can exploit structural correspondences with annotated active sites to identify functional residues (). More generally applicable are methods that do not require annotated proteins for comparison but assess each individual residueposition by means of a knowledge-based scoring system. Owing to the relevance of this task, a large number of such in silico approaches have been introduced, which are sequence-based () or combine information from sequence and structure of a protein () to predict one or two functional categories. As we were interested to classify more specifically, we have recently introduced a multiclass support vector machine (MC-SVM), which we named CLIPS-1D (). In contrast to other approaches, CLIPS-1D predicts in a mutually exclusively manner a role in catalysis, ligand-binding or protein structure by analyzing a multiple sequence alignment (MSA). Interestingly, not more than seven carefully selected features related to the conservation and the abundance of residues at individual sites and their local sequence neighborhood were sufficient to attain state-of-the-art performance. Many of the inferred 3D features are orthogonal to the sequence-based features exploited by CLIPS-1D, and therefore we expected an increase of classification quality for a combination of both. This is why we have systematically determined the classification performance for combinations of 1D and 3D features and selected an optimal combination for a novel classifier, which we named CLIPS-4D. This program uses the 3D structure of a single protein chain to deduce the local environment of each residue and does not use the position of ligands. A comparison with CLIPS-1D made clear that the prediction of ligand-binding sites profited most from the integration of 3D features. Our approach compares favorably with state-of-the-art algorithms, although this MC-SVM distinguishes catalytic, ligand-binding and structurally relevant residue-positions. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.
METHODS
1D features
Conservation of a residue-position The conservation measureJSD(k) () has performed better than other conservation measures (see) and was computed for a residue-position k according tois the probability mass function for site k approximated as f obs K aa i   f k aa i  by the amino acid frequencies observed in the respective column k of the MSA; the mean amino acid frequencies as found in the SwissProt database () were taken as background frequencies f backgr. H(.) is Shannon's entropy (). For classification, we used the z-score cons JSD (k):Here, aa k s is the amino acid aa s occurring at site k under consideration, f kl aa i  is the frequency of aa i at position l relative to k, and f CLASS kl aa i jaa s  is the conditional frequency of aa i at the same positional offset deduced from the neighborhood of all residues aa s of a set CLASS. Neib is the AE3 neighborhood.Here, aa k s is the amino acid aa s occurring at site k under consideration, f l aa i  is the frequency of aa i at position l, and f CLASS l aa i jaa s  is the conditional frequency of aa i deduced from the neighborhood of all residues aa s of a set CLASS. The set 3D-Neib was determined as previously mentioned.
3D Features
Mutual information score of a 3D neighborhood As proposed (), we determined a proximity score pMI, which assesses the mutual information of pairs of residue-positions in the vicinity of k.cMI(l) is a cumulative mutual information value (see), and 3D-Neib was determined as previously mentioned.
Assessing the B-factor of a residue In analogy to Petrova andWu (2006), a normalized B-factor BF(k) was computed.BFmean(k) is the mean B-factor deduced from all n atoms of residue aa k according toand m BFmean and BFmean are the mean and the standard-deviation determined individually for each 3D structure.
Computingthe relative solvent-accessible surface area Using the software library BALL (), the solvent-accessible surface area (SASA) was deduced from the protein 3D structure for each residue aa k to compute the relative SASA (rSASA).Here, SASA max (aa k ) is the maximally possible SASA () of the amino acid.
Assessing pocketsAs has been shown, fpocket (Le) is one of the best methods for the identification of pockets in proteins (). fpocket scores cavities of the protein surface based on a Voronoi tessellation and alpha spheres. To compensate for the protein-specific number of pockets, we determined a normalized score nPocket. nPocketaa k   maxPocketScore PocketScoreaa k  12 max(PocketScore) is the largest score deduced for any pocket of the considered protein, and PocketScore(aa k ) is the score of the pocket in which aa k is allocated. We assigned a score of 1 to all residues that did not belong to pockets or whose rSASA value was 54%.were determined as well as areas under the precision-recall curve (PR-AUC). As a further performance measure, the Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) has been introduced ().MCC-values are considered a fair measure to assess performance on unbalanced sets of positives and negatives (), as observed here. In all formulae, TP is the number of true positives, TN the number of true negatives, FP the number of false positives, and FN the number of false negatives. For example, when classifying catalytic sites, positives are the selected CAT_sites, and negatives are all other residue-positions of the considered MSAs.
Evaluation of the classification performance
Classifying by means of SVMs CLIPS-4D was configuredand trained as described for CLIPS-1D (). We used the libsvm library () with a Gaussian radial basis function kernel and determined optimal parameters RBF and C during training by means of a grid search (). Training and assessment was organized as an 8-fold cross validation. For each training step, the number of positive and negative cases was balanced. To eliminate sampling bias during the grid search, all parameters were deduced as means from training trials with the same positives and 50 different randomly selected sets of negative cases. In contrast to training, all positive and all negative cases were classified to compute performance measures (e.g. MCC-values). The output of the MC-SVM consists of four class-probabilities p CLASS (see) for each residue-position. Each residue-positions k was assigned to the class, whose p CLASS-value was largest. P-values were determined as follows: For each class and each residue, the respective cumulative distribution was deduced from the p CLASS-values of residue-positions l belonging to NOANN_sites. That is, the P-value for a Glu-residue with p STRUC-value s(k) is the fraction of all Glu-residues from NOANN_sites reaching or surpassing s(k).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Selecting an optimal combination of 1D and 3D featuresFor training and testing SVMs on a combination of 1D and 3D features, we used the set of MSAs prepared for CLIPS-1D () and supplemented the respective pdb-files (). In brief, all MSAs were taken from the HSSP database (), and each residue-position was assigned to one of four sets (classes) representing functional categories. The set CAT_sites consists of 840 catalytic residue-positions, which are listed in the manually curated part of the Catalytic Site Atlas (CSA, Version 2.2.12) () and come from 264 enzymes. For 216 of these enzymes, we found 4466 ligand-binding sites in the pdbsum database (), which constitute the dataset LIG_sites. Owing to the lack of a representative set of proteins, which are annotated with structurally important residue-positions, we regarded conserved residues in the core of proteins important for structure. Thus, we have handpicked 136 proteins without enzymatic function and identified 3703 residue-positions, which were both buried and more conserved than the meanFor CLIPS-1D, we have chosen seven sequence-based features for classification: cons JSD (k)] assesses the conservation of individual residue-positions and cons neib (k)assesses the conservation of their neighborhood. abund(k, CLASS) [Formula (4)] scores the abundance of residues at functionally or structurally important sites and abund neib (k, CAT_sites) and abund neib (k, LIG_sites) [Formula (5)] score the composition in the neighborhood of functionally important sites. To this end, six more features, which require a 3D structure for their computation, were selected as candidates for a combination with the aforementioned sequence-based features. Two are 3D versions of sequence-based conservation scores: 3D  cons neib k). The biochemical role of a residue may affect its flexibility, which can be estimated with the mean B-factor BF(k) () computed according to Formula (9). The relative solvent accessible surface area rSASA(k)] allows for the differentiation of surface and core residues. Catalytic and ligand-binding sites tend to lie in surface pockets (); thus, we used the normalized score nPocket(k) according to Formula (12) as a further feature. Before finding an optimal combination of features, we were interested to corroborate the contribution of evolutionary information and of 3D data to classification quality. Thus, we combined those features that do not require an MSA for classification and named the resulting MC-SVM CLIPS-3D. We chose abund(k, CLASS), which scores the abundance of residues in functionally or structurally important sites (), and the 3D features 3D  abund neib aa k s , CLASS, rSASA(k) and nPocket(k). CLIPS-3D was trained and assessed by means of an 8-fold cross validation on the aforementioned classes. The output of this and all other MC-SVMs of the CLIPS-suite is for each residue-position a set of four class probabilities p CLASS (k) (), which were taken to assign k to the class with the highest probability. Generally, it is difficult to characterize the performance of a classifier, if the number of positive and negative cases is highly unbalanced as is also the case here. A fair measure () is the MCC], which was computed for all analyses; see. Comparing the MCC-values of CLIPS1D and CLIPS-3D shows that evolutionary information is important to predict CAT_sites and STRUC_sites, and that 3D data contribute markedly to the prediction of LIG_sites. Next, we combined each of the aforementioned 3D features and all CLIPS-1D features to train and assess six different MC-SVMs analogously. The comparison with MCC-values of CLIPS-1D made clear that only rSASA and nPocket improved classification performance and that the classification of LIG_sites profited most by the latter two features (). Further performance tests showed that the assessment of a residue's neighborhood in 3D space did not outperform the respective 1D features. Thus, we combined the seven sequenced-based features of CLIPS-1D with rSASA and nPocket to form the classifier CLIPS-4D. Compared with CLIPS-1D, the MCC-values increased from 0.34 to 0.43 for CAT_sites, from 0.12 to 0.27 for LIG_sites and from 0.67 to 0.68 for STRUC_sites. As the respective MCC-value was optimal, if CAT_sites with p CAT (k)40.64 were selected as positives, we implemented this cutoff for functional assignment. For the output of CLIPS-4D, we additionally determined a residue-specific P-value, which indicates the fraction of NOANN_sites reaching or surpassing the considered p CLASS-value (see Section 2.2.8). Using Pvalues in the range of 0.010.20 as cutoffs, MCC-values as well as Sensitivity (Recall), Specificity and Precision [Formulae (13)] of CLIPS-4D were determined (and Supplementary). MCC-values of CAT_sites and LIG_sites reached a plateau for P ! 0.05. Thus, we recommend the P-value of 0.05 for the selection of functional sites, as sensitivity is acceptable and specificity is then as high as 0.99, 0.95 and 0.96 for CAT_sites, LIG_sites and STRUC_sites; compare. In summary, the final configuration of CLIPS-4D is an MC-SVM, which classifies based on nine features. These are the seven sequence-based features cons neib (k), abund(k, CLASS) and abund neib aa k s , CLASS, plus the two 3D features rSASA(k) and nPocket(k). CLIPS-4D is available as a web service at http:// www-bioinf.uni-regensburg.de; this version was trained on the full datasets. An assessment of typical output is provided as Supplementary Data.
Classification performance of CLIPS-4D varies in a class-and residue-specific mannerOwing to their biochemical properties, residues are not evenly distributed at functionally or structurally important positions. For example, only 11 residues are generally observed as being directly involved in catalysis (), and few residues are overrepresented at catalytic sites. The charged residues Lys, Glu, Arg, Asp and His as well as Cys are the only residues with an abund(k, CAT_sites)-value40.5, whereas Pro and the hydrophobic residues Val, Ile, Leu and Ala are scored52.0, i.e. are drastically underrepresented. To characterize classification performance in detail, we determined in a class-specific manner MCC-values for each individual residue. In, these MCCvalues were plotted versus abundance scores. For CAT_sites, all of the overrepresented residues were classified with an MCCvalue40.33. In contrast, the underrepresented residues Ala, Gly and Phe had an MCC-value of zero; no MCC-value could be computed for the underrepresented residues Pro, Val, Ile, Leu and Met due to missing values. The abund(k, LIG_sites)-scores were less extreme, indicating that more types of residues are involved in ligand-binding than in catalysis. MCC-values were lowest (50.13) for the underrepresented residues Glu and Lys but also for the overrepresented residues Asp, Arg and His. These three residues were also observed as CAT_sites, which might explain why some ligand-binding sites were misclassified as catalytic ones. Among STRUC_sites, the MCC-values were generally higher (mean 0.63) and for the hydrophobic residues Ala, Val, Ile, Leu, Met, Phe, Tyr and Trp the mean was 0.73.Note: For all variants of the CLIPS classifier, MCC-values for the classification of CAT_sites, LIG_sites and STRUC_sites are listed. CLIPS-3D is based on seven propensities or structure-based features, which do not require an MSA for computation, and CLIPS-1D uses seven sequence-based features. Each of the lines labeled 3D  cons JSD , 3D  abund neib , pMI, BF, rSASA and nPocket gives the performance of an MC-SVM exploiting the seven CLIPS-1D features plus the listed 3D feature. CLIPS-4D is a classifier using the seven CLIPS-1D features plus rSASA and nPocket. The classifier ConSurf does not distinguish catalytic and ligand-binding sites. Therefore, we merged the sets CAT_sites and LIG_sites before classification.Classification performance was lowest for the two less abundant residues His and Lys. In summary, these findings indicate that classification performance varies to a great extent depending on residues and their function. This is why we introduced P-values, which allow the user to select predictions of similar quality for all classes and sites. A detailed analysis of class-specific misclassifications was added to the Supplementary Data.
The more specific classification of CLIPS-4D reaches the same performance as less specific alternativesMethods for the identification of functionally important residues can be divided into homology transfer methods and other approaches that do not use knowledge about binding sites in a homologous protein for a prediction. As CLIPS-4D belongs to the second group, we comprehensively compared its performance with other methods following the same approach. DISCERN () and POOL () use 1D and 3D features to predict functionally important residue-positions. On a subset of the CSA, a recall of 0.50 at a precision of 0.19 was determined for DISCERN (); CLIPS-4D reached for this recall a precision of 0.32. For a subset of 100 enzymes from the CSA and a false-positive rate of 0.05, POOL had a recall of 0.87 at a precision of 0.15 (). For P  0.05, the recall of CLIPS-4D was 0.47 at a precision of 0.34; compare. ConCavity, which focusses on ligandbinding residues, reaches a PR-AUC value of 0.65 for entries of the LigASite database and one of 0.32 for catalytic sites of the CSA (). CLIPS-4D reaches PR-AUC values of 0.23 for LIG_sites and of 0.30 for CAT_sites, respectively (Supplementary). Most plausibly, the lower performance of CLIPS-4D on LIG_sites is due to the pdbsum-specific choice of ligands (which include metal ions) and ligand-binding residues. However, the MCC-value of 0.56 reached by CLIPS-4D for the difficult case of CASP9 target T0604 () suggests the prediction of a substantial number of biologically relevant ligand-bindings sites; see later in the text. An alternative to CLIPS-4D is ConSurf, which predicts two distinct categories, namely, functionally or structurally important residue-positions. ConSurf is available as a web service and deduces a measure for evolutionary conservation from an MSA (). The overall performance of ConSurf was better when we uploaded our preprocessed MSAs instead of letting ConSurf generate MSAs on its own (data not shown). Additionally, performance of ConSurf was best if we classified residues having assigned the maximal conservation score of 9 as positive and all other residues as negative cases. We presumed a structural role if the residue was buried (rSASA55%) and a functional role if it was exposed to the solvent (rSASA ! 5%). As ConSurf does not distinguish between catalytic and ligand-binding sites, we merged CAT_sites and LIG_sites before the assessment. The resulting MCC-value of 0.30 was closer to the MCC-value reached by CLIPS-4D for LIG_sites, which corresponds to their overrepresentation in the merged datasets. For STRUC_sites, the MCC-value was 0.46; see. In summary, these comparisons confirmed state-of-the-art performance for CLIPS-4D, which offers a broader classification spectrum than alternatives.
CLIPS-4D can supplement homology transfer methods in the prediction of ligand-binding sitesIn the ligand-binding site prediction category of CASP, it is the task to predict residues directly involved in ligand binding in the experimental control structure. The results of CASP9 () and CASP10 experiments (http://www.predictioncenter.org/casp10/) impressively demonstrate that most ligandbinding residues can be predicted with high performance by homology transfer methods. However, if the ligand is large and flexible, it is difficult to predict the full binding site, as indicated. Class-specific performance of CLIPS-4D for individual residues. In a class-specific manner, MCC-values were determined for each residue and plotted versus the respective abundance values abund(k, CLASS). The rareness of residues P, V, I, L and M among CAT_sites precluded to compute MCC-values. Thus, they were assigned an MCC-value of 0.1 by a lower performance (MCC-value of $0.5 for best-performing methods) on CASP9 target T0604 (). Additionally, substrates tend not to be crystallized in proteins, and their binding residues are more family specific. Thus, we hypothesized that CLIPS-4D might supplement homology transfer by predicting additional residues that bind substrates or nonmetal ligands. First, we confirmed that CLIPS-4D predictions help to identify substrate or product binding sites of the enzymes IGPS (1A53), LgtC (1G9R), HIT (1KPF) and TIM (1M7P); pdb ids are given in brackets. In each of these and the following cases, the sets CAT_sites and LIG_sites were merged before assessing in a CASP-related manner the performance for residues binding non-metal ligands. A detailed analysis was added as Supplementary Data. Second, we compared the outcome of CLIPS-4D and firestar (), a top-performing method, for those cases of CASP9 where the MCC-value of the best-performing participant of the contest was lowest (). We selected five targets with a non-metal ligand, namely, T0526, T0584, T0604, T0615 and T0632. Owing to the lack of sufficiently large MSAs or unavailable 3D structures, we could only analyze one nonmetal target of CASP10, namely T0721. Results were summarized inand listed as Supplementary Data. In two of the six cases (T0526, T0604), the MCC-value of CLIPS-4D was superior to firestar. A union of the predictions generated by firestar and CLIPS-4D gave in comparison with firestar for two more cases (T0615, T0721) a higher sensitivity at the cost of a moderate loss in specificity. Among these six CASP targets, the performance of CLIPS-4D was worst for T0584 (pdb id 3NF2). T0584 is a polyprenyl transferase generating the product from the building blocks isopentenyl diphosphate and dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP) by consecutive steps of elongation, cyclopropagation, rearrangement and cyclization reactions (). During synthesis, the product grows into an elongation cavity, and mutagenesis studies made clear that residues protruding into the elongation cavity determine the length of the product (). Two pairs of aspartates of Asp-rich regions are involved in binding DMAPP and catalysis via chelation of the cofactor Mg 2. Five residues from these Asp-rich regions shown to be important for catalysis () were predicted by CLIPS-4D as CAT_sites. Four of these residues are not directly involved in ligand binding in the experimental control structure 1RQI and are thus false-positive predictions as well as 41 LIG_sites. Of these, 18 line the elongation cavity modeled previously (). Three more LIG_sites most likely contact the ligand after an active site rearrangement; see Supplementary Data for details. Therefore, experimental evidence makes plausible some of these predictions that do not belong to the extended binding site. Thus, although not representative due to the small number of analyses, these findings suggest to supplement the result of homology transfer with CLIPS-4D predictions in cases of active site rearrangements, flexible substrates or unknown poses of a ligand.
CONCLUSIONSThe combination of evolutionary and 3D data allows CLIPS-4D to predict critical residue-positions with state-of-the-art quality. As shown here, not more than nine features are sufficient to reach state-of-the-art classification performance, if features are orthogonal to each other. The sequence-and structure-based features contribute differently to the identification of functionally and structurally important residue-positions: For the identification of catalytic and structurally important sites, sequence-based features like conservation are most relevant, for ligand-binding sites 3D features indicating a position in a surface pocket contribute markedly to classification quality. Assessing the content of the CSA made clear that those residues, which were frequently found at catalytic sites could be identified with high quality. In contrast, the identification of residues, which are rare at catalytic sites, and those of ligand-binding sites is still aNote: All MCC-, sensitivity (label 'Sens'), and specificity (label 'Spec') values were determined according to Formulae (13) and (14). The rows with label 'Union' give performance values resulting from merging positive predictions from firestar and CLIPS-4D. The first line gives the number of the target, and the second line gives the pdb id. difficult problem. CLIPS-4D identifies biologically relevant residue-positions and can supplement methods of homology transfer.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
J.-O.Janda et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CLIPS-4D at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
