Gene copy number and DNA methylation alterations are key regulators of gene expression in cancer. Accordingly, genes that show simultaneous methylation, copy number and expression alterations are likely to have a key role in tumor progression. We have implemented a novel software package (CNAmet) for integrative analysis of high-throughput copy number, DNA methylation and gene expression data. To demonstrate the utility of CNAmet, we use copy number, DNA methylation and gene expression data from 50 glioblastoma multiforme and 188 ovarian cancer primary tumor samples. Our results reveal a synergistic effect of DNA methylation and copy number alterations on gene expression for several known oncogenes as well as novel candidate oncogenes.
INTRODUCTIONGenomic instability is a hallmark of cancer and characterization of copy number changes in tumors has lead to identification of a number of genes that contribute to tumor progression and drug response (). In addition to copy number alterations, DNA methylation of CpG islands regulates gene expression patterns in cancers (). Copy number aberrations, methylation patterns and gene expression profiles can be measured genome-scale with microarrays, which enables integration of these data and further identification of genes that are crucial to cancer progression. When integrating copy number and expression data, the major goal is to identify genes that are both amplified and upregulated or deleted and downregulated (). Gene upregulation can also be due to hypomethylation (decrease in methylation of cytosine and adenosine residues in DNA) and downregulation due to hypermethylation. As both copy number and methylation changes may affect gene regulation, integration of these data should result in improved characterization of genes essential in cancer progression (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.We introduce an R package (CNAmet) that integrates highthroughput copy number, methylation and expression data. Our primary goal is to identify genes that are amplified, hypomethylated and upregulated, or deleted, hypermethylated and downregulated, though all combinations between copy number, methylation and expression levels are calculated. To our knowledge CNAmet is the first software package for copy number, methylation and expression integration. To demonstrate the utility of CNAmet we analyze copy number, methylation and expression data from 50 patients with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), which is the most aggressive type of brain cancer, as well as 188 ovarian cancer (OV) patients (The Cancer Genome Atlas Research).
METHODSThe CNAmet algorithm consists of three major steps. In the weight calculation step, the signal-to-noise ratio statistic () is used to link expression values to copy number and methylation aberrations. In the score calculation step, the weight values are combined to a score that indicates genes whose expression alterations are due to changes in DNA methylation and copy number levels. In the significance evaluation step, corrected P-values of the scores are calculated with a permutation test. Let m denote the number of genes and n the number of samples. In general, n can vary between the datasets but is subsequently assumed the same for notational convenience. Inputs to CNAmet are labeling matrices for copy number (cn) and methylation (me) data M cn ,M me {0,1} mn. For example, when searching for genes whose upregulation is likely due to hypomethylation and high copy number status, '1' denotes amplification and '0' lack of amplification in M cn. Similarly, '1' denotes hypomethylation and '0' lack of hypomethylation in M me. In order to calculate weights for the i-th gene we first take the i-th row in M cn. Let m i cn,1 and  i cn,1 be the mean and SD of the expression values of samples labeled with '1' for the i-th gene in M cn , and m i cn,0 and  i cn,0 are calculated with samples labeled with '0'. The values m i me,1 and  i me,1 are calculated similarly from M me for methylation data. Now, for the i-th gene we calculate the weight for methylation and expression data asEquation (1) is used similarly to calculate the weight W i cn for copy number data. By default, the weights are calculated for genes that have '1' in at least two samples in both copy number and methylation data. Weights with a negative sign are denoted as NA. Events where all samples are labeled with '1' in either methylation or copy number data are listed separately. In order to combine the weight values we define T to be the total number of samples and U i the number of samples in the intersection of samples with '1' in M cn and M me for the i-th gene. The optional correction term  i of the CNAmet score for the i-th gene is calculated as  i = U i T. The correction term forces the CNAmet score to favor genes that have aberrant methylationor copy number in many samples. Thus, CNAmet score S i for i-th gene is calculated
R.Louhimo and S.HautaniemiStatistical significance for W i cn , W i me and S i is calculated by randomly permuting the labeling vectors and recalculating W i cn , W i me and S i. The P-values for S i are corrected with the false discovery rate method (). The H 0 here is 'large score is due to random event'. CNAmet is available as an R package and as a component in the Anduril framework (). The Anduril compliance enables modular analysis via a number of preprocessing methods, such as normalization, copy number segmentation or calling algorithms. This allows the use of appropriate preprocessing methods to handle data emerging from different experimental designs and array platforms. In order to assess the utility of CNAmet we applied it to The Cancer Genome Atlas GBM and OV datasets. GBM dataset consists of 181 patient samples with expression and copy number data, and 64 samples with methylation data (The Cancer Genome Atlas Research). There were 50 samples with survival data that overlapped between all three array types. The OV dataset consists of 188 ovarian cancer samples having data from all three array types.
RESULTSOur analysis of the GBM data using CNAmet resulted in four lists of genes (Supplementary File 1). In the hypomethylation and amplification analysis the top scoring six genes (P < 0.05) included MDM2, EGFR and PDGFRA that are well-known oncogenes. We also compared CNAmet to ANOVA and our results indicate that CNAmet identifies more oncogenes and prioritizes the resulting genes better (Supplementary File 2). Based on these results, we hypothesized that the effect of methylation and copy number on expression for these genes is synergistic. To test this hypothesis we grouped the samples based on their methylation and amplification status gene by gene (Supplementary File 2) of which EGFR is shown in. Samples with hypomethylated and non-amplified EGFR show almost normal expression, while samples with EGFR amplification result in upregulated EGFR. Strikingly, samples with hypomethylated and amplified EGFR exhibit a substantial upregulation of EGFR expression when compared to solely amplified samples (t-test, P < 3.810 8 ). This demonstrates a synergetic function of methylation and copy number changes in EGFR expression in GBM. The results are similar for MDM2 and PDGFRA (Supplementary File 2). The ability of CNAmet to detect such synergetic effects is also demonstrated in an analysis of OV data (Supplementary Files 2 and 3). Amplification and overexpression of EGFR are controversial prognostic factors in GBM (). We compared the age-independent survival of GBM patients with hypomethylated and amplified EGFR to patients with only hypomethylated EGFR. Patients with hypomethylated EGFR had marginally better prognosis than the patients with hypomethylated and amplified EGFR (logrank test P < 0.06; Supplementary File 2). This survival effect would have been undetected when using copy number data only (Supplementary File 2), which illustrates the benefits of integrating methylation and copy number data.
CONCLUSIONWe have designed and implemented a novel and versatile method, CNAmet, to facilitate the integration of copy number, methylation and expression data. We applied CNAmet to GBM and ovarian cancer data and our results demonstrate the added value of integrating these three data sources.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [10:36 19/2/2011 Bioinformatics-btr019.tex]
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
