The method for genome-wide association study (GWAS) based on copy number variation (CNV) is not as well established as that for single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)–GWAS. Although there are several tools for CNV association studies, most of them do not provide appropriate definitions of CNV regions (CNVRs), which are essential for CNV-association studies. Here we present a user-friendly program called CNVRuler for CNV-association studies. Outputs from the 10 most common CNV defining algorithms can be directly used as input files for determining the three different definitions of CNVRs. Once CNVRs are defined, CNVRuler supports four kinds of statistical association tests and options for population stratification. CNVRuler is based on the open-source programs R and Java from Sun Microsystems. Availability: CNVRuler software is available with an online manual at the website, www.ircgp.com/CNVRuler/index.html Contact: yejun@catholic.ac.kr.
INTRODUCTIONCopy number variation (CNV) is thought to contribute to interindividual differences in phenotypes including disease susceptibility (). Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotypes are always represented as categorical values, while copy number variations (CNVs) are often represented as regions consisting of continuous values for consecutive probes. For this reason, the following three steps are required to perform a CNV-based genome-wide association study (GWAS): (i) calling CNVs, (ii) merging CNVs into common CNV regions (CNVRs), and (iii) statistical analysis of the associations. Despite the importance and popularity of CNV phenotype association studies, there are not many algorithms that provide all three key steps mentioned above.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors * To whom correspondence should be addressed.A number of tools supporting CNVdisease association analysis have been developed (Supplementary). However, most of these tools do not offer methods for defining the CNVRs and require additional manual processes for converting the input CNV calls into files suitable for statistical analysis. In order to support the steps from merging CNVs into CNVRs to CNVR-based association analysis in a single software program, we developed a user-friendly tool for CNVGWAS, called CNVRuler.
DESCRIPTIONCNVRuler was designed to define three different types of CNVRs from the predefined CNVs and provides four statistical methods for CNVR-based association studies. The overall analysis flow in CNVRuler is illustrated in. All forms of major CNV call outputs from different segmentation tools such as Genotyping Console, Genome Studio, Genomic Workbench, PennCNV and Nexus can be processed without additional conversion steps. Details are described in the user manual.
PrerequisitesCNVRuler requires Java Runtime Environment from Sun Microsystems or the equivalent (JRE 1.6.0). The major functions of CNVRuler algorithms are implemented in R program as a calculation core.
Processing CNV dataOutputs from the 10 CNV defining algorithms can be used directly as input files for determining the CNVRs with CNVRuler (Supplementary). Alternatively, CNVRuler can read a manually prepared custom tab-delimited text file of CNV information to build the CNVRs including next-generation sequencing data as a user-customized text file. Users can filter out the CNVs by size and signal intensity threshold. Details are available in the user manual.
Building CNVRsFor association analyses, each CNVR should have the same boundaries among subjects such that each subject will be coded as CNVR-gain positive, CNVR-loss positive, or diploid. CNVRuler supports three different definitions of common CNV regions.). This process is simple and straightforward, but it may overestimate the size of CNVRs when any of the overlapping CNVs are extremely long (see user manual). In order to minimize this possibility, CNVRuler provides the option to assess the regional density of the participating CNVs base-by-base and trim the low-density areas. For example, the area covered by <10% of the total contributing CNVs within a CNVR will be removed by default. The density threshold for trimming can be selected by the user. Second, common CNV regions can also be determined by reciprocal overlap (RO). RO is the degree of overlap between any two CNV calls defined as the overlap of one CNV with another over a predefined threshold value (). In CNVRuler, we set the RO threshold to 0.5. The third definition involves splitting the overlapping regions into fragments. Since this definition generates a larger number of fragments, the calculation time is longer than that in other methods. To validate the CNVRuler, we used the CNVs identified from Affymetrix SNP array 6.0 genotyping data of 10 individuals and defined CNVRs using CNVRuler and CONAN software (). Nearly 100% of the CNVRs defined by the three methods of CNVRuler were defined by CONAN (Supplementary).
Association analysisCNVRuler supports chi-squared and Fisher's exact tests in addition to logistic and linear regression analyses using defined CNVRs and clinical information. Clinical information can be easily coded into a simple tab-delimited text file format. Both the false discovery rate and Bonferroni correction can be used for multiple testing with this software. There is an option to remove the CNVRs from the association analysis based on the frequency (see user manual). CNVRuler supports the likelihood ratio test (LRT), which can be used to assess the goodness-of-fit of logistic regression models. For population stratification, CNVRuler uses principal component analysis. It calculates eigenvectors and uses up to 3 principal components as covariates of regression. In order to validate the performance of CNVRuler, we applied the data of 4574 CNVs identified in 500 cases of subarachnoid aneurysmal hemorrhage using Illumina HumanHap300 BeadChip (). The three different CNVR-defining algorithms identified different numbers of CNVRs: 1843 CNVRs, 2211 ROs and 2797 fragments (Supplementarywere detected by all three algorithms of CNVRuler. In association analyses, the two CNVRs were consistently significant in univariate models regardless of the CNVR-defining algorithm (Supplementary). However, our CNVRs were not significant in logistic regression models adjusted for age and sex and for multiple comparisons by the FDR method. This discrepancy may be partly due to the different correction methods applied for multiple comparisons and the difference between region-based and probebased analyses (). CNVRuler can handle both common and rare CNVs once CNVs are called. Different from common CNPs, rare CNVs can cause complete or quasi 'separation' in 22 tables, where the odds ratios cannot be calculated or the approximation of significance is inadequate. For example, complete separation occurs when a particular CNVR aggregates in cases, but it is not found at all in controls. In these situations, users can select the  2 test with Yates' continuity correction or Fisher's exact test. There are different opinions regarding which of these two methods to choose; so users should use their own statistical knowledge and discretion. After this step, users can perform exact logistic regression analysis or other methods specialized for dealing with a small number of events or small sample sizes, but CNVRuler does not provide these specialized regression methods at the moment.
CONCLUSIONCNVRuler is a user-friendly program with multiple functions that support all procedures of CNVphenotype association analysis in a single system without requiring any additional manual processes.1008.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
