Motivation: To assess whether two proteins will interact under physiological conditions, information on the interaction free energy is needed. Statistical learning techniques and docking methods for predicting protein–protein interactions cannot quantitatively estimate binding free energies. Full atomistic molecular simulation methods do have this potential, but are completely unfeasible for large-scale applications in terms of computational cost required. Here we investigate whether applying coarse-grained (CG) molecular dynamics simulations is a viable alternative for complexes of known structure. Results: We calculate the free energy barrier with respect to the bound state based on molecular dynamics simulations using both a full atomistic and a CG force field for the TCR–pMHC complex and the MP1–p14 scaffolding complex. We find that the free energy barriers from the CG simulations are of similar accuracy as those from the full atomistic ones, while achieving a speedup of 4500-fold. We also observe that extensive sampling is extremely important to obtain accurate free energy barriers, which is only within reach for the CG models. Finally, we show that the CG model preserves biological relevance of the interactions: (i) we observe a strong correlation between evolutionary likelihood of mutations and the impact on the free energy barrier with respect to the bound state; and (ii) we confirm the dominant role of the interface core in these interactions. Therefore, our results suggest that CG molecular simulations can realistically be used for the accurate prediction of protein–protein interaction strength. Availability and implementation: The python analysis framework and data files are available for download at http://www.ibi.vu.nl/ downloads/bioinformatics-2013-btt675.tgz.
INTRODUCTIONProteinprotein interactions (PPI) are at the heart of all processes in life. To understand living systems beyond the genome, comprehensive knowledge of PPI is therefore essential. Experimental techniques (), prediction from sequence () and proteinprotein docking methods () all have their specific limitations. To assess the likelihood of two proteins interacting under physiological interactions, we need to know both the concentrations and the dissociation constant (or binding free energy) of the proteins involved. Although it seems that the identification of the interface region is rather successful (), major open challenges are the accurate determination of interaction strength (), the incorporation of protein flexibility () and accounting for water and small solute entropic effects (). Most importantly, Kastritis andshow that there is a poor correlation between binding affinity and scores for all nine commonly used docking algorithms they tested on 81 complexes with known binding affinity. Molecular simulations using atomic pairwise interaction potentials are much more accurate for estimating interaction strength than docking scoring functions, though computationally much more expensive (). Nevertheless, an immediate bonus of molecular simulation is that it addresses all three challenges mentioned above: interaction strength, flexibility and entropic effects. For biomolecular simulation in general, the solvent (water) is the major obstacle to improve computational efficiency due to the large number of water molecules needed to solvate the protein. Many possible approaches to overcome this problem exist (for recent reviews, see). Among the fastest available are the mean-field or 'implicit solvent' methods; however, one of the main drawbacks is the lack of accurate estimation of the solute entropy, especially in combination with charged solutes (). By lumping together small molecules (e.g. water molecules) or *To whom correspondence should be addressed. yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. molecular segments into 'meta particles', coarse-grained (CG) force fields retain the explicit description of the system, including the solvent. Several CG models for water are available, each with their particular strengths and weaknesses (). Compared with atomistic force fields, CG models provide increased computational efficiency at sufficient levels of accuracy (). Therefore, for the calculation of molecular interactions, thermodynamic integration based on atomistic simulations with explicit water is both theoretically well founded and the most accurate solution available to date (). In this work, we investigate the option of addressing the high computational cost of atomistic molecular simulations by the use of a CG force field for such simulations. For this, we will use the MARTINI CG protein force field for molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (). This force field was developed for CG simulations of biological membraneprotein systems and has recently been used to simulate the spontaneous association of GPCR proteins in a lipid bilayer (). The MARTINI force field does not capture structural rearrangements, such as changes in secondary structure. We will assess its applicability and accuracy for the calculation of interaction strengths for a pair of protein structures in a water environment from constraint-force profiles. By applying the MARTINI CG force field, we first show that we are able to estimate the free energy barrier with respect to the bound state (G off ) with similar accuracy compared with atomistic force field calculations and in good agreement with experimental data, but at4500-fold increased computational speed. For this we selected two test cases: a TCRpMHC and an MP1p14 scaffolding complex, both of which were previously studied with atomistic models (, respectively). We then show that calculated contributions of surface residues to the interaction strength are sensitive to changes in the amino acid residues involved. Random mutations at the interface core yield major changes in calculated interaction strengths, whereas mutations at the partially solvated interface rim yield only minor changes. Random mutations at the rest of the surface on average hardly affect the interaction strength at all. Moreover, we find that the evolutionarily most likely mutations, as assessed by standard residue exchange propensities, at the interface core also have a negligible influence on the interaction strength, whereas evolutionarily unlikely mutations disrupt favourable PPI considerably. This behaviour with respect to mutations is consistent with what we would expect from a biological point of view. Finally, we discuss future implications of our finding that the major contributions to the interaction strength within our CG approach arise from the interface core.
METHODS
Software and force fieldsThe mutate_model script in Modeller () was used to produce mutant structures. DSSP () and JOY () were used to calculate the absolute and relative solvent accessibility of residues, respectively. VMD () was used to visualize the structures. We used GROMACS 4.0.5 () for all MD simulations. Atomistic simulations were performed using the GROMOS G43a1 force field using the default time step (t  1 fs) (). CG simulations were performed using the MARTINI force field with the default time step (t  20 fs) (). Coarse-graining (CG-ing) was performed as previously described for the MARTINI model (). All 20 amino acids were mapped into four different bead types with respect to their physicochemical properties (Supplementary). The non-bonded interactions between the CG solvent and solute particles were modelled by truncated and shifted LennardJones pair-potential with a cut-off radius of 1.2 nm ().
The potential of mean forceWe use the potential of mean force (PMF) to describe the interaction strength between two structures (). The centre of mass (COM) separation r was chosen as the reaction coordinate along which the mean force is measured. Integration of the mean force along this pathway results in a free energy profile (strictly, the PMF is not a free energy profile, as it does not correct for standard conditions; this is covered in the Supplementary Information) that can be used to derive the free energy barrier with respect to the bound state G off. We first calculate the force F mean as a function of the reaction coordinate from constrained MD simulations,where F pull r denotes the average force required to keep the interaction members at the constraint distance r, ~ F A and ~ F B the total forces acting on the first and the second interaction members, which arise from direct interactions and interactions with explicitly simulated solvent, ~ r u  ~ r=r the unit vector connecting the two centres of mass and angular brackets    h i NPT an average in the isothermalisobaric ensemble. We define the constraint distance r as r  r COM, A  r COM, B and r 2 r 1 , r 2 , :::, r N f g  2 where r COM, i is the COM position of interaction member i and N is the number of separation distances at which the F mean values are calculated. Three arbitrary separations are illustrated infor MP1p14. We calculated the F mean at 50 distances for the TCRpMHC (where 5 nm r 7:45 nm) and at 54 distances for MP1p14 (2:16 nm r 4:44 nm). In cases where we simulated nearly identical starting conformations of a particular structure for better sampling at distance r, we included these F mean values into the average of F mean r. After generating the force profile F mean r for the range of separations, we calculated the PMF by numerically integrating the interpolated F mean r asFrom this profile, the free energy barrier G off is obtained from the difference between the minimum of PMFr at r min and the maximum PMF value at larger distances r4r min :
Simulation setupThe wild-type (WT) X-ray structures of the TCRpMHC () and MP1p14 () complexes, resolved at 2.6 and 1.9 A  , were taken from the Protein Data Bank entries 1ao7 and 1vet, respectively. The TCRpMHC structure contains 707 residues, of the human A6 TCR in complex with the MHC-bound Tax nanopeptide. The MP1p14 complex contains 240 residues, of two structurally very similar chains of low sequence similarity, with a large and shallow interface.
Equilibration procedureFor the atomistic and CG simulations, a general equilibration scheme was performed, which was identical for atomistic and CG except where noted below. First, the structure was energy-minimized in vacuum, followed by the separation of the interacting proteins to the constraint distance r along the reaction coordinate. These structures, for each r, were solvated in a periodic cubic box with a size ensuring a minimum distance between the proteins and the box edges to avoid self-interactions with periodic images. For the atomistic simulations, the SPC water model and a minimum distance of 1.2 nm were used. For the CG simulations, MARTINI water was used with a 1.0 nm minimum distance. Energy minimization on the solvated system was performed first with, and then without, position restraints. In the atomistic energy minimization, position restraints were first put on non-H atoms, followed by restraining only C atoms. The system was neutralized by adding as many Na  or Cl  counter ions as needed for a total charge of 0. Then, another unrestrained energy minimization was performed. The neutralized and solvated structure was simulated for 20 ps (atomistic) or 30 ps (CG) with position restraints on the C atoms (atomistic) or whole structure (CG), to allow the solvent to equilibrate around the solute. The temperature was set to T  303 K using a Berendsen () (CG) or a NoseNoseHoover () (atomistic) thermostat with T  0:1 ps. The pressure in atomistic simulations was set to P  1 bar using a ParrinelloRahman barostat (1981) with P  0:5 ps. In CG simulations, pressure was set to P  300 bar, using a Berendsen barostat () with P  0:5 ps. The high pressure in the CG simulations was applied to ensure the bulk MARTINI CG water is in the fluid region of the phase diagram. We determined the MARTINI CG water phase diagram from separate Gibbs ensemble simulations (). Temperature and pressure were equilibrated for 0.1 ns (atomistic) or 0.2 ns (CG). The resulting conformations were used in the production simulations without position restraints.
Atomistic production simulations Atomistic production MDsimulations were performed for the WT TCRpMHC (3 replicates) and MP1p14 (10 replicates). Equilibration procedure and production runs were repeated for each distance, cf. Equation (2). Each production simulation was run for 2 ns.
CG production simulations CG production MD simulationswere performed for the WTs and in-silico mutants (20 replicates). Before starting the CG equilibration procedure, the atomistic structure was first energy minimized and then coarse-grained using atom2cg (http://md. chem.rug.nl/cgmartini). The tertiary structure of the CG complex was stabilized by generating distance restraints on the backbone atoms (). This equilibration procedure and the production runs were repeated for each distance in Equation (2). Production simulations were run for 2 ns or 2 s as indicated.). Subsequently, residues that have57% of their side chain accessible to the solvent in both forms were defined as protein core. Residues that have47% of their side chain exposed to the solvent in the monomer and 57% in the dimer were defined as interface core. Residues that have 47% of their side chain accessible to the solvent in both forms were defined as interface rim if there was a difference of at least 1 A  2 in their absolute SASA between two forms. Residues that do not fall into one of the above groups were called surface residues. The outer interface rim class is composed of the closest surface residue neighbours of interface rim residues located on the same monomer. The number of outer rim residues identified in a complex is the same as the number of rim residues.
Definition of different residue classes
In silico mutations and statistical analysisTo probe the biological relevance of the CG calculations, we introduce mutations guided by the BLOSUM62 substitution matrix () in the MP1p14 complex. We mutated all 23 interface core residues to the amino acid with the highest substitution score (other than itself) to obtain the evolutionarily most likely mutant (see Supplementary). In a separate set of mutations, we mutated the interface core to the lowest-scoring substitutions to obtain the least likely mutant (see Supplementary). We performed 20 replicate simulations for both mutants, each starting from slightly different starting conformations. Next, we also made all 23  19 possible interface core mutants and simulated each 10 times. To further probe biological relevance, we compare the effects of random mutations at different locations at and around the interface for both the MP1p14 and the TCRpMHC complexes. We created 20 compositionally different interface core mutants where all n interface core residues (see Supplementary) were substituted with randomly chosen amino acids. Then, we created 20 different interface rim mutants by randomly substituting n interface rim residues with random amino acids. Next, we obtain 20 outer interface rim mutants by randomly substituting the n non-interface neighbours of the interface rim. We calculated the PPI for each of these mutants only once rather than multiple replicates. Differences in the free energy barrier G were statistically tested with a two-sided MannWhitney test separately for every mutant and for the WT. Finally, we made specific interface mutations in a homologue of the TCRpMHC complex described by. We chose the seven mutants with the largest measured Gs: in the beta chain Q64A, E69A and A73G, and in the peptide K99R, T102N, T102S and the double mutant Y97F/T102S.
RESULTS
Calculation of free energy barrier with respect to the bound stateTo obtain the free energy barriers to compare atomistic and CG results, we calculate the PMF (and D). This can be derived from the mean force F mean cf. Equation(1) required to constrain interaction members (e.g. TCR and pMHC) at a number of COM separation distances (and B). Several immediate observations can be drawn from. First, force profiles obtained by the atomistic and the CG model are in reasonable agreement for both complexes (and B). Second, at a given separation distance r, simulations of nearly identical starting conformations (identical symbols inand B on the distance r) yield a distribution of force values in both atomistic and CG simulations rather than converging to some value. Finally, these distributions overlap closely for distances larger than $2.75 nm () and $5.5 nm (), but diverge at shorter distances. Next we calculated the average mean force at each distance to obtain the force profiles F atom mean r, in blue, and F CG mean r, in green inand B. We calculated the PMF by numerically integrating the interpolated F mean r cf. Equation 3 (and D). The free energy barrier can now simply be obtained from the well-depth of the PMF, cf. Equation (4). The resulting PMFs shown inand D for both complexes provide a comparison between the free energy minima calculated from the atomistic and the CG simulations, as well as with the experimentally determined interaction strengths. For the MP1p14 complex, atomistic and CG simulations yielded free energy barriers G off  132 and 104 kJ mol 1 , respectively, both overestimating the reported experimental G off  91 kJ mol 1 (). For the TCR pMHC complex, atomistic and CG simulations yielded free energy barriers G off  101 and 80 kJ mol 1 , respectively, close to the experimental values G off  79:5 kJ mol 1 () and G off  78:6 kJ mol 1 (Davis-Harrison et al., 2007 and see Supplementary Table S1 for further details). As noted above, a very small correction must be made to the free energy barrier (), which amounts to $4 kJ mol 1 (see Supplementary Data for a detailed calculation). To probe the effect of sampling of the rotational degrees of freedom, for the MP1p14 complex, we also calculated the PMF based on a triplicate set of long 2 s CG simulations. Supplementaryshows ordering is present in the short (2 ns) simulations, as well as at close distances in the long (2 s) simulations; however, this ordering disappears at farther distances (44 nm) in the long simulations, indicating a strongly improved rotational sampling. We found a negligible change in the G off as a result of this improved sampling. Besides interaction strength,and D presents a comparison between the experimentally reported PPI equilibrium distance (the separation distance in X-ray structure) and the corresponding value from simulations (the distance at the PMF minimum). We see that the experimental distances were slightly underestimated by the atomistic PMF in both cases, whereas the CG PMF appears to yield distances closer to the crystal structure, especially in the case of TCRpMHC interaction.
Computational speed-upThe running time of atomistic MD simulations for MP1p14 at the longest COM separation distance r  4:44 nm was 284 CPUhours (CPUh). CG-ing reduced the running time at this distance to 0.5 CPUh, yielding a 568-fold speed-up. Shorter separations are progressively faster, but show similar speed-ups. In the case of the TCRpMHC, this was 1333 and 2.5 CPUh, respectively, for a speed-up of 533-fold. In total, we invested well over 300 000 CPUh in the atomistic simulations, over the 3 and 10 replicate calculations for the TCRpMHC and MP1p14 complexes, respectively. In contrast, the CG simulations for the 456 different mutants (10 or 20 replicates each) only required $100 000 CPUh. The 2 s CG simulations (three replicates) required an additional 64 000 CPUh.
Evolutionary likelihood of mutations and the free energyTo obtain a simple, although biologically relevant test case, we substituted interface core residues in MP1p14 according to BLOSUM62 (). We define two sets of mutations; one where each residue is mutated into the evolutionarily most distant residue, and one where it is mutated into the closest residue type (detailed substitutions in Supplementary). One would expect minimal distortion of the PMF from the closest substitutions, and maximal distortion for the evolutionarily most distant substitutions. It is clear from the results shown inthat when the interface core composition was altered with the most similar amino acids, change in the interaction strength remains insignificant (G off  7 kJ mol 1 , P50.38; see Supplementaryfor detailed significance values), whereas substitutions with the most dissimilar amino acids have a strongly disruptive effect on the PPI that is highly significant (G off  71:5 kJ mol 1 , P510 11 ; see Supplementary). However, we still observe a favourable interaction (G off  32 AE 13 kJ mol 1 ) with the most dissimilar mutant structure. Note that the force field alone has no such predictive value (see Supplementary). We have in addition considered all single mutations for each of the 23 interface core residues for MP1p14. Of all G off s with respect to the WT, 16 are significant (P 0.05 using Student's t-test with Hommel multiple testing correction; 121 at P 0:05 with just t-test). This corresponds to a detection limit of about G off ! 8 kJ mol 1 .compares G off between all mutants (excluding the WT as the rest of the protein structure is biased towards the WT amino acid) with the corresponding BLOSUM62 scores, and shows that there is a strong correlation between them, as expected. In a homologue of the TCRpMHC complex, we furthermore show that we can reproduce experimental G off s for interface mutations to within the accuracy of our calculations (see Supplementary).
The interface core dominates the interactionOur final in silico experiment with the CG model was aimed at investigating the effective role of interface residues in the interaction between two proteins. We first defined classes of residues based on SASA and distance (, for definitions see Section 2, a summary is provided in Supplementary Table S2). We substituted the same number of residues from each class with randomly chosen amino acids, and calculated the interaction strength in the resulting mutant complexes. The resulting PMFs shown inindicate significant disruptive effects of mutations at the interface core in both the MP1p14 (P510 8 ; see Supplementaryfor detailed significance values) and TCRpMHC (P52  10 4 ; see Supplementary), whereas mutations in the interface rim appear to have very little influence on the PMF compared with the WT. Note that in both complexes, mutations of outer rim sometimes yielded enhanced interaction strengths.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONIn this article, we have set out to answer the following questions. First, can we use CG MD simulations to get the free energy barrier with respect to the bound state for PPI that are of similar accuracy to those from atomistic MD simulations? Second, what is the gain in speed and overall sampling for CG versus atomistic? Finally, can we get biologically relevant results from the CG model, similar to what we expect to get from the atomistic model (at much higher computational cost)?
Biological relevanceWe have shown that by using the CG MARTINI force field, we obtain free energy barriers that are at least as close to the experimental values as those obtained using an atomistic force field. Moreover, evolutionarily least likely mutations, according to BLOSUM62 substitution propensities, at the interface core disrupt binding, whereas the most likely mutations hardly influence A B. The PPI effects of different mutations at the MP1p14 interface. (A) PMF curves of the WT, the most similar and dissimilar mutants in black, red and blue, respectively. Error bars are based on standard deviations in the mean force, cf. Equation (5). (B) Box-plot of average G off per substitution type, based on pairwise differences between single mutations at the interface core, versus the corresponding BLOSUM62 substitution score, with a correlation R  0:39 and significance P 2:2  10 8 binding. It is important to note here that the residue similarities from large-scale sequence comparisons, as captured in the BLOSUM62 matrix, are independent of the MARTINI CG force field. Likewise, mutations on the interface core have a much more disruptive effect on the binding than those at the interface rim. Mutations farther away from the interface have negligible effects. This is consistent with the findings that residues at the interface core in general behave much like protein core, whereas interface rim residues are more similar to those at the surface (e.g.). These results show that the CG MARTINI force field is sensitive to changes in the shape and physicochemical properties of the interface, and suggest it is suitable for studying the effects of biologically relevant structural changes in PPIs. Of note, we observe that even the evolutionarily least likely mutations in the interface core still result in a minimum well in the PPI PMF, which means that some (weak) affinity is retained. This may be due to retained shape compatibility of the mutant interface or due to favourable 'supporting' interactions of residues in the interface rim. This could also explain our finding that least likely mutations that are performed only on one side of the interface (see Supplementary) have much smaller disruptive effects on the binding. We also noticed that some outer interface rim mutations significantly lower the well depth; note that these residues doshows corresponding plots with only one of three residues mutated not participate in the interaction in the WT complex. This increased binding strength could be caused by additional interactions that are introduced by these mutations. We found that the most significantly increased binding strength occurred in mutants with a higher net charge. This could mean that either additional salt-bridges contribute to the binding, or that possibly (additional) counter-ions interact at the interface to increase the binding strength. Alternatively, the interface rim is known to infer specificity through complementarity of shape and binding properties (), and is therefore not tuned for optimal binding strength. Likewise, the interface as a whole may not be evolutionarily optimized for binding affinity, as other functional aspects are also likely to give selective advantages. This means that there may in fact be ample room for optimization of the binding affinity in any particular naturally occurring proteinprotein interface. Finally, we do see qualitative differences between the atomistic and CG PMFs, although our set of two complexes does not allow us to decide which one is in better agreement with experimental dissociation constants. Underlying reasons for these differences are likely related to the different parameterization of short-range interactions in these force fields. The difference between the experimental and computed equilibrium distances can have a number of explanations. The crystal structures represent vacuum systems in which the protein structure is very rigid, whereas we simulated systems of solvated 'breathing' proteins. Furthermore, the MARTINI force field includes restraints on the tertiary structure of the protein, whereas the unrestrained atomistic simulations will allow larger deviations in the interface on binding. This may explain why equilibrium binding distance in the CG calculations is closer to the crystal structure than the atomistic simulations. In any case, a comparison of the experimental equilibrium COM distances to the ones we computed is expected to yield differences.
Sampling is crucialSurprisingly, for both complexes, the CG model appears to be at least as accurate in approximating the experimental value as the atomistic model. Part of the reason for that could be better sampling of the mean force for the CG model where the faster simulations enabled us to perform 20 independent simulations for each separation distance, whereas only 3 (TCRpMHC) or 10 (MP1p14) simulations could realistically be performed for the atomistic model. We also find that, for a given separation distance, simulations from slightly different starting conditions do not converge to the same value of the constraint force (seeand B,  and symbols) for both the CG and the atomistic models, and this effect is strongest at short separation distances. We attribute this observation to the complex potential energy surface at small separation distances. Simulations of biomolecules starting from nearly identical initial conditions are known to get trapped in local minima (). In general, this can be overcome as well with sufficient sampling. The reason we could perform so many more simulations for the CG model is of course its increased computational efficiency, 500600 times faster than the atomistic simulations. The primary reason for this large computational gain is the reduction in particle density, and the ensuing quadratic decrease in numbers of pairwise interactions calculated. Moreover, the larger heavier particles with softer interaction potentials in the CG force field allow much longer integration time-steps without loss of accuracy than is possible with the atomistic force field. Therefore, we can conclude that, for all but very small-scale analyses, the amount of sampling required for accurate determination of the G off barrier can only realistically be achieved using CG models. Some further efficiency could possibly be gained by optimizing simulation parameters, particularly the integration time-step. For the atomistic simulations, time-steps of up to t  5 or 6 fs may be used with negligible loss of accuracy (). A similar speed-up may likewise be achieved in the CG simulations. One final challenge regarding the accurate calculation of the free energy of binding in particular remains largely open: that of the accurate estimation of loss of rotational entropy on formation of a protein complex (). In the results presented here, at 2 ns sampling, the rotational entropy is not fully sampled (see Supplementary). For the free energy difference between the bound state and the unbound state, this would result in a discrepancy between the simulation and the experiment. However, at the top of the barrier, this error is expected to be much smaller (); our 2 s simulations for the MP1p14 complex confirm that this effect can be extremely small. Furthermore, the correction is expected to be independent of the details of the force field used, and therefore we can directly compare the results between the atomistic and CG simulations. It is interesting to note that we could use the increased efficiency in the CG simulations to directly sample rotational degrees of freedom, as indicated by the complete loss of orientational ordering at 2 s and large separation distance (see Supplementary). It is beyond the scope of this work, but once sufficient sampling is established, these results can be used to estimate directly the changes in entropy during the bound to unbound transition in complexes like this one.
Limitations of the approachIn this article, we compared two force fields on two complexes of known structure. We have shown that for these two complexes, the interaction profiles are highly similar when comparing the atomistic force field to the CG MARTINI force field. To claim generality of these findings, a larger test set may be required. However, the computational requirement for the reference simulations using the atomistic force field is prohibitive. Additionally none of the current methods in docking or simulation can predict binding affinities without knowledge of the bound structure (). The comparison has been made by assuming that conformations in the free state as well as in the bound state are relatively stable. For other complexes, this may be different, e.g. when the PPI involves 'induced fit' effects, especially for highly flexible binding partners. It is unlikely that the methods proposed here will be directly applicable to such cases. It should be emphasized that the atomistic approach is equally unfeasible here, but in that case due to limits in computational sampling. The in silico mutational study presented here did not account for the possibility that mutations might disrupt protein secondary structure, as these kinds of structural rearrangements are not possible in the MARTINI model.
Future implicationsOur results confirm the dominance of the interface region in determining the PPI for the two complexes. This opens the possibility to restrict the simulated system to the interface area and intervening water only. However, when only a limited volume at the interface region is simulated, the number of water molecules in that volume cannot be assumed constant during force calculation. Rather, this system should be considered at a constant chemical potential () with fluctuating numbers of particles (N), i.e. the grand-canonical (GC) or VT ensemble. Traditionally, MD simulations are performed in the microcanonical (NPE), canonical (NVT) or isothermal/isobaric (NPT) ensemble, as this simplifies calculations and the complexity of the software required (). We have recently published a python library interface to the GROMACS simulation engine () that enables simulation of a GC VT ensemble through a hybrid MD/Monte Carlo integration scheme. The combined speed-up achieved by coarse-graining and volume restriction would be sufficient to incorporate the calculation of binding free energies into a three-stage approach to PPI calculation for genomic-scale application. First, non-interacting protein pairs would be filtered out using cheap sequence-based methods (e.g.). Second, docking will be used to find the most likely binding interfaces (). In a final step, binding energy calculation will then be used to select the stable complexes (). Although this goal, for now, remains in the future, it does seem only a few small steps away.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CG vs. atomistic: realistic protein interaction energies at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
A.May et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
