Cobweb is a Java applet for real-time network visualization; its strength lies in enabling the interactive exploration of networks. Therefore, it allows new nodes to be interactively added to a network by querying a database on a server. The network constantly rearranges to provide the most meaningful topological view. Availability: Cobweb is available under the GPLv3 and may be freely downloaded at
INTRODUCTIONNetwork-based techniques are used today to tackle a wide variety of scientific questions, ranging from interaction mechanisms in protein networks to signalling pathway analysis (). Consequently, there is a strong need to have tools to visualize and explore networks such as Cytoscape (), Gephi () and ProViz (). However, these programs aim at visualizing large networks and offer many features. They cannot be integrated into web sites and have a significant learning curve. Therefore, we have developed Cobweb as a Java applet that has fewer features but can be easily used from any webpage. Cobweb offers uncomplicated real-time visualization of networks up to a few hundred nodes. In contrast to earlier web-based approaches such as Medusa () and jSquid (), Cobweb stresses interactive features. Thus, it is possible to interactively add new nodes to the network at which time the network topology changes to provide the most uncluttered view.
THE APPLETCobweb's strength lies in its ease of use and ability to be adapted to new tasks.
Features@BULLET Can be easily integrated into web pages. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. @BULLET The user interface is easily customizable using JavaScript (Section 2.2).@BULLET Network conformation changes for best viewing (Section 2.4).@BULLET Networks can be input and output as XGMML and GraphML files (Section 2.5). @BULLET Pictorial representation of nodes.
User interfaceThe user interface consists of three parts: a network view, a status bar and a side bar (). The network view is the actual applet, where the network is drawn. Here nodes can be clicked, dragged and visualization options (like how to depict nodes, the length of edges, etc.) chosen. The other parts, the side and status bars, are not part of the applet, but of the HTML content of the page. The status bar gives some information about the actions the applet is performing while the side bar offers possibilities for interacting with the network, e.g. to add new nodes or to perform basic analyses. The content of these bars is generated by JavaScript functions, so it is possible to add additional features to the side bar just by changing the JavaScript code without touching the applet code.
Interactively add nodesThe applet supports interactive exploration of the network displayed by adding new nodes to the network. Nodes are added either by double clicking on existing nodes in the network view or through buttons in the side bar. To add a new node to the network, the Java applet calls a script (e.g. written in PHP) that returns detailed information (like neighbours, description, etc.) about the node. This information is then parsed by Cobweb and the node is added to the network. If the script is stored on the same server as the applet, this works without having to sign the applet.
Network arrangementThe network is represented internally as a particle system, where each node in the network is represented by one particle. Each particle is connected by spring-like forces to all other particles in a pairwise manner. If two nodes in the network are connected by an edge, the force between the corresponding particles is attractive, otherwise repellent. The positions of all particles are constantly recomputed based on these forces using a fourth-order RungeKutta method(). As such, the network automatically returns to a favourable position after nodes are added or moved by the user. Additionally, single nodes can be given a fixed position to improve clarity.
J.von Eichborn et al.
Input and outputThe applet is able to read and write networks as valid XGMML (eXtensible
CONCLUSIONSCobweb is a tool for uncomplicated real-time network visualization and particularly suited to interactive exploration of datasets accessed from web sites. Cobweb is able to open and save documents in XGMML-and GraphML-format and thus is suited to preliminary viewing before loading into more complicated and detailed analytical software. We are currently using Cobweb in our project PROMISCUOUS (von); incorporation into other projects is on-going. Cobweb is written in Java and based on the Processing framework () and the G4P library (http://lagers.org.uk/g4p) by Peter Lager. Being object oriented makes it straightforward to add new functionality (e.g. new node and edge properties) to the applet.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [13:54 14/5/2011 Bioinformatics-btr195.tex]
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
