Codon optimization has been widely used for designing synthetic genes to improve their expression in heterologous host organisms. However, most of the existing codon optimization tools consider a single design criterion and/or implement a rather rigid user interface to yield only one optimal sequence, which may not be the best solution. Hence, we have developed Codon Optimization OnLine (COOL), which is the first web tool that provides the multi-objective codon optimization functionality to aid systematic synthetic gene design. COOL supports a simple and flexible interface for customizing various codon optimization parameters such as codon adaptation index, individual codon usage and codon pairing. In addition, users can visualize and compare the optimal synthetic sequences with respect to various fitness measures. User-defined DNA sequences can also be compared against the COOL optimized sequences to show the extent by which the user's sequences can be further improved. Availability and implementation: COOL is free to academic and non-commercial users and licensed to others for a fee by the National University of Singapore.
INTRODUCTIONThe advent of synthetic biology ushered in the new era of life science research where synthetic genetic circuits (e.g. artificial biomolecules, usually nucleotides) can be constructed and inserted into the living host to perform novel biological functions such as a metabolic pathway, a specific cell signalling response and/or novel gene regulation (). However, the desired biological functions can be achieved only if the synthetic genes are properly expressed within the host organism. Therefore, it is highly required to develop a systematic framework that rationally designs the synthetic genes for optimal expression in the recombinant host. Factors affecting the expression of recombinant genes have been well studied. The codon usage pattern, which relates to relative abundance of tRNA isoacceptors, has been implicated as one of the crucial determinants of heterologous protein expression level (). However, experimental studies have shown that the precise factors and their relative contributions are unclear (). Computational tools, such as JCat (), Synthetic Gene Designer () and OPTIMIZER (), have been developed to quantify and optimize the codon usage frequency of the coding sequence in terms of the host's codon adaptation index (CAI) or individual codon usage (ICU). Moreover, the optimization of codon pairing, also known as codon context (CC), has been demonstrated to be effective in improving heterologous gene expression (). Additionally, the presence of hidden stop codons (HSC) also prevents off-frame reading, thereby reducing resource wastage, and maximizing the HSC count might increase gene expression (). Thus, several design factors should be simultaneously considered for better synthetic gene design. To address such a need for incorporating multiple design parameters including CAI, ICU, CC and HSC in codon optimization, we have developed a new web server application, Codon Optimization OnLine (COOL), using a multi-objective framework, which has been presented in a recent work ().
FUNCTIONAL FEATURESCOOL is designed as an adaptable web-based interface that provides an expansive collection of features. Users can fully customize the synthetic gene design process through a step-by-step job submission process that allows them to specify their preferred parameter settings. More notably, COOL supports a wide range of visualization capabilities for comparing the quality of optimized DNA coding sequence with respect to the various design parameters.
Gene design parameter settingsSimilar to existing online applications, COOL can perform the optimization of a coding sequence based on CAI, which was known to correlate well with gene expressivity (). Additionally, COOL is the first web server that uses a multi-objective framework that incorporates ICU, CC, CAI, HSC and GC content. For each codon optimization job, users can select any desired combination of design parameters. Notably, COOL enables greater flexibility through the customization of these design parameters, a feature not found in other *To whom correspondence should be addressed. codon optimization tools. For a full comparison with other online tools, refer to Supplementary. Because changes in metabolic resources can significantly affect gene expression (), the ability to specify CAI, ICU and/or CC usage distribution is accommodated in COOL, where users either select a host from the predefined list, which includes Escherichia coli, Pichia pastoris and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, or fully customize the codon usage rules. When a predefined expression host is chosen, users have the option to select the relevant genes for calculating the reference codon usage patterns that correspond to efficient expression. Thus, this functionality enables users to customize their own list of high-expression genes based on expression data. Furthermore, some motifs, such as restriction enzyme cleavage sites, patented sequences and nucleotide repeats, may not be desirable in the coding sequence, as they pose difficulties in either the preparation of plasmid or the in vivo expression of the proteins. Such sequences can be specified for exclusion during job submission.
Visualization and export of resultsWhen more than one optimization criteria are selected, the multiobjective optimization algorithm generates a number of Paretooptimal sequences. Although an earlier stand-alone tool EuGene () also claimed to perform this function, it did not have the functionality to generate the Pareto-optimal sequences and visualize them on a plot. Therefore, COOL has addressed this limitation by providing a visualization and comparative analysis interface (). The relative positions of the Pareto-optimal sequences on the graph show their fitness levels on the basis of the corresponding optimization criteria. In the case where three or more optimization criteria are selected, the plot displays a third fitness value in the form of the colour of the points using a cyanred colour gradient. Users can also customize the plot by choosing any optimization criteria to be displayed on the axes and the colour gradient. As a unique feature, user-defined sequence can be mapped into the Pareto plot for comparison (). Thus, the relative positions of the user-defined sequence(s) on the plot can indicate the similarities or differences with the Pareto-optimal sequences so that the users are guided to enhance the sequences further. The Pareto plot is interactive and users can click on any of the optimized sequences to obtain detailed information of the sequence, which includes visualization of the coding sequence and a table of summary statistics showing its fitness values. These results can also be easily exported in the format of PDF files. The optimized sequences may also be exported to a tab-delimited file containing the fitness values for all optimization criteria. This allows users to plot and analyse the sequences using other software such as Microsoft Excel.
IMPLEMENTATIONThis website was built using the open source LAMP solution stack (Linux, Apache, MySQL, PHP) based on a Model-ViewController architecture. The source code for the LAMP stack can be downloaded from the COOL website. Although additional interface and visualization features (e.g. sortable tables) were added in JavaScript, the website is still functional even when JavaScript is disabled. The backend gene optimization, which uses a multi-objective genetic algorithm as described in our earlier work (), is implemented in Perl and functions independently of the main website, interfacing only with the MySQL database to read inputs and write results. The waiting time for optimizing a 500-amino acid sequence is estimated to be 20 m. We are currently patenting the backend code and will only release it in binary form, available on the COOL website. Funding: This work was supported by the National University of Singapore, Biomedical Research Council of A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), Singapore, and a grant from the Next-Generation BioGreen 21 Program (SSAC, No. PJ009520), Rural Development Administration, Republic of Korea.
Conflict of Interest:The authors are listed as inventor or coinventor on a backend code patent, which is pending approval.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
J.X.Chin et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
