
the use of alphanumeric characters suggest the use of ICD-10 (http:// www.who.int/classifications/icd/en, Accessed October 26 2015), but the number of chapters, 12, does not match the 22 chapters included in ICD-10. Of further concern is the article's selection of the code E62, which it describes as 'respiratory infections/inflammations'. The author places this code, according to its starting letter 'E', under chapter four (IV) of ICD-10 ('Endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases'). The conceptual mismatch alone should raise doubts even among readers unfamiliar with ICD-10, and indeed further inspection would reveal that E62 does not exist as an ICD-10 code (http://apps.who.int/classifications/icd10/browse/2016/en, Accessed October 26 2015). Because of the lack of details about the dataset used and given the aforementioned example, we proceeded to analyze in further detail the rest of the codes provided in this article, comparing them with the ICD-10 codes, to check whether this was an unfortunate error limited to the introduction or a misconception propagated in further sections of the article. Our analysis of the codes in Table 1 of the article, which are said to account for 75% of the analyzed admissions, showed that they are either incorrectmeaning that they do not match the description provided (24 out of 30, 80%)or non-existent (the remaining 6 out of 30, 20%). After this initial analysis, we attempted to identify a plausible origin for the codes used in this article, comparing them with other medical informatics codes. The results of our analysis point toward the use of the Australian Refined Diagnosis Related Groups (ARDRGs). Determining the exact version used is impossible due the removal of the additional letter that builds the code) (https://www. V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Markov model developed by the same author (similar to those presented in his reference 3, Arandjelovic, 2015a, b). For us to do a more detailed analysis in the interests of replicating this study would have required access to the original dataset. Despite the journal policy encouraging dataset publication, we understand if the dataset cannot be made available due to ethical and confidentiality issues associated with the secondary use of data extracted from clinical records. For this very reason, it is concerning to note that this article lacks any mention of ethical approval or procedures used for data anonymization, nor even acknowledgement of the original data source. This article's disregard for the meaning of clinical codes, its loose use of key healthcare terminology (the term 'admission' is indistinctly used referring to codes, admission causes, diagnosis and apparently even for actual hospital admission events) and its critical omission of key information about the health data source all emphasize the need for greater collaboration between the bioinformatics and medical informatics communities to advance research of this kind. This is essential to ensure that there is fundamental understanding of the context where data are derived and where new methods and systems will be applied. Conflict of interest: none declared.
G.H.Lopez-Campos et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
