Motivation: PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) are a class of small non-coding RNAs that are highly abundant in the germline. One important role of piRNAs is to defend genome integrity by guiding PIWI proteins to silence transposable elements (TEs), which have a high potential to cause deleteri-ous effects on their host. The mechanism of piRNA-mediated post-transcriptional silencing was also observed to affect mRNAs, suggesting that piRNAs might play a broad role in gene expression regulation. However, there has been no systematic report with regard to how many protein-coding genes might be targeted and regulated by piRNAs. Results: We trained a support vector machine classifier based on a combination of Miwi CLIP-Seq-derived features and position-derived features to predict the potential targets of piRNAs on mRNAs in the mouse. Reanalysis of a published microarray dataset suggested that the expression level of the 2587 protein-coding genes predicted as piRNA targets showed significant upregulation as a whole after abolishing the slicer activity of Miwi, supporting the conclusion that they are subject to piRNA-mediated regulation. Availability and implementation: A web version of the method called pirnaPre as well as our results for browse is available at
IntroductionPIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), microRNAs (miRNAs) and short-interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are three major classes of small RNAs (). piRNAs differ from miRNAs and siRNAs in several aspects: (1) piRNAs show specific expression in germ cells (; (2) most piRNAs have lengths in the range of 2533 nt (Sai), greater than those of miRNAs and siRNAs, which are 2023 nt in most cases, although Caenorhabditis elegans piRNAs with the unusual length of 21 nt constitute an exception to the general rule (); (3) piRNAs do not show any conservation in either sequence or secondary structure(Le), except that there is a preference for a 5 0 uridine (U) residue and an adenosine as the tenth nucleotide(); (4) piRNAs bind to Piwi-clade Argonauts, whereas miRNAs and siRNAs associate with the Ago-clade Argonauts (); and (5) most piRNAs are derived from genomic piRNA clusters, which are discrete regions containing a large number of various types of transposable elements (TEs) (). Besides, piRNAs have distinguished biogenesis mechanisms which are independent of Dicer (). The recently reported phased manner of piRNA biogenesis further supports thatpiRNAs are more diverse than other classes of small RNAs (). The existence of piRNAs represents adaptive control mechanisms that protect the genomic architecture against TEs, which constitute a large fraction of the mammalian genome and are a constant threat to the host (). PIWI proteins participate in the piRNA pathway(Le). The mutation of Miwi in the mouse results in male infertility and the upregulation of LINE1 retrotransposon transcripts (). There have been similar observations made in flies when mutations in piwi, aub or Ago3 occurred (). The silencing machinery is similar to that of siRNAs and miRNAs (). A piRNA recognizes a transposon transcript target by complementarity, and the interacting PIWI protein then slices via its catalytic domain, cleaving the target at a position 10-nt downstream of the 5 0 end of the piRNA, generating a 5'-monophosphate containing fragment (). Recent studies suggest that piRNA-mediated cleavage acts not only on TEs () but also on mRNAs (). In silkworm,even discovered that a single piRNA is responsible for primary sex determination by mediating cleavage of the Masc mRNA, demonstrating the functional importance of piRNA-mediated cleavage on mRNA. Our previous study revealed widespread Miwi/piRNA-mediated mRNA cleavage events in mouse testes and demonstrated the functional importance of the temporal cleavage of piRNA target mRNAs for spermiogenesis (). Taking advantage of published global 5 0 RACE (rapid amplification of 5 0 complementary DNA ends) tags, we previously identified 169 piRNA-targeted mRNAs (). The role of piRNAs in mediating mRNA cleavage is also evidenced in C. elegans () and D. melanogaster (). However, there has been no systematic assessment with respect to how many protein-coding genes might be regulated by a piRNA-guided cleavage mechanism. In this study, we trained a support vector machine (SVM) classifier to predict potential piRNA targets on protein-coding genes. Because base-pairing recognition by piRNAs as well as the physical association of Miwi are both critical for piRNA-guided cleavage in mouse male germ cells, the anti-Miwi crosslinking immunoprecipitation coupled with deep sequencing (CLIP-seq) data that we produced recently was used to obtain both piRNAs and target fragments. In particular, we introduced a combination of CLIP-Seqderived features and position-derived features. In contrast to the previous identification of piRNA targets from 5 0 RACE tags, which is restricted to the sequencing depth, we have undertaken a genomewide scan across all sites of mRNA transcripts and computationally identified 3781 mRNAs of 2587 protein-coding genes as potential piRNA targets. This result was further validated by a microarray dataset that presented gene expression differences between catalytic mutant without Miwi slicer activity and the wild type. The dataset of piRNA targets in mRNAs is available for browsing, searching and download via http://www.regulatoryrna.org/software/piRNA/ piRNA_target_mRNA/index.php.
Methods
Biologically relevant datasetThe potential piRNA target sites that we recently identified () were used as positive examples of our training dataset. We have previously reported 169 protein-coding genes with 193 target sites of piRNAs. Two protein-coding genes were removed because they have multiple genomic loci on different chromosomes. Consequently, the positive examples of our training dataset consist of 191 target sites in 167 protein-coding genes. To construct reliable negative examples for the training dataset, we referred to the published microarray data performed on wild type and Miwi mutant mouse testis in two replicates (). Considering that the expression level of genes that were not targeted by piRNAs should not be influenced when the slicer activity of Miwi is disrupted, we first extracted genes that showed little change in expression between wild type and the Miwi mutant (data from GEO: GSE32180). To equalize the amount of positive and negative examples, 191 were randomly selected from the resulting 3071 proteincoding genes that had an expression level not affected by the Miwi mutation. Each of these genes contributes one site by random selection, generating 191 sites as negative examples for the training dataset (See Supplementaryfor details). Thus, the final size of the dataset was 382 sites from 358 specific protein-coding genes.
Antimiwi CLIP-seq processingAnti-Miwi CLIP-seq was performed as described previously () and deposited in the GEO database under the accession number GSE67683. The sequenced reads were first mapped to the mouse genome (mm9) using Bowtie (). The reads that were successfully mapped were further classified into piRNAs and Miwi targets according to their length (). Reads with a length of 2533 nt were classified as piRNAs, whereas longer reads (36 nt) were classified as Miwi targets. Reads with a shorter length were discarded because it was difficult to determine to which class they belonged. Of the $48 million reads that were mapped to the mouse genome, a total of $17 million reads corresponded to. Pipeline for extracting MIWI CLIP-Seq features (see Section 2). The RNA library was obtained following the CLIP protocol and subjected to highthroughput sequencing. The reads that were successfully mapped to the genome were then classified as piRNAs or Miwi targets according to their length. The classified reads were mapped to the mRNAs of RefSeq with Bowtie using different mapping criteria. The yellow star depicts a candidate piRNA cleavage site. In this presented example, the piRNA enrichment of the candidate site is counted as three, whereas the Miwi target enrichment is counted as two piRNAs and $10 million reads correspond to Miwi targets. Miwi targets with more than one genomic location were excluded from further consideration.
Support vector machineWe used an SVM () to build a classifier discriminating the target sites of piRNAs on mRNAs. SVM mapped the sample vectors into a high-dimensional feature space in which the samples may be separated by an optimal boundary through the kernel transformation. In our study, a radial basis function (RBF) kernel was used:where the parameter c determines the similarity level of the features. In practice, a separating hyperplane may not exist when a problem is very noisy or complex. Thus slack variables n i ! 0 for all i  1. .. n are introduced to loosen the constraints as follows (): yihw; x i ib ! 1  n i for all i  1;.. .; n: A classifier that generalizes well is then obtained by adjusting both the classifier capacity kwk and the sum of the slacks P i n i , which can be realized by minimizing the following objective function:subject to the constraints on ni and (2), where the constant C > 0 determines the trade-off between margin maximization and training error minimization. Consequently, two parameters, c and C should be determined in the classification model.
SVM featuresThe SVM features that were used for classifier training were categorized into two groups: anti-Miwi CLIP-Seq-derived features and position-derived features. An analysis of anti-Miwi CLIP-Seq resulted in two features for a site to be predicted: the enrichment of 5 0 ends of distinct piRNAs at position 10 nt downstream of the site and the enrichment of target fragments that were detected in the Miwi complex mapping to a region ranging from 150 nt upstream to 150 nt downstream of the site (). To generate the piRNA enrichment, the full-length mRNA sequences of the RefSeq database () were scanned by Bowtie to search for sites with a possible piRNA interaction. Complementary base-pairing focused on the first 21 nucleotides from the 5 0 end of piRNAs by an imperfect pattern. No more than three mismatches were allowed. At the same time, at least one perfect match for the first three nucleotides from the 5 0 end of piRNAs was required. piRNA enrichment for a given site is calculated as the number of distinct piRNAs with 5 0 ends that are located exactly 10 nt downstream of the target site based on base-pairing complementarity to the flanking sequence. piRNAs interacting with more than 100 mRNAs were eliminated because their targeting might result from the complementary basepairing of simple sequence repeats that were difficult to distinguish from random hits. Additionally, the genomic locations of Miwi targets were compared to those of mRNAs by BEDTools ().For position-derived features, we incorporated information from three aspects. First, the position of the candidate target site was compared to the architecture of the mRNA to which it belongs to determine whether it was located in the 5 0 UTR, CDS or 3 0 UTR. Second, 10 neighboring nucleotides upstream and downstream of the target site were extracted, generating a sequence of 20 nucleotides with the target site exactly in the middle. The sequence was then scanned to determine whether it consisted of short repeats (kmer tandem repeat in which k  2, 3 or 4). Third, the nucleotide selection (the use of A, U, C and G) at the 20 nucleotide positions represented the remaining features. All of the position-derived features had qualitative values (0 or 1). In total, we obtained a feature space of 86 dimensions, and all of the feature values were normalized to have real values with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.
Parameter optimization and classifier evaluationBefore applying a trained SVM classifier for large-scale prediction, the performance of our method should be evaluated. We first divided our dataset by random selection into two groups: 70% in the first group for SVM classifier training and the remaining 30% in the second group for independent validation. Data for validation should not participate in any of the steps of classifier training. Before training the SVM classifier on the first group, we should determine in advance two SVM parameters, c and C, by 10-fold cross validation. The first group is further divided into 10 subgroups of equal size by random sampling. At each sampling, nine subgroups were used to train an SVM classifier given a specific pair of values for c and C, while the remaining subgroup was used to test the performance of the trained classifier. The average prediction accuracy of the 10-fold cross validation was recorded to represent the performance of the specific pair of values for c and C. After all of the combinations of values for c and C were tested, the best pair of values was selected according to the best prediction accuracy. The SVM classifiers were trained on the whole of the first group with the selected parameters and applied to the second group. The sensitivity and specificity of prediction were calculated by setting different thresholds of the SVM score, thus generating an ROC curve that had an area that represented the performance of the SVM classifier. A larger area under the curve indicated better performance. To avoid possible bias in one categorization, the assessment described above was repeated 10 times and the ROC curve was plotted with the specificity and sensitivity averaged from the result of 10 repeated evaluations. Because a genome-wide prediction would be conducted across all of the sites of the full-length mRNA transcripts, evaluation at the gene level is more important. The evaluation at the gene level was different from previous evaluations in that a gene was considered a piRNA target as long as it contained at least one site that was predicted as 'positive' after all of its sites are scanned by the classifier.
Functional enrichment of piRNA target genesA functional enrichment analysis was performed for predicted piRNA target genes with the GO Enrichment Analysis Software Toolkit (GOEAST) (). The resulting GO terms with a P-value<0.05 and log-odds ratio (LR) > 0.7 were considered statistically significant.
Public microarray data analysisAs described previously (), the raw data (CEL file format) for samples of round spermatids (GSE32180) () and elongating spermatids (GSE59291) () from adult mouse testes were downloaded and load into R (). Signal intensities were normalized and log2 transformed by the affy package and rma package. For comparison of gene expression levels between the two different platforms, the expression levels were further normalized by the limma package.
Results
Performance of the SVM classifierThe performance of the SVM classifier was evaluated at two levels, the site level and the gene level, following the steps that were described in the Methods section. At the site level, a test applying a set of different threshold values to the SVM scores resulted in an area under the ROC curve of 87.25% (), with a specificity of 89.48% and a sensitivity of 63.91% corresponding to a default threshold of zero. Since the trained SVM classifier would be applied to scan all of the sites across the full-length of the mRNA sequence of a candidate target gene to determine whether it is a target of piRNAs, the performance of the SVM classifier was reevaluated at the gene level. After all of the sites were scanned, an mRNA was determined as a potential target of piRNAs if it contained at least one site that was classified as 'positive'. The reevaluation gave an area under the ROC curve of 75.55% at the gene level (), whereas the default threshold of zero resulted in a specificity of 82.07% and a sensitivity of 62.75%.
Identification of piRNA targets on mRNAsA final SVM classifier was built based on the whole training dataset with the c and C parameters optimized by a grid search upon 10-fold cross validation. The classifier was then applied to a total of 28 050 mRNAs from the mouse (the 358 genes used as training examples as well as genes with multiple genomic loci were excluded in advance) with a default threshold of zero. This generated a list of 3781 mRNAs from 2587 genes which contained 12 233 potential target sites which may be cleaved by piRNAs. On average, each target mRNA harbored more than three target sites. The distribution of number of predicted target sites harbored by each mRNA is shown in. It was also observed that piRNA target sites were enriched near the 3' ends of the mRNAs (). Further analysis of flanking bases revealed a strong bias for U at the mRNA cleavage site and for A 10 nt downstream of the U residue ().reported on genes that had mRNA expression levels that showed significant changes after truncation of the slicer activity of Miwi. These data were used to verify our predictions, considering that piRNA targeting genes should have elevated expression levels when the piRNA-guided cleavage mechanism was obstructed. The expression difference of the 2587 predicted piRNA target genes between the Miwi mutant and wild type has a positive trend compared with other genes (), suggesting that the prediction result captures a substantial number of actual piRNA target genes. Moreover, we found a significant decrease in the expression level of 2587 predicted piRNA target genes in elongating spermatids (GSE59291) compared with those in round spermatids (GSE32180) based on global expression profiling analysis (). This result might be explained by the hypothesis that piRNAs ensure germ cell development by suppressing specific genes through a cleavage mechanism. The predicted piRNA target genes were then subjected to pathway enrichment analysis (). Nearly one-quarter of the target genes were associated with metal ion binding. In addition, a significant proportion of the total predicted target genes were enriched in the regulation of nitrogen compound metabolic process and biosynthetic process. Although piRNAs had been considered to have specific expression in germ cells, this result suggests that piRNAs might have largely unexplored functions.
Contribution of each featureTo investigate which features were most important in piRNA target prediction, we ranked all features by data mining. The OneR classifier and Ranker methods of the Weka software were used to evaluate the features, and the 20 most important features are shown in. Miwi CLIP-Seq-derived features occupied the first two positions in the rank. Of them, piRNA enrichment was the most important. mRNA fragment enrichment, as inferred from Miwi CLIP-Seq, was the second most important, further indicating that Miwi is necessary in the piRNA-guided cleavage mechanism. The third ranked feature concerns about genomic annotation, with 3'UTR being preferred. Next are features regarding the nucleotide composition. Of all the positions along the sequence of 20 nucleotides, the preference of uracil (U) at the first position and adenine. Performance of the SVM classifier as evaluated with 10-fold cross-validation at the site level (A) and the gene level (B)Computational identification of piRNA targetsred line) and elongating spermatids (GSE59291; blue line). The expression of individual genes is log2 transformed and duplicate averaged (A) at the tenth position downstream of the target site are the most outstanding, showing complementarity with the preferred usage of U and A at the first and tenth positions from the 5' end of piRNAs.
Characteristics of mRNA-targeting piRNAsOf all of the piRNAs that were identified by the anti-Miwi CLIP-Seq experiment, 16 657 piRNA reads representing 3385 different piRNA species contributed to cleavage of the predicted targets on mRNAs. The length profile of these piRNA species showed a stronger peak at 30 nt than that of the total piRNA species from the anti-Miwi CLIPSeq (). An unexpected large percentage of these mRNA-targeting piRNA species ($88.54%) were derived from repetitive genomic sequences, whereas the corresponding percentage of repeat-derived piRNAs in the total piRNA population from the anti-Miwi CLIP-Seq data was less than 30% (). Among the different repeat classes, the SINE family constituted the highest proportion ($66.44%), with Alu-like elements representing largest amount within the SINEs ($42.48%). A de novo motif analysis was performed by the MEME Suite () and discovered a significant consensus sequence residing in these mRNA-targeting piRNAs (). More than 700 mRNA-targeting piRNA species harbored the identified motif starting from the first nucleotide at the 5 0 end. The bias towards U at the 5 0 end and A at the tenth position downstream indicated the ping-pong interaction. Nontheless, this motif only represented $23% of all of the mRNA-targeting piRNA species, indicating that this motif alone would be inadequate to distinguish mRNA-regulating piRNAs.
DiscussionUsing the piRNA targets that we previously identified () as positive examples of our training dataset, we madeComputational identification of piRNA targetsgenome-wide de novo predictions and provided a much larger list of mRNAs that might be targeted and cleaved by piRNAs. In this study, we took advantage of CLIP-Seq data, which are specific to fragments that are bound by the Miwi protein, whereas the previous study was based on 5 0 RACE sequencing data, which contains not only fragments that are produced by piRNA-mediated cleavage but also other biological processes. Moreover, the previous study was restricted to the coverage of 5 0 RACE sequencing data on mRNAs, whereas the depth of the CLIP-Seq data that were used in this study makes it possible to systematic explore piRNA targets on mRNAs. In addition, the incorporation of position-derived features enabled the discovery of piRNA target sites that might be missed by the absence of complementary piRNAs from sequenced reads. Our method presents robustness as repeated random selection of negative examples for training the model did not resulted in much difference with regarding to the predicted list of piRNA target genes. It could also be applied to other tissue types which have both training examples and anti-Miwi CLIP-Seq data. In addition to the repression of mRNAs by cleavage in this study, another repression mechanism is mediated by piRNAs that induces mRNA deadenylation, resulting in mRNA degradation. For example, piRNAs target the nanos 3 0 UTR with imperfect complementarity, thus facilitating nanos mRNA deadenylation and normal anteroposterior embryonic patterning in Drosophila (). Recently,reported that more than 7000 mRNAs were associated with Miwi, of which approximately 60% experienced destabilization by Miwi in the elongating spermatids of mouse. Together with mRNAs that are involved in piRNA-mediated cleavage, a catalog of nearly ten thousand protein-coding genes are potentially mediated by piRNAs, suggesting a prosperous role of piRNAs in gene expression regulation. Conclusively, piRNAs have mechanisms that act to repress protein-coding gene expression similar to miRNAs, either causing the cleavage of the target or the degradation of the target. Both the miRNA pathway and the piRNA pathway require recognition based on base-pairing and the participation of proteins from the Argonaute protein family. However, because piRNAs are restricted to expression in germ cells, piRNAmediated regulation might take place primarily during spermatogenesis.
ConclusionIt has been well accepted for a long period of time that the emergence of piRNAs plays a role in genome defense by silencing TEs; however, many recent studies have shown that piRNA-guided silencing mechanisms are also involved in the regulation of nontransposon transcripts. The first example of a piRNA targeting mRNA was described in the Drosophila embryo (). A similar phenomenon was also observed in C. elegans, mouse and silkworm (), suggesting that piRNAs could regulate gene expression via a mechanism similar to that of miRNAs. Although there have been many published programs aimed at predicting miRNA targets as well as public databases curating experimentally verified or computational predicted targets of miRNAs, there have been no studies assessing how many proteincoding genes might be regulated by piRNAs. In our study, piRNA targets on mRNAs were systematically identified at the genomewide level using an SVM classifier. The classifier was trained based on the incorporation of Miwi CLIP-Seq-derived features and position-derived features and achieved an area of the ROC curve of87.25% at the site level and 75.55% at the gene level. Of all of the features that were used, Miwi CLIP-Seq-derived features play a dominate role in the piRNA enrichment of the 5 0 end 10 nt downstream of the target site occupying the top ranked position. Of the position-derived features, the genomic annotation is highly ranked, with 3 0 UTR as a preferred choice, and nucleotide usage on the first and tenth positions downstream of the target site is the next highest ranked. Genome-wide prediction based on the trained classifier resulted in 3781 mRNAs of 2587 protein-coding genes as piRNA targets. These genes show significant upregulation as a whole after the slicer activity of Miwi was abolished, suggesting that the predicted list of piRNA targets is reliable. This work might provide valuable clues for biologists who are interested in the function of piRNAs in protein-coding genes. More details of the prediction results in this study and the online version of the method called pirnaPre are available at http://www.regulatoryrna.org/software/piRNA/piRNA_tar get_mRNA/index.php.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
J.Yuan et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
