Motivation: Identifying protein cavities, channels and pockets accessible to ligands is a major step to predict potential protein–ligands complexes. It is also essential for preparation of protein–ligand docking experiments in the context of enzymatic activity mechanism and structure-based drug design. Results: We introduce a new method, implemented in a program named CCCPP, which computes the void parts of the proteins, i.e. cavities, channels and pockets. The present approach is a variant of the alpha shapes method, with the advantage of taking into account the size and the shape of the ligand. We show that the widely used spherical model of ligands is most of the time inadequate and that cylindrical shapes are more realistic. The analysis of the void parts of the protein is done via a network of channels depending on the ligand. The performance of CCCPP is tested with known substrates of cyto-chromes P450 (CYP) 1A2 and 3A4 involved in xenobiotics metabolism. The test results indicate that CCCPP is able to find pathways to the buried heminic P450 active site even for high molecular weight CYP 3A4 substrates such as two ketoconazoles together, an experimentally observed situation. Availability: Free binaries are available through a software repository at
INTRODUCTIONProtein concavities play an important role for biological functions at the molecular level such as ligand binding. Knowledge of proteinligand binding sites and their access routes contributes to optimize virtual screening of chemical libraries and then to propose new potential drugs. The concavity containing the active site may be located at various places in the protein. When it is at the surface of the protein, the concavity is called a pocket, and it is called a cavity when the active site is buried inside the protein, in which case the route to the active site is called a channel.In any case, defining the shape of the protein needs to locate the boundary between the protein and its void parts. Many algorithms were proposed in the literature to solve this non-trivial problem. In a recent review (), 20 geometric algorithms were reported, plus 10 algorithms based either on genomic information or on energy calculations. These latter being devoted to proteinligand complexes energy calculation by docking (seefor a review), they are outside the scope of this article. We report ina nonexhaustive list of 35 geometric algorithms and their variants. There are several ways to classify them. The main criteria are:(i) the computation is dependent or not on probes spheres assumed to represent ligands, (ii) the computation is based either on a rectangular grid or on a Delaunay triangulation or on none of them. It has to be noticed that building the Delaunay triangulation of N input vertices in the 3D space consists practically in partitioning the smallest convex polyhedron enclosing the N input vertices into non-overlapping adjacent tetrahedra with endpoints edges at input vertices, such that none interior of the spheres circumscribed to these tetrahedra contains any of the input vertices (). The dual structure of the Delaunay triangulation is the Voronoi diagram (), which, roughly speaking, is the union of the N polyhedral cells defined from the set of the planes mid-perpendicular to the sides of these tetrahedra. To each of the input vertices K, 1 K N, is associated its polyhedral cell (possibly unbounded) which is the domain containing all points of the space closest to K than to any of the N  1 other vertices. This important property explains why Voronoi tessellations were used to visualize the shape of proteins, such as in Voro3D (). Grid methods offer several drawbacks. The orientation of the 3D grid is arbitrary, and most of the time an increase of the precision by 10 needs to increase the number of nodes by 10 3 , thus increasing computing times by 1000. It is the case, when the measures of cavity volumes are estimated from the number of nodes or from the number of voxels (i.e. the 3D analogs of pixels). When the grid nodes are in a graph in which paths are seeked to identify channels, the number of paths to be enumerated increases exponentially with the number of nodes. To overcome this problem, the user can define an arbitrary upper bound *To whom correspondence should be addressed.of the shortest paths, but in this case the major part of the network of channels is lost. At the opposite of a grid of virtual nodes, the Delaunay triangulation of the N atomic centers is more natural, and efficient algorithms exist, the main one being based on a 4D convex hull (). It is why the seminal concept of alpha shape appears in most modern pockets and channels calculation algorithms, as seen in. This concept was first introduced in the plane by, and then was generalized to higher dimensional spaces and proposed for molecular applications by Edelsbrunner and MuckeMucke (1992). Alpha shapes are a generalization of the convex hull of the N points, this latter being the smallest convex polyhedron enclosing the N points. A spherical probe sphere of radius alpha erases from the polyhedral hull any point at distance less than alpha to the sphere center for all positions where the sphere does not enclose any of the N points. The resulting object is called an alpha hull. Substituting straight edges for the circular ones and triangles for the spherical caps, the final object is the alpha shape of the N points set. When alpha tends to zero, the alpha shape reduces to the N points. When alpha is large enough, the alpha shape is the convex polyhedral hull of the points. For intermediate alpha values, the alpha shape is not convex and can be used as a model of the protein shape. The original variant of the alpha shape concept that we introduce is described in the next section.
METHODS
ApproachOur approach differs from the existing ones based on alpha shapes variants at three levels: (i) we are interested in the structure of the network of channels, i.e. the complement of the protein alpha shape to its convex hull, (ii) we considered several geometric models for the ligand, not only spheres and (iii) the solid representing a ligand is used to flag the triangular faces as 'can be passed' or 'cannot be passed', rather than erasing edges, triangles and tetrahedra. The first level is of crucial importance when it is necessary to identify potential access channels to a buried active site, as in cytochromes P450 (): the shape of the channels must be analyzed, not the shape of the protein. The second level is detailed in Section 2.2, in which it is shown that the spherical model of ligands is most of the time inadequate. The third level can be understood as follows: to travel inside the polyhedral protein hull, the ligand must pass through some sequence of triangular faces, each face separating two adjacent tetrahedra, just as triangular doors can be open or closed in a labyrinth of tetrahedral rooms: see Section 2.3. The final goal is to exhibit the full network of paths through the labyrinth, or from the exterior of the labyrinth to the chamber neighboring the hidden active site.). In fact these values depend on how they are defined (see, for a discussion). Thus we neglect the atomic spheres and we look at other parameters. The geometric shape coefficient I g  (D  R)/R () relates the diameter of the hull to its radius, but it varies few in this context. Assuming that the shape is convex, the best shape model is the convex hull of the atomic centers, i.e. the smallest convex polyhedron containing these centers: by definition, any other enclosing convex solid will contain this polyhedron. The observed distribution of the ratio I v of volume of the convex hull to the volume of the smallest enclosing sphere exhibit a mean value 50.17, which is quite low, thus proving the inadequation of the sphere model. However it is much more difficult to test if a convex polyhedron can pass through pathways without colliding a set of punctual or spherical obstacles rather than testing if a sphere can pass these obstaches without colliding. It is why the cylindrical shape was devised for molecules (). A cylinder has a convex shape defined by only two parameters: radius and height, although a sphere has only one, a rectangular 3D box has three ones and a polyhedron has many ones. However cylinders are easier to handle than rectangular boxes for collision tests (see Section 2.3). Since there are two parameters, there is an infinity of ways to combine them to define the minimality criterion for a cylindrical solid (e.g. minimize its volume or its surface, or else), but we retained only two of them: the minimal height cylinder which is relevant for rather flat ligands, and the minimal radius cylinder which is relevant for rather elongated ligands. Intuitively, the former reflects atomic centers distributions for which the smallest eigenvalue of the inertia matrix (i.e. N times the covariance matrix) is small compared to the two other eigenvalues, although the latter reflects atomic centers distributions for which two eigenvalues are small compared to the largest one. We see inthat the radius of the minimal height cylinder and the height of the minimal radius cylinder remain close to 1, although the respective minimized height and minimized radius of these cylinders are significantly51. Then the distributions of the hull volume to the cylinder volume offer values significantly 51, and of the same magnitude than the sphericity coefficient G and than the volumic shape coefficient I v , thus confirming the pertinence of the cylindrical model over the spherical model. It is of major importance to understand that, although a ligand conformer has a unique shape, it does not preclude that this unique shape can be modeled through several ways, such as the minimal height enclosing cylinder, the minimal radius enclosing cylinder, the smallest enclosing sphere (even if that latter encloses a large void volume) and so on. Furthermore, it is recalled that most ligands are flexible, and that is a second reason to insist that several realistic shape models can be simultaneously useful. However, the data ofshow that cylindrical shapes are more realistic than spherical shapes, as already mentioned in that section and illustrated in.
Geometric tests of passageIn the basic alpha-shape approach, a tetrahedral cell with its circumscribed sphere of radius alpha can contain a spherical probe ligand of radius alpha (protein atomic spheres are neglected). Assuming that the circumcenter is in the tetrahedra (it is most of the time the case), the spherical ligand cannot exit from the tetrahedra because each radius of the four circles circumscribed to the triangular faces is smaller than alpha. Thus the knowledge of the standard protein alpha shape does not suffice to conclude that the ligand can travel in a channel: a ligand is ensured to travel in a channel if and only if it passes through its associated sequence of triangular faces, and that is a major originality of our approach. To implement this approach we consider the graph of the Delaunay triangulation, in which the N nodes of the graph are the tetrahedra and). the edges of the graph are the triangular faces, i.e. two adjacent tetrahedra are two nodes joined by a non-directed edge. This graph, which underlies the Voronoi diagram structure, is called here the 'facial graph' and must not be confused with the one where the nodes are the atoms and the edges are the sides of the tetrahedra. Each node of the facial graph has at most four neighbors. Optionnally, a dummy node representing the exterior of the convex hull can be added to the graph, in which case each of the N nodes has exactly four neighbors. Then it suffices to perform a loop on the edges (i.e. the triangles) of the facial graph and flag the ones which cannot be passed by the ligand as deleted edges. The resulting network of channels is a subgraph of the facial graph, not necessarily connected. The most difficult task is to decide whether or not an object (the ligand) can pass through a triangle. It is hard in the case of a nonconvex object, and even for convex objects such as a polyhedral hull or a straight box it is not trivial to do. In fact the problem is to define the criterion for passage rather than to compute if yes or no the passage is possible once its criterion is defined. Thus we followed a simplified approach: we considered punctual atoms and then we defined a passage test through a triangle for the two cylindrical models under the assumption that we can neglect collisions with atoms not at the triangle vertices. For cylinders with a ratio radius/height sufficiently close to zero, the smallest planar projected section of the cylinder is its circular section because its 2D image can be contained in any of its other planar projected sections. The axis of the cylinder is optimally set orthogonal to the plane of the triangle and we are left to a 2D problem. Then, we flag the passage test as being successful in two cases (a) or (b): (a) the triangle is acute and the radius of the circular section (i.e. the one of the cylinder) is smaller than the circumradius of the triangle, or (b) the triangle is obtuse and the circular section of the cylinder does not contain any of the triangle vertices when the center of this circular section is constrained to lie in the triangle. In the case (a), the largest possible cylinder radius is the circumradius, and in case (b) it is the distance from the vertex at the opposite of the largest side to the point at the intersection of the largest side and of the mid-perpendicular of the second largest side. In both cases (a) and (b), the center of the circular section must pass inside the triangle, not outside (the passage of a punctual solid through a 3D triangle is always defined). It should be noticed that the tests (a) and (b) are rigorous in the case of the largest section of a spherical ligand, for which the condition of a lack of collision with a fourth vertex can be relaxed. For cylinders with a ratio height/radius sufficiently close to zero, the axis of the cylinder is optimally set parallel to the plane of the triangle and we are left to a 2D problem. The cylinder height is also the distance between the two closest parallel planes enclosing the ligand. Here, still under the assumption that we can neglect collisions with atoms not at the triangle vertices, we flag the passage test as being successful when the cylinder height is smaller than the largest height of the triangle (or than the second largest side of the triangle when it is obtuse). This passage test can be applied with the same limitations as above to any ligand shape provided that we know the distance between the two closest slabs enclosing the ligand, this latter distance being equal to the height of the smallest height cylinder defined in Section 2.2.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONTo exemplify how works CCCPP, we first considered the CYP 1A2, which is known to accept rather flat substrates (). The data were extracted from the crystallized complex of the 1A2 with-naphtoflavone, PDB code 2HI4. The flatness, i.e. the thickness of the ligand, is defined as 2H h (see).shows that ligands of thickness 4.5 A  and higher can access to surface pockets although no pathway is found to the buried heminic site. Lowering this critical value from 4.5 A  to 4.45 A  , the network of channels available to the ligand appears in front of the distal face of the heme, and CCCPP indicates that the network connects the exterior of the enzyme to the active site. When visualized in superimposition of the channel computed for a 4.45 A  critical value, the flat ligand of the complex (0.32 A  ) appears indeed in this predicted channel, in front of the distal face of the heme. A remarkable result is that all parts of the central area of the access channel become unavailable quasi simultaneously for any ligand of thickness slightly increasing from 0.05 A  above the critical value of 4.5 A  although the surface pockets are still available for ligands of thickness 4.5 A . Another result is that the network of channels does not reduce to a small number of chains of nodes: there is NOT a small number of channels, and counting them is meaningless, at the opposite to what seems intuitively suggested by some other channels modeling approaches (see). CCCPP provides relevant information on this complex network rather than outputting a misleading small number of paths, and the full network structure can be stored both in a text file and in a molecular file to be reused or displayed by any molecular viewer. The CYP 3A4 is known to accept a much wider diversity of substrates than the 1A2 (), some of them being very large. The case of the ketoconazole is of special interest. Its radius, as defined in, is 10.1, and its thickness is 4.8 A . A conformational study showed that only a limited number of conformers suffices to handle flexibility (), and the effect on the radius and on the thickness can be neglected to compute the network of channels. A crystallized complex containing two ketoconazoles is available, PDB code 2V0M. There are four chains A, B, C, D in the PDB file. Only surface residues are missing in chains A and D, so that no reconstruction is needed for these chains in our context. The 3D similarity between chains A and D was checked with the SDM algorithm () after 3D alignment of the two backbones. Only the C ofARG 212 was outside the maximal common 3D motif, thus we neglected this difference and we considered only the chain A. Using a passage test based on a spherical model (it is an option in CCCPP), CCCPP did not find any access to the heme. However CCCPP indeed found an access for the cylindrical model.shows that the two ketoconazoles are indeed in the predicted channels, one in front of the distal face of the heme, and the other one just above in a dead end part of the network. CCCPP outputs many surface pockets. It is of interest to observe that they can be used.shows such a situation for the complex of the CYP 3A4 with progesterone, PDB code 1W0F. CCCPP can predict channels from the 3D structure of the enzyme without the help of a complex. We used two 3A4 structures crystallized without ligand, 1TQN and 1W0E. Due to missing residues, we reconstruct the mid of the sequence with HYDRO_PDB ().shows the results of CCCPP for two 3A4 structures found in the PDB, codesFig. 2. The facial graph of the CYP 1A2 channels network available for ligands of, respectively, 4.50 A  (top) and 4.45 A  (bottom) thickness, visualized with PyMOL. For clarity, the channels are superimposed with the ligand (-naphtoflavone) of the CYP 1A2 complex, pdb code 2HI4. Edges indicate the pathways in the network, except for the ligand and for the heme, where edges indicate chemical bonds 1TQN and 1W0E. Both the initial spatial structures and the reconstructed ones slightly differ, but the central part of the channels network is visible in front of the distal face of the heme. The critical thickness above which the access to the heme disappears was computed at 6.25 A  (1TQN) and at 5.25 A  (1W0E). The same values were got without reconstruction. The critical thickness has been computed for other 3A4 complexes, such as with metyrapone and ritonavir, PDB codes 1W0G and 3NXU, respectively. For 3NXU, there are two chains A and B. For these letters, the SDM algorithm did not found significant differences between the backbones: all the 457 C were in the common 3D motif. The critical thickness was 5.0 A  for 1W0G and 6.0 A  for 3NXU. All critical thickness values we computed for the 3A4 ranged in the interval 56 A . The differences are interpretable in terms of malleability of the enzyme: some CYPs have been observed to adopt different open and closed conformations when bound to different ligands (). No objective numerical criterion exists to compare channels computed from different algorithms. That fact is mainly due to the deep differences in the nature of the output produced by the softwares, thus introducing a major difficulty to compare channels. For instance, let us compare the channels of the CYP 3A4 computed bywith CAVER, cited in. The main differences are: CCCPP produced channels depending on the shape and size of the ligand, i.e. the routes sterically available to a small ligand were more numerous that the routes available to a large ligand, although CAVER produced 'universal' channels, i.e. independent of the ligand. CCCPP concluded about the sterical ability of a given ligand to pass or not through the channels, although CAVER did not. Owing to the examples presented in this section for the CYP 3A4, CCCPP found a complex topology of the network of channels, all of them being in intersection, although three 3A4 channels are mentioned bySince these CAVER channels (visually, sequences of intersecting spheres) were described from their closeness (not numerical) to specific loops and helices of the CYP 3A4, it is impossible to compute some degree of similarity they offer with our single network of channels got for a specific ligand. Nevertheless, on the basis of a visual checking, the egress of the CAVER channels were found to be seemingly correct by CCCPP, although the network we found was not indicated by CAVER. CYP 3A4 channels were briefly evoked byas an example of use of a MOLE2, a variant of MOLE, this latter being considered as returning similar results to CAVER (). The authors of MOLE2 found four channels but did not perform channels comparisons with the three CAVER channels mentioned above, although CAVER and MOLE are algorithms having much in common. Anyway, we insist that the user must restrict channels comparisons to results produced by a common software, or at least produced by softwares based on similar algorithms. CCCPP computes only voids, not binding sites. Numerical comparisons of void calculations need at least that there exist computer representations of the voids as numerical objects. Even though these computerized objects are unambiguously defined, most of the times they have deeply different meanings because they are issued from different methods.Comparing objects of deeply different nature is not always possible because it needs to define a numerical criterion to compare these objects. It is stressed that the objects differ in nature, not by the values of their measured parameters: there is no list of parameters common to the objects. In the case of CCCPP, the computerized objects are non-connected graphs, in which each node of the graph is associated to a tetrahedra (but not to an atom) of the Delaunay triangulation of the protein. Actually none of the methods cited inoffers a computer representation compatible with the one of CCCPP (thus CCCPP offers indeed a new insight on the voids), even with those based on Delaunay triangulations (e.g. CASTp, MOLE), thus precluding extensive numerical comparisons with the help of data banks. This is a major difference with the computation of binding sites, because these latter can be checked from experimental values stored in data banks. The examples given in this section are for illustration of our methodology: a deeper investigation of the CYP450 channels is outside the scope of this article. Reviews on specific members of this enzyme's family are available in) and in. The computing times were around 2 min on linux and macosx workstations. Nearly a half of this time is devoted to compute the Delaunay triangulation, and most of the rest of the time is used to generate the output molecular file containing the network for display. Once the triangulation done, finding pathways for a ligand from the exterior of the protein to an end point in the center of the enzyme is done in less than 1 s. Also, we point out that CCCPP did not predict binding pockets. Computing pockets can be a preliminary step to the computation of binding pockets, but the latter problem is out of the scope of that paper
CONCLUSIONWe presented a new algorithm to compute cavities, channels and pockets in proteins, and we developed a software called CCCPP which implements this algorithm and outputs the full network of cavities. The void parts are bounded by the convex hull of the atoms of the protein. The structure of the network is stored in a text file and is written in a molecular file to be displayed with any molecular viewer. It was proved that cylindrical ligands shapes are much more realistic than spherical ligands shapes. On the basis of this unusual cylindrical model, CCCPP was successful in explaining how large molecules can be admitted in front of the buried heminic active site of CYP450s. For these latter, CCCPP indicated that there is a complex network of channels rather than a small finite number of channels. It also indicated that the final part of the network in front of the heme lies at its distal face, which is in agreement with physico chemical data. We do not claim that our methodology is superior to the tenths of available other ones. We just point out that our methodology gave rise to an alternative tool providing new information about pockets and channels in proteins. It can be used in a virtual screening context, eventually in addition to energy-based methods.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Computing cavities, channels, pores and pockets in proteins at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
.2 Ligands shapes analysis In order to analyze the shapes of the ligands, we report in Table 2 the statistics for 21 geometric parameters on the dataset of 70 substrates of the cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 used by Meslamani et al. (2009), containing from 16 to 186 atoms, hydrogens included. The CYP 3A4 substrates are known to offer a wide structural diversity (Rendic, 2002), so it is why we considered that the statistics on these 70 substrates are meaningful. There are several ways to see in Table 2 that the spherical model of ligands is irrealistic. The first way is to look at the sphericity coefficient G, which is equal to 1 for a sphere and is less than 1 for other solids. It is the case of our dataset, for which G is always50.5, but G reflects the shape of the van der Waals solid and thus does not include internal void cavity volumes although the need to compute them was pointed out (Sonavane and Chakrabarti, 2008). Also, G depends on the atomic radii values and there is no agreement about these values (see, for example, some suggested set of values in Gavezzotti, 1983; Richards, 1985; Scott and Table 1. Continued Name References Method UnionBall Mach and Koehl (2011) Enhanced version of AlphaVol (part of the original alpha shape package); the calculation of volumes of spheres unions are based on the Voronoi diagram (Edelsbrunner, 1995) CAVER 3.0 Chovancova et al. (2012) Variant of CAVER implementing new algorithms for the calculation and clustering of pathways MOLE2 Berka et al. (2012) Variant of MOLE; needs a user defined starting point; a vertex of the Voronoi diagram is removed if a sphere with interior threshold radius cannot pass through any of the tetrahedron sides; channels are defined from shortest paths detection HOLE Smart et al. (1993, 1996, 1997) Monte-Carlo simulated annealing exploration of the space available to a sphere; at each step the maximal sphere radius is computed PASS Brady and Stouten (2000) Layers of non-overlapping filling spheres are generated in cavities SCREEN Nayal and Honig (2006) An envelope surface is computed with the help of a 5 A  radius probe sphere, allowing to assign depth values to vertices on the protein surface; the clusters of vertices below a depth threshold define the surfaces of the cavities PHECOM Kawabata and Go (2007) Two probe spheres radii are used; small probes not overlapping large ones define pockets Binding Response Zhong and MacKerell (2007) Overlapping filling spheres are clustered (two steps); clusters define pockets Grid means 3D rectangular or cubic mesh of nodes. Voxels are 3D analogs of pixels. Alpha shapes are substructures of the Delaunay triangulation
L.Benkaidali et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Pierre & Marie Curie), Paris 6, France (to L.B.); Integrative BioComputing (IBC company), Rennes, France (to L.B.). Conflict of Interest: none declared.
