Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) form the largest class of non-protein coding genes in the human genome. While a small subset of well-characterized lncRNAs has demonstrated their significant role in diverse biological functions like chromatin modifications, post-transcriptional regulation, imprinting etc., the functional significance of a vast majority of them still remains an enigma. Increasing evidence of the implications of lncRNAs in various diseases including cancer and major developmental processes has further enhanced the need to gain mechanistic insights into the lncRNA functions. Here, we present a comprehensive review of the various computational approaches and tools available for the identification and annotation of long non-coding RNAs. We also discuss a conceptual roadmap to systematically explore the functional properties of the lncRNAs using computational approaches.
IntroductionNon-coding RNAs have been one of the major focuses in the field of functional genomics since the last decade. Non-coding RNAs have been largely classified based on their size into small and long noncoding RNAs. The former class of ncRNAs encompasses well studied candidates including tRNAs, miRNAs, piRNAs and snoRNAs (). The latter class of non-coding RNAs encompasses a functionally diverse set of transcripts, which by definition are transcripts greater than 200 nucleotides in length with no potential to encode for functional proteins of more than 30 amino acids (). A large number of transcripts of this class were initially discovered through earlier studies reporting expressed sequence tags (ESTs) in Human and mouse through the H-invitation () and FANTOM () consortia. This repertoire was significantly expanded in the recent years, benefitting from the availability of technologies to annotate transcriptome at single nucleotide resolutions (). There are over 23 898 transcripts from 13 870 genomic loci as reported by Gencode (Gencode v21) for humans, which encompass classes of transcripts previously annotated as antisense transcripts, intronic transcripts, large intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs), and processed pseudogenes (). Long non-coding RNAs are generally thought to be transcribed by RNA polymerase II, and largely observed to be 5 0 capped and 3 0 poly-adenylated, though exceptions to this general rule are not uncommon (). Recent evidence suggests that a small subclass of lncRNAs could encode for small peptides and could also be processed to smaller RNAs (). The functional relevance of these observations has not been explored to great detail. The lncRNA class also includes transcripts classified by some authors as macroRNAs and vlincRNAs. MacroRNAs are long, un-spliced RNAs transcribed from RNA pol II and can readily form secondary structures. MacroRNAs such as Airn or KCNQ1OT1 function mainly in the maintenance of imprinting in normal tissues (). VlincRNAs or very long intergenic RNAs on the other hand, represent a subset of human transcriptome spanning the intergenic genomic space ranging from 50 to 700 kb in size. These transcripts have been identified in various tumors and show cell specific expression. They have also been shown to be associated with pluripotency or the extent of malignancy in some tumours (). Highthroughput techniques have enabled the identification of large number of circular non-coding transcripts commonly known as circRNAs. CircRNAs are non-canonical alternatively spliced RNA structures in which 5 0 donor and 3 0 acceptor sites are back spliced to form a circular RNA product. Recent studies have discovered large number of circRNAs, majority of which have not yet been functionally characterized ().Nevertheless, one of the human circRNAs, CDR1as has been shown to harbor 70 binding sites for miR-7, thus potentially acting as microRNA sponge (). Of the lncRNA repertoire known till date, only a small subset of lncRNAs appear to be evolutionary conserved (). LncRNA conservation could potentially be dealt in four dimensions, viz., (i) primary sequence, (ii) secondary or tertiary structure, (iii) function and (iv) conservation in terms of their expression and regulation (). Most of the lncRNAs are not conserved at the level of their primary sequence, though lncRNAs could harbor small stretches of ultra-conserved elements which serve as functional motifs. At the structural level, lncRNAs could have conserved motifs as in the case of SRA lncRNA, where they act as functional domains (). Recent analysis from our laboratory show that regions of lncRNAs participating in bio-molecular interactions have a paucity of variations in potential functional domains similar to that of protein coding exons suggesting a strong selective pressure operating at these loci (). The long non-coding RNA repertoire further encompasses transcripts, which have distinct molecular functions. These functional attributes could be broadly classified as guides, decoys, signals and scaffolds (), depending upon the types of molecular interactions with other biomolecules in the cell, namely; DNA, RNA, proteins or small molecules (). These interactions have been shown to result in a wide spectrum of functional outcomes ranging from chromosomal inactivation as in the case of XIST in X chromosomal inactivation (), epigenetic modifications as in the association with Polycomb repressor proteins (), RNA interference as in antisense activity () or scaffolding of biomolecules as in the case of peri-nuclear bodies (). This diversity of functional outcomes is reflected in the myriad ways that lncRNAs have been implicated in disease processes. Long noncoding RNAs are presently implicated in a number of disease processes included cancers, developmental disorders, neurological, metabolic and immunological disorders () It would be noteworthy to mention the distinct functional roles and molecular dissection of the functional interactions that have been characterized for a small subset of lncRNAs. The functional roles of a vast majority of the lncRNAs still remain uncharacterized and elusive. The majority of lncRNAs annotated in the recent years have come out of analysis of transcriptome sequencing datasets and the information on these transcripts have been largely limited to the genomic loci and expression patterns in the various conditions studied. This gap in the understanding of the functional roles of lncRNAs has largely been due to the non-availability of tools to characterize specific biomolecular interactions on genome-scale and of resources, which systematically catalogue these interactions. Recent insights into specific molecular interactions of lncRNAs have been obtained from the integration of genome-scale datasets, both from our laboratory () and from others (). Additional evidence on the potential functional attributes of lncRNAs have also been obtained from methodologies, which rely on expression patterns and 'guilt-by-association' methods based on correlation of expression patterns with genes or mutations linked to known phenotypes (). Computational methodologies integrating genome-scale datasets, expression patterns, motifs and structure annotations provide immense opportunities towards understanding the functional role of lncRNAs. In the present review, we provide an overview of the computational resources, methodologies and tools available for the identification and functional annotation of human long non-coding RNAs. We also provide a conceptual overview of computational approaches using genome-scale bio-molecular interactions and expression correlation towards understanding the potential function of lncRNAs. We also summarize the current status in identifying functional variations in lncRNAs and discuss the major challenges and opportunities.
Computational approaches for LNCRNA annotation and expression analysisThe earliest large-scale genome-wide annotations of long noncoding RNAs have largely emerged from the annotation of ESTs and from orthologous approaches to understand the transcriptome using tiling microarrays. These studies identified a large and previously unknown repertoire of transcripts, many of which did nothave any obvious potential to encode for functional proteins (). Further in-depth characterization of the transcriptome using deep sequencing from the ENCODE consortium has validated the existence of many of these transcripts (). As opposed to conventional microarray-based approach, which is commonly used to profile known transcripts, deep sequencing approaches like RNA-Seq facilitates genome-wide expression profiling thereby unraveling many novel rare transcripts including novel alternatively-spliced isoforms (). It appears that further depth and focused approaches would uncover an even larger repertoire of transcripts. A generalized computational pipeline for annotation of lncRNAs includes three steps: (i) alignment of reads to the reference genome, (ii) assembly of transcripts and isoforms and (iii) annotation of the transcripts for coding potential. Additional independent approaches with or without sequence information or transcript annotation, including proteogenomics approaches and RNA secondary structure-based approaches have also been extensively used to annotate long non-coding RNAs and are described briefly in the following sections.
Alignment of reads and transcript assemblyIn a conventional transcriptome analysis pipeline the high-quality reads are aligned to the respective reference genomes using a spliced read aligner like Tophat () or STAR (). The aligned reads are further reconstructed into transcripts using reference guided assemblers like Cufflinks () or Scripture () which performs an ab initio transcriptome assembly, though de novo approaches for transcriptome reconstruction have also been attempted in many organisms. (). Providing a comprehensive review of the plethora of methods available for spliced alignment and transcript reconstruction exceeds the scope of this review. In addition, an exhaustive evaluation and discussion of more than 25 RNA-Seq aligners () and transcriptome assemblers () have been published recently.
Annotation of lncRNAsIdentification of lncRNAs broadly involves selection of non-protein coding transcripts longer than 200 nucleotides that lack an open reading frame (ORF) of significant length. The ORFs are predicted using tools like GetORF from the EMBOSS suite (). There is no definite ORF length threshold adopted for lncRNAs. More than 95% of the mammalian proteins in public databases such as SwissProt and International Protein Index have an ORF of greater than 100 amino acids (). Some of the landmark lncRNA studies have used ORF length cutoffs ranging from 30 to 100 amino acids. However, it should also be noted that some of the wellcharacterized lncRNAs such as H19, Xist, Mirg, Gtl2 do have predicted ORFs longer than 100 amino acids (). Recent studies have drawn attention to the biological significance of the translated short peptides from short sORFs () and their potential regulatory role as biologically active peptides. A lot of distinguishing factors based on ORF conservation, nucleotide composition, residue bias and codon usage have been examined towards this goal. Cross-species comparison-based programs like PhyloCSF () and CRITICA () have been popular while complementary approaches like CSTMiner () and RNAcode () use nucleotide substitution and gap patterns as the criteria to assess the coding potential of a sequence. Apart from these, other popular approaches include Support Vector Machine-based classifiers such Coding Potential Calculator (), PORTRAIT (Prediction of Transcriptomic ncRNA by ab initio methods;) which uses multiple distinct sequence features and Coding Potential Assessment Tool () which uses an alignment-free logistic regression model. Alternately, sequence similarity search programs like BLASTX () and HMMER3 () help to identify homologous domains in protein data repositories which can also be used to identify and remove transcripts with protein-coding potential. Apart from these computational approaches, experimental techniques like ribosomal profiling have also been employed () to assess the protein coding capacity of lncRNAs relying on the periodicity of ribosome occupancy along the short translated ORFs.
Proteogenomics-based approaches to evaluate coding potential of transcriptsWith the rapidly growing number of newly discovered lncRNAs, several groups have reported that many putative lncRNAs encode for short peptides (). Recent efforts have used innovative approaches to scan transcripts for the presence of putative peptide products using tandem mass spectrometry studies. For example, the recent ENCODE study analysed RNA-Seq data along with the proteomics data and suggested that majority of the annotated lncRNAs (92%) are not translated (). Introduction of novel strategies like ribosome profiling (the deep sequencing of ribosome-protected RNA fragments) facilitates genome-wide quantitative monitoring of protein synthesis at high resolution. Ingolia and co-workers developed a machine-learning algorithm to systematically deduce protein products from the riboprofiling data and identified many putative lincRNAs containing regions of high translation, which they called short poly-cistronic ribosome-associated coding RNAs (sprcRNAs;). However, examples like H19 mouse lncRNA transcript, which functions as a true lncRNA () in spite of harboring highly conserved ORFs with high ribosomal occupancy (), demonstrate that ribosomal occupancy alone does not sufficiently indicate the protein coding potential of a transcript. Recentlydefined a metric called ribosome release score (RRS), which records the release of the ribosome on encounter with the stop codon to correctly distinguish between coding and non-coding RNA.
RNA structure-based approaches for lncRNA discoverySeveral tools have been developed to aid the classification of transcripts as lncRNAs based on the presence of conserved predicted RNA secondary structures. These include RNAFold (), QRNA (), EvoFold () and RNAz (). These approaches have been used extensively in the literature () and have been discussed for their advantages and drawbacks (). Nevertheless, the use of RNA secondary structure and conservation alone for the identification of lncRNAs could potentially be misleading as conserved RNA secondary structures could also be shared between coding and non-coding transcripts (). Given these limitations, recently there is an increased focus on analyzing RNA structure and binding properties for functional annotation of lncRNAs over their detection ().
Databases and resources for long non-coding RNAsConcomitant with the increasing number of lncRNAs discovered, a number of resources collecting, curating and providing associated functional information of the lncRNAs have been built up in the recent years. In the present collection, described in detail below, we have attempted to provide the salient features of lncRNA resources. A comprehensive listing and description of the resources is summarized in. LncRNAdb has been one of the earliest manually curated databases of eukaryotic lncRNAs with information derived from literature and other resources (). Apart from lncRNAdb, GENCODE is by and large, one of the most popular lncRNA catalog. The latest version of Gencode (v21) comprises of 15 877 long non-coding RNA genes corresponding to 26 414 transcripts. Another resource, LNCipedia hosts over 21 488 annotated human lncRNA transcripts. The resource provides prediction of secondary structure as well as assessment of the protein coding potential and in addition, incorporates an automated reprocessing pipeline based on data from proteomics experiments to detect ORFs in lncRNAs. NONCODE 4.0 provides information on transcript isoforms and their expression in human tissues while a similar resource lncRNAMap extensively uses RNA-seq datasets available in the public domain to provide insights into the expression levels of lncRNAs in different tissues, cell lines and disease conditions (). The database also incorporates miRNA targets, homologous protein coding genes and endogenous siRNAs (esiRNAs) derived from lncRNAs and their targets. Two resources lncRNome and the Functional lncRNA database integrate information from other databases to provide insights into
Understanding lncRNA function through expression correlationThe most popular and largely studied approach towards understanding the function of lncRNAs have been based on 'guilt-byassociation' from co-expression patterns shared with their protein coding counterparts (). The basis of the methodology stems from the concept that transcripts sharing common expression patterns should largely share similar biological pathways. A number of different studies have used this approach towards functionally annotating potential lncRNAs. One of the first studies on co-expression analysis of lncRNAs and coding genes at the genome scale (). The authors ranked the protein coding genes co-expressed with a given lncRNA. The protein coding genes were further analyzed using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) to identify enriched functional terms corresponding to the lncRNAs (). In another study, a co-expression network between).This network takes into account not only the co-expression of lncRNA and protein coding genes but also other lncRNAs, thus being able to identify statistically significant clusters of co-expressed genes, which potentially correspond to functional modules. A couple of computational tools have come up in the recent past, which uses the probe annotation information of Affymetrix microarrays for the analysis of expression of lncRNAs. ncFANs () and Noncoder () provides a web interface to re-analyze datasets for lncRNA expression. ncFANs also provides functional annotation based on co-expression patterns of the lncRNAs with protein coding genes.
Understanding lncRNA function as part of interactionsApart from expression-based approaches, the advent of next-generation sequencing for understanding bio-molecular interactions through a variety of methodologies have opened up new avenues to create genome-wide interaction maps for specific biomolecules. Though many of these methods have largely addressed the problem in the perspective of protein coding genes and their regulation, aspect of lncRNAs still needs to be unraveled. The genome-wide data can be integrated with the lncRNA annotations enabling construction of maps of putative biological interactions and thereby correlating potential functional consequences. The biological function of lncRNAs in the cell could be understood as a function of biological interactions mediated by lncRNAs with other RNA species (RNARNA interactions), with proteins (RNAprotein interactions), with DNA (RNADNA interactions) and/or processing of lncRNAs to smaller RNAs. In many cases, a combination of one or more of the abovesaid interactions could be necessary for the functional outcome. RNAprotein interactions are crucial for the functioning of RNA, either independently or in conjunction with other molecules. One of the well-studied examples is the interaction of lncRNAs with the Polycomb Repressor proteins to modulate epigenetic modification of the targets. A number of computational and experimental approaches have been extensively used to characterize RNAprotein interactions. The earlier computational tools relied on sequence, structure and physicochemical properties or features to predict potential RNAprotein interaction pairs, and the popular algorithms include CatRAPID () and RPIseq (). A specific approach for lncRNA named lncPro () has also been developed based on the physicochemical properties of the interaction pairs. Using this resource, the authors could predict the interactions of HOTAIR with PRC2 complex and LSD1 on the basis of their interaction scores, which were in concordance with the experimental findings (). Experimental methods for understanding RNAprotein interactions have also been extensively used. The most popular approach includes cross-linking immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (CLIP-seq;) and its variants. Other complementary experimental methodologies include protein capture on RNA like RNA affinity in tandem (RAT;), Csy4 Select () and MS2-TRAP (). Affinity-based capture approaches including SeqRS () and RNAcompete () have also been used to identify RNA binding proteins interacting with specific RNAs. Apart from interaction with protein, one of the active areas of interest has been to identify genomic targets of lncRNAs. A number of well-studied lncRNA candidates like Xist, HOTAIR and HOTTIP modulate their function through interactions with genomic DNA (). A number of experimental approaches to identify RNADNA interaction sites have been used in the recent years. Chu et al., introduced a technique of Chromatin Isolation by RNA purification (CHIRP;). The approach used tiling oligonucleotides to capture specific RNAs with bound protein and DNA sequences, the sequence identity of which could be deciphered by sequencing. Simon et al., developed this hybridizationbased technique by designing affinity-tagged versions of the complementary oligonucleotides against the RNA called Capture Hybridization Analysis of RNA Targets (CHART;). This technique could identify interaction of lncRNAs at the chromatin level. It has also been hypothesized that lncRNAs could function through formation of DNA-RNA triplexes where lncRNAs form the third strand. For example, a long non-coding transcript originating from upstream region of the major DHFR promoter represses the transcription of downstream protein coding gene by forming an RNADNA triplex structure with the DHFR promoter (). Computational approaches like Triplexator () and R-loop finder () offers enormous promises to computationally predict such interactions on a genome-scale. Besides interactions with DNA and proteins, lncRNAs have also been extensively shown to interact with other RNAs. The most widely studied interactions have been miRNA-lncRNA interactions, where it has been widely proposed that lncRNAs could modulate the action of regulatory microRNAs by acting as a sponge (). Our group () has recently re-constructed a genome-wide interactome of lncRNA and miRNAs which might play regulatory roles in gene expression. Argonaute proteins are part of the RISC complex which mediates targeting of microRNAs. PAR-CLIP datasets of argonaute proteins serve as the evidence pointing to microRNA binding. A number of computational tools have also been extensively used to identify conserved and non-conserved microRNA targets in transcripts. It is also noteworthy that some of the lncRNAs serve as templates for the biogenesis of small regulatory RNA. Using small RNA sequencing datasets and comparison of the genomic loci, a genome-wide map of lncRNA processing has also been discussed (). In addition to this, () have proposed a repeat insertion domains of lncRNAs (RIDL) hypothesis where they address that the transposable elements may serve as functional domains for lncRNA interactions with proteins or nucleic acids. LncRNAs harbor a higher frequency for transposable elements (TEs) than protein coding exons. Some lncRNAs like AK046052, a brain specific mouse lncRNA is thought to be derived from TEs. The insertion of TEs in an lncRNA sequence is thought to add functionality by virtue of serving as interacting domains for proteins, RNA and DNA. The outcome could be exemplified in interactions such as Alu/LINE mediated interaction with ribosomal complexes or Alumediated mRNA decay by lncRNA ().
Understanding lncRNA structure and motifsA variety of computational approaches including single sequence structure predictors like Mfold (), RNAfold () and Sfold (), sequence alignment-based tools like QRNA (), EvoFold () and RNAz () multiple structural alignment tools like RNAForester () and MARNA () and derivatives of Sankoff's algorithm like Foldalign (), Dynalign () and LocARNA () have been employed for RNA structure predictions of short conserved domains within lncRNAs, though it is still uncertain if all lncRNAs harbor local structured domains. It is also important to note that most of these RNA structure prediction approaches have high false positive rates, around 50%. Minimum free energy folding-based approaches often fail to provide reliable signals that can clearly distinguish non-coding RNA structures from random sequences. While approaches driven by sequence-based alignments are faster than structure-based alignments, the former fails to capture the hidden dimension of conservation at the structure level often missed in weakly conserved primary sequences. Additional algorithmic advances including the use of conservation and additional features to predict pseudoknots have been developed in the recent years (). The predictions of structure of lncRNAs were largely limited by the non-availability of accurate methods to predict structures of these long RNAs which are mostly unstructured. Therefore, it is important to integrate computation predictions with other types of data including experimental approaches to ensure precise functional annotation. A detailed discussion on the pros and cons of these approaches has been detailed previously (). Recent experimental approaches using next generation sequencing technology such as PARS (), FragSeq (), and SHAPE-seq () have significantly added to the repertoire of the structural map of lncRNAs. Sequence and structure motifs in RNAs have been an active area of interest. A number of computational tools including RegRNA () have curated structural and sequence motifs in RNA and offer a user-friendly interface to identify them in sequences. In addition, non-conventional motifs including Gquadruplex motifs and intramolecular RNA triplexes have been actively studied (). In an earlier bioinformatics analysis of G-quadruplex motifs in the lncRNome distinct patterns of occurrence have been demonstrated in lncRNAs compared to protein coding genes (). A number of computational tools to predict G-quadruplexes have been reported and offer a unique opportunity to understand their functional attributes ().
Computational approaches to understand functional variations in lncRNAsIt is generally observed that a large proportion of the lncRNAs do not show evolutionary conservation unlike well conserved subsets of ncRNAs like microRNAs and snoRNAs. Previous studies have also characterized large variability in the sequence of lncRNAs, which was used to support the argument that lncRNAs do not probably have functional roles. Nevertheless it has also been shown that the well-studied functional lncRNAs such as XIST, HOTAIR show poor conservation across species suggesting conservation is not a prerequisite for functionality (). In a recent analysis, our group () has shown distinct patterns of variations in lncRNAs and compared the variation densities across potentially functional elements in lncRNAs and protein coding exons. The analysis suggested that the variation densities in functional elements in lncRNAs were comparable to the protein coding exons in mRNAs. The authors also found a number of GWAS associated markers mapped to lncRNA loci. In one example, three isoforms transcribed from gene ENSG00000223891 having binding sites for HUR protein harbor a SNP (rs6017291) which is associated with cognitive test performance. This observation opens up enormous opportunities to map functional elements in lncRNAs and potentially understand the effects of genomic variations in these elements. Additionally the impact of variations on conserved sequence and structural motifs in lncRNAs have not been explored to great detail. Computational tools to map the effect of variations on RNA structure including popular tools like SNPfold (), RNAsnp () have been proposed. A starting point in this area has been the analysis which revealed 1900 SNVs which have a potential to alter the RNA structure ().
Computational framework towardsunderstanding the role of lncRNA in Diseases.
Knowledge gaps, challenges and opportunitiesThe current understanding of the role of long non-coding RNAs in biological processes is largely limited to a handful of well characterized candidates, while the lion's share of the annotated lncRNAs we know today, do not have any obvious functional annotations. The lack of functional annotations have been mostly contributed by a host of factors including the absence of unified resources to annotate lncRNAs, lack of common biogenesis or mechanism of action for lncRNAs and primarily, lack of evolutionary conservation of lncRNAs, which precludes their study in model systems. The present functional correlations of lncRNAs are largely thus limited to 'guilt by association' studies mainly based on integration of omics datasets to arrive at potential functional correlates of lncRNAs. The challenges aside, the larger role of lncRNAs in mediating disease processes are increasingly being cemented through converging evidence from GWAS studies as well as expression-based studies in disease processes. Computational approaches towards understanding the biogenesis, regulation and function of lncRNAs thus could provide a huge impetus in the field. The incident opportunity provided by the ready availability of omics datasets, thanks to large-scale data on genomics, epigenomics and transcriptomics presently available through consortia including the ENCODE and NIH RoadMap Epigenomics projects () provides the much required baseline to start understanding the regulatory dynamics of lncRNAs and be able to provide insights into the regulation of lncRNAs. The second opportunity has been the availability ofComputational approaches for lncRNA analysissequencing-based approaches to understand biomolecular interactionsbe it Protein:RNA, RNA:RNA or RNA:DNA interactions, also described previously in this manuscript. Though the current availability of the datasets for interactions is limited, integration of information from disparate datasets has not been attempted towards understanding unified principles of action of lncRNAs. The third opportunity has been the recent availability of sequencing-based approaches to characterize the secondary structure of RNAs, using chemical or enzymatic approaches followed by sequencing. Insights into the RNA structure or rather the dynamics of RNA structure and its relation with bio-molecular interactions would significantly add to the understanding of lncRNA functionality. The sequence variations in lncRNAs, be it at the genome level or at the RNA level, modulated through RNA editing and its effect on structure and interactions have not been studied to any great extent and is a potential opportunity. The fifth and the most challenging opportunity could be potential new approaches to understand sequence, structure and/or functional orthologs of lncRNAs in models systems to be able to draw parallels between the phenotypes in animal systems modulated through lncRNAs with human diseases or traits. This could potentially be the Holy Grail in the understanding of lncRNA function.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
S.Jalali et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
. lncRNAdb lncRNAdb is a database providing comprehensive annotations of functional long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) http://www.lncrnadb.org/ Amaral et al. (2011) 4. lncRNAMap Functional Long non-coding RNAs Database http://lncrnamap.mbc.nctu.edu.tw/php/ Chan et al. (2014) 5. lncRNome lncRNome is a comprehensive searchable biologically oriented knowledgebase for long non-coding RNAs in Humans. http://genome.igib.res.in/lncRNome/ Bhartiya et al. (2013) 6. NONCODE 4.0 NONCODE provides an integrative annotation of long non-coding RNAs. http://noncode.bioinfo.org.cn Xie et al. (2014) 7. The Functional lncRNA Database repository of mammalian long non-protein coding transcripts that have been experimentally shown to be both non-coding and functional http://www.valadkhanlab.org/database Niazi and Valadkhan (2012) 8. NRED A database of long non-coding RNA expression http://nred.matticklab.com/cgi-bin/ncrnadb.pl Dinger et al. (2009) Secondary information databases 9. ChIPBase Database for annotating and exploring the expression profiles and the transcriptional regulation of lncRNAs and other ncRNAs.
000 human long non-coding RNA transcripts and is maintained by our group. lncRNome apart from providing information on genomic motifs including sequence and structural motifs also provides information on RNA processing, miRNA binding sites from PARCLIP datasets and epigenetic modifications in close proximity with lncRNA promoters (Bhartiya et al., 2013). The database also maps genomic variations in lncRNA sites and features a genome browser. The Functional lncRNA Database hosts a subset of well-curated non-protein coding long non-coding RNAs from literature for Human, Mouse and Rat (Niazi and Valadkhan, 2012), and includes over 180 human lncRNA annotations. Each lncRNA annotation also is accompanied by miRNA precursor information, repeat information and predicted ORFs, apart from the genomic information and sequence. Apart from the primary lncRNA databases which provide information on lncRNAs, a number of databases also feature functional information of interactions of lncRNAs in specific contexts. Many of these databases also rely on expression information, integration of genome-wide datasets and computational predictions to be able to provide clues into the functional insights of lncRNAs. A subset of the prominent databases is detailed below. Starbase v2.0 (lncRNABase) integrates public RNAprotein interaction sites generated from high-throughput datasets. The distinct feature of this database is that it provides a comprehensive overview of miRNA-lncRNA interaction maps apart from the expression information. NRED provides microarray and in situ hybridization gene expression information for thousands of transcripts including long ncRNAs in human and mouse (Dinger et al., 2009). Additionally, information for featured ncRNAs evolutionary conservation, secondary structure evidence, genomic context links and antisense relationships are also available. DIANA-LncBase is a comprehensive resource for computationally predicted and experimentally annotated miRNA-lncRNA interactions (Paraskevopoulou et al., 2013). For the experimental annotation, the database extensively makes use of the CLIP-seq datasets for Argonaute proteins, apart from genome-wide degradome sequencing and other datasets. In addition, the database also provides information on expression, microRNA regulatory modules and their conservation. A similar database lnCeDB catalogs human long non-coding RNAs which can potentially act as competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNA; Das et al., 2014). The database scores the likelihood of lncRNA-mRNA pair for actually being ceRNA based on two methods and integrates predicted mRNAmiRNA interactions from a number of resources. In addition, the Linc2GO database provides functional annotation based on the hypothesis that lncRNAs can function as a ceRNA. Apart from the databases which largely discuss the expression and function of lncRNAs, LncRNA Disease maintained by the Cui Lab systematically collects diseases associated with lncRNAs, and has created a niche for itself (Chen et al., 2013). The disease associations of lncRNAs have been curated from literature evidence from peer reviewed publications, and in addition, were investigated using bioinformatics methods based on genomic neighborhood. 4 Computational approaches to understand LNCRNA function and disease associations A large number of lncRNAs have been discovered through computational mapping of the transcriptome, but the functional annotation and intricate molecular mechanisms of gene regulation still remains an enigma. Computational methods offer a new opportunity to understand the potential functional implications of lncRNAs. However, it should be emphasized that follow-up experimental validation would be necessary to examine specific functional correlates unambiguously. The following section provides an overview of the popular computational approaches towards deciphering the functionalities of lncRNAs (Fig. 2). Unlike conservation of the sequence and/or structure, characteristic of members of the small RNA class, like miRNAs and snoRNAs, lncRNAs are largely not conserved. Earlier analyses comparing lncRNAs in humans and other model systems have shown that only a very small subset of the human lncRNAs are evolutionarily conserved, thus severely limiting synteny or orthology-based approaches towards extrapolating functions of lncRNAs from model systems. Unlike protein-coding genes which require strong sequence conservation to preserve their function, lncRNAs may only require short stretches of conserved sequence to maintain structural motifs important for its functional role (Mercer et al., 2009).
Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have provided immense insights into the potential disease associations of long noncoding RNAs (Bochenek et al., 2013; Jin et al., 2011; Kumar et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2013). A recent analysis of GWAS signals in long non-coding RNAs revealed that a significant proportion of the variations associated with human traits/diseases map to lncRNA loci (Hrdlickova et al., 2014; Kumar et al., 2013). A comprehensive compendium of long non-coding RNAs and traits associated with them have been compiled into a web-based resource lncRNADisease (Chen et al., 2013). Apart from GWAS, a number of expression-based approaches to infer disease associations of lncRNAs have been reported in the recent years. In one of the most recent approaches, Gao and coworkers have used a lncRNA-protein coding gene network based on lncRNAs and protein coding genes implicated in diseases and suggested high predictability of the approach towards finding associations of lncRNAs with diseases (Yang et al., 2014). A similar network-based approach by Liu et al used networks built based on expression correlation (Liu et al., 2014) and Sun et al., which used known lncRNA disease associations implemented in the framework called RWRlncD (Sun et al., 2014), both with reliable accuracies.
