Motivation: Automated computational methods can infer dynamic regulatory network models directly from temporal and spatial experimental data, such as genetic perturbations and their resultant morphologies. Recently, a computational method was able to reverse-engineer the first mech-anistic model of planarian regeneration that can recapitulate the main anterior–posterior patterning experiments published in the literature. Validating this comprehensive regulatory model via novel experiments that had not yet been performed would add in our understanding of the remarkable regeneration capacity of planarian worms and demonstrate the power of this automated methodology. Results: Using the Michigan Molecular Interactions and STRING databases and the MoCha software tool, we characterized as hnf4 an unknown regulatory gene predicted to exist by the reverse-engineered dynamic model of planarian regeneration. Then, we used the dynamic model to predict the morphological outcomes under different single and multiple knock-downs (RNA interference) of hnf4 and its predicted gene pathway interactors b-catenin and hh. Interestingly, the model predicted that RNAi of hnf4 would rescue the abnormal regenerated phenotype (tailless) of RNAi of hh in amputated trunk fragments. Finally, we validated these predictions in vivo by performing the same surgical and genetic experiments with planarian worms, obtaining the same phenotypic outcomes predicted by the reverse-engineered model. Conclusion: These results suggest that hnf4 is a regulatory gene in planarian regeneration, validate the computational predictions of the reverse-engineered dynamic model, and demonstrate the automated methodology for the discovery of novel genes, pathways and experimental phenotypes.
IntroductionPlanarian worms, despite their complex morphology, have the extraordinary ability to regenerate a complete body after almost any kind of amputation (). With the goal to unravel the mechanisms responsible for this outstanding regenerative capacity, a large dataset of experiments, including surgical amputations, genetic perturbations and pharmacological interventions, and their resultant phenotypes have been reported in the literature and curated in the Planform centralized database (). However, due to the complex feed-back loops and non-linear interactions typical of biological regulatory networks, understanding how the worm
Bioinformatics Advance Access published June 2, 2016restore its head-trunk-tail pattern is a very difficult inverse problem (). This has led to a lack of mechanistic, fullyspecified models that can explain simultaneously more than one or two features of planarian regeneration (). In order to solve this inverse problem, heuristic computational methods have been proposed for the reverse-engineering of dynamic models directly from experimental data (), including biological development (). These computational methods represent a promising approach to build systems-level models that can mechanistically explain the complex biological processes that are not only necessary but also sufficient for the observed exquisite regulation of growth and form. Following this approach, the most comprehensive dynamic model of planarian regeneration was recently reverse-engineered with an automated computational method (). Directly from a dataset of outcomes of functional (surgical and genetic perturbation) experiments including the main head versus tail phenotypes, the method inferred a dynamic genetic regulatory network that could recapitulate all the experimental phenotypes when simulated in silico. Importantly, the model predicted the existence of unknown regulatory genes inferred as necessary for the correct regulation of planarian regeneration. Finding these unknown predicted products would aid in our understanding of planarian regeneration and serve as a validation of the reverse-engineered model in particular and the computational methodology approach in general. We thus used the model to attempt to uncover new biological signaling and predict the outcomes of experiments that have never been performed. Here, we present the discovery of hnf4 (hepatocyte nuclear factor 4) as a planarian regulatory gene and its predicted capacity by the reverse-engineered model to rescue an abnormal tailless phenotype. In addition, we tested these predictions in vivo by performing the same surgical and genetic experiments in the planarian worm, which validated all the predicted results by the reverseengineered model.
Methods
Planarian cultureAn asexual clonal line of Schmidtea mediterranea (CIW4) was maintained at 20 C in the dark, in 0.5 g/l Instant Ocean salts (Spectrum Brands, U.S.A.) added to ultrapure water. They were starved for at least a week before microinjection and double-stranded RNA interference (RNAi) experiments.
Double-stranded RNA interference (dsRNAi)For double-stranded RNA interference experiments, dsRNA was generated and injected as described by. dsRNA of each gene were microinjected into the worms of 7 mm in length, either as single gene dsRNAi, or mixed with another dsRNA for double-dsRNAi, while the amount of each dsRNA introduced was maintained constant. dsRNA injection was performed for 3 consecutive days, followed by amputation of the planaria into 3 regions (head, pharynx and tail) 5 h after the third and last injection. Amputations were performed under a dissecting microscope with a scalpel, on filter paper over a moist Kimwipe kept chilled on a cold plate. Pharynx fragments were produced by transversely cutting the worms immediately anterior and posterior of the pharynx.Fragments were kept in welled non-treated tissue-culture plates in the dark at 20 C to regenerate, and moved into fresh media and new wells once a week, until scored.
In silico morphological predictions of single and double knock-downs of hnf4 and its interacting genesWe then used the reverse-engineered dynamic model of planarian regeneration to predict the morphological outcomes of amputated trunk pieces with single and double knock downs (RNAi) of hnf4 and its predicted interacting genes b-catenin and hh (). Consistent with the input dataset of experiments used to automatically infer the model, the control experiment resulted in the wild-type morphology, the knock down of b-catenin resulted in a double-head morphology (), and the knock down of hh resulted in a tailless morphology (). Then, we used the model to formulate novel predictions regarding the predicted hnf4 regulatory gene and its interactors. As shown in, the simulation of a single knock down of hnf4 resulted in a wild-type morphology (similar to the control), a double knock down of b-catenin and hnf4 resulted in a double-head morphology (similar to the single knock down of b-catenin), and, remarkably, a double knock down of hh and hnf4 resulted in a wild-type morphology, instead of the tailless morphology of the single knock down of hh. In this way, the reverse-engineered model formulated the nontrivial prediction that RNAi of hnf4 would rescue the tailless phenotype due to RNAi of hh.
Validation of the regulatory role of hnf4 with single and double RNAi in vivo experimentsWe then validated all the in silico predictions made by the reverseengineered model with similar in vivo experiments in the planarian worm. Similarly to the simulations, trunk pieces were amputated under single and double RNAi knock downs (). The in vivo results () showed that while RNAi of hnf4 resulted in the regeneration of the wild-type morphology, RNAi of b-catenin resulted in a double-head morphology and RNAi of hh resulted in a tailless morphology, as it was predicted by the reverse-engineered model. Then, the in vivo experiments showed that a double RNAi of bcatenin and hnf4 still resulted in the double-head morphology, but, remarkably, a double RNAi of hh and hnf4 restored the wild-type morphology, instead of the tailless morphology obtained by the single RNAi of hh. These results validated the ability of RNAi of hnf4 to rescue the tailless morphology, as it was predicted by the reverseengineered model. Additionally, we performed a statistical analysis of the area sizes of the regenerated tails under the different RNAi treatments (). The analysis confirmed that while there were no statistical difference in the tail area ratio between the control and the single RNAi of hnf4, the single RNAi of hh produced morphologies with statistically significant smaller tail area ratios. In the case of double RNAi of hh and hnf4, there were no statistical difference of the tail area ratios with respect the controls; however, the tail area ratios of the double RNAi morphologies were statistically larger than the single RNAi of hh morphologies. This statistical study validated the
DiscussionHere, we presented the computational discovery and in vivo validation of hnf4 as a regulatory gene in planarian regeneration. Starting from the prediction of an unknown necessary gene from a reverse-engineered dynamic model, we characterized it with the use of the MiMI and STRING databases and the MoCha tool. Then, we used the reverse-engineered dynamic model to produce exact predictions of the regenerated morphologies when perturbing hnf4 and their regulatory interacting genes in the predicted pathway. This in silico study revealed the ability of RNAi of hnf4 to rescue the abnormal regenerated phenotype (tailless) due to the RNAi of hh. We then used an in vivo approach to validate at the bench all the predictions of the model. Using RNAi to knock-down single and double genes involved in the pathway, we performed similar surgical amputations and genetic knock downs (RNAi) in planarian worms. The results confirmed that RNAi of hnf4 produced the wild-type morphology when applied alone, but when combined with RNAi of hh, it rescued the tailless phenotype caused by RNAi of hh alone. A statistical analysis further confirmed the significance of these results. In summary, these results show how the reverse-engineered model remarkably predicted a non-trivial regulatory role of hnf4 in planarian regeneration. The dynamic nature of the presented model explains in a mechanistic way the morphologies resulting from the different perturbations. When both hh and hnf4 are knock-down, the level of tail signal is naturally higher than the trunk signal; that is, the default outcome is tail. When only hnf4 is knock-down, the tail signal is even higher (since hh enhances tail) and the trunk signal stays the same than in the double knock-down, so the wild type morphology is still regenerated. However, when only hh is knock-down, hnf4 is higher expressed (since hh represses hnf4), which results in a higher signal of trunk (since hnf4 enhances trunk) and higher than tail (which is also lower than the wild type, since hh enhances tail), producing the no-tail morphology. Finally, with no knock-downs, the presence of hh produces higher signal of tail and reduces the signal of trunk (since hh enhances tail and represses hnf4, which enhances trunk), resulting in the wild type morphology.
ConclusionComputational approaches are indispensable for the construction of predictive models of complex biological phenomena and the understanding of their regulatory networks. These methods can automatically formulate mathematical models that can recapitulate the observed phenotypes. Crucially, these reverse-engineered models can formulate testable predictions, including the prediction of novel regulatory elements and experimental phenotypes. Here, we validated the novel predictions of a comprehensive dynamic model of planarian regeneration, including the discovery of a novel regulatory gene (hnf4) and its capacity to rescue an abnormal phenotype. The model accounts for the minimum set of interactors needed to explain the resultant head versus tail morphology from a comprehensive set of perturbation experiments. In a future work, we will validate the second unknown regulatory gene predicted by the model, which was preliminary characterized as the Frizzled family of receptors (). Further regulatory elements are indeed needed to control other aspects of tail regeneration, such as the specific round shape, determination of tissue types (epithelium, muscle, nerves, etc.) in the correct locations, and the dorsalventral axis regulation. Adding perturbation experiments involving these elements to the input dataset will allow for the discovery of more detailed models by the reverse-engineering system, extending the pathways presented here. This work serves as a proof of principle for a pipeline for converting models discovered by machine learning into predictive hypotheses that can be tested at the bench to uncover novel biological interactions. Interaction databases such as MiMI or STRING enable the characterization of unknown elements predicted by these models. Importantly, the interaction confidence scores included in these databases summarize the quality of the available evidence and can be used to rank candidate interactions, being the ones with higher score the best candidate interactions to test at the bench. This approach demonstrates the strength of automated reverseengineering methods for the discovery of predicted mechanistic models of developmental and regenerative biology.
FundingThis work has been supported by NSF grant EF-1124651. Computation used the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE), which is supported by NSF grant ACI-1053575, and a cluster computer awarded by Silicon Mechanics.. Statistical analysis of the area size ratios of the regenerated phenotypes from a trunk piece under different gene knock-down treatments (RNAi). As predicted by the reverse-engineered model, the regenerated tail area ratio when knocking down hh is significantly smaller than the wild type but not significantly different than when knocking down both hh and hnf4. Each value is given as the mean 6 SEM (n  2429). * P < 0.05, Student's t-test. ns not significant
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
.3 Image collection, measurements and statistics Images were collected using a Zeiss Stemi SV 6 dissecting microscope, with a Canon EOS Rebel T3i DSLR camera. All measurements were carried out using images of worms when fully extended. Adobe Photoshop was used on images of the regenerated pharyngeal fragment to categorize the pixels as belonging either to the head, trunk, or tail regions within the entire regenerating fragment and the pigment-less anterior and posterior blastemas. A custom script in Matlab was developed and used to automatically count the pixels in each region and calculate the ratios. 3 Results 3.1 Characterization of the predicted unknown regulatory gene as hnf4 The most comprehensive dynamic model of planarian regeneration, recently reverse-engineered with a computational method (Lobo and Levin, 2015), predicted an unknown regulatory gene necessary for the correct regeneration of the planarian worm (Fig. 1A, labeled with '?'). The model predicted that this unknown gene was regulated (directly or indirectly) by both b-catenin (MiMI gene id CTNNB1) and hh (hedgehog, MiMI gene id SHH). We then used this information to search for possible candidates in the Michigan Molecular Interactions database (MiMI) (Tarcea et al., 2009), which resulted in the identification of HNF4A (MiMI gene id 3172) in Homo sapiens as the only known candidate to be regulated by both b-catenin (MiMI interaction id 48746) and shh (MiMI interaction id 228335) (Fig. 1B). We further validated these interactions with the software tool MoCha (Lobo et al., 2016). MoCha uses the STRING database v10 (Szklarczyk et al., 2015) and facilitates the identification of pathways with unknown products. We queried MoCha for candidate products directly interacting with both b-catenin (ctnnb1) and shh (shh) in any organism and with no score limitations. The tool confirmed that HNF4A is a candidate for such regulations in Homo sapiens, Mus musculus and Rattus norvegicus. Table 1 shows the scores of the interactions found in the three species. Interestingly, an homolog of HNF4A (hnf4) exists in the planarian Schmidtea mediterranea, and it has been found to be expressed in intestinal cells and in interspersed cells surrounding the intestine, including neoblasts (planarian stem cells) (Wagner et al., 2011), to be involved in intestinal regeneration (Forsthoefel et al., 2012), and to be expressed in the gamma neoblasts' subpopulation (van Wolfswinkel et al., 2014). Furthermore, other homologs of HNF4A has been found to regulate blastema formation in amputated axolotl limbs (Jhamb et al., 2011). Together, these data suggests that hnf4 may be indeed a regulatory gene in planarian regeneration.
