Motivation: The enormous number of redundant sequenced genomes has hindered efforts to analyze and functionally annotate proteins. As the taxonomy of viruses is not uniformly defined, viral proteomes pose special challenges in this regard. Grouping viruses based on the similarity of their proteins at proteome scale can normalize against potential taxonomic nomenclature anomalies. Results: We present Viral Reference Proteomes (Viral RPs), which are computed from complete virus proteomes within UniProtKB. Viral RPs based on 95, 75, 55, 35 and 15% co-membership in proteome similarity based clusters are provided. Comparison of our computational Viral RPs with UniProt's curator-selected Reference Proteomes indicates that the two sets are consistent and complementary. Furthermore, each Viral RP represents a cluster of virus proteomes that was consistent with virus or host taxonomy. We provide BLASTP search and FTP download of Viral RP protein sequences, and a browser to facilitate the visualization of Viral RPs. Availability and implementation: http://proteininformationresource.org/rps/viruses/
IntroductionThere are existing methods for reducing protein sequence space. NCBI-nr (NCBI Resource) clusters identical proteins, while UniRefs () provide clustered protein sequences at multiple similarity levels. NCBI-RefSeq () and UniProt's Reference Proteomes () provide users with the ability to perform analyses or create protein families using a limited set of complete proteomes selected by curators. However, such approaches are difficult to scale up and do not show the relationships between organisms. Previously, we created Representative Proteomes (RPs) () by clustering Archaea, Bacteria and Eukaryota proteomes into related groups and selecting a representative organism from each group. Compared to UniRefs clustering, which is based on the similarity of individual proteins, RPs clustering is based on the similarity of whole proteomes. These computationally determined RPs are now included in the UniProt Reference Proteome set (). However, viral proteomes posed special challenges, as the taxonomy for viruses is not uniformly defined; potentially there are taxonomic nomenclature variations resulting from naming more distantly related viruses as if they were the same genus or by naming closely related viruses as if they were in different taxonomic clades. To address those challenges we clustered virus proteomes based on the similarity of their overall protein sequences in a proteome scale using algorithms that can reliably and quickly calculate a hierarchical set of Viral Reference Proteomes (Viral RPs) at different co-membership cut-offs. Specifically, the clustering of the virus proteomes starts at very high similarity level in order to identify the proteomes that are very similar to other proteomes or proteomes that are an identical subset of other proteomes (sub-proteomes). In addition, we incorporate the UniProtKB annotation score (http://www.uniprot.org/help/annotation_score) () into our Proteome Priority Score (PPS) ().
MethodsViral RPs are updated monthly using UniProtKB complete proteomes and UniRef50. Each proteome used in the calculation is rendered approximately 'one entry per gene'. We take all Swiss-Prot entries for a given gene in each proteome, sort the TrEMBL entries by sequence length and retain only the entry with the longest sequence for any gene not already represented by a Swiss-Prot entry. The procedure to generate Viral RPs includes: (i) Compute pair-wise co-membership for all Virus proteomes. (ii) Cluster Virus proteomes into Representative Proteome Groups (RPGs). (iii) Select Reference proteomes from each RPG.
Co-membership of two proteomesThe relatedness of two proteomes is measured by their co-membership (X) in UniRef50 clusters and is defined as: X  2  100  N ab N a  N b cut-offs < 90%; otherwise;where N a is the number of UniRef50 clusters containing a protein from proteome A. N b is the number of UniRef50 clusters containing a protein from proteome B. N ab is the number of UniRef50 clusters containing a protein from both proteomes A and B. Given a comembership cut-off (CMC), if X ! CMC, two proteomes are grouped together.
Representative proteome group (RPG)The co-membership (X) of each pair of proteomes is calculated for all virus complete proteomes. The mean co-membership for a proteome is the average X value between a proteome and all other proteomes. RPGs are constructed as follows:(i) proteomes are ranked according to their average X values. (ii) The top proteome is taken as the seed for a new RPG. For the rest of the proteomes in the ranked list, if X ! CMC with the seed, they are added to the newly formed group and then removed from the ranked list.and 15%) hierarchically using a top-down approach to ensure the proteomes grouped together stay together even at a lower CMC.
Select representative from RPG
Results and discussionsOne objective in producing a Viral RP set is to reduce the protein sequence space while preserving both sequence representation and annotation.shows that low CMCs tend to greatly reduce sequence space at the cost of producing RPGs that may contain multiple genera in one RPG. High CMCs have a low sequence space reduction, and are more likely to split species from a given genus into multiple RPGs. Nonetheless, even at 95% CMC, only $5% virus proteomes from the same species are split among multiple RPGs. Close examination reveals that a majority of these are bacteriophages, where enormous diversity exists even within those found in the same bacterial host (). As expected, at all cut-offs the taxonomic consistency of RPGs rises with taxonomic rank; that is, successively fewer RPGs contain viruses from multiple taxa as one traverses from species (not shown) to genus to family. This is also observed as one traverses the taxonomic ranks of virus hosts (Supplementary). The algorithmically selected viral RPs are mostly consistent with the ones selected manually by UniProt curators (Supplementary). We developed a web site to disseminate Viral RPs and related data. Users can download pre-selected Viral RP sequences or custom build sequence files with respect to taxonomic groups and CMCs. We developed a Viral RPs browser that shows the proteomes at different co-membership cut-offs and provides taxonomic and hosttion by decreasing the redundancy of similarity search results, thereby aiding the identification of homologs, protein family classification and comparative genomic and proteomic analyses. RPGs can also be used to identify errors in proteome annotations. For example, identical species are expected to be in the same cluster at 95%. When they are not it is often due to an annotation error. Taxonomic assignment among viruses is usually derived from phylogenetic analyses. Nonetheless, grouping on the basis of shared proteome features has been suggested as a more accurate view of viral relatedness for phages because of their high recombination rate (). By taking advantage of the tunable CMC resolution, viral RPGs have the potential to serve as a tool not just for grouping viruses into broad categories, but also for differentiating closely related strains. The inability to discern a virus' host range from its genome sequence has also represented a significant problem in interpretation of viral metagenomic data. The host range of viruses observed in RPGs with high CMC tends to be quite narrow, with about 96% of RPG95s sharing a species-level host among all members, while the same viruses will often occur in RPGs with broadening host ranges at successive higher CMC (Supplementary). By exploiting this trend, the known host range within a given RPG may be used to provide clues toward the host range of unknown viruses in the same group.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Based on UniProtKB release 2015_10; # of Seqs of proteomes: 219525; # of proteomes: 3312; CMC: Co-membership cut-off; RPG: Representative Proteome Group.
C.Chen et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
