Motivation: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are major regulators of gene expression in plants and animals. They recognize their target messenger RNAs (mRNAs) by sequence complementarity and guide them to cleavage or translational arrest. So far, the prediction of plant miRNA–target pairs generally relies on the use of empirical parameters deduced from known miRNA–target interactions. Results: We developed comTAR, a web tool for the prediction of miRNA targets that is mainly based on the conservation of the potential regulation in different species. We used data generated from a pipeline applied to transcript datasets of 33 angiosperms that was used to build a database of potential miRNA targets of different plant species. The database contains information describing each miRNA–target pair, their function and evolutionary conservation, while the results are displayed in a user-friendly interface. The tool also allows the search using new miRNAs. Availability and implementation: The Web site is free to all users, with no login requirements, at
INTRODUCTIONmicroRNAs (MiRNAs) are small RNAs processed from larger precursors with foldback structures by ribonuclease type III enzymes (). The mature miRNAs are assembled into ARGONAUTE complexes and recognize target messenger RNAs (mRNAs) by partial base complementarity to control their translation and stability (). Ancient miRNAs conserved across angiosperms with important biological roles have been identified, some of them even found in gymnosperms, ferns, lycopods and mosses (). The prediction of miRNA targets in plants usually relies on the total number and position of mismatches and the minimum free energy (MFE) hybridization (). Usually, miRNA-binding sites are conserved during evolution, and their conservation between Arabidopsis thaliana and rice has been exploited to identify miRNAs and targets (Jones). More recently, it has been shown that the conservation of the target sites using partial genomic information can be used to identify new targets for conserved miRNAs in plants (). Here, we present comTAR, a web-based application for the identification of miRNA targets in plants based on sequence conservation during evolution. The tool allows users to analyze the variations of known miRNA targets during evolution, and to predict new miRNA targets.
METHODS
MiRNA and transcript sequencesBecause miRNA sequences can vary in different species, especially positions 1, 20 and 21 (), we used sequences 219 (18 nt) for the search. If there were still variations between different miRNAs of the same family, we used the most common sequence considering the genomes of A.thaliana, poplar and rice (miRNA consensus sequence), as described earlier (). The user can also search with new small RNA sequences. Plant transcript sequence data were extracted from libraries of the Phytozome project (http:// www.phytozome.net/), formed by nucleotide FASTA format files of spliced mRNA transcripts (UTR, exons), with or without alternative splice variants.
Target searchTarget search was performed using PatMatch (), which allows mismatches (insertions, deletions and substitutions). We searched for potential targets with four mismatches (substitutions and insertions) to the 18 nt miRNA consensus, while G:U wobbles and bulges were also considered as mismatches.
Additional featuresWe have integrated third-party tools and in-house scripts to make the search for targets more powerful and useful. To perform the alignment of the miRNAtarget pair, we developed an implementation of the NeedlemanWunsch dynamic programming algorithm () in Perl (http:// www.perl.org/). RNAhybrid (http://bibiserv.techfak.uni-bielefeld.de/rnahybrid/) () was integrated by developing inhouse scrpits to find the MFE hybridization of the miRNAtarget duplex for each candidate. Candidate sequences were labeled with the best A.thaliana TAIR10 hit locus identifier (ID) as a TAG, using the annotation files of Phytozome. Genes from different species having the same TAG were grouped together. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Each A.thaliana TAG was indexed with a short description, curator summary and computational description belonging to the TAIR10 functional description file. Targets were also sorted into gene families according to the TAIR10 classification.
Web tool and data storageComTAR was designed as a web application implemented in an opensource PHP framework (Codeigniter) for the Graphical User Interface (GUI), but the analysis is based on a back-end written in Perl language, and for data storage, we chose MySQL (http://www.mysql.com/). The back-end performs the searches, the integration of third-party tools for increasing the specificity and sensitivity and the generation of final results, whereas the front-end is responsible for displaying the results (). The TAG of the best hit in A.thaliana determines the number of species that a hit is present, a parameter that is defined by the user. The user can search for targets of new miRNAs and also has access to graphical display of the miRNAtarget alignment, the hybridization energy and a filter for empirical miRNAtarget parameters (). Because plant miRNAs generally regulate genes coding for proteins of the same family, the tool has another feature that allows the search for targets by grouping the results by families rather than by gene-TAG. Furthermore, users can introduce a particular locus TAG (either the A.thaliana or Phytozome gene ID), and comTAR identifies the species where this particular gene can be an miRNA target.
DISCUSSIONWe developed a web tool, comTAR, that allows the characterization of miRNAtarget interactions in different plant species. The tool also allows the prediction of new candidates based mainly on the conservation of the miRNAtarget pair with a relaxed number of mismatches. An advantage of the tool presented here is that evolutionary conserved miRNAtarget interactions might be likely involved in relevant biological processes. The approach requests that miRNA targeting should be able to occur in the context of a minimum set of interacting parameters in different species. Therefore, the sequence of the target itself does not need to be conserved. A previous report using a similar strategy, but using a fewer species and datasets, was successfully used to detect targets previously validated in A.thaliana and to predict and experimentally validate new targets in A.thaliana (). The web tool can also be used in a reverse way to search for species where a gene of interest is potentially regulated by an miRNA.
CONCLUSIONComTAR allows users to predict and characterize miRNA-regulated genes by focusing on the conservation of the potential targeting. It provides an alternative strategy to other predictions tools based solely on empirical parameters.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
comTAR? at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
