Motivation: Loops in proteins are often involved in biochemical functions. Their irregularity and flexibility make experimental structure determination and computational modeling challenging. Most current loop modeling methods focus on modeling single loops. In protein structure prediction , multiple loops often need to be modeled simultaneously. As interactions among loops in spatial proximity can be rather complex, sampling the conformations of multiple interacting loops is a challenging task. Results: In this study, we report a new method called multi-loop Distance-guided Sequential chain-Growth Monte Carlo (M-DISGRO) for prediction of the conformations of multiple interacting loops in proteins. Our method achieves an average RMSD of 1.93 A ˚ for lowest energy conformations of 36 pairs of interacting protein loops with the total length ranging from 12 to 24 residues. We further constructed a data set containing proteins with 2, 3 and 4 interacting loops. For the most challenging target proteins with four loops, the average RMSD of the lowest energy conformations is 2.35 A ˚. Our method is also tested for predicting multiple loops in b-barrel membrane proteins. For outer-membrane protein G, the lowest energy conformation has a RMSD of 2.62 A ˚ for the three extracellular interacting loops with a total length of 34 residues (12, 12 and 10 residues in each loop). Availability and implementation: The software is freely available at:
IntroductionProtein loops are key structural regions involved in recognition and binding of small molecules and proteins. In structure prediction, accurately predicted loop regions can provide valuable information for understanding the function and dynamics of the proteins. Prediction of loop structures, or loop modeling, has received considerable attention in the past (V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com). Among these, database search methods can make accurate loop prediction if templates of loop fragments to a query protein are found at a high level of confidence (). With the rapid expansion of the PDB, fragment-based approaches are very effective for modeling loop structures (). Nevertheless, fragment based loop modeling approaches are blind to the local environment of loops, and currently are not applicable for modeling multiple loops that are interacting with each other. In such cases, it is necessary to use template-free methods to predict loop structures. Recent advances have enabled template-free prediction of loops with high accuracy (). Most previous loop modeling studies have focused on predicting structure of a single loop. In reality, multiple loops often need to be modeled for a particular protein target, where loops in spatial proximity can interact in complex ways (). An example of interacting loops can be found in the bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI, pdb 6pti), where loop A (residues 716) interacts with loop B (3546). A single substitution in loop B (Y35G, pdb 8pti) results in substantial changes to the conformations of both loop A and loop B (). In this case, the conformations of the two loops are stabilized by their interactions. Interacting loops are also found in membrane proteins. For example, in the b-barrel assembly machinery A protein, the extracellular loops interact with one another, and form a dome over the top of the b-barrel domain (). Given that the transmembrane strands of many b-barrel membrane proteins can be predicted (), accurate loop structure prediction will facilitate the prediction of full structures of this important class of membrane proteins. Conventional methods for modeling interacting loops are to generate single loops sequentially one loop after another. However, these methods are prone to be trapped at local energy minima formed by intra-loop interactions, since it cannot effectively model the complex interactions among the loops in spatial proximity. To resolve this issue, several methods have been developed that can model two interacting loops (). In, a method for simultaneous prediction of the structure of multiple loops based on the bond-scaling-relaxation loop-closure algorithm was reported. For two loops of lengths of five to seven residues in spatial proximity, their results showed that more accurate predictions can be made than modeling individual loop sequentially.developed the CorLps method, in which an energetically feasible ensemble of individual loops are generated using the loopyMod method () disregarding the presence of other loops. Although successful in predicting a number of interacting loop pairs, this method does not work well when both loops have !9 residues. Methods have also been developed to model loops in certain protein classes (e.g. antibodies,), using information specific to these classes of proteins. To the best of our knowledge, none of these existing methods can effectively predict three or more interacting loops. In this study, we describe the multi-loop Distance-guided chainGrowth Monte Carlo method (M-DISGRO) for simultaneously modeling of two or more interacting loops. Based on chain-growth Monte Carlo sampling, which has been applied to a number of studies of proteins (), M-DISGRO simultaneously constructs multiple loops, and does not require completeness of one loop before growing another loop. This sampling strategy randomizes the order of the residues being sampled to generate more diverse loop conformations, making it less likely to over-sample conformations in certain local energy minima. Consequently, inter-loop interactions are taken into account more effectively compared with sampling one loop at a time. In addition, loop growth is guided by empirical end-to-end distance functions and backbone dihedral angle distributions, allowing effective exploration of low-energy conformational space (). To improve the sampling of long loops, we further introduce a strategy of regrowing loops using fragments. This article is organized as follows. We first describe the MDISGRO method in detail. We then present results for loop prediction of soluble proteins using two different test data sets, followed by results on predicting multiple interacting loops in b-barrel membrane proteins. We show that M-DISGRO has significant advantages in modeling native-like multi-loop compared with CorLps reported in Danielson and Lill (2010). The performance is further improved when loop fragments are used.
Methods
Multi-loops distance-guided chain-growth Monte Carlo (m-DiSGro)Based on our previous DiSGro method for sampling single loops, our task in this study is to model n ! 2 loops in spatial proximity in protein structures (). M-DISGRO simultaneously samples conformations of the n loops. At each step of the chain growth process, a residue i in a chosen loop p is added upon completion of the previous residues in all of the n loops. Here loop p is chosen randomly from the n loops, regardless of loop lengths. The newly added residue is represented by three consecutive backbone atoms during the growth process: C atom of residue i, N atom ofis sampled, C i can be placed on two positions with equal probabilities. Here x C;i is the selected position of C i. C 0 i is placed at the position x C 0 ;i alternative to x C;i. Similarly, the N i1 atom has to be on the circle Q N and its position x N;i1 is determined by d Ni1 ;Ct in a similar fashion residue i  1, and CA atom of residue i  1 (). The coordinates of the three atoms, C i , N i1 and CA i1 , are denoted as x C;i ; x N;i1 and x CA;i1 , respectively. Here x C;i and x N;i1 are determined by sampling the dihedral angles /; w. We describe this sampling process in detail in Section 'Sampling backbone atoms'. The x dihedral angles that determine the coordinate of CA atoms are sampled from a normal distribution with a mean of 180 and SD of 4. Side-chains are built upon completion of backbone placement of all loops. The generated conformations of the loops are scored and ranked by our atom-based distance-dependent empirical potential function. Our potential function is an empirical function following (). Explicit water molecules are not considered, and there is no specific solvation energy calculation beyond what is implicit in the empirical potential function. Details of side-chain construction and the atomic potential function are described in. Unlike the CorLps method, which is based on ensembles of individual loops with complete structures (), M-DISGRO does not require completeness of one loop before growing another loop. It generates multiple loops by randomly selecting one residue to grow from all incomplete loops. All previously built residues in different loops immediately become part of the structural environment and contribute to the calculation of the coordinates of future atoms. When compared with methods based on sampling one whole loop at a time, our method can generate more diverse conformations of multiple loops, and can effectively avoid being trapped at some local energy minima.
Loop fragment librariesDuring the chain growth process, a partial conformation may have to adopt a state with very high (or infinite) energy, making further growth fruitless. For example, it may be impossible to add any atoms due to lack of available space and loops may fail to close. MDISGRO would have to terminate the whole chain-growth process upon such a failure. This is costly if failure occurs when a significant or the full portion of other loops have been built. To increase the efficiency of sampling, we develop a fragmentbased regrowth method to repair failed loops in M-DISGRO, as the near-native regions can be more efficiently explored by using fragments to generate an adequate number of native-like loop conformations. The overall procedure of M-DISGRO with fragments is outlined in. For a protein with n loops to be sampled, we first build n loop fragment libraries, one for each loop. Conformations in each library are sampled independently in the absence of the other n  1 loops. All loop fragments are generated using the DiSGro single loop prediction method (). Conformations of the individual loops generated are then ranked by the atom-based distancedependent empirical potential function described in. For each individual loop, the top-50 energetically favorable loop conformations are retained to form the loop fragment library specific to this loop. During the chain-growth process, when a failure occurs in loop p which begins at residue s and ends at residue t with a length of (t  s  1), a randomly selected fragment f of length (t  s  3) from its loop fragment library, is used to replace the residues from s to t  4 of loop p. As we apply the Coutsias-Seok-Jacobson-Dill (CSJD) analytical closure method () at the residue t  2 to close the loop, the replacement of residues s to t  2 will lead to a high occurrence of highly similar loop conformations.In order to introduce the necessary diversity in loop conformations while at the same time achieving high sampling efficiency, we only replace the residues s to t  4 with residues from fragment f. The multi-loop chain-growth process is then continued until the rest of the residues of all loops, including residues t  3 to t of loop p, are fully built. This fragment strategy is only used for loops of length !5. For short loops of length 4, the success rate of completing loops without fragments is already sufficient.
Sampling backbone atomsThe procedure to sample backbone atoms is the same as that of the single loop method DiSGro (). Below we give a brief description for completeness. Let C t be the C-terminal anchor atom in the end residue t of a loop. We describe the sampling procedure for (C i , O i , N i1 and CA i1 ) atoms as an example ().and x  x CA;i   x CA;i  x N;i   cos h C;i g :Given a fixed d Ci;C t , C i can be placed on two positions x C;i and x C 0 ;i on circle Q C , x C;i and x C 0 ;i are labeled as C i and C 0 i , respectively. As the probability for placing C i on either position is equal, we randomly select one position to place atom C i .) are then subject to a filtering procedure using an empirically derived backbone dihedral angle distribution. One filtered trial is selected according to its probability calculated using an atomic distance-dependent empirical potential function. The coordinate of O i atom is determined by (N i , CA i , C i ). Seefor more details.
Results
Test setsTo assess the accuracy of M-DISGRO and facilitate direct comparison with the CorLps method reported in, we use their test set, which we name as the CorLps Set. It is obtained from high-resolution (1.53 A  ) structure of trypsin (pdb 1utk) (). It contains 36 pairs of interacting loops, including 7 pairs of 66-residue loops, 10 pairs of 69-residue loops, 3 pairs of 99-residue loops, 9 pairs of 612-residue loops, 5 pairs of 9 12-residue loops and 2 pairs of 1212-residue loops. We have also developed a new data set of 2-, 3-and 4-interacting loops, called MultiSet, to assess the effectiveness of M-DISGRO in more complex situations. Proteins in this set are taken from (. In total, MultiSet contains twenty 2-interacting loops, eleven 3-interacting loops and eight 4-interacting loops (see). We use a strict criterion to select interacting loops: all loops must be spatially close and interact with each other. For example, each of the four loops has to be interacting with the other three loops in a four-loop target. We use the edge simplices from the alpha-shape computed from the protein structures to detect interactions among neighboring loops (). Using alpha-shape eliminates spurious neighbor interactions that are not in physical contact (). Here we use the solvent radius of 0.5 A  following (). In MultiSet, loops have lengths ranging from 4 to 16. To construct a challenging data set of two interacting loops, both loops have to be at least 10-residue long. For three-and four-loop target proteins, only those with at least one long loop (length ! 10) are included. Multiple interacting loops are present across different protein families. Based on the classification scheme of loops of the Archdb (), 42.9% of long loops (!10) and 48.6% of loops in the MultiSet have already been classified, suggesting modeling multiple loops will be applicable to a large number of proteins.The test set of loops in b-barrel membrane proteins contains four proteins satisfying the following criteria: (i) no in-plug structure is present; (ii) no incorrect loop structures are included; and (iii) loops are of length 217 residues. Our test set contains both extracellular and periplasmic loops, which are modeled separately. This test set is called b-Barrel Set (see).
Multi-loop structure prediction on CorLps SetWe first test M-DISGRO using the CorLps Set. The sampled loop conformations are ranked based on their energy values calculated usingour atom-based distance-dependent empirical potential function () instead of the DFIRE empirical potential function as in Danielson and Lill (2010). For each loop pair, the RMSD of the lowest energy conformation to the native structure R Emin among 10 000 trial conformations is reported. Our results are all reported as global backbone RMSD, calculated using the N, CA, C and O atoms of the backbone. The conformation of a loop is obtained by superimposing its two ends on the flanking secondary structures, while the deviation is calculated using the backbone atoms of the loop structure. From the results summarized in12-residue loop pairs, respectively. Only for 66residue loop pairs, M-DISGRO with fragment has a slightly larger R Emin of 1.19 A . These results indicate that using loop fragment library is effective in improving the modeling accuracy when loops are nine residues or longer. We also report results using a single independent loop modeling method s-DiSGro for comparison. A maximum number of 10 000 loop combinations are generated by initially combining the top-100 ranked single loop conformations of each loop region, similar to CorLps, except single loop conformations are generated here by the DiSGro method () instead of the loopyMod (). The computation cost for M-DISGRO without fragment is only 14 cpu minutes on a single 2 GHz AMD Opteron processor. M-DISGRO with fragment takes a slightly longer time of 17 min, as loop fragment libraries specific to the loops need to be constructed on the fly.
Multi-loop structure prediction on MultiSetWe then test M-DISGRO on the MultiSet. Results are summarized in. For the eight proteins with four-interacting loops, the average R Emin by M-DISGRO with and without fragment are 2.35 and 2.75 A  , respectively. M-DISGRO with fragment is close to the accuracy level of sub-angstrom (1.04 A  ) for three target proteins containing only one loop with more than 10 residues. The remaining five target proteins are challenging, as they have at least two long loops with length !10. For these five target proteins, M-DISGRO with fragment has an R Emin of 3.13 A . Of these five, three of them have three long loops. For example, the structure of mandelate racemase (pdb 2mnr) has four loops of length 13, 13, 14 and 9, respectively. The R Emin by M-DISGRO with fragment is 2.96 A . Another example is azurin (pdb 1nwp), which has four loops of length 7, 10, 13 and 15, respectively. It is challenging to model a 15-residue loop in an inexact environment when three other interacting loops also need to be modeled as well. The total length of these loops is 45 residues. As can be seen from, M-DISGRO with fragment achieves good accuracy for 1nwp, with an R Emin of 2.77 A . For the eleven 3-loop target proteins, R Emin by M-DISGRO with and without fragment are 2.13 and 2.32 A  , respectively. For the seven 3-loop target proteins with only one loop longer than 10 residues, M-DISGRO with fragment has an average R Emin of 1.86 A . The R Emin of the rest of the three-loop target proteins with at least two long loops are 2.52 A  by M-DISGRO with fragment. For the twenty 2-loop target proteins, R Emin values are 2.61 and 3.26 A  with and without using fragments, respectively. This twoloop data set is challenging, as both loops have lengths !10-residue. Among the three-and four-loop target proteins, short loops can be modeled fairly easily with high accuracy, which contribute to the overall improved RMSD. In thirteen of the twenty 2-loops target proteins, M-DISGRO with fragment achieves good accuracy of R Emin 3 A  , with six of them of RMSD 2 A . Even when there is a loop of length ! 15, M-DISGRO with fragment also gives good R Emin. An example is lactoferrin (pdb 1lcf), which has a 16-and a 13-residue loops. The RMSD of the lowest energy conformation is 2.63 A  .
Multi-loop structure prediction of b-Barrel membrane proteinsWe also assess M-DISGRO in predicting loop conformations of b-barrel membrane proteins. Results are summarized in. For extracellular loops, the average RMSD of the lowest energy loop conformations R Emin of the four proteins by M-DISGRO with fragment is 1.88 A . Among these, 2 of the 4 extracellular loops in the Neisserial surface protein A, NspA (pdb 1p4t) are longer than 10 residues (Vandeputte). The predicted extracellular loop structures have an R Emin of 1.54 A . The outer membrane protein G, OmpG (pdb 2  9 k) has three long extracellular loops of length 10, 12 and 12, respectively. The R Emin of this three-loop target protein is 2.62 A . Noticeably, there is a short helix in the middle of the 12-residue (138149) loop. M-DISGRO with fragment successfully predicts this short helical secondary structural element without any explicit additional secondary structure information (). The periplasmic loops are usually short turns connecting b-strands. Most of them have lengths <10-residue. Prediction of these periplasmic loops is not as challenging as prediction of extracellular loops. The average RMSD R Emin of the lowest energy periplasmic loop conformations of the four proteins by M-DISGRO with fragment is 1.35 A . For the four interacting loops at the periplasmic end of OmpG, R Emin is only 0.93 A  .
Conclusion and DiscussionIn this study, we present a multi-loop chain-growth Monte Carlo method (M-DISGRO) for modeling interacting loops. Our method samples multiple loops by growing one residue at a randomly selected loop in each step. The calculation of the positions of newly added atoms is determined by the coordinates of previous placed atoms in all loops. This method is capable of exploring large conformational space of multi-loop effectively, without frequently being trapped in narrow or dead space. With further incorporation of loop fragment libraries, even failed loops can be efficiently regrown. MDISGRO has significant advantages in predicting multiple interacting loops over previous methods, such as the CorLps method (), as interacting information among loops are taken into account during the simultaneous chain-growth process. M-DISGRO can model multiple interacting loops simultaneously and efficiently, especially for those target proteins with long loops. For a set of 36 interacting loop pairs, M-DISGRO with and without fragment have better average R Emin of 1.93 and 2.22 A  , compared with CorLps of 4.02 A . For 1212-residue loop pairs, the R Emin by M-DISGRO with fragment is 2.87 A  , and the average computing time is only 17 min. Furthermore, our method is the first that considers three-and four-interacting loops explicitly. It successfully predicts these loop structures, with an R Emin of 2.13 A  for three-loop target proteins, and 2.35 A  for four-loop target proteins. Preliminary results on building loops in b-barrel membrane proteins suggest that our method can be extended to model multiple loops of other complex membrane proteins. Our study shows that by randomizing the order of residues to be sampled, we can generate more diverse sets of loop conformations, which helps to increase the overall sampling effectiveness. However, it is possible that there exist specific orders by which loop residues are to be sampled that are especially effective for certain proteins. For example, residues in more constrained environment may need to be sampled first. One approach towards this is to look-ahead and further sample a number of states that can be grown into in the next step for each loop, and then select one state to place the next residue according to either energy or other specific bias criterion. Those sampled but unused states can be reused in future steps. This approach has been successfully applied to side chain conformations of proteins () and reaction network sampling (). There are several directions for further improvement. The single loop method DiSGro is an important component of M-DISGRO. DiSGro is also the limiting step for the accuracy of modeled multiple interacting loops, especially when there are long loops. We envision that this can be improved by sampling dipeptide segment instead of sampling individual residue currently implemented in DiSGro. It will likely lead to improved sampling efficiency further and enable longer loops to be modeled (). Our work is also related to modeling loops in a flexible environment (), as other loops can be regarded as the flexible environment of the loop currently being modeled. Furthermore, the atom-based distance-dependent empirical potential function taken from Ref (), can be improved by using nonlinear kernel for training (), or by optimization using rapid iterations through a physical convergence function ().
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
K.Tang et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Multi-Loop modeling
