Herein, we present CONSRANK, a web tool for analyzing, comparing and ranking protein–protein and protein–nucleic acid docking models, based on the conservation of inter-residue contacts and its visualization in 2D and 3D interactive contact maps.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
differently colored. As only about 3% of the models are correct, the contacts conservation rate is overall quite low, but still the native contacts clearly emerge from the background, correctly driving the ranking. Model ranked first, which is indeed a correct solution, obviously matches the most conserved contacts (Fig. 1A). As for the clearly incorrect model ranked 100th (Fig. 1B), as expected most of its contacts have a low conservation rate (note that more than half of them are not visualized in the 3D map because their conservation is too low). However, it also presents one of the best conserved contacts, between receptor Leu57 and ligand Ile115, that is indeed a native one, being present in the corresponding X-ray structure [PDB ID: 3Q87 (Liger et al., 2011)]. This confirms that the conservation of native inter-residue contacts may be contributed by incorrect solutions (Oliva et al., 2013; Vangone et al., 2012), also in line with previous results by Lensink and Wodak (2010). By analyzing 20 CAPRI targets, they indeed showed that about one-quarter of the interfaces in models ranked as incorrect in the CAPRI assessment are actually correctly predicted. These findings highlight the importance of a thorough analysis of a set of docking models in terms of inter-residue contacts. CONSRANK, the interactive and user-friendly web tool we propose here, has in fact most of the desirable features that can make this analysis easy and exhaustive. Starting from an ensemble of the Fig. 1. CONSRANK 3D maps for the CAPRI target T46, showing the consensus contacts for the ensemble of 387 models (gray). (A) Contacts present in the model ranked first, and (B) contacts present in the model ranked 100th are highlighted
