We introduce CoNtRol, a web-based framework for analysis of chemical reaction networks (CRNs). It is designed to be both extensible and simple to use, complementing existing CRN-related tools. CoNtRol currently implements a number of necessary and/or sufficient structural tests for multiple equilibria, stable periodic orbits, convergence to equilibria and persistence, with the potential for incorporation of further tests.
INTRODUCTIONDifferential equation models of chemical reaction networks (CRNs), encompassing many ecological, epidemiological and related non-negative systems, are almost universally complicated by parameter uncertainty. However, dynamical properties of large classes of CRN models are remarkably robust to changes in parameter values, leading to a range of results relating network structure to dynamical behavior. Such parameter-free approaches to the analysis of CRNs fall into the scope of chemical reaction network theory (). Fuelled in part by its implications to systems biology (), chemical reaction network theory has seen a surge of interest in recent years, attacking questions about multistationarity (), global stability (), oscillatory behavior () and persistence (). Many of the results in chemical reaction network theory lend themselves to algorithmic implementation, which is useful for large networks. In this article, we introduce CoNtRol (CRN tool), a new, fully open source platform, currently coded in C, Java, Octave and PHP, to perform computations on CRNs without the need for any proprietary software. CoNtRol has a web-based front-end interfacing with a suite of modular tests, to which users may add new tests in any language. With its array of features, CoNtRol complements existing software tools. The Chemical Reaction Network Toolbox () is a proprietary Windows program that implements the results of deficiency theory (), as well as checks for concordance (), equivalent to network injectivity. It applies to various types of kinetics, including mass action, and generates detailed information about network properties, multiple and degenerate steady states and their stability. Reaction Network Equilibria Study Toolbox (ERNEST) () and CRNreals () are MATLAB toolboxes aimed at testing multistationarity, and distinguishability and identifiability of CRNs, respectively. Tests for multistationarity of CRNs are also implemented in Maple (). While not all criteria included in these tools are currently tested in CoNtRol, its extensible nature allows for their future inclusion.
FEATURES AND FUNCTIONALITYCoNtRol has an intuitive user interface where a list of reactions can be input manually or uploaded in a variety of formats. While the focus so far has been on developing the framework for extensible functionality, a number of tools for the analysis of CRNs have also been implemented and tested.
Network analysisThe current functionality of CoNtRol includes a number of necessary and/or sufficient structural tests for multiple equilibria, stable oscillation, convergence to equilibria and persistence, assuming mass action or more general kinetics. In particular, the following are checked: sufficient conditions for convergence to equilibria based on the theory of monotone dynamical systems (); conditions of the deficiency zero and deficiency one theorems (), resulting in claims about local stability of equilibria, absence of multiple positive equilibria and absence of periodic orbits, primarily for mass action kinetics; structural conditions for persistence () based on examining the siphons of the system; and a large number of sufficient/necessary conditions for injectivity and absence of multistationarity gathered from the literature and developed in (). The outputs are cross-referenced *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com to the documentation of CoNtRol, where each conclusion and its implications are described in detail. Some of the multistationarity results of CoNtRol are similar to those of the Chemical Reaction Network Toolbox ().
DSR graph generationA useful tool in the parameter-free study of CRNs is the directed species-reaction (DSR) graph: a bipartite graph with signed, labeled and sometimes directed edges. CoNtRol includes a Java Web Start application for drawing DSR graphs. The graph layout is highly customizable, and the 'export to LATEX' feature generates TikZ code for the resulting DSR diagram. An example is illustrated in. Easily checked structural conditions on the DSR graph can imply, or contribute toward, powerful conclusions regarding multistationarity, asymptotic stability or oscillatory behavior in a CRN (). Several of these are implemented or lend themselves naturally to future implementation.
Batch processingThis feature allows users to analyze a number of networks in a single run, thus generating statistics about the occurrence of certain behaviors. An archive containing individual files describing each network is uploaded, and the user is emailed a link to the output once it is complete. For example,summarizes the results of some injectivity tests implemented in CoNtRol, applied to the database of all 4082 non-isomorphic bimolecular CRNs with three species and three reactions ().
MiscellaneousA number of features that further improve usability have been implemented. These include multiple input formats, the option to receive the output via email and automatic generation of LATEX code (e.g. list of reactions, stoichiometric matrix).
CONCLUSIONWe have written CoNtRol aiming for a user-friendly tool with maximal functionality, implementing state-of-the-art theory on CRNs. We expect future inclusion of further results from the rich theory of CRNs, with contributions from the research community.GK, general kinetics; MA, mass action kinetics; , the system is injective on the relative interior of each non-trivial stoichiometry class; , the fully open system is injective on the non-negative orthant. For example, with mass action kinetics, 45% (MA) of the networks was injective on the relative interior on each non-trivial stoichiometric class, only slightly more than with general kinetics (GK). See () for more details.. Futile cycle DSR graph
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
P.Donnell et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
