Macromolecular assembly coordinates essential cellular processes, such as gene regulation and signal transduction. A major challenge for conventional computational methods to study these processes is tackling the exponential increase of the number of configurational states with the number of components. CplexA is a Mathematica package that uses functional programming to efficiently compute probabilities and average properties over such exponentially large number of states from the energetics of the interactions. The package is particularly suited to study gene expression at complex promoters controlled by multiple, local and distal, DNA binding sites for transcription factors. Availability: CplexA is freely available together with documentation at http://sourceforge.net/projects/cplexa/
INTRODUCTIONThe study of the cellular behavior from the molecular components often requires approximations in terms of chemical reactions. However, there are many instances, such as combinatorial macromolecular assembly, that cannot be efficiently described in terms of chemical reactions (). Macromolecular complexes are typically made of smaller building blocks with a modular organization that can be combined in a number of different ways. The result of each combination is a specific molecular species. Therefore, there are potentially as many reactants as the number of possible ways of arranging the different elements, which grows exponentially with the number of the constituent elements. Several approaches have been developed to tackle this exponentially large multiplicity in the number of states. They involve a diversity of methodologies that range from stochastic configuration sampling (Le) to automatic generation of all the underlying equations (). The complexity of the general problem makes each of these approaches work efficiently only on a particular type of problems, be it conformational changes, multi-site phosphorylation
METHODSThe mathematical approach underlying CplexA is discussed in detail in. It specifies the system by a set of N state variables, S ={s 1 ,...s i ,...s N }, that can be either 1 to indicate that a property is present (e.g. binding or conformation) or 0 to indicate that it is not. The free energy, G(S), and a configuration pattern, (S), can generally be expressed as a function of these state variables. The probability of the configuration pattern is obtained fromby computing the thermodynamic average over all 2 N possible values of S.
APPLICATIONThe package CplexA provides the function AvConfthat computes the thermodynamic average  .illustrates the use of CplexA with Mathematica 7 to compute the effective transcription rate at the P RM promoter of Phage  (). This system consists of two sets of three contiguous binding sites for the CI dimer. The two sets, known as left and right operators, are 2 kb; for details, see Supplementary Material). apart from each other. CI dimers bound at different operators can interact with each other by looping the intervening DNA. In this case, just a few lines of code, from lines 'In' to 'In' in, can achieve the same results as a table with entries for each of the 128 states. The state of the system, S, is described by six binding and one looping state variables in line 'In'. The free energy,G(S), in line 'In' includes, in a very compact manner, binding to each of the six sites as a function of the dimer concentration, interactions between neighboring dimers, DNA looping and the formation of octamers and tetramers between dimers bound at different sets of binding sites. The transcription rate, (S), as a function of the binding and looping state is given in line 'In'. Its average value,  =AvConf, closely matches the experimental data on the transcriptional activity of the promoter (). CplexA also provides the function DGTable, which constructs a table with the free energy and statistical weight (Boltzmann factor) of each state that has a non-zero probability.
IMPLEMENTATIONThe critical issue in the implementation of the function AvConfis dealing with the combinatorial explosion in the number of states. Using state variables overcomes the combinatorial explosion in the specification of the problem but not in the sum over all the states, which still grows as 2 N. A fundamental advantage of using a computer algebra system, such as Mathematica, over imperative programming languages, such as Fortran, C or Java, is that it allows for the direct manipulation of functions. In CplexA, the implementation of the sum over all possible values of S in the numerator and denominator of Equation (1) is performed in N steps, rather than in 2 N , by using the backwards recursionStarting this recursion with the functions/RT leads to the sought values of the sums asrespectively, after the N steps of the recursion have been performed. With this method, the actual computational complexity depends on the specific form of f N (s 1 ,...s N ) and does not necessarily increase proportionally to the number of states. For instance, for a linear array of binding sites with next-neighbor interactions, the CPU time needed to compute the average occupancy for the case of 40 sites is only a factor 8 higher than that needed for 20 sites, whereas the number of states increases by a factor 10 6 (Supplementary Material).
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. or oligomerization (Borisov et al., 2006; Bray and Lay, 1997; Saiz and Vilar, 2006). The package CplexA focuses on macromolecular assembly on a template. The prototypical example is a complex promoter, where DNA provides a flexible template for the assembly of transcription factors. CplexA provides mathematical tools to infer the probability of having a given set of configurations. In the case of a promoter, it would be the probability of having a pattern of transcription factors bound, which can be used to infer the resulting transcription rate in a way that can be integrated with other software to study the dynamics of cellular networks (Shapiro et al., 2003). This type of systems has traditionally been studied by writing a table with entries for each state and the corresponding free energies and associated probabilities, which are used to compute average quantities such as effective transcription rates (Ackers et al., 1982). As the number of states increases exponentially, the approach becomes impracticable. In this type of systems, however, it is possible to take advantage of the unambiguous structures that macromolecular complexes typically have on a template and use 'table-centric' equivalent mathematical approaches that are able to capture this complexity in simple terms (Saiz and Vilar, 2006).
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
