Motivation: Despite the growing popularity in using CRISPR/Cas9 technology for genome editing and gene knockout, its performance still relies on well-designed single guide RNAs (sgRNA). In this study, we propose a web application for the Design and Optimization (CRISPR-DO) of guide sequences that target both coding and non-coding regions in spCas9 CRISPR system across human, mouse, zebrafish, fly and worm genomes. CRISPR-DO uses a computational sequence model to predict sgRNA efficiency, and employs a specificity scoring function to evaluate the potential of off-target effect. It also provides information on functional conservation of target sequences, as well as the overlaps with exons, putative regulatory sequences and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). The web application has a user-friendly genome–browser interface to facilitate the selection of the best target DNA sequences for experimental design. Availability and Implementation: CRISPR-DO is available at
Methods
CRISPR target sequence scan in the whole genomeThe workflow to generate the target sequence database is shown in Supplementary. We first obtained the full human (GRCh37/hg19 and GRCh38/hg38), mouse (NCBI37/mm9 and GRCm38/mm10), zebrafish (danRer7), fly (dm6) and worm (ce10) genome sequences from UCSC genome database. We removed alternate loci, unlocalized and unplaced (random) sequences. Next we performed a genome-wide sgRNA target sequence scan for PAM sequences on both the forward and the reverse strand in each genome. Here, we identified only 5'-NGG-3' as PAM sequences, since PAMlike NAG sequences have much lower Cas9 loading efficiency (). We used 19 bp or 20 bp target with its PAM and 7 bp 3' flanking sequence (total 29 bp and 30 bp separately) to build our primary sgRNA target sequence library for further evaluation. The total number of target sequences in each genome is shown in Supplementary Tables S1, S2 and S3.
Score sgRNA efficiencyThe nucleotide composition of the 3' end of the target sequence influences Cas9 loading (). Recently, we have developed a model to predict the efficiency of Cas9 cleavage based on the DNA sequence of an sgRNA target and its flanking regions (). We showed that this model effectively predicts the efficiency of guide RNA in high-throughput CRISPR/Cas9 knockout screens. The coefficients of each nucleotide in the model can be represented as a sequence logo (Supplementary). We applied this model to all target sequences to compute genome-wide efficiency scores. The overall efficiency score distributions are shown in Supplementary.
Measure sgRNA off-target effectFor each target in our primary database, we first used BWA () to map it back to the genome, allowing maximum three mismatches and no gaps. When examining sgRNAs with mismatched mapping, we removed those not followed by NGG/NAG on both strands. For the remaining mismatched mappings, we calculated a specificity score based on Zhang Lab's formula () (more details in Supplementary materials). The distributions of the specificity scores in hg38 and mm10 are shown in Supplementary.
CRISPR target sequence annotationWe annotated each target sequence to characterize its evolutionary conservation and to exam its overlap (1 bp) with referenced exons, regulatory elements or SNPs. The average conservation score is calculated using UCSC PhastCons (Supplementary). The exon annotation is from UCSC refGene tables. The SNP annotation is from the NCBI dbSNP database. Peaks from each ENCODE DNase-seq data were merged to form the union of DNase I hypersensitivity regions, representing a comprehensive repertoire of putative regulatory elements in the genome (). These annotation features give experimentalists more reference in selecting sgRNAs with the best balance of specificity, efficiency and function.
Introduction CRISPR/Cas9 (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats/CRISPR-associated protein 9) originally came from bacterial host defense and has provided new insight into site-specific genome editing (Hsu et al., 2014). The CRISPR/Cas9 technology requires an sgRNA with a 20 bp guide sequence to pair with the target DNA, which enables the Cas9 protein loading to the correct location and introduces a DNA double-strand break (DSB) (Cho et al., 2013; Cong et al., 2013; Jinek et al., 2012; Mali et al., 2013). To fully utilize the CRISPR genome editing technology, one must consider two essential factors: off-target effect and cleavage efficiency of sgRNA. On one hand, it has been reported that the mismatches in off-target sites, especially those in the 10-12 bases proximal to the PAM, allow less off-target binding (Cong et al., 2013; Hsu et al., 2013; Jinek et al., 2012; Mali et al., 2013). About 1719 bp truncated sgRNAs are more sensitive to mismatches thus more specific (Fu et al., 2014). CRISPR design tools like CRISPR-P (Lei et al., 2014), E-CRISPR (Heigwer et al., 2014) and CasOT V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 1 Bioinformatics, 2016, 13 doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw476 Advance Access Publication Date: 10 July 2016 Applications Note Bioinformatics Advance Access published July 31, 2016 at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
