CySBML is a plugin designed to work with Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) in Cytoscape having the following features: SBML import, support of the SBML layout and qualitative model packages, navigation in network layouts based on SBML structure , access to MIRIAM and SBO-based annotations and SBML validation. CySBML includes an importer for BioModels to load SBML from standard repositories. Availability and implementation: Freely available for non-commercial purposes through the Cytoscape plugin manager or for download at http://sourceforge.net/projects/cysbml/.
INTRODUCTIONThe Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) is a free and open interchange format for computer models of biological processes (), which is currently supported by4230 software tools (). SBML is used to represent models for a wide range of cell biology, including cell signaling, metabolism and gene regulation. SBML provides a common standard of interoperability and exchange allowing several researchers to work with diverse tools on building, curation, annotation, simulation, analysis and visualization of the same model. Standard repositories of SBML models such as BioModels () have been established, providing annotated models on a molecular level for a wide range of biological questions with access to their resources through web services (). However, preserving models without the semantic layer of information needed for an unambiguous identification and interpretation of model components is meaningless (). To this end, SBML can be annotated based on Minimum Information Required for the Annotation of Models (MIRIAM;) and Systems Biology Ontology (SBO; LeNov re, 2006a, b), a set of controlled vocabularies in systems biology. Cytoscape (), a widely used open-source platform for complex network analysis and visualization, currently provides only rudimentary SBML capabilities; its application to SBML models is limited to a subset of SBML. The SBML document structure is inaccessible for visualization, validation of SBML files is not possible and neither the information from SBO or MIRIAM annotation nor SBML packages for layout information or qualitative models are supported. visualization of fluxes with FluxViz (KonigKonig and HolzhutterHolzhutter, 2010) ().
CONCLUSIONCySBML combines SBML, the standard format of models of biological processes, with Cytoscape, one of the standard platforms for the visualization of biological networks. Cytoscape has already been used in numerous applications for visualization and graphical network analyses, whereas the BioModels database collects and annotates structural and mathematical models in SBML format that provide insights into the dynamic behavior of biological networks. CySBML makes it possible to combine these two important system biological resources in a convenient and easy-to-use way with special focus on the semantic layer defining the models. This work opens the door for the development of further plugins facilitating the analysis of SBML models in Cytoscape.
DESCRIPTION We present CySBML, a Cytoscape SBML plugin based on JSBML (DragerDrager et al., 2011), a free, open-source Java TM library for SBML. CySBML supports all versions and levels of SBML, handles models in SBML and the SBML Qualitative Model format, includes validation of imported SBML files and provides a navigation menu based on SBML structure and easy access to BioModels through web services. All functions of CySBML are available with one or two clicks through the Cytoscape menu bar. CySBML was successfully tested with all networks from the SBML Test Suite (version 2.0.2) and BioModels (release 21). CySBML utilizes layout information encoded through the SBML layout extension (Gauges et al., 2006) or alternatively applies standard layouts based on visual styles optimized for the bipartite species/reaction model underlying SBML. Species and reactions are assigned to different visualization classes with nodes being color coded according to their SBML compartment. Special focus was put on making annotation information and the semantic layer accessible to the user and linking these data to additional web resources (see the methylselenol example in Fig. 1). CySBML reads RDF-based MIRIAM annotations of the SBML elements and provides access to the annotated resources within the network visualization. Clicking at links to online annotation resources and databases opens additional information in a browser window. In this way, information from a wide range of resources and databases can be integrated within the visualization. SBML files from BioModels can be imported either by their identifiers or searched through name, author, publication, ChEBI or UniProt ( Fig. 1). Multiple models can be imported at once for comparative analysis. Validation of the imported SBML is available through the menu bar. Validation results can be filtered with respect to the severity of the errors. SBML annotation, BioModel import and SBML validation are based on web services and therefore require an Internet connection. CySBML integrates seamlessly with other plugins by making SBML information as Cytoscape node and edge attributes under names defined in CySBMLConstants accessible. A wide range of tools works out of the box with CySBML providing additional functionality for SBML models, such as analysis of topological parameters with NetworkAnalyzer (Assenov et al., 2008), search of network motifs with NetMatch (Ferro et al., 2007) or * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Cytoscape plugin for SBML at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
