S-glutathionylation, the reversible protein posttranslational modification (PTM) that generates a mixed disulfide bond between glutathione and cysteine residue, critically regulates protein activity, stability and redox regulation. Due to its importance in regulating oxi-dative/nitrosative stress and balance in cellular response, a number of methods have been rapidly developed to study S-glutathionylation, thus expanding the dataset of experimentally determined glutathiony-lation sites. However, there is currently no database dedicated to the integration of all experimentally verified S-glutathionylation sites along with their characteristics or structural or functional information. Thus, the dbGSH database has been created to integrate all available data-sets and to provide the relevant structural analysis. As of January 31, 2014, dbGSH has manually collected 42200 experimentally verified S-glutathionylated peptides from 169 research articles using a text-mining approach. To solve the problem of heterogeneity of the data collected from different sources, the sequence identity of the reported S-glutathionylated peptides is mapped to UniProtKB protein entries. To delineate the structural correlations and consensus motifs of these S-glutathionylation sites, the dbGSH database also provides structural and functional analyses, including the motifs of substrate sites, solvent accessibility, protein secondary and tertiary structures, protein domains and gene ontology. Availability and implementation: dbGSH is now freely accessible at
INTRODUCTIONS-glutathionylation is a redox-dependent posttranslational modification (PTM) that involves the covalent attachment of glutathione (GSH) to the thiol group of cysteine residues, and regulates based on the physiological GSH level and the GSH/GSSG ratio through spontaneous or enzymatic reaction (). In addition to regulating redox signaling, S-glutathionylation also serves to modulate cancer migration, cell death and survival, energy metabolism and glycolysis, as well as protein folding and degradation in several species, ranging from bacteria to human (). The various targets of S-glutathionylation also participate in pathogenesis of many diseases, such as neurodegenerative diseases, metabolic disorders and cancers (). Due to the importance of S-glutathionylation in clinical biological processes, numerous methods have been developed, directed toward mass spectrometry-based S-glutathionomics using various biological systems to investigate and identify S-glutathionylated targets and sites (). As the number of experimentally identified S-glutathionylated peptides grows, a structured database is desirable for the further investigation of the biological functions of S-glutathionylated proteins and the substrate specificities of S-glutathionylation sites. Although a number of databases have been developed for PTMs, such as dbPTM (), PhosphoSitePlus (), RegPhos (), dbOGAP () and dbSNO (), limited resources have been dedicated to S-glutathionylated proteins and their corresponding substrate sites (). Thus, a new database (dbGSH) containing the experimentally verified S-glutathionylated peptides from research articles is proposed to facilitate the functional analysis of S-glutathionylated proteins and to assist with the structural investigation of substrate sites. literature (PubMed ID) reference. In addition, a small number of protein S-glutathionylation sites in UniProtKB are integrated into dbGSH with the corresponding literature references. As of January 31, 2014, a total of 169 S-glutathionylation-associated articles covering 16 organisms have been retrieved from PubMed. In the dbGSH database, there are 2257 S-glutathionylated cysteines from 1314 S-glutathionylated proteins. Supplementaryshows the statistics for the S-glutathionylation data for each organism. For a given protein, the biological function can be obtained from the annotation in UniProtKB. To provide more effective information about protein functional and structural annotations relevant to S-glutathionylated cysteines, a variety of biological databases, such as InterPro (), Gene Ontology (GO), Protein Data Bank (PDB) () and KEGG Pathway (), are integrated. The information regarding the molecular function, cellular components and biological process for S-glutathionylated proteins can be accessed by a cross-linking to the corresponding entry from GO via a UniProtKB accession number. In addition, the InterPro BioMart, which is a web service that provides the ability to build custom queries on the InterPro database, is used to extract the information about protein domains and functional sites for the S-glutathionylated proteins in dbGSH. Additionally, the molecular interaction and signaling network of S-glutathionylated proteins can be accessed by a cross-link that refers to the corresponding entries from KEGG pathway. To study the structural characteristics of S-glutathionylation sites within the protein tertiary structure, all the experimentally identified S-glutathionylation sites are mapped to the corresponding positions in the protein entries in PDB. The solvent accessibility and secondary structure around the substrate sites are also investigated. However, due to the limited information on protein structures in PDB, only 1% of the GSH sites have corresponding tertiary structures. With reference to a previous study investigating the structural characteristics of PTMs () in proteins without known tertiary structures, two effective tools, RVP-net () and PSIPRED (), are used to predict the solvent accessibility and secondary structure, respectively.
UTILITYTo facilitate the use of the dbGSH resource, a web interface has been developed for users to browse and efficiently search for their S-glutathionylation proteins of interest. Supplementaryshows the content of a typical dbGSH query, including basic information, graphical visualization of S-glutathionylation sites, table of S-glutathionylation sites with the associated literature and visualization of tertiary structures by the Jmol program. According to the GO annotations, the distributions of the biological processes, molecular functions and cellular components of S-glutathionylated proteins are presented in Supplementary Table S2. The investigation of protein domains shows that the most abundant domain in S-glutathionylated proteins is the RNA recognition motif (Supplementary), and 70% of the reported S-glutathionylation sites are located within functional domains (Supplementary). Additionally, Supplementarypresents the distribution of KEGG pathways for S-glutathionylated proteins.that the S-glutathionylation sites (upper panel) have a higher preference for containing negatively charged residues (D and E) than non-glutathionylation sites (lower panel) do. To investigate the substrate specificity of the S-glutathionylation sites, MDDLogo (), a maximal dependence decomposition (MDD) analysis that clusters the aligned signal sequences into subgroups containing statistically significant motifs, was performed to identify the substrate motifs for the S-glutathionylation data in humans, with a sufficient dataset. Supplementaryshows that a total of nine substrate motifs were identified from 1735 S-glutathionylation sites with a 21-mer window length: six groups contain a conserved motif of negatively charged amino acids (D and E) and three groups contain a conserved motif of positively charged amino acids (K, R and H) surrounding the S-glutathionylation sites. The substrate sites of S-glutathionylation might favor the cysteines flanked by acidic and basic amino acids, suggesting that the acid/basic environment in a close three-dimensional proximity may contribute to the specificity of reactive cysteine toward S-glutathionylation.. The compositional biases of amino acids around S-glutathionylation sites compared with the non-S-glutathionylation sites. The amino acids that are significantly enriched or depleted (P50.005) around S-glutathionylation sites are presented
METHODS Supplementary Figure S1 shows the exhaustive system flow of the construction of dbGSH, containing the experimentally verified data for S-glutathionylated proteins and S-glutathionylation sites. The database entries are extracted manually from research articles through a literature survey. All fields in the PubMed database are first searched using the keywords 'glutathio(ny)lation' or 'glutathio(ny)lated', followed by the downloading of full-text versions of these research articles. A textmining system is developed to survey the full-text literature that potentially describes the site-specific identification of S-glutathionylation sites for the various proteomic identification experiments (Chiang et al., 2012; Hamnell-Pamment et al., 2005). Approximately 1073 original and review articles associated with protein S-glutathionylation are retrieved from PubMed. Next, the full-length articles are manually reviewed to ensure precise extraction of the S-glutathionylated peptides and the modified cysteines. To determine the exact locations of S-glutathionylated cysteines within a full-length protein sequence, the experimentally verified S-glutathionylated peptides are then mapped to UniProtKB (Consortium, 2013) protein entries based on the database identifier (ID) or sequence similarity. The S-glutathionylated peptides that do not align exactly to a protein sequence are discarded. Finally, each mapped S-glutathionylation site is attributed to the corresponding *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CONCLUSIONS The dbGSH database is the first public resource to allow efficient access to experimentally validated S-glutathionylation sites and comprehensive bioinformatics analyses, including functional annotations, structural characteristics and substrate motifs for S-glutathionylation sites. The database not only provides a benchmark dataset for the development of computational prediction tools and their comparison but also supplies the potential glutathionylated targets for verification and other biological applications. Funding: This work was supported by the National Science Council in Taiwan (NSC 101-2628-E-155-002-MY2 to T.Y.L. and NSC-100-2922-I-016-002 to Y.J.C.). Conflict of Interest: none declared.
dbGSH: a database of S-glutathionylation at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Y.-J.Chen et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
