Protein–nucleic acid interactions are among the most important intermolecular interactions in the regulation of cellular events. Identifying residues involved in these interactions from protein structure alone is an important challenge. Here we introduce the webserver interface to DNA Binding Site Identifier (DBSI), a powerful structure-based SVM model for the prediction and visualization of DNA binding sites on protein structures. DBSI has been shown to be a top-performing model to predict DNA binding sites on the surface of a protein or peptide and shows promise in predicting RNA binding sites. Availability and Implementation: Server is available at http://dbsi.mitchell
IntroductionProteinnucleic acid interactions are crucial to cellular events in the regulation of transcription, DNA replication and repair; and RNA splicing and post-transcriptional regulation. Identifying residues involved in nucleic acid binding is crucial to understand function. Cocrystal structures are often unavailable, and DNA/RNA binding sites may not be easily discernable from the protein sequence or unbound structure. Here we present the web interface to DBSI (http://dbsi.mitchelllab.org), a machine learning approach to classify surface residues as binders or non-binders of DNA. DBSI employs sequence-and structure-based features encompassing a range of physical, chemical, geometric and evolutionary properties of the protein surface (). DBSI also implements microenvironment features that allow for small-scale structural perturbation and the role of non-local cooperative effects. The webserver greatly simplifies the use of DBSI, eliminating the need for downloading, installing and configuring third-party software and requiring the upload of only one file. The DBSI server facilitates online visualization of results, and it ensures privacy of user jobs.with the DBSI classification and score for each surface residue is provided as well. Sample PBEQ archives and a user manual with directions for generating the tgz files, using the server and interpreting results are provided on the DBSI Server website. The DBSI server typically takes around 12 minutes for a 200 residue-sized protein, and is faster on machines with a solid state drive (Supplementary).
Results and performanceDBSI has been developed through a process of rigorous feature selection, model parameter optimization and internal 5-fold crossvalidation. DBSI has been tested on an independent dataset comprising 206 high-resolution structures of DNA-binding proteins, showing it to outperform other available models. The AUC of 0.88 obtained by DBSI meets or exceeds that of other recently tested models, with our AUC being computed as an absolute number across the entire dataset rather than the 'per protein average AUC' used in, which does not lead to a well-defined classification cutoff. Testing on a dataset with structures of complexed and free DNA binders () has demonstrated that DBSI is very robust to conformational changes induced by binding and can predict binding sites on disordered proteins (Supplementary Tables S3 and S4). Details on testing, statistical analyses and comparisons with other models are available (). The DBSI model has been tested on a range of proteins and peptides that bind nucleic acids (including large protein complexes such as histones, transcription factors, restriction enzymes, higher-order oligomers, RNA-binding proteins) with promising results ().shows DBSI results for DNA-and RNA-binding proteins as well as a short peptide. DBSI makes accurate binding site predictions for DNA-(and D) and RNA-(and E) binding molecules of varying size and function, from small peptides to large complexes like the nucleosome. We find that for a set of 19 RNAbinding protein structures from the Nucleic Acid Database (), the DBSI server correctly identifies binding sites with high accuracy and specificity, but has a lower sensitivity than observed for DNA-binding proteins. This suggests that sites predicted by DBSI are very likely to bind RNA, but the current model may misclassify weaker RNA binding sites. We are currently performing more thorough testing for a larger set of RNA-specific examples and will extend the DBSI model in the future for optimized performance on RNA-binding proteins. A list of the RNA binding examples and performance metrics is given in Supplementary Table S1. In the case of short antimicrobial peptides (Supplementary), where DNA-binding is thought to be important to activity (), DBSI is able to correctly predict residues believed to bind DNA. While it is difficult to verify the DNA-binding residues without structures of the peptideDNA complexes, molecular dynamics simulations () and other studies () suggest that DBSI correctly identifies key binding residues. For example, DBSI identifies residue Arg23 as an important binder of DNA on LL-37 (). Predictions from DBSI strongly reinforced the observation that, in contrast to its homologs, the important mitochondrial protein COQ9 was unlikely to bind DNA (). This is significant, as COQ9, a member of the TetR family of regulators, possesses the characteristic conserved Helix-Turn-Helix DNA binding domain; COQ9 is the only known protein with a TetR transcription factor fold that appears to have lost DNA binding ability, something readily supported by the difference in DBSI predictions between COQ9 and the transcription factor FadR. DBSI has also be used to predict interaction sites for chemically similar molecules to DNA, such as heparin, as evidenced by its strong performance in CAPRI challenge 57 (). With DBSI's proven performance in predicting nucleic acid binding sites, we believe that the ease of use of the webserver coupled with the simple and powerful visualization tools for analysis will make the DBSI server a widely used tool for the identification of key residues in proteinnucleic acid interfaces, thereby aiding the study of interactions between proteins with DNA/RNA and other chemically similar molecules.
FundingThis work was supported by the National Science FoundationConflict of Interest: none declared.The table shows number of PDB structures (PDB), total number of amino acids (AA), predictive accuracy (AC), specificity (SP), sensitivity (SE), precision (PR) and F1 Score (F1).
References
Input and output To use the DBSI server, the user first generates an electrostatic map of their structure (after stripping off heteroatoms) using the CHARMM-GUI (Jo et al., 2008). The resulting PBEQ archive (a tgz file) comprises the sole input to our simple and intuitive user interface. In order to ensure the most accurate predictions, three values in step 2 of the CHARMM-GUI submission should be defined differently from the default values (epsP  2.0, Dcel_c  1.0, Dcel_f  0.5). The DBSI algorithm computes a set of sequence-and structurebased features and generates DNA binding predictions for each surface residue and a score that quantifies confidence that the residue will bind DNA, using a distance cutoff of 5.0 A  between the binding partners. The interface allows users to track the status of their jobs in the queue and provides a private link to results. Links to results can also be sent to the (optional) email address provided in the job submission screen. Upon job completion, users may visualize DBSI predictions within the browser using JSmol (Fig. 1D) (Hanson et al., 2013). Users may also download a PDB file with the DBSI scores built into the B-factor column, allowing for visualization using PyMol or other molecular viewers(Fig. 1E). A text-based results file V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 1 Bioinformatics, 2016, 13 doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw315 Advance Access Publication Date: 3 June 2016 Applications Note Bioinformatics Advance Access published June 20, 2016 at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
