Motivation: Comparing genomes of individual organisms using next-generation sequencing data is, until now, mostly performed using a reference genome. This is challenging when the reference is distant and introduces bias towards the exact sequence present in the reference. Recent improvements in both sequencing read length and efficiency of assembly algorithms have brought direct comparison of individual genomes by de novo assembly, rather than through a reference genome, within reach. Results: Here, we develop and test an algorithm, named Magnolya, that uses a Poisson mixture model for copy number estimation of contigs assembled from sequencing data. We combine this with co-assembly to allow de novo detection of copy number variation (CNV) between two individual genomes, without mapping reads to a reference genome. In co-assembly, multiple sequencing samples are combined, generating a single contig graph with different traversal counts for the nodes and edges between the samples. In the resulting 'coloured' graph, the contigs have integer copy numbers; this negates the need to segment genomic regions based on depth of coverage, as required for mapping-based detection methods. Magnolya is then used to assign integer copy numbers to contigs, after which CNV probabilities are easily inferred. The copy number estimator and CNV detector perform well on simulated data. Application of the algorithms to hybrid yeast genomes showed allotriploid content from different origin in the wine yeast Y12, and extensive CNV in aneuploid brewing yeast genomes. Integer CNV was also accurately detected in a short-term laboratory-evolved yeast strain.
INTRODUCTIONGenomes can differ in many ways. Several types of variation are commonly distinguished, from small local differences such as single nucleotide polymorphisms and short insertions and deletions (indels), to variation involving DNA fragments41 kbp, i.e. structural variation. Structural variations can be divided into balanced and unbalanced mutations. Balanced mutations, such as inversions and translocations, preserve the copy number of a given allele, whereas unbalanced mutations, such as indels and duplications, change the number of copies of the involved allele. Differences between genomes in the latter respect are referred to as copy number variation (CNV). Algorithms for variant discovery have until recently started by mapping sequencing reads to a reference genome. Subsequently, variation between the sequenced genome and the reference is inferred by analysing aberrantly mapped reads (), read-depth variation (), split-read mappings () or a combination of aberrantly mapped read pairs and read-depth variation (). Optionally, reads from the target sample in regions with many aberrantly mapped reads can then be locally assembled to infer genomic sequence not present in the reference genome. Recently, the Cortex assembler was introduced, the first fully de novo variant detection algorithm, not reliant on a reference genome. Cortex is a de Bruijn graph assembler capable of co-assembling multiple sequencing samples. In the underlying data structure, the de Bruijn graph, the nodes and edges are coloured by the samples in which they are observed. By observing bifurcations in the graph that separate the colours (bubbles), sequence variation is detected. While bubble finding works well for detecting (simple) variation, it does not easily allow CNV detection. A duplication event introduces an (almost) identical sequence in the genome, i.e. a repeat; furthermore, larger CNV regions are likely to contain repetitive regions inherent to the genome, such as transposons and paralogous genes. The resulting repeats pose a problem for assemblers, which collapse them into single contigs (). Because it is unknown how such collapsed repeats should be traversed, i.e. which pairs of incoming and outgoing edges should be connected via the repeat, a bubble cannot be detected. Thus, in a de novo variation detection setting bubble calling is not suitable to detect CNVs. The number of times a contig occurs in the genome can be inferred from read depths, exploiting the fact that assembly automatically segments the genome into contigs of integer copy number. Previously, the A-statistic has been proposed to determine whether a contig is unique or represents a collapsed repeat (). Medvedev andestimated the copy *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com number of a contig using a maximum likelihood flow-solving algorithm, assuming a known genome size. Here, we introduce a Poisson mixture model (PMM) approach to estimate the copy number (CN) of a contig without making assumptions on genome size. The use of a PMM for modelling read depths in segments across multiple samples that have been mapped to a reference genome was recently introduced (). Here, we use a PMM in a de novo setting to obtain a genome-wide model for one genome, rather than in a local segment across multiple samples. The algorithm relies on de novo assembly for segmentation. We show how this mixture model can be applied in coloured assembly graphs to detect CNVs. The algorithm was named Magnolya (matched genomes de novo assembly graph analysis). In contrast to Cortex's De Bruijn graph approach, we use an overlap-layout-consensus assembler to generate a contig string graph. Contig string graphs are generated by first calculating pairwise overlaps between reads. A node in the resulting graph represents a read, and an edge between two reads represents an overlap. The graph is subsequently simplified by transitive reduction, which removes redundant edges, followed by unitigging, a process of collapsing simple paths without branches (). The result is a contig string graph, in which now the nodes represent collapsed reads called contigs, and edges represent reads spanning two contigs. The contigs cannot be collapsed further, as for each pair of contigs connected by an edge the inor out-degree (dependent on strand) is 41. String graph assemblers were first developed in the Sanger era, to assemble relatively long sequencing reads. The advent of nextgeneration sequencing (NGS), yielding short reads of length 36100 bp, required development of assemblers not reliant on pairwise overlaps of reads, the widely used de Bruijn graph assemblers. However, increasing read lengths produced by NGS technology (including the third-generation single-molecule sequencers) are renewing interest in overlap-layout-consensus assemblers, such as String Graph Assembler, capable of efficiently assembling mammalian genomes (). We extended the string graph by assigning each read a colour, corresponding to the sample from which it originated. In the resulting coloured contig string graph, we then detect variation by modelling read counts per colour with a mixture of Poissons and inferring the probability of a CNV. To our knowledge, we here for the first time apply a PMM to detect CNVs fully de novo between samples from two individuals. This approach has two main advantages. First, no read count based segmentation of the genome is required to distinguish regions with different copy numbers; this is handled in the co-assembly. Second, there is no bias to a, possibly distant, reference genome. In experiments, copy number estimation using Magnolya is demonstrated both on simulated data and on data from the genome of an allotriploid wine yeast. Furthermore, CNV detection with Magnolya applied to co-assemblies is tested on simulated data and demonstrated on the aneuploid genomes of two Saccharomyces pastorianus brewing yeasts and a laboratoryevolved yeast strain.
ALGORITHMWe propose an algorithm for CNV detection based on NGS data, not reliant on mapping to a reference genome. In this section, we outline how contig copy number can be inferred using a PMM (Section 2.1) and how these models are used in a coloured co-assembly string graph to detect CNV (Section 2.2). Detailed derivations of the formulas can be found in the Supplementary Material.. Coloured string graphs with two samples, O 1 (solid) and O 2 (dashed). The pairs of numbers indicate the traversal count (left for O 1 , right for O 2 ), which are estimated by a PMM. Solid and dashed edges represent reads spanning the connected contigs. Bars under the graphs represent the unknown corresponding genome structures of the solid and the dashed sample. (a) A 'clean' duplication of contig R. (b) A more complex duplication in which another repeat is enclosed. If the duplicated region is large, the centre node R is likely to contain repeats homologous to other sequence in the genome, complicating the graph structure which is based on sequence information instead of read counts. For example, if a single sample assembly would have been performed on the dashed sample, contig R inwould not be repetitive, and contigs A-R-C and B-D would be formed. Mapping-based CNV detection between the solid and dashed sample would require segmenting contig B-R-D based on read depth variation in the solid sample, which introduces inaccuracies. By co-assembly we exploit the assemblers inability to resolve repeats to obtain precisely delineated contigs with a unique copy number difference. 2.1.2 Modelling read depths on contigs with a Poisson mixture model The copy number of a contig can be inferred from the number of reads that start on a contig. We can model the observed number of reads x c that start on a contig c 2 C with a given copy number i as px c ji. The data set contains contigs with different copy numbers, which together are modelled as a mixture model containing M components:
Contig copy number assignment with a Poisson mixture modelThe number of reads sampled from a certain nucleotide position in the genome can be modelled as a Poisson process (), with rate parameter  R G , where R is the total number of reads and G is the genome length. px c ji can thus be replaced by a Poisson distribution Poisx c j i, c , yielding the following:The parameters are the mixture coefficients the i , estimates of p(i)'s and the Poisson parameters i, c  L c i, with L c the contig length and i the copy number (i.e. the mean number of reads in a contig with copy number i is modelled as directly proportional to i). We cannot compute directly because we do not know the genome size G; therefore, we estimate and the i from the data, which we do by Expectation Maximization (EM).
Highcopy number repeats Specific repetitive regionsin the DNA occur at high copy number, such as ribosomal DNA repeats and transposons. We are not interested in modelling the copy number of these repeats. Therefore we view them as outliers and capture the contigs with a copy number higher than M  1L c in a shifted geometric distribution (model M  1). We define the set of highcopy number repeat contigs Z asThe outlier distribution for the highcopy number repeats is defined aswhere is the rate parameter of the geometric distribution. Our model thus becomeswhere u(c) is an indicator function defined as uc  1 if c 2 Z 0 ifc = 2 Z 6
Estimation of the model parameters by expectation maximizationThe mixture parameter , the Poisson rate parameter and the geometric distribution rate parameter are estimated from the data (N contigs) by optimizing the log likelihood,In the E-step, current estimates of the parameters ( old i, c  L c i old and old ) are used to estimate the posterior probabilities, or responsibilities r i, c  ^ pijx c  for each model and each contig. In the M-step, the newly obtained responsibilities are used to update and as follows:2.1.5 Incorporating prior knowledge on ploidy In many biological experiments, there is prior knowledge on the distribution p(i). For example, in haploid yeast samples, most contigs will correspond to mixture component i  1; for diploid samples, it is expected that p(i  2) will dominate. Note that ploidy is not the sole influence on the distribution of p(i) in an unfinished assembly, but also the repeat content in the genome. We adopted the idea ofto use a Dirichlet prior distribution with parameters for cases where we can incorporate prior knowledge on p(i), where is an M-dimensional vector ( 1 ,. .. , M ). The update rule for i then becomes as follows:Contigs for which ^ { MAP  M  1 are outlier contigs.
Copy number variation using co-assembly2.2.1 Detecting copy number variation Given two sequencing samples O 1 and O 2 , we are interested in those contigs that display an aberrant copy number in the two samples, i.e. in CNV. We fit the proposed PMM for both samples; assuming independent, we can calculate the probability of a CNV for non-outlier contigs as follows:
METHODS
Simulated DNA sequencing dataThe Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain S288C reference genome () was downloaded from the Saccharomyces Genome Database () (www.yeastgenome.org, accessed March 03, 2011). For testing CNV detection, a perturbed yeast genome containing 100 duplications (gains) was simulated from this yeast reference genome. Donor and insertion sites were randomly drawn. The duplication length was randomly drawn between 1 Kbp and 10 Kbp. Distance between the duplication events was guaranteed by rejecting a newly drawn event if either one of the edges of the donor or the insertion site was within 10 Kbp of another event. A total of 800 000 error-free sequencing reads with a length of 150 bp each were then simulated at 10 coverage for each sample using fragsim (). Additionally, a 20 coverage read dataset was simulated from the reference genome to generate a shotgun reference assembly, which was used to gauge performance of mapping-based CNV detection methods on an unfinished genome.
Real DNA sequencing dataIn the experiments, we used a number of NGS data sets available for various yeast strains (). The sequencing of S.cerevisiae CEN.PK113-7D was described in, yielding a Illumina library (Illumina, San Diego, CA) with a 50-bp read length and a 454 GS FLX library (454 Life Sciences, Branford, CT) with an average read length of 350 bp. The genomic DNA of two brewing yeasts of the species S.pastorianus was purified as previously described (). The two S.pastorianus strains are indicated as SPA and SPB in this study. The fragments of $180200 bp were sequenced paired-end on a Genome Analyzer IIx (Illumina) with a read length of 100 bp at Baseclear (Leiden, The Netherlands). Afterwards the overlapping read pairs were merged into single longer reads. DNA sequencing reads (454/Roche) were downloaded from the short-read archive for the S.cerevisiae strain Y12, part of the S.cerevisiae strain project (http://genome.wustl.edu/genomes/saccharomyces_cerevisiae_strain_project_genomes).
Assembly and alignmentGenome assembly was performed using the GSAssembler 2.6, aka Newbler (454/Roche), using default settings. The contig string graph that results from an assembly with Newbler was coloured using the output file that describes the read layout on the contigs (the .ACE file). Alignments were performed with nucmer version 3.07, part of the Mummer 3 package ().
Copy number integrityA contig has to be present an integer number of times in its genome if the assembler correctly bifurcated the contig graph. This was assessed by aligning contigs that were assembled using simulated reads to the genome. Only contigs longer than 500 bp were considered. Alignments with an identity lower than 95% were discarded. For each position in the reference, only the best query hit was kept, allowing for query overlaps (delta-filter-i95-r in the Mummer package). The number of times the contig is covered in the remaining alignments is then summed. The closest integer to this sum is denoted as CN align. We define copy number integrity () as the absolute deviation from CN align , optimal at 0 and with a maximum of 0.5. For example, a contig that is covered 1.6 times in the genome has a integrity value of 0.4, which implies the contig is far from having an integer copy number.
ValidationValidation was performed on the genome with the simulated duplication events (gains) described above. Magnolya was run on the co-assembly with haploid settings. FREEC v5.6 (), CN.MOPS v1.2.1 () and CNV-Seq () were used to benchmark the performance of Magnolya. The read datasets used to perform the co-assembly were independently mapped to the reference genome and the reference shotgun assembly. CN.MOPS was provided three times the reference sample and one time the perturbed sample, to enable it to model 'normal read count'. The haploid CN.MOPS version was used with minWidth  1 and priorImpact  0.5. The minimum and maximum expected guanine-cytosine content (GC content) GC content required for FREEC were set to 0.3 and 0.5, respectively (the S.cerevisiae GC content is 0.38). For both FREEC and CN.MOPS, the window size was set to 500 bp, CNV-seq inferred a window size itself. CNV-seq was run with global normalization on the reference genome and the shotgun assembly. Additionally, contig normalization was performed on the shotgun assembly to account for possible collapsed repeats. Reads were mapped to the reference genome and the reference assembly using the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) version 0.5.9-r16 (Li and Durbin,2009). Sensitivities and specificities were calculated by counting true positive and false positive calls per base. In all, 250 bp around duplications were ignored, to prevent counting them as false positives owing to overhanging windows.
TimingSets of 1000, 2500, 5000, 7500, 10 000 and 12 500 contigs were randomly sampled without replacement from the Y12 dataset. Magnolya was run 25 times on each dataset, each with M  8 and initialized on the 25th percentile. The algorithm was halted when an iteration resulted in a likelihood improvement 510 5. The processor time for the EM procedure was measured using python's time.clock() on a single core of a Dell T7400 Workstation with Intel Xeon X5272 dual core processor.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONMagnolya can be used in estimating the copy number of the contigs in the genome. This was first verified on simulated data and then applied on data obtained from an allotriploid hybrid genome of a palm wine yeast. In a multi-sample setting, the PMM can then be used as a statistical approach to CNV detection. This has been tested on simulated data and on the complex aneuploid genomes of beer brewing yeasts.
Copy number estimation
SimulationsThe performance of the PMM to estimate the number of times a contig is present in a genome was assessed using an assembly of simulated reads from the S288C yeast reference genome. Two individual features of our method were tested using this simulation (). First, the assumption that contigs have an integer copy number was assessed by calculating copy number integrity (Section 3.4). The contigs were found to have low average integrity values (). Only 18 of the 3723 contigs had an integrity value 40.1, which proves the assembled contigs indeed mostly have an integer copy number. Second, the PMM copy number estimate ^ { MAP was compared with the number of times a contig appears in the genome CN align. Of the 3723 tested contigs, the PMM incorrectly estimated the copy number for just a single contig.
Copy number and genomesize estimation of an allotriploid hybrid genome Saccharomyces yeast species used in industrial fermentation processes, such as beer and wine making, are often hybrid species, containing DNA of several Saccharomyces origins. For example, the lager beer brewing yeast S.pastorianus was shown to be a hybrid between S.cerevisiae and Saccharomyces eubayanus (). The wine-making yeast VIN7 was shown to contain diploid S.cerevisiae and haploid Saccharomyces kudriavzevii genomic content (). Furthermore, these hybrid genomes may contain many chromosomal rearrangements and aneuploidy (). Aneuploid genomes have an irregular number of chromosomes. Magnolya can be used to estimate the copy number per contig in aneuploid genomes and thereby the total genome size. Saccharomyces cerevisiae Y12 is such a hybrid yeast. Genomic sequencing reads from its genome were assembled into 14 551 contigs containing 16.1 Mbp of total sequence, of which 5893 large contigs (!500 bp) contained 13.9 Mbp. Fitting the mixture model on the read counts without incorporation of prior knowledge on the ploidy resulted in i  2 and i  4, to fit the two peaks in, i.e. the model explained the data as contigs having copy number 2 and 4. Visual inspection of the read count histogram () led us to the belief that these peaks stem from haploid and diploid genomic content instead, which is in line with previous results describing the allotriploid strain VIN7 (). The uneven coverage of the 454 sequencing data resulted in a better explanation of the data using more Poissons. The parameters for the Dirichlet prior distribution were then set to favour single and double copy numbers for the contigs (), representing our belief that the Y12 genome has haploid and diploid content, rather than diploid and tetraploid. The mixture model was fit on the contigs (!500 bp) using the model selection procedure. A total of M  8 Poissons was found to be optimal. The S.cerevisiae Y12 genome was estimated to be:9Mbp in size, 22% of which was represented one time (haploid) and 74% two times (diploid). The contigs were mapped to the 12.1 Mbp S.cerevisiae S288C reference genome to investigate the possible S.cerevisiae origin of parts of the genome. Only alignments of contigs that aligned reliably to the reference genome were kept (495% contig coverage, 499% identity). In total, 9.2 Mbp could thus be aligned. These aligned bases originated for 97% from contigs with ^ { ML  2, indicating that the S.cerevisiae content in this hybrid genome is present in diploid form, as is the case for VIN7 ().(b). A contig should be present an integer number of times in the genome. To assess whether this is true, contigs assembled from simulated reads were aligned to the genome from which the reads originate. (a) The contig occurs exactly two times in the genome and therefore is assigned an integrity value of 0. (b) The contig occurs 1.4 times in the genome and is assigned an integrity value of 0.4Only copy numbers 14 are listed, as no higher copy numbers were observed. The integrity column indicates averages and standard deviations of the integrity values (). The Y12 assembly had the most contigs and was therefore used to time the algorithm (). Computational complexity is low, (compared with mapping and assembly of short read data) and scales linearly with the number of contigs.
Copy number variation detection
BenchmarkingA simulation experiment was designed to benchmark the performance of Magnolya in a setting where a closely related reference genome is available versus the situation where this is not the case. We did not simulate biological noise or contamination, nor did we introduce uneven depth of coverage. Therefore, this benchmark does not gauge how well the methods deal with such biological effects, but merely illustrates the potential performance drops when no reference is available. Magnolya was benchmarked against the three top-performing methods in the study performed by. The reference and a perturbed yeast genome containing 100 duplications between 1 Kbp and 10 Kbp were used. The sequencing reads were mapped to the reference genome and to a shotgun assembly to infer CNVs. Sensitivity and precision are the two measures relevant to CNV detection.reports the F-measure, i.e. the harmonic mean of sensitivity and precision, for both situations. The F-measure does not take the true negative rate into account, but this is not an issue because this rate is always high for all methods (as genomes are very large compared with the total length of the CNVs). For all methods, two samples were used, a reference and a perturbed sample, except for CN.MOPS. CN.MOPS is designed to be used with multiple samples, so it can model read depth across multiple samples. It cannot be used on only two samples because it cannot distinguish what is normal read count and what is not. We therefore provided it with three times the reference sample and one time the perturbed sample. CNV-seq performs best on the reference genome (). Possibly this is because it is model free, only looks at read depth ratios and does not account for noise, which is absent in this simulation. For all methods, performance dropped when applied to the shotgun assembly. Magnolya has the highest F-score, with a sensitivity of 0.93 and a precision of 0.94. Its performance is close to the other methods on a finished reference genome, but surpasses the other methods with at least a double F-measure on the shotgun-assembled reference genome.
CNV in a laboratory evolution pairAs another test case, a pre-and post-laboratory evolution pair was analysed. Shortterm laboratory evolution (up to a few months) generally leads to only few mutations. An evolved strain and its pre-evolution ancestor are therefore expected to be genetically close. We recently applied laboratory evolution to investigate lactate transport in the haploid yeast S.cerevisiae CEN.PK113-7D (de Kok et al.,(b). Poisson mixture distribution fitted on the assemblies of two brewing yeasts. The grey bars are the read counts x c on the contigs, normalized to a contig length of 1000 bp. The plotted distributions indicate the mixture components (M  6, 1000  99 for SPA and 1000  169 for SPB)The columns show a scenario with and without the availability of a finished reference genome. CNV-seq was run with global normalization and normalization per contig.
Fig. 3. PMM fittedon the assemblies of the wine yeast Y12. Grey bars: histogram of read counts on the contigs, normalized to a contig length of 300 bp. The fitted PMM is the plotted as a black line with 300  11:7:). This strain, used in systems biology research and in industry, deviates significantly from the yeast reference sequence S288C () including multiple Kbp insertions and deletions and 420 000 single nucleotide variations. Our de novo CNV detection algorithm enables us to directly compare the two CEN.PK113-7D individuals, without having to resort to comparison using a more distant reference genome. A mutant harbouring a JEN1 deletion grew poorly in liquid culture with lactate as sole carbon source. Laboratory evolutionary engineering was then used to evolve a JEN1-independent fast-growing strain on lactate. A mutation in ADY2, an acetate transporter, was identified as responsible; but additionally a copy number increase was suspected to give the evolved strain a competitive advantage. Read mapping analysis confirmed that the gene dosage of ADY2 was indeed increased through the formation of a novel isochromosome carrying two additional copies of ADY2 (). Here, we reanalyzed the sequencing data of the evolved strain. The obtained integer copy numbers indeed indicate the chromosomal regions corresponding to the novel isochromosome (). Compared with the mapping-based approach taken in, these results are easier to interpret.
CNVin aneuploid brewing strains CNV was detected between two aneuploid lager brewing yeast strains of the species S.pastorianus. Co-assembly of the Illumina reads showed aneuploidy for both strains (), with a large percentage of contigs present one, two or three times in the genomes. This is in agreement with previous observations in a different S.pastorianus strain (). The mixture model was trained on both datasets using the model-selection procedure. The Bayesian information criterion indicated a total of M  6 Poisson distribution was optimal to use on these data.shows that the two S.pastorianus strains have different karyotypes. For example, strain SPB appears to have more contigs appearing only once in the genome. For each contig, the probability of a copy number difference between the strains was calculated using the posterior probabilities pijx c , i 2 f1, 2,. .. , 6g, using equation (12). More than 13 Mbp (pCNV40:95) were found to be present at a different copy number. Although the nucleotide composition of these two strains may be similar, this large scale CNV largely affects the gene dosage of thousands of genes, with an intriguing yet unexplored effect on the phenotypic characteristics.
CONCLUSIONSSince the advent of NGS, variation detection has been performed by mapping short reads to a reference genome to detect aberrant read mappings. Comparing two individuals by mapping them to a (perhaps distant) reference inevitably introduces bias. The only unbiased approach to comparisons of individuals is through de novo assembly. Short sequencing reads and repetitive genomes have thus far hampered accurate reconstruction of individualgenomes. However, with increasing read lengths and recently developed de novo assemblers that efficiently assemble mammalian sized genomes, reconstruction and comparison of individual genomes is coming within reach. We here proposed a PMM to de novo estimate copy numbers of contigs, and combined this with a co-assembly approach. This allows easy detection of CNV, one of the most abundant types of genomic variation, with severe phenotypic effects. The mixture model estimates copy numbers per sample at high specificity, exploiting the fact that assemblers automatically segment a genome into regions of integer copy number, and allows inference of CNV. The resulting de novo CNV detection algorithm has two main advantages over mapping-based approaches: foregoing the need for read count-based segmentation and the lack of bias with respect to a reference genome. The Magnolya algorithm performs at higher precision and sensitivity than other methods when no finished reference is available. The method was shown to perform well on yeast genomes, a simple eukaryote for which good assemblies can be obtained using current sequencing technology. When long enough reads can be obtained to generate human assemblies, a de novo approach might be preferred over reference-based approaches to detect CNV in matched experiments, such as tumor-normal pairs. The co-assembled coloured string graphs that are used in this study enclose all genomic variation between the two assembled individuals, including inversions, insertions, deletions and translocations. While in this work we focused on the detection of CNVs, an algorithm named bubble calling was recently proposed to mine other classes of variation from coloured assembly graphs (). We expect a combination of a bubble calling algorithm, our CNV detection and approaches exploiting read pair data in coloured assembly graphs to allow a move to fully unbiased detection of variation between individuals in the near future.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
.1.1 Assembly segments the genome into integer copy number contigs Assemblers would ideally assemble all sequencing reads into chromosome-sized contigs (contiguous sequences), but usually do not succeed in doing so because of repetitive sequences in the genome. Repeats are common in any genome owing to transposons, rDNA repeats and paralogous genes and homozygous regions of two or more copies of a chromosome. Assemblers are unable to distinguish multiple copies of an (almost) identical sequence. As a result, reads originating from these identical sequences are merged into a single contig up until the position where the two sequences diverge. In the contig graph, a situation where a sequence occurs twice in the genome, flanked by four unique sequences, results in a node with and in-and out-degree of two. This is the case for sample O 1 (solid edges) in Figure 1a: it is unknown whether contig A and C or A and D should be connected via R; therefore, this repeat cannot be resolved without additional information. However, in the resulting contig graph, regions with different copy number are thus automatically segmented, and contigs will have integer copy numbers. Co-assembling the two target samples is essential to obtain contigs with a single copy number for both samples. This negates the need for read-countbased genome segmentation of readmapping approaches to CNV detection. In our approach, the genome is segmented by bifurcations in the contig graph, (a) ( b)
J.F.Nijkamp et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
De novo detection of CNV at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
