A new pK a prediction web server is released, which implements DelPhi Gaussian dielec-tric function to calculate electrostatic potentials generated by charges of biomolecules. Topology parameters are extended to include atomic information of nucleotides of RNA and DNA, which extends the capability of pK a calculations beyond proteins. The web server allows the end-user to protonate the biomolecule at particular pH based on calculated pK a values and provides the downloadable file in PQR format. Several tests are performed to benchmark the accuracy and speed of the protocol. Implementation: The web server follows a client-server architecture built on PHP and HTML and utilizes DelPhiPKa program. The computation is performed on the Palmetto supercomputer cluster and results/download links are given back to the end-user via http protocol. The web server takes advantage of MPI parallel implementation in DelPhiPKa and can run a single job on up to 24 CPUs. Availability and implementation: The DelPhiPKa web server is available at http://compbio.clemson. edu/pka_webserver.
IntroductionBiological processes are affected by the pH of the cellular environment. For example, enzyme catalysis, protein folding and binding, protein-protein interactions are all pH-dependent (). Different protonation states of titratable residues within molecules due to pH changes can result in significantly different complex conformations and binding free energies. Fast and accurate predictions for pK a values of ionizable groups will facilitate investigations aiming at designing better drugs and more robust enzymes, which are active and stable over a wide range of pH. Although there are many programs for predicting pK a values of protein ionizable residues such as MCCE (), UHBD (), PROPKA (), H (), which are based on various methods, to the best of our knowledge, there is no pK a prediction web sever that provides pK a calculations for RNAs and DNAs () bases as well. Here, we developed a new pK a web server that implements the following features (i) calculates pK a values for the protein, RNA and single stranded DNA, (ii) protonates the structure at userspecified pH according to calculated pK a , (iii) provides the option of various force field parameters (AMBER, CHARMM, PARSE, GROMOS), (iv) calculates electrostatic free energy components with the Gaussian dielectric function without defining molecular surface and (v) provides different hydrogen conformations. The web server is implemented in DelPhiPKa program and built on the supercomputer cluster to take advantage of MPI parallelization, which improves the computation speed up to 20 times.
Methods
Back-end program DelPhiPKaThe web server is built on the pK a calculation programDelPhiPKa, which is written in the object-oriented C code. The methodology of the back-end program is described in the supplementary material and more details can be found in).
Overall architecture of the web serverThe server contains two components, the first of which is user interface and second is the job submission/queue/running system. The user interface is implemented using PHP and HTML. It contains various parameters for user input that control the back-end program and results calculated by the algorithm. The job submission/queue system uses a job monitor module written in bash/python scripts to sends/retrieves the job information to/from the Palmetto supercomputer cluster.
User input parameters of the web serverThe web server requires the following user input parameters and each parameter has the corresponding function: @BULLET Force field. The server reads atomic charges and radii from the specific force field parameter file to calculate electrostatic potentials and to produce the output PQR file. @BULLET Remove HETATM. The server can remove all HETATM information in the uploaded PDB file, making those HETATM not involved in the calculations. @BULLET HETATM in PQR format. If selected, the server reads the HETATM information that is provided by users in PQR format within the uploaded PDB file. This is applied to the calculations involving ligands and solvent ions, for which the atomic information is not included in the standard topology parameter file. @BULLET Output protonated PQR file based on calculated pK a results. This gives the option for users to download the protonated structure in PQR format based on calculated pK a results and specific pH. @BULLET Given pH value. It's related to the previous parameter as the user-defined pH value to produce PQR output file. @BULLET Hydrogen of ASP/GLU attached atom. These options provide users to choose the hydrogen positions of aspartic and glutamic acids (which atom should the hydrogen placed with) to be generated. @BULLET Variance of Gaussian distribution. This is the sigma value in the Gaussian function and our benchmark results showed that with a low value (default is 0.70) the program performs better on surface residues while a high value (e.g. 0.93) is better for buried residues. @BULLET Reference dielectric. This is the reference dielectric constant for the protein in the Gaussian function and the default is set 8.0 based on our benchmark results. @BULLET External dielectric. This is the external dielectric constant for the solvent water in the Gaussian function and the default is set to be the widely adopted value of 80.
Results page and download linksThe server provides pK a results with three download items. pKa.csv, which contains the calculated pK a value for each individual ionizable residue with electrostatic energy components for its protonated and deprotonated states; titration.txt, which reports each individual ionizable residue probability of protonation from pH of 0 to 14; (input_ pdbname).pqr, which is the protonated structure in PQR format with each individual ionizable residue in its protonated or de-protonated state based on the calculated pK a values and user selected pH.
Performance
Test of accuracyWe performed the benchmark with calculated pK a values against experimental results with three force fields (AMBER/CHARMM/ PARSE) to test the accuracy of pK a predictions. The dataset we used is from Protein pK a Database (), which contains 302 experimental measured pK a values for titratable residues from 32 proteins. The parameters we used for this dataset are r  0.70, e ref  8, e extern  80 and others with default values. With three force fields, we achieved an average RMSD of 0.77 (Supplementary) and about 90% of the overall predictions less than 1.0 pK unit error. For surface residues (72% of the dataset), we achieved an average RMSD%0.55 (Supplementary). We also benchmarked calculations on two RNAs with experimental measured results by NMR spectroscopy: branch-point helix (BPH) and lead-dependent ribozyme (LDZ) with 5 and 7 measured pK a 's for adenosine residues, respectively. The topology information and corresponding parameters used for nucleic acids are described in the supplementary material. Results inshowed the pK a values were successfully identified in the correct order and 90% of predictions are less than 0.6 pK units error.
Test of speedThe webserver is built based on DelPhiPKa program, which implemented with MPI parallelization for the distributed computing. The server could run the job on the Palmetto supercomputer cluster with 8 or 24 CPUs. Here, we performed a speedup test of the parallelization. According to the Supplementarythe speedup could reach 7.5 and 19.4 with 8 and 24 CPUs (by increasing the number of CPUs, the huge memory usage and more communications between CPUs degrade the speedup).
FundingThis work was supported by a grand from National Institutes of Health (R01 GM093937). Conflict of Interest: none declared.
V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
