DEsubs is a network-based systems biology R package that extracts disease-perturbed subpathways within a pathway network as recorded by RNA-seq experiments. It contains an extensive and customized framework with a broad range of operation modes at all stages of the subpath-way analysis, enabling so a case-specific approach. The operation modes include pathway network construction and processing, subpathway extraction, visualization and enrichment analysis with regard to various biological and pharmacological features. Its capabilities render it as a tool-guide for both the modeler and experimentalist for the identification of more robust systems-level drug targets and biomarkers for complex diseases. Availability and implementation: DEsubs is implemented as an R package following Bioconductor guidelines (permanently available in URL: http://biosignal.med.upatras.gr/wordpress/desubs).
IntroductionIn the last years, systems-level network-based approaches have gained ground in the research field of systems biology (). Towards this direction the research community has been focusing on the analysis of subpathways, namely local gene sub-regions within a pathway network (). Approaches in this direction are essential for identifying more accurate system-level drug targets and biomarkers for complex diseases by monitoring the local functions of networks perturbed by diseases (). Hence, several subpathway-based tools have been developed recently focusing though predominantly on differentially expressed (DE) genes (). Meanwhile, since the amount of RNA-seq transcriptome studies is increasing rapidly year by year, there is high demand for tailored differential expression (DE) analysis tools. Although most DE tools are crucial components in pathway analysis workflows, there is a gap in addressing this issue through an extensive and customized subpathway-based approach using DE analysis for RNA-seq data. Towards this orientation, we developed an R package, called DEsubs, which extracts differentially expressed subpathways based on RNA-seq expression profiles enabling so a customized analysis to the problem under investigation through numerous operation modes. DEsubs offers a systematic way to uncover the local perturbations within a net
Methods
Pathway network constructionAll available organism-specific KEGG pathway maps are converted to a pathway network, maintaining both their topology and information flow (). Organism level networks are constructed by joining all related processed graphs based on the user-input list of genes. DEsubs operates for six well-known organisms three pathway types and several gene label systems (for details see package vignette).
Pathway network processingNext, the RNA-seq data are mapped onto the nodes and edges of the pathway network. Two pruning rules are used to isolate robust and validated interactions (edges) among statistically significant differentially expressed genes (DEGs). selects the core set of genes with statistically significant differential expression and further prunes the interactions among these genes according to prior biological evidence. More specifically, DEGs are identified using any of the eight wellestablished DE tools (edgeR, DESeq, NBPSeq, TSPM, voom, vst, SAMseq, EBSeq) by considering the FDR-adjusted P-value of each gene () based on the work of (). For a graph , with nodes and edges, the is as follows: : ,  . Among the edges ofisolated genes, we highlight those where the expression profiles of the adjacent genes comply with prior biological knowledge. These are edges with highly positive or negative correlated adjacent gene expression profiles and are considered a priori as edges with activating = 1 or suppressing = 1 regulation role based on KEGG pathway maps (). The correlation is estimated based on value which uses any of the three well-established correlation measures (Pearson, Spearman, Kendall). For a pair of interacting gene nodes , the rule is formulated as follows: : , * , > ,  , . The thresholds are user-defined and the default values are 0.05 and 0.7 respectively. For more details, see package vignette.
Subpathway extractionThe processed pathway network is subsequently frittered based on five main topological structures. We extract (i) group of genes sharing common roles or properties within the graph (communities), (ii) strongly connected genes (components), (iii) gene streams, (iv) cascades and (v) neighborhoods. The three latter types are generated starting from a gene of interest with specific topological or functional properties within the network. From this point on, subpathways are generated following either forward or backward propagation. Thus, the user can observe the local perturbations within the network starting from (or ending to) different points of interest through various topological schemes. As a result, a total of 124 different extraction types are supported thus providing the user with a broad repertoire of the sub-structures existing within the pathways. To assess the performance of DEsubs, we examine all operation modes based on synthetic benchmark data and provide guidelines for the user to select the appropriate parameter setting. For detailed description in the subpathway extraction stage, see package vignette.
Subpathway enrichment analysisThe extracted subpathways are further examined for enrichment in various biological and pharmacological features. A hypergeometric test is used to estimate the subpathway associations with (i) pathway terms, (ii) gene ontology (GO) terms of molecular function, biological processes and cellular components, (iii) disease terms, (iv) drug substances, (v) microRNA targets and (vi) transcription factors. The aforementioned associations are extracted from seven databases (KEGG, GO, miRecords, Transfac, Jaspar, GAD, OMIM, DrugBank) using the approach of (). For details see package vignette.
VisualizationThe enriched associations of a subpathway to each feature are illustrated through circular diagrams. Furthermore, by zooming in and out of subpathways, DEsubs provides a customizable view of the resulting subpathways from the gene up to organism level. Feature-rich genes are imprinted in bar plots and heat maps. Also, the resulted subpathways along with their associations to biological and pharmacological features are summarized in dot plots providing a comprehensive illustration of each experiment (see package vignette).
Bioinformatics Advance Access published August 19, 2016 at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Conclusion DEsubs R package is a flexible, computationally fast and efficient tool (see supplementary file) for exploring disease-associated gene perturbations contextualized by subpathways in a graph-theoretic framework. The numerous operation modes provide the user a highly customizable setup, rendering the package as a guide for the systematic exploration of the local subpathways within a pathway network perturbed by disease.
