Experimentally found gene expression profiles are used to solve different problems in pharmaceutical studies, such as drug repositioning, resistance, toxicity and drug–drug interactions. A special web service, DIGEP-Pred, for prediction of drug-induced changes of gene expression profiles based on structural formulae of chemicals has been developed. Structure–activity relationships for prediction of drug-induced gene expression profiles were determined by Prediction of Activity Spectra for Substances (PASS) software. Comparative Toxicogenomics Database with data on the known drug-induced gene expression profiles of chemicals was used to create mRNA-and protein-based training sets. An average prediction accuracy for the training sets (ROC AUC) calculated by leave-one-out cross-validation on the basis of mRNA data (1385 compounds, 952 genes, 500 up-and 475 down-regulations) and protein data (1451 compounds, 139 genes, 93 up-and 55 down-regulations) exceeded 0.85. Availability: Freely available on the web at
INTRODUCTIONDrug-induced gene expression profile (DIGEP) is an important determinant of the drug effect on a cell. Recent rapid advances in DNA microarray technology allow one to use in practice the DIGEPs (). Lamb introduced Connectivity Map (CMap) as a phenotype-based drug discovery approach based on comparison of disease gene signature and drug-induced changes in gene expression profiles (). Since then, more than 50 studies using CMap approach for drug repositioning, lead discovery, mechanism of action elucidation and so forth were published (). It was shown that CMap approach can be used to reveal side effects of drugs (), estimation of drug resistance () and analysis of the drug synergistic effects (). CMap approach is applicable only for several thousand drugs having experimentally determined DIGEPs but cannot be used for other drugs or new drug candidates. To overcome this limitation, we decided to create a web service to predict DIGEPs for new drug-like compounds on the basis of the existing data on DIGEPs. There are several freely available databases on experimental DIGEPs, including NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (), Connectivity Map Database () and Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD) (). Structureactivity relationships are traditionally used to decrease the number of experiments in the process of drug development. The gene expression changes can be considered as a particular type of the biological activity of a drug. Therefore, Prediction of Activity Spectra for Substances (PASS) approach can be applied for prediction of DIGEPs. To the best of our knowledge, the developed web service is the first tool that allows the prediction of drug-induced changes in gene expression profiles based on the structural formulae of chemical compounds. drug-like organic compounds based on their structural formula (). PASS is based on the use of Bayesian approach and Multilevel Neighborhoods of Atom descriptors for representation of a molecule structure (). It was earlier shown that the Bayesian approach used in PASS, being selected by comparison of many mathematical algorithms for analysis of 'structureactivity' relationships, overtakes them by accuracy of prediction () and robustness (). A freely available web service for prediction of the biological activity spectra for drug-like molecules on the basis of PASS technology (http://www.way2drug.com/PASSonline) was developed earlier (). PASS prediction results are represented by the list of activities with probabilities ''to be active'' Pa and ''to be inactive'' Pi. The list is arranged in a descending order of PaPi; thus, the more probable changes of gene expression are at the top of the list. The list can be shortened at any desirable cutoff value, but Pa40.5 is used by default. In this case, both the chance to confirm the predicted DIGEPs by the experiment and the number of false-positive predictions are reasonable. The detailed description of PASS approach is represented in the Supplementary Material.
RESULTSDuring PASS training, we selected the activities with three and more active compounds and with 40.75 receiver operating characteristic (ROC) Area under an ROC curve (AUC) values calculated by leave-one-out cross-validation procedure to reach accurate and robust results of DIGEP prediction. The average accuracy of prediction for mRNA-based training set of 952 genes (500 up-and 475 down-regulations) and for protein-based training set of 129 genes (85 up-and 51 down-regulations) was 0.853 and 0.858, respectively (the accuracy of prediction for each activity is represented in the Supplementary Material). Such accuracy is reasonable for application of DIGEP-Pred to make prediction for new compounds. Input data include the structural formula presented as MOL file or SMILES, or can be drawn by MarvinSketch (). Input data are sent to PASS service that makes DIGEP prediction on the basis of above mentioned training sets. The prediction results are kept in MySQL database. Web service through PHP scripts and appropriate links provides a possibility for a user to save DIGEP prediction results as SDF or CSV files. One can use either mRNA-or protein-based prediction or both. The service provides links between gene names in predicted DIGEPs and CTD site, which simplifies the interpretation of predicted results because of access to the relationships of genes with diseases, side effects and biological pathways. DIGEP prediction for captopril (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor used as antihypertensive drug), that was not included in the training sets, was analyzed by CTD data (). The relationships between genes from predicted DIGEP and hypertension (REN, CAT, AGT and APOA1) and known side effects (MediGuard: https://www.mediguard. org/medication/side-effects/captopril) (fetal death: TMEM41B, PLXNA2, PCDH17, MYBL1; dizziness: WIPI1, AGT, REN; fatigue: TMEM41B, C10ORF118, WIPI1, TOB1, REN; cough: REN) were found. Apart from analysis between the changes of single gene expression and diseases, the results of DIGEP prediction may be used as input data of the methods based on CMap approach for drugs without known experimentally determined microarray data.
METHODS The data on drug-induced changes of gene expression were downloaded from CTD (version of October, 2012). The CTD data were derived from scientific literature based on the change in an experimentally measured level of mRNA or protein. CTD contains the data on gene ontology, associations and relationships of genes with diseases and biological pathways that give an insight into the influence mechanisms of chemical compounds on the human health (Davis et al., 2013). Despite CTD data not being cell dependent, different studies showed that, based on the gene expression data of one cell line, the active compounds against another cell line can be found (Karube et al., 2013; Sirota et al., 2011). CTD provides per se general drug-induced changes of gene expression that can be used in drug discovery with some limitations and assumptions (Qu and Rajpal, 2012). Such general drug-induced changes of gene expression reflect the intrinsic properties of a drug, and their different fractions may be revealed in the appropriate cell lines or tissues under the certain experimental conditions. Based on mRNA and protein data, we have created two independent training sets that provide a more definite prediction of the change in mRNA expression and appropriate protein concentration. Structural formulae of chemicals were obtained from ChemIDPlus (http://chem.sis. nlm.nih.gov/chemidplus) and ChemSpider (http://www.chemspider.com). The structures of single organic molecules with molecular weight 501250 Da and the data on drug-induced changes of human-specific gene expression were selected from 2638 agents in CTD. mRNA-based training set consists of 1385 compounds changing the expression of 14 700 genes (11 131 up-and 10 980 down-regulations). Protein-based training set consists of 1451 compounds changing the expression of 1950 genes (1357 up-and 1204 down-regulations). Developed over 20 years ago and brought up-to-date, PASS is a computer program to predict qualitatively different biological activity types of *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
DIGEP-Pred at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
