Motivation: Association rule analysis methods are important techniques applied to gene expression data for finding expression relationships between genes. However, previous methods implicitly assume that all genes have similar importance, or they ignore the individual importance of each gene. The relation intensity between any two items has never been taken into consideration. Therefore, we proposed a technique named REMMAR (RElational-based Multiple Minimum supports Association Rules) algorithm to tackle this problem. This method adjusts the minimum relation support (MRS) for each gene pair depending on the regulatory relation intensity to discover more important association rules with stronger biological meaning. Results: In the actual case study of this research, REMMAR utilized the shortest distance between any two genes in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene regulatory network (GRN) as the relation intensity to discover the association rules from two S.cerevisiae gene expression datasets. Under experimental evaluation, REMMAR can generate more rules with stronger relation intensity, and filter out rules without biological meaning in the protein–protein interaction network (PPIN). Furthermore, the proposed method has a higher precision (100%) than the precision of reference Apriori method (87.5%) for the discovered rules use a literature survey. Therefore, the proposed REMMAR algorithm can discover stronger association rules in biological relationships dissimilated by traditional methods to assist biologists in complicated genetic exploration. Availability: The source code in Java and other materials used in this study are available at http://websystem.
INTRODUCTIONFormerly, biologists were constrained to performing laboratory experiments to clarify gene expressions; however, manipulation of multiple genes is very costly, in both time and money. Microarray technology is a useful tool for gaining the expression value of many genes in the cell environment while simultaneously tackling * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the manipulation problem. At present, how to explain the cell's inner working with efficiency has become another challenge for the biologist. Data mining technologies are ideal for discovering information from large datasets. Thus, a growing number of researchers are applying data mining technologies for efficient elucidation of genetic information. Recently, various types of analysis methods were proposed to analyze gene expression data, such as clustering analysis (), association rule analysis (), classification analysis (), among others. These methods equip biologists to extract biological knowledge quickly for different analysis purposes. Association rule analysis is used to find and describe relationships between genes. Every rule indicates whether a given gene is expressed () or repressed () to describe expression relationships in a cellular environment. Suppose that we discover the rule {gene x } => {gene y ,gene z } from a gene expression dataset. This rule states that when gene x is expressed, gene y is repressed and gene z is expressed together in this dataset. Two important thresholds exist to measure the significance of a rule, support and confidence. The support of a rule is the frequency that gene x , gene y  and gene z  together in a sample. The confidence of a rule is the frequency that gene y , gene z  occurs when gene x  occurs (). Although various types of association rule analysis methods were proposed to analyze gene expression data (), not all of the proposed methods fit with the goal of our work in exploring the regulatory relations of genes from microarray datasets.adopted the half-space technique to discover quantitative association rules on numeric microarray datasets without requiring a discretization process. However, their approach cannot mine a complete set of relevant rules when applying the method on microarray profile.proposed the GenMiner method to mine association rules from a set of gene expression profiles and the publicly available gene ontology (GO) terms. However, the main purpose of their approach is different from ours since they were in an attempt to extract relationships between certain genes and its annotated GO terms. Finally,proposed an association rule mining algorithm called MaxConf, which was developed with a row-enumeration method. However, it did not consider the constraintPage: 3143 31423148 REMMAR of minimum support threshold. Moreover, the results of applying the algorithm on microarray dataset can only show high confidence gene regulations. Nevertheless, MaxConf may fail in discovering the longer rules with the context containing many items. However, the longer rules are usually more important than the rules that are shorter in size in the real applications (). On the other hand, the rules with low support would also be mined using their algorithm. These rules are likely to be regarded as false positive as long as they appear infrequently over all samples. Differentiated with the previous works as described above, our method proposed in this article is effective for mining putative gene regulations from microarray profiles. However, the traditional association rule analysis implicitly assumes that all items have similar importance without considering their significance in the data. Regardless, this is often not the case in real-life applications. Therefore, a number of researchers have proposed weight-based () or multiple support-based () association rule mining to engage this problem in a transaction database. Nevertheless, traditionally weighted or multiple supportbased association rule mining techniques only take into account the importance of each item. In a number of real-life case, the degree of importance is dependent on relationships between items. Both techniques never consider the relation intensity between any two items. For this reason, we propose the REMMAR (RElationalbased Multiple Minimum supports Association Rules) algorithm, which adjusts the minimum relation support (MRS) for each paired item dependent on the relation intensity, to discover the rules that have stronger biological meaning. In a real case study, we used the shortest distance between any two genes in the gene regulatory network (GRN) as the relation importance. Two real S.cerevisiae microarray datasets were used to evaluate the comparison results between the traditional association rule mining method and the proposed algorithm. The remainder of this article is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a brief review of traditional association rule mining and presents the proposed method; Section 3 consists of the application of the approach to S.cerevisiae datasets, to study the significance of the discovered rules. Finally, in Section 4, we present a conclusion regarding our findings.
METHODSIn this section, we first describe the reference Apriori algorithm and research using the Apriori framework to discover gene interaction rules from gene expression data. Before we utilize the REMMAR algorithm to discover association rules, microarray data must undergo a transformation into transactional data format. Thereafter, the problem in the research must be defined. Finally, Section 2.3 shows the proposed REMMAR algorithm in detail.) first proposed association rule analysis. It was used as the Apriori algorithm () to analyze databases, to discover valuable relationships between items. The support of an itemset is defined as the frequency that occurs in all transactions. If the support of an itemset was not less than the user-specified minimum support, it would be recognized as a large itemsetThe main concept of all Apriori-based methods is that any subitemsets of a large itemset is surely also a large itemset. In other words, an itemset is not required to be revised if it exceeds minimum support as long as any one of subitemsets of the itemset is not a large itemset. For example, if a large itemset generated by an Apriori-based algorithm contains k items, all of the subitemsets involving 1 to k 1 items are certainly large itemsets. In contrast, with a brute force method, an itemset needs to be verified even if it contains an item whose frequency does not exceed the minimum support. Taken together, using an Apriori-based method can reduce the overhead in examining whether the produced itemsets are large ones. For this reason, the Apriori-based methods are more efficient since the verification of ineligible itemsets is not required. When all large itemsets are identified, any large itemset possessing more than one item can be divided into two itemsets, S x and S y. An association rule is described as S x => S y , where S x and S y are the left-hand side (LHS) and right-hand side (RHS) of this rule, respectively. This rule means that S y can possibly occur where S x exists. The confidence of a candidate rule is the frequency that S y occurs when S x exists. If the confidence of this candidate rule is not less than a user-specified minimum confidence, it would be defined as an association rule in this data. In 2003,used the Apriori method to discover numerous gene interaction rules from gene expression data, many of which are biologically sensible. Every rule can indicate whether a given gene is expressed () or repressed (), to describe the expression relationship in a cellular environment. Suppose that the user discovers the rule {gene x } => {gene y ,gene z } from the gene expression dataset. This rule states that if gene x is expressed, then gene y is repressed and gene z is expressed together in this dataset.
Traditional association rule mining
Gene expression data transformation and basic definitions of our method
Transformation of gene expression data As with the modelCreighton and Hanash (2003) proposed, which consists of applying the association-based method on gene expression data analysis, each sample can be recognized as a transaction. Each expression value in the data can be transformed as up (; expressed; readings are > 0.2 for the log base 10 of fold change 1.58 as upper bound), down (; repressed; readings are lower than 0.2 for the log base 10 of fold change 1.58 as lower bound) or normal(neither expressed nor repressed). For the threshold value of 0.2, it is set in a reasonable range (fold change from 1.5 to 2.0) based on most microarray analysis studies in identifying the differentially expressed probes. The up or down notation suffices in displaying whether a gene is significant and has the probability to influence other genes. For this reason, only the expression value for each gene can be transformed as up or down in transactional data format, as shown in. After gene expression data transformation, gene x  and gene x  will be defined in different items. Thus, the number of items would be increased when either decreasing the upper bound or increasing lower bound, whereas that of items would be decreased when either increasing upper bound or decreasing lower bound.
Initial minimum supportThe support of an itemset S x is the frequency of S x occurrence in all transactions (Samples). The initial minimum support (IMS) is a user-specified baseline threshold to judge the support of each item. Items greater than, or equal to, IMS are called large 1-itemsets.
Initial minimum confidenceThe confidence of an association rule S x => S y is the frequency of S y occurrence when S x occurs. The initial minimum confidence (IMC) is a user-specified baseline threshold to judge the confidence of each rule.
Minimum relation supportIn the real case study of this research, we used the shortest distance between any two genes in the GRN as the relational importance. As an example,is a GRN. For any pair of neighboring genes (physical interaction) in the network, the distance between them will be defined as 1. Hence, the shortest distance between G2 and G4 is 1, and that between G1 and G2 is 3. In theory, two genes are more likely to involve the same pathways or biological functions if they have a shorter distance.is the gene shortest distance matrix retrieved from the GRN of., because G2 and G4 have a stronger relation intensity (with smaller shortest distance) than others in the GRN. Furthermore, if the itemset S has more than two items, based on the second equation, the MRS of S will be the maximum MRS of each item-pair in S. A large itemset would be generated as long as the support value of the itemset (contains at least two items) is not less than its corresponding MRS.MRS(S) = Max{MRS(x,y)|x,y  S and x = y, where S is an itemset containing more than one item} (2)
Minimum relation confidence As Creighton and Hanash (2003)proposed, this study focused on the rule S x => S y , where S x has a single item, as to limit the search space of candidate rules. In the Minimum relation confidence (MRC), we also used the shortest distance between any two genes in the GRN as the relation importance. Based on Equations (3)and(4), the MRC of rule S x => S y will be the maximum MRC of each item-pair between S x and S y. Suppose the user-specified IMC is 45% and the MRC({G2} => {G4, G5}) = Max{MRC(G2, G4), MRC(G2, G5)} = Max{39.4875, 46.0125} = 46.0125. Therefore, in this example, if the confidence value of the rule ({G2} => {G4, G5}) is not less than its corresponding MRC (46.0125), the rule would be an eligible association rule.
Relational-based multiple minimum supports association rules miningThe REMMAR algorithm was proposed to discover gene interaction rules from the gene expression database on relation intensity. As stated above in Section 2.1, REMMAR utilizes the main concept of Apriori to improve the efficiency of mining association rules compared with the brute force method. The REMMAR algorithm is shown below:The main process of the REMMAR algorithm is described as follows:(1) Count the support of each item in Database D (all samples). If the support of the item is greater than, or equal to, the IMS, it is called large 1-itemsets in L 1 (the set that includes all the large 1-itemsets).(2) Utilize the candidate-gen function to generate candidate k-itemsets in C k (the set that includes all the candidate k-itemsets) based on large k1-itemsets in L k1 .(3) Utilize the subset function to count the support of each candidate k-itemset in D.(4) If the support of the candidate k-itemset in C k is greater than, or equal to, the MRS of this itemset, it is called large k-itemsets in L k .(5) Increment k by 1 and repeat the procedure from Stage 2 to Stage 4 until candidate itemsets can no longer be generated.After the process of REMMAR, the algorithm can generate all large itemsets that satisfy the MRS. In the next phase, for each set of large itemset L and each possible subset A of L, they can generate the association rule A  (LA) that satisfies the MRC themselves. Following the proposal of, REMMAR have two important functions similar to other Apriori-based algorithms; the candidategen function and the subset function. The candidate-gen function is used to generate the
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONSThis section compares the association rules discovered from the proposed REMMAR algorithm to the reference Apriori method, and whether the former is superior at satisfying the biological meaning. The first part presents a brief introduction of the gene regulatory (GR) data, the proteinprotein interaction (PPI) data and two yeast-related datasets that were utilized. The second part offers a comparison of the significance of rules REMMAR discovered, against of reference Apriori method, to verify with the PPI network. The third part displays the discovered rules that are verified with biological literatures.
DatasetsThe GR and PPI data of S.cerevisiae were obtained from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (). The GRN is composed of 5331 genes interacting with one another via 143 668 transcriptional regulation interactions. The proteinprotein interaction network (PPIN) comprises 5603 proteins interacting with one another via 85 622 protein physical interactions. To the best of our knowledge, the microarray profile can be conducted in the three major experiments involving temporal, duplicate and perturbation (). In this study, we applied our proposed method on two microarrays involving individual datasets performed by. The former is a S.cerevisiae gene expression dataset on different stress in perturbation experiment, which contains a collection of 173 different stress conditions and a selection of 2993 genes. The latter is a S.cerevisiae gene expression dataset in duplicate on yeast segregation experiment. The dataset contains 6229 genes and 40 segregates with dye swap are included.
Evaluation with PPINIn the real case study, the shortest distance between any two genes in the GRN was used as the relation importance to discover association rules. The distances of proteins that have physical interactions are defined as 1 in PPIN. Moreover, the average shortest distance (ASD) between any two proteins is 2.771 in PPIN. This section shows that the rules discovered with REMMAR have stronger biological meanings (has the shorter ASD in the PPIN) than those discovered with the reference Apriori algorithm. The focus on rules was on position where the LHS possesses only a single item, asproposed, to limit the search space of candidate rules in this study. Therefore, if the rules represent their items with {gene x } => {gene y ,gene z }, the rule length (RL) is defined as 3 (RL3). In addition, if the shortest distance between gene x and gene y in PPIN is 2, then the shortest distance between gene x and gene z in PPIN is 4. Based on Equation (5), the ASD of this rule in PPIN is 3.where S x and S y are itemsets, n is the number of items in S yWe conducted a novel method named REMMAR, which automatically adjusted two arguments involving IMC and IMS. To prove that our improvement is significant, we set IMC of our method as 80%, which is same as the minimum confidence value introduced in the primitive Apriori algorithm of a previous approach (). On the other hand, we empirically set the values of IMS and minimum support since the aim of this research is to manually evaluate the mined rules by either REMMAR or Apriori with literature. By decreasing the values (lower threasholds) of IMS for REMMAR and minimum support for Apriori, a large number of satisfied rules will be mined. This arises a big problem that comprehensive evaluations of these massive rules would be beyond our ability. On the contrary, few rules will be mined when we increased the parameter values (higher threasholds). In facing this trade-off, in this study, we set both the IMS value for REMMAR and the minimum support value for Apriori as 60% in the first dataset () and 92% in the second dataset ().indicates the resultant rule numbers under different methods (Apriori and REMMAR) and different RLs in the first dataset. Here 'Common' represents the intersection of the results produced by Apriori and REMMAR algorithms. 'Apriori (no common)' and 'REMMAR (no common)' represent the respective results without the common intersection. In other words, all rules within the respective results are unique. From RL2 to RL7, both Apriori and REMMAR generated 42 739 (including common) and 53 616 (including common) rules, respectively. In all, 37 771 of the discovered rules appear in both generated rule sets. From RL2 to RL7, only a difference of 4968 and 15 845 rules exists. Furthermore,indicates the ASD under different methods and different RLs in the first dataset. In this table, REMMAR (no common) can discover shorter ASD rules in PPIN under any RL in contrast with Apriori (no common). The ASD (2.173) of a total number of association rules mined by REMMAR (no common) is better than
Y.-C.Liu et al.that (2.288) of the Apriori (no common). Therefore, in the result of this dataset, REMMAR can evidently mine not only more rules, but also rules of more importance in real biological significance than traditional association rule mining methods.indicates the result rule numbers under different methods (Apriori and REMMAR) and different RLs in the second dataset. From RL2 to RL14, Apriori and REMMAR generated 613 799 (including common) and 541 165 (including common) rules, respectively. However, 541 133 rules are shared in both generated rule sets. Hence, from RL2 to RL14, only 72 666 and 32 rules are different. Moreover,indicates the ASD under different methods and different RLs in the second dataset. In this table, REMMAR (no common) can discover shorter ASD rules in PPIN under any RL than Apriori (no common). The ASD (2.467) of a total number of association rules mined by REMMAR (no common) is better than that (2.873) of the Apriori (no common). The ASD 2.873 of Apriori (no common) is inferior to the ASD 2.771 between any two proteins in PPIN. Therefore, in the result of this dataset, REMMAR was evidently not generating many rules that have no real biological meanings.
Evaluation with literatureAfter evaluating the correlation of associated rules with ASD in PPIN, REMMAR, proposed in this study, has a lower ASD compared with the Apriori method. Genes involved in association rules have a high probability for representing an interaction at protein level, which includes three main types: positive regulation, negative regulation or physical interaction. However, the PPIN does not contain this information. This study applied REMMAR on two yeastrelated datasets, composed of differentially expressed values ofprobes. Upregulation and downregulation of a gene in different conditions are represented as two items within a transaction database (see Section 2). Both Apriori and REMMAR algorithms generated numerous rules from these two datasets, as shown inand 3. Verifying all these rules with literature is a difficult task. Therefore, if our identified rules have physical interactions in PPIN (ASD = 1), the rules whose regulations involve positive or negative regulations would be further verified with the literature. We showed the results in. In this table, we want to test whether these association rules are highly informative, especially in the biological domain. In previous studies, an increasing amount of literature has reported enormous critical regulations for gene pairs in certain conditions. These published papers were manually collected as ground truth for validating rules identified from these two datasets. In the Supplementary Material, the rules in each dataset in the beginning will be disassembled into a length of two as relations for verifying with the literature. For example, {YLL039C_Up} => {YDR074W_Up, YHR089C_Down} will be disassembled into {YLL039C_Up} => {YDR074W_Up} and {YLL039C_Up} => {YHR089C_Down} two disassembled relations. If prior studies have reported a disassembled relation, a positive serial number of corresponding papers will be assigned in its entry in the References column. On the contrary, the serial numbers in negative represent an opposite way between the relations and the statement of literature. For instance, for the first dataset results, we illustrate two relations: {YJL164C_Up} => {YPL203W_Up} and {YPL203W_Up} => {YJL164C_Up}. The former states that the overexpressed gene YPL203W is dependent on the upregulation of gene YJL164C, and
REMMARvice versa for the latter. In terms of this bidirectional regulation, these two genes may have a high cooperation or a similar function in a bioprocess. Interestingly,had identified that these two candidates can encode catalytic subunits of cAMPdependent protein kinases, and be encoded by the TPK genes in 1987. A similar result showed that these two genes play critical roles for the maintenance of iron levels (). For biologists, the most important issue is how these relations provide valuable information. The REMMAR method identified a novel relation between a pair of genes; {YCR057C_Down} => {YGL171W_Down}. To date, the relation has not been reported. To check the reliability of the novel regulation relation '{YCR057C_Down} => {YGL171W_Down}' discovered in this study, we get insights into the biological functions of these two genes through a literature survey. Both proteins, YCR057C and YGL171W, have been reported in the assembly of the 90S preribosomal particle to drive the process of ribosome biosynthesis (). Moreover, it has also been reported that they played functional roles involved in rRNA biogenesis in the nucleolus (). However, to the best of our knowledge, it has yet been reported that both proteins directly regulate each other even though they would colocalize with ribosomes and nucleolus. Therefore, we can provide biologists with this kind of gene regulation relation with high reliance in validation. Moreover, it has been reported that YCR057C could predominantly accumulate in a complex with YJL069C (). This relation can also be found in our results. Hence, this study provides a novel relation for gene pairs among a total number of 34 disassembled relations. All remaining relations in the two datasets coincided with previous studies in certain conditions of yeast species. Therefore, when comparing to the reference algorithm in this study, the advantages of applying REMMAR to automatically adjust MRS yield a precision of 100% (33/33, without considering the novel one), rather than Apriori's 87.5% (7/8). We can find an incorrect disassembled relation, {YPL154C_Up} => {YMR174C_Up}, which does not correspond to the contents of previous literature because Pai3p (YMR174C) was reported as a specific Pep4p (YPL154C) inhibitor (). However, since a pair of genes with long distance may involve in different pathways or play entirely different roles in a cell, we only verified the part of both methods that identified distinctive rules, whose ASD values are equal to 1 in PPIN. If the ASD of an identified rule is >1, this rule would not be considered for verification in this study. Definitely, there exist putative gene regulations that have yet been identified. Besides, all the rules and disassembled relations evaluated with literature are unique, as shown in the Supplementary Material. In fact, we found 33 verified disassembled relations that did not appear in the results by the reference Apriori algorithm. The results of this study suggest that the REMMAR method has a significant improvement, which can identify more association genes from microarray data.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
