
INTRODUCTIONHigh-throughput screening (HTS) technologies play a critical role in modern biological research and drug discovery (). One of the major advantages of HTS technologies is their ability to simultaneously interrogate thousands of genes/ compounds per experiment. To glean biological information from large volumes of HTS data, the first step in data analysis is to use specific graphics to visualize and display important features of data. Data display allows the identification of potential problems such as systematic spatial effects, pin issues, assay quality issues and so forth, as they occur (). The methods and figures of displaying data in HTS experiments have been described to disclose various patterns of spatial effects and assay quality issues in the literature (). Specific figures such as dual-flashlight plot have also been explored previously (). However, there is a lack of an analytic tool to implement all those methods and figures. To serve this need, here we develop an R package displayHTS to display data and results from HTS experiments. The R package can generate not only plate-based images but also differential abundance/enrichment plots. Specifically, it can generate useful distinctive graphics such as (i) the plate-well series plot that can display data well by well and plate by plate in an experiment (), (ii) the plate image that incorporates box-plot statistics and reveals positions and patterns of selected hits () and (iii) the dual-flashlight plot that shows both average fold change and effect size reflected by strictly standardized mean difference (SSMD) (). displayHTS can also generate other plots such as the volcano plot and plate correlation plot.
THE PACKAGE AND ITS USAGE
Description of package displayHTSThe R package displayHTS has four main functions: plateWellSeries.fn, image.design.fn, image.intensity.fn and dualFlashlight.fn. plateWellSeries.fn generates a scatter plot based on the measured or calculated values of each well in every plate in an HTS experiment. image.design.fn displays a plate design that can be used to visualize the arrangement of controls and samples in a plate. image.intensity.fn creates an image plot that shows the intensities or calculated values of every well using the box-plot statistics and allows for easy analysis of any systematic measurement errors. Finally, dualFlashlight.fn generates the dual-flashlight plot, volcano plot and plate correlation plot. This package also includes three example datasets: HTSdata, HTSdataSort and HTSresults. HTSdata contains the raw data; after sorting and removing redundant records, the data are stored in HTSdataSort; finally, the data are processed and the SSMD, mean, P-value and number of replicates of the data are contained in HTSresults. See Supplementary Materials and the help files of the packages for how to download the package and to use the functions.
Plate-well series plotIn a typical HTS experiment, there are tens to hundreds of plates each with 96, 384 or 1536 wells. It is important to display the measured or calculated values well by well and plate by plate in an experiment so that the existing position pattern both in each plate and across plates can be revealed. A scatter plot called a 'plate-well series plot' () has been designed to serve this purpose. In a plate-well series plot, the value of the x-axis is the index of the position of a well in a plate, whereas the labels in the x-axis are the plate numbers, instead of the index of the position of a well. The positions of wells in a plate can be indexed by either the rows or columns in a plate. The y-axis denotes the intensity either in the original scale, a transformed scale such as log-transformed, or a calculated value such as fold change, percent inhibition, *To whom correspondence should be addressed. z-score or SSMD. We may use different colours or point types to display the values of various control wells if there are controls in the experiments. The function plateWellSeries.fn in the package can draw a plate-well series plot for all or part of the plates in an HTS experiment (). The plate-well series plot can also display hit selection results in a screen as shown in the help file of plateWellSeries.fn. The advantage of a plate-well series plot is that it can effectively display plate-to-plate variability, show selected hits for all plates and present common data features of multiple plates in a single plot. See Zhang (2011) for examples.
Plate design imageFor both quality control and hit selection, it is important to display where the controls and samples are arranged in a plate, which is achieved by the plate design image. In a plate design image plot, the design of well types in a plate can be displayed by using different colours. The image of well-type design can show the positions of each type of wells including different control and sample wells. This information is helpful for revealing outliers, systematic errors and assay quality (). The function image.design.fn can display the design of well types in a plate of an HTS experiment. In addition, it can display hit selection results in a screen as shown in the example of its help file ().
Plate intensity imageAlthough presenting common data features of multiple plates in a single plot, the well-series plot cannot display the positional effects in an individual plate as straightforwardly as the plate intensity plots. Thus, in many cases, it is helpful to display the data and/or results in each individual plate so that the positional effects and other potential systematic errors such as pin effect can be revealed. A plate intensity image is built by incorporating box-plot statistics into a regular image plot (). That is, we first use the box-plot technique to find the lower and upper whiskers. The strongest green represents the lower whisker (instead of the minimal value in the regular image plot) and the strongest red represents the upper whisker (instead of the maximal value in the regular image plot). A green '' in a white well indicates that the value in that well is an outlier in the lower end, and a red '' in a white well indicates that the value in that well is an outlier in the upper end. The values in the legend are those between the upper and lower whiskers (). The plate intensity image can check the data plate by plate without the masking effect of outliers. The function image.intensity.fn can generate the plate intensity image.
Dual-flashlight, correlation and volcano plotsThe results for hit selection for each siRNA or compound are usually shown by SSMD, z-score and/or P-value. Those results for all siRNAs or compounds can be displayed by using dual-flashlight or volcano plots. SSMD is the average fold change (in log scale) penalized by the variability of fold change (in log scale) (). SSMD can overcome the drawback of average fold change not being able to capture data variability and has a probability-based classifying rule (). The dual-flashlight plot displays average fold change and SSMD with lines drawn that represent the thresholds in the SSMD-based classifying criteria () (). The dual-flashlight plot can be drawn using function dualFlashlight.fn in our package. This function can also be used to generate (i) volcano plot, which displays both average fold change and P-value (), which may be generated by using existing R packages like 'edgeR' (), and (ii) plate correlation plot, which is commonly used to check for reproducibility among replicate plates. See the help file of 'dualFlashlight.fn' for example codes.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONThe R package displayHTS provides an analytic tool that can generate figures for displaying data and hit selection results from HTS experiments. This package can be used to generate not only useful distinctive graphics including the plate-well series plot, plate image and dual-flashlight plot but also other commonly used figures such as volcano plot and plate correlation plot. The visualization of data and hit selection results enabled by displayHTS is critical to reveal various patterns of spatial effects and assay quality issues in HTS experiments for both small molecules and siRNAs.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
displayHTS at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
X.H.D.Zhang and Z.Zhang at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
