Motivation: Hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus are the two leading causes resulting in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). It is observed that hepatitis C virus (HCV) is relatively difficult to induce HCC compared with hepatitis B virus (HBV). This motivates us to reveal the reasons behind this from the viewpoint of immune genes. Results: To distinguish the immune genes with low-level expression in HBV-induced HCC, but high-level expression in HCV-induced HCC, the concept of distinction immune gene is proposed. A filter is then designed to screen these genes. By using gene positive network with strong correlations between genes, the genes are further filtered to form the set of key distinction immune genes. The 23 key distinction immune genes are screened, which are divided into four clusters, T cells, B cells, immune signalling and major histocompatibility complex. It is evident that the screened genes are important immune genes, which are activated in HCV-induced HCC, but inactivated in HBV-induced HCC. In HCV-induced HCC, the structures of HCV adaptively update, so that they are difficult to be identified by antigens. Therefore, the clinic advice is either to increase the update speed of antigens or reduce the update speed of the viruses during the treatment of HCV-induced HCC. Moreover, it is also advised to add T cells or add the expression levels of T cells to strengthen the ability to kill cancer cells. In contrast, HBV updates slowly, but the immunity system in HBV-induced HCC has been damaged seriously. As a result, the clinic advice is to improve the immune ability of patients subjected to HBV-induced HCC, such as increasing immunoglobulin, T cells and B cells and so forth. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) accounts for 7085% of primary liver cancers, ranking it at the fifth position among the most common malignancies worldwide and in the third position as a cause of cancer death (). HCC is a devastating tumour, with a mean survival of much less than one year if left untreated HCC. More than 500 million people worldwide are persistently infected with the hepatitis B virus (HBV) and/or hepatitis C virus (HCV), who are at a risk of developing chronic liver diseases, cirrhosis and even HCC (). Increasingly, experimental evidences suggest that viruses, such as HBV and HCV, contribute to HCC by directly modulating pathways that promote the malignant transformation of hepatocytes (). HCV infection is one of the major risk factors for HCC. However, cancer arises in only a subset of patients, which takes several years to develop. Therefore, the role of HCV in the aetiology of cancer has remained elusive (). HCV may activate the immune system, for instance, natural killer cells are activated by the HCV (). It is also noticed that HCC may escape adaptive immune responses (). In addition, cirrhosis is a transition state from normal liver to tumorigenesis in HCV-induced HCC (). There is a strong incentive to seek key immune genes and identify the relationship between these genes and hepatitisinduced HCC. Motivated by this, a filter is designed to screen these genes, and experiments are implemented by using the data from the Stanford database (). According to the experiment's results and analyses, clinical recommendations are finally given for the treatments of HCV-induced HCC and HBV-induced HCC. Equation-based dynamic network model () and graph-based gene community network () are usually used to model gene networks. In this study, gene community network will be used to describe gene networks.
DATA AND METHODS
DataThe data come from the Stanford database at http://genomewww.stanford.edu/hcc/Figures/SupTable3.xls (). There are 156 samples, and 3180 genes (represented by 3964 cDNAs). Only 136 samples related to hepatitis B or hepatitis C are chosen for our research, including four types of samples, 72 HBV-induced HCC samples, 4 HCV-induced HCC samples, 54 HBV-infected non-tumour liver samples and 6 HCV-infected non-tumour liver samples.
MethodsTo distinguish the immune genes with low-level expression in HBV-induced HCC, but with high-level expression in HCV-induced HCC, the concept of distinction immune gene is proposed. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com Definition 1. Distinction Immune Gene (DIG) A gene is called distinction immune gene (DIG) of the hepatitisinduced HCC provided that the following criteria are satisfied:(i) The average expression level of the gene in the HCVinduced HCC tissues, simply denoted by HC, is higher than the average expression level of the gene in the HCV-infected non-tumour liver tissues, simply called LC.(ii) The average expression level of the gene in the HBVinduced HCC samples, simply denoted by HB, is lower than the average expression level of the gene in HBVinfected non-tumour liver samples, simply dented by LB.(iii) The average expression level of the gene in HCV-infected non-tumour liver tissues is greater than the average expression level of the gene in HBV-infected non-tumour liver tissues.Definition 1 implies that a DIG should meet the condition HB5LB5LC5HC. As a result, a three-layer filter is proposed as follows:By using the three-layer filter, one can obtain the DIGs. To look at the relation among these genes, gene positive network is defined as follows.Definition 2. Gene positive network Gene positive network (GPN) is used to describe the positive relationship between genes. A connection matrix C is used to store gene community networks, whose element is c ij , defined by:c ij  p ij , i4j and 0 p ij 5T 1 0, i j 4 where p ij is the Pearson correlation coefficient between the i-th gene and j-th gene, and T is the pre-set threshold value (). For instance, when T  0.6 or T  0.8, the obtained GPN represents a strongly positive network or an extremely strong positive network. The higher is the threshold value, the stronger is the obtained gene positive network, describing the correlations between the genes. In this research, T  0.8 is used to screen key DIGs. To address the importance of the obtained DIGs, the following definition is given.Actually, SIS represents the strength of an individual distinction immune gene (DIG), whereas GIF stands for the major impacts of the gene on others genes in the network. As a result, the product of the SIS and GIF, namely DIGF, can describe the degree of importance of this gene in the immune system of the HCC. Greater is the DIGF, more important is the DIG.
RESULT
DIGsBy using the proposed three-layer filter, we obtain 128 DIGs. Deleting the duplicate genes, there are 120 DIGs left, which are shown in.
Key DIGs and biological functionsIn this subsection, we will look at the correlations between the obtained 128 DIGs. By setting the threshold value as T  0.8, an extremely positive-related network is established, shown in. It is noted that there are eight sets of genes forming extremely strong correlated positive networks, and the remaining genes have no big impacts on each other. In addition, the gene network with two nodes is generally composed of two same genes with different structures. Therefore, we only emphasize the gene networks with at least three nodes, leading to the four sets of key DIGs, denoted by A, B, C and D in. The biological functions of the four clusters composed of 23 genes are shown by. In the clustering set A, there are two major genes, named COPB2 and MARVELD2. It is known that the gene COPB2 is related to the signal transduction of G protein (), and MARVELD2 plays an important role in immune system signalling (). Therefore, the cluster A is about immune signals and immune regulation. In the clustering set B, there are four genes, including TRA@, TRB@, TRD@ and EPC1, which are all related to the T cells () with immune functions. As a result, the cluster B may reflect the relationship between the abnormalities of T cells and liver cancers. In the cluster C, there are genes, such as ID4, PSMF1, IGKC, CSF2RA, PHC2, SULT1E1, IGHV, IGL@, TNFSF10 and so on, which form B cell with immune functions. In the module D, there are three genes, such as MB, HLA-C and MSTP9, to form the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). The proteins encoded by the MHC genes present the antigens to T cells ().
Degree to importance to key DIGsIn this subsection, the degrees of the importance of the four gene clusters are discussed. Setting the threshold at T  0.6, the networks of the four clusters are shown by. It can be seen that the clusters A, B and C are strongly correlated, and the cluster D is isolated. It is clear that the cluster B is the centre of the cluster ABC, and the clusters A and C work as the main forces in this cluster. By using Definition 3, we can calculate the average DIGF for groups A, B, C and D as shown by. The results are generally consistent for T  0.4, 0.6 and 0.8, which indicates the main force A is much weaker than the main force C. As a result, the clusters B and C have higher degrees of importance. In consequence, we should pay more attention on the immune genes in the clusters B and C, that is, T cell and B cell genes. The T cell genes play a central role in the immune system, which is agreed with the conclusion by (). Moreover, the B cell genes are a major force in the immune system.
SUGGESTION FOR CLINIC TREATMENTIf a human body was regarded as a computer, the HCV and HBV would be the viruses, and the immune system would be the anti-virus software. It is noted that the HCV-induced HCC and HBV-induced HCC are different, thus we need to classify them and treat them in different ways.
Treatment advices to HCV-induced HCCThe immune genes are activated in HCV-induced HCC, which seem to be in a good position to kill cancer cells. However, HCV is an RNA virus, whose structures are variable. When an antigen identifies one of the structures, the HCV may mutate to form another structure (). Thus, it is challenging to identify the HCV with varying structures. The human body is just like a computer installed with anti-virus software, where theIGL@, IGHV, TNFSF10, IGHV5-78, SULT1E1, IGKC, PHC2, NKG7, MIG, CD8B1, HNRPU, TUFM, FAM76A, EPC1, Trans, TRD@, ID4, SCYA5, PIM2, TRB@, GBP1, CD79A, CSF2RA, CD3D, LCK, GZMK, CORO1A, PLEK, HLA-DQA1, FLRT3, HABP2, MEOX1, IL2RG, HLADQB1, VNN3, TRA@, EMP3, ISL1, ARHGAP30, CTSS, ICAM1, ARMCX3, ISG20, CECR1, SPTLC2, TFF3, PIK3CD, HLA-DQB2, SLA, MSTP9, TBXAS1, BIN2, HSPC022, D6S49E, SLC12A2, CXorf30, COPB2, ENO2, ACP5, OLAH, CFL1, CD53, SEMA5A, TLR2, MARVELD2, LITAF, EVI2A, CDK6, RAB8B, NCF4, G2692X, GLIS3, GABBR1, LACTB2, SPIB, CD3G, PSMF1, CNN1, C4orf19, LOC100506965, GSDMB, RALGAPA1, H6PD, LIPG, QPP, C3AR1, ADAM8, RRBP1, GBP3, AMD1, GPSM3, ASB1, TMEM205, SEMA4D, SLC7A7, ABHD15, HLA-C, MB, RAB31, KCNAB2, ITM2C, MAFB, CMTM7, BACE2, SGK, ZDHHC8, RHOJ, MED11, FAM46A, THRB, C12orf23, G277X, SYK, SLC11A3, LIMK2, CDKN2A, SLC3A2, ZNF218, NQO2, P4HA1 Trans  transcribed locus; G2692X  no gene information of GENE2692X; G277X  no gene information of GENE227X.update of viruses is always faster than the update of the software, eventually leading to the collapse of the computer. As a result, it is essential either to increase the update speed of antigens or reduce the update speed of the viruses during the treatment of HCV-induced HCC. Moreover, we have found that the T cells, a centre of DIGs, which is agreed with the conclusion by the reference (), are relatively weaker compared with B cells, the major force of DIGs. The weak T cells may be a reason that cancer cells cannot be killed efficiently. Therefore, it is also advised to add T cells or add the expression levels of T cells for the treatment of HCV-induced HCC.
Treatment advices to HBV-induced HCCHBV is a DNA virus, whose structures are rather stable (). Unfortunately, the immune system of HBV HCC has been seriously damaged, which has been clearly reflected by the downregulated expressions of the DIGs. In this case, the human body is just like a computer without protection from anti-virus software. Although the viruses update slowly, the virus can be infinitely replicated because of the absence of the protection of anti-virus software. Consequently, the computer or the human body will eventually collapse. To treat the HBV-induced HCC, the human body should be installed with anti-virus software, or called defence system. In other words, we need to strengthen the immune system of the patients with HBV-induced HCC, such as increasing immunoglobulin and T cells, B cells and so on.
CONCLUSIONThe main contribution is summarized as follows.
Theory and methodThe concept of the DIG has been proposed, and a three-layer filter is designed to screen these immune genes. By using the GPN and DIGF, the degrees of the importance of these genes have been characterized.
Experimental resultsThe 23 key DIGs are screened, which are divided into four clusters, T cells, B cells, immune signalling and MHC. It is evident that immune signalling, T cells and B cells form a strong correlated positive network, where T cells are in the centre, and B cells and immune signalling are the two main forces in this community; B cells are the strongest from the viewpoint of distinction immune gene forces in the community.
Clinical suggestionFor the HCV-induced HCC, the clinic advice is either to increase the update speed of antigens or reduce the update speed of the viruses. Moreover, it is also advised to add T cells or add the expression levels of T cells to strengthen the ability to kill cancer cells. For the HBV-induced HCC, the clinic advice is to improve the immune ability, such as increasing immunoglobulin, T cells and B cells and so forth. Conflict of Interest: none declared.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
J.Hu and D.Z.Gao at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Distinction immune genes of hepatitis-induced HCC at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
