PrIME-DLRS (or colloquially: 'Delirious') is a phylogenetic software tool to simultaneously infer and reconcile a gene tree given a species tree. It accounts for duplication and loss events, a relaxed molecular clock and is intended for the study of homologous gene families, for example in a comparative genomics setting involving multiple species. PrIME-DLRS uses a Bayesian MCMC framework, where the input is a known species tree with divergence times and a multiple sequence alignment, and the output is a posterior distribution over gene trees and model parameters. Availability and implementation: PrIME-DLRS is available for Java SE 6þ under the New BSD License, and JAR files and source code can be downloaded from
INTRODUCTIONThe surge in Bayesian phylogenetic methods over the last decade can be attributed to their ability to achieve more realistic models as well as a solid track record for resolving outstanding biological issues (). Recently, the interplay between gene family evolution and species phylogenies has gained particular attention, partly owing to the information that gene trees may confer on unresolved species relationships and also because it can shed light on orthology and paralogy of genes. With sophisticated conventional phylogenetic models burgeoning, it is therefore not surprising that there is a growing interest to extend them to a setting entailing both gene trees and species trees.
MODELIn, we presented a probabilistic model for gene family evolution. This work was extended in A  kerborg et al.(2009) to create the model DLRS (formerly GSR), in which the evolutionary process inheritantly relies on a species tree while allowing for a relaxed molecular clock. The acronym captures the key concepts underlying the model:illustrates the model: starting with a single lineage at the most ancient point in the species tree, a gene family evolves down by means of duplication, loss and speciation events. Duplications and losses are governed by duplication rate and loss rate akin to a birthdeath processwhereas lineages branch deterministically at speciations. Lineages that fail to reach the leaves of the species tree are pruned away. Consequently, the model properly accounts for species evolution to guide a gene family's evolution in a way that, for instance, a Yule process or a uniform distribution for gene tree divergence times do not. The resulting clock-like gene tree is then relaxed by applying iid rates on each branch in order to generate non-clocklike branch lengths on which a substitution model of choice acts to produce family sequences.
FEATURESTo accompany the DLRS model, we have developed the PrIME-DLRS software package as a part of the PrIME suite of phylogenetics tools (http://prime.sbc.su.se). PrIME-DLRS uses a Bayesian MCMC framework togiven a species tree S with divergence times t and a multiple sequence alignment Dsample from the posterior distribution of gene trees G, branch lengths l and model parameters (encompassing , , etc.). Using the MetropolisHastings algorithm and the factorization, pG, l, jD, S, t  PDjG, lpG, lj, S, tp PDjS, t , it suffices to compute the right-hand side numerator. PDjG, l can be computed with Felsenstein's pruning algorithm (), whereas PrIME-DLRS uses a dynamic *To whom correspondence should be addressed.programming approach on a discretization of S to calculate pG, lj, S, t, and uniform priors are employed for p. It should be noted that this approach avoids potential perils associated with including divergence times and substitution rates in the state space, instead of algorithmically integrating these into the branch lengths l. PrIME-DLRS provides a variety of user options, including some popular predefined substitution models (e.g.) as well as allowing for user-defined fixed-parameter substitution models for nucleotide, protein and codon data. A gamma distribution is currently used for the iid edge rates. The implementation also supports modelling rate variation over sites using discrete gamma rate categories (). Output consists of a tab-delimited file of samples from the posterior and can be analysed in any suitable tool, e.g. the coda package for CRAN R (). PrIME-DLRS has been implemented in Java and C. Compared to the original version published with A , the newer versions are more robust and typically 420 times quicker (see further Supplementary Material).
CONCLUSIONBy incorporating information on the species tree, PrIME-DLRS significantly improves on conventional species tree unaware approaches when inferring gene trees (). In A  kerborg et al., the method was shown to be self-consistent on artificial data generated in accordance with the model. In the same article, the significance of species tree guidance and a relaxed molecular clock was demonstrated on biological data utilizing a predicted whole-genome duplication in yeast. These findings have been further corroborated by the ability to classify syntenic one-to-one orthologs in Drosophila (Supplementary Material). Unlike certain similar approaches that take the species tree into consideration (e.g.), PrIME-DLRS requires no a priori derivation of clock relaxation parameters and can be run on individual gene families. Moreover, as demonstrated in the Supplementary Material, by inferring and , the model can provide estimates of genome-wide evolutionary duplication and loss rates. The Bayesian property of yielding a posterior distribution not only implicitly brings forth a confidence measure on gene trees but also provides an important step toward probabilistic orthology analysis when considering the reconciliation of the gene trees with the species tree (and Supplementary Material).
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
