Disease ontology (DO) annotates human genes in the context of disease. DO is important annotation in translating molecular findings from high-throughput data to clinical relevance. DOSE is an R package providing semantic similarity computations among DO terms and genes which allows biologists to explore the similarities of diseases and of gene functions in disease perspective. Enrichment analyses including hypergeometric model and gene set enrichment analysis are also implemented to support discovering disease associations of high-throughput biological data. This allows biologists to verify disease relevance in a biological experiment and identify unexpected disease associations. Comparison among gene clusters is also supported. Availability and implementation: DOSE is released under Artistic-2.0 License. The source code and documents are freely available through Bioconductor
INTRODUCTIONCharacterizing disease-disease relationships and mining gene-disease associations provides insights in analyzing high-throughput data to elucidate molecular mechanisms of complex diseases. Understanding similarities among diseases and among genes in disease context helps in early diagnosis, drug repurposing, and new drug development. Investigating gene-disease associations with gene lists obtained by high-throughput experiments helps exploring biological questions in disease context and discovering unanticipated functions. Disease ontology (DO) provides a consistent description of genes in disease perspectives. To provide researchers with more accessible of disease knowledge, the DO database () supplies a web browser for users to explore DO vocabularies while disease and gene annotations database () supplies a web interface for mapping genes and diseases. DO is organized as a directed acyclic graph, laying the foundation for computation of disease knowledge using semantic similarity algorithms. There are many generic quality tools for computation of semantic measures including SML, SimPack, SemMF, OWLSim and Similarity Library (http://goo.gl/ 3xCuJ6). These generic libraries can be employed to analyze DO semantic similarities. DOSim () was designed specific for DO, but the authors fail to maintain the package. Functional DO (FunDO) () implemented hypergeometric test to assess significant of DO associations with a gene list. However, FunDO doesn't allow users to customize the background set of genes and thus may introduce biases in the results. To address the shortcoming of lack of R/Bioconductor package that designed for computation of semantic and enrichment analyses based on DO, we present DOSE, that allows measuring semantic similarity among DO terms and genes using several information-content and graph-structure based algorithms. For evaluating functional associations with gene lists of highthroughput genomic and proteomic studies, DOSE supports hypergeometric test and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), which incorporate expression level measurements to extract disease relevance of biological experiments. More importantly, DOSE provides several DO-specific visualization functions to produce highly customizable, publication-quality figures of similarity and enrichment analyses that are not available elsewhere. With these visualization tools, the results obtained by DOSE are more interpretable.
IMPLEMENTATIONDOSE provides doSim function to compute semantic similarity among DO terms. DOSE implemented four information content based algorithms proposed by Resnik (), Lin (), Jiang and Conrath () and Schlicker (), respectively, and one graph based algorithm proposed by Wang () to measure the semantic similarity among DO terms. These algorithms were extended from in-house developed R package GOSemSim (). By mapping genes to DO annotations, geneSim function measures the semantic similarities among genes based on their annotated DO terms. Four combine strategies were implemented in DOSE for aggregating semantic similarity scores of multiple DO terms associated with genes, *To whom correspondence should be addressed. including max which calculates the maximum similarity score over all pairs of DO terms, avg which uses the average of similarity scores over all pairs of DO terms, rcmax which measures the maximum of RowScore and ColumnScore, where RowScore (ColumnScore) is the average of maximum similarity on each row (column) and best-match average which measures the average of maximum similarity scores on each row and column. The semantic similarity results obtained from doSim and geneSim can be visualized by simplot function. DOSE provides hypergeometric model to assess disease associations of differential express genes. The enrichDO function allows users to select an appropriate background of genes as baseline. The gseAnalyzer function supports GSEA to evaluate disease relevance of high-throughput data. These approaches can be used to verify whether the genes implicated in biological experiment are disease associated and to identify unexpected disease associations. Multiple comparison corrections including Bonferroni, Benjamini, False Discovery Rate and q-values are also incorporated. Disease associations among different gene clusters or gene lists from different conditions can be compared using in-house developed R package clusterProfiler (). Several visualization functions including barplot and cnetplot are implemented for visualizing significant disease associations and gene-disease association network respectively. Running sum of enrichment scores and its association with phenotype can be visualized using gseaplot function.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONDOSE was developed using the R statistical computing language and is released within Bioconductor project. It provides five algorithms for DO and gene semantic similarity measurements (); hypergeometric test for identifying significant disease association of gene list (and C); GSEA for interpreting genome wide expression profiles in disease context () and comparison of significant disease associations among different gene sets (). R scripts to generateare presented in Supplemental File. The DOSE package presented here makes use of semantic similarity approaches and enrichment analyses to facilitate users to investigate large gene sets. Moreover, DOSE provides users the abilities to visualize semantic similarities, significant gene-disease associations, and gene set comparison.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Ontology semantic and enrichment analysis at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
