Motivation: Nonlinear dose–response models are primary tools for estimating the potency [e.g. half-maximum inhibitory concentration (IC) known as IC50] of anti-cancer drugs. We present drexplorer software, which enables biologists to evaluate replicate reproducibility, detect outlier data points, fit different models, select the best model, estimate IC values at different percentiles and assess drug–drug interactions. drexplorer serves as a computation engine within the R environment and a graphical interface for users who do not have programming backgrounds. Availability and implementation: The drexplorer R package is freely available from GitHub at https://github.com/nickytong/drexplorer. A graphical user interface is shipped with the package.
IntroductionUnderstanding the doseresponse relationship of therapeutic compounds is a major focus of clinical oncology. Large-scale drug screening in cancer cell lines has demonstrated that different genomic characteristics (mutations) confer distinct drug sensitivity, supporting patient stratification into treatment regimens on the basis of genomic markers (). Cell lines resistant to single-drug treatment may respond to synergistic drug combinations (). As cell viability assays become widely used, it is important to provide easily accessible tools to analyze drug profiling data. We developed drexplorer software in the R environment (R Core) to encompass several aspects of doseresponse analysis: assess reproducibility of replicated experiments, detect outlier data points, fit different models, identify the best model, estimate inhibitory concentration (IC) values and evaluate drugdrug interactions.
AlgorithmsA typical drug screening experiment exposes cells to a range of concentrations (doses) of a drug and quantifies cell viability (response). To account for experimental variations, multiple measurements are obtained for each dose. We denote the jth repeat of the ith dose by x ij and the corresponding response by y ij. For anti-cancer drug screening, response y ij is further scaled by the mean response of the controls (i.e. under x ij  0) and is called relative viability.
Outlier detectionOutlier values in response y ij will affect doseresponse curve fitting and IC estimation. We implement the Newman test () to detect outliers, defining the test statistic as q  w=s, where w is the maximum difference among the response vector y i1 ;. .. ; y imi  at the ith dose and s is the standard deviation of the response in untreated controls. Once calculated, the test statistic can be comparedwith the threshold value from the null distribution under the specified type I error (a  0:01 or 0:05). We apply this test to identify outlier data points at each dose separately.shows outlier detection using the ryegrass data ().
Assessing reproducibilityWhen replicate experiments have been performed, it is necessary to assess the quality of the reproducibility. We use the concordance correlation coefficient (CCC) to capture both the location shift and the scale shift between replicates (). CCC ranges between 1 and 1, where CCC  1 means perfect agreement.illustrates the reproducibility assessment for two technical replicates run on different dates.
The doseresponse modelThe doseresponse model can be expressed as a nonlinear function:where h is the vector of unknown parameters, e ij is the measurement error for the response y ij , n is the total number of doses administered and m i is the number of repeats under the ith dose. The error term e ij is assumed to be identically independently distributed as N0; r 2 . In the case of the sigmoid Emax model, f  has the following form:Here, h  E 0 ; E max ; ED50; h is the vector of parameters to be estimated. The doseresponse models in drexplorer include all the models in the drc () and DoseFinding () packages and can be easily used through a uniform interface. Parameters in the doseresponse models can be estimated by minimizing the sum of the squared residuals (SSR):After fitting the model, we estimate the IC at percentile s by solving x in equation s  f x; ^ h ; where ^ h is the vector of the fitted parameters. Different models can be fit, so we identify the best model as that with minimum residual standard error, calculated as SSR divided by degrees of freedom. Approaches for parametric doseresponse models may use the Akaike information criterion or Bayesian information criterion.
The Interaction Index for Drug CombinationsThe interaction index (IAI) is useful to quantify the degree of interaction in drug combinations. For a 2-drug combination, IAI can be defined asHere, D y,1 and D y,2 and are the doses needed to induce response y for drugs 1 and 2 when administered alone; d 1 and d 2 are the doses in the mixture that produce the same response y. We adopt the source code used byand Lee and Kong (2009) to estimate the IAI and 95% confidence interval (seeusing UMSCC22B data;). Graphical user interfaces (GUIs) help users without advanced programming skills to analyze doseresponse data (and e).(c) Reproducibility assessment using concordance. Responses from two replicates are highly concordant showing good reproducibility. (d) GUI screenshot for doseresponse estimation. (e) GUI screenshot for interaction index estimation.
ConclusionDrexplorer is a versatile R package encompassing several aspects of doseresponse and drugdrug interaction analysis. The GUI enables biologists without programming skills to analyze their data.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
P.Tong et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
