DroPhEA is a core module of a web application that facilitates research in insect functional genomics through enrichment analysis on mutant phenotypes of fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster). The phenotypes investigated in the analyses can be predefined by FlyBase or customized by users. DroPhEA allows users to specify mutation or ortholog types, displays enriched term results in a hierarchical structure and supports analyses on gene sets of all insect species with a fully sequenced genome.
INTRODUCTIONEnrichment analysis is a promising strategy for investigators to biologically interpret gene lists obtained from high-throughput studies in the post-genomic era. Among the backend annotations employed in different enrichment tools (see review in), mutant phenotype annotation is unique because it represents the consequence of altering the information output of a gene. Therefore, annotations of phenotypes are an ideal means to aid in the understanding of how a set of genes function within the context of the whole organism. Studies in fruit-fly biology were first documented in the early 1900s (); over the last century, Drosophila has become one of the most widely used model organisms for animal genetics and developmental biology. As an insect species, in addition to basic genetics studies, Drosophila has served as a model to assist in agricultural and epidemiological investigations. The richness and comprehensiveness of fly omics data have been invaluable to many fields of biology. Currently, the proportion of mutated and phenotyped fly genes (36.9%; 5606 of 15 191 genes mapped to the genome) is approaching that of the house mouse (Mus musculus) [40% of the genes comprising the mouse genome have been phenotyped;. However, with the exception of the house mouse (), an enrichment tool based on mutant phenotypes of another species has never been developed. Some bioinformatic tools for insect genomics, such as FlyMine (), * To whom correspondence should be addressed. do not implement mutant phenotype data. Insects and mammals diverged from each other >900 million years ago (). Due to the substantial anatomical, physiological, developmental and behavioral differences between insects and mammals, it is challenging to utilize mammalian phenotypes to explore insect functional genomics. We therefore developed DroPhEA (Drosophila Phenotype Enrichment Analysis). Similar to MamPhEA, a phenotype enrichment tool for analyses on mammalian genes (), DroPhEA provides several useful features. First, DroPhEA allows enrichment analysis not only on phenotypes predefined by FlyBase (http://flybase.org/), but also on customized phenotypes to study complex traits. Second, different types of mutations exhibit distinct impacts on protein function; to remove potential biases caused by the use of data derived from differential mutagenesis approaches (), DroPhEA enables users to perform analyses that exclude phenotypes derived from gain-of-function mutations. Third, DroPhEA generates graphical and downloadable output displaying the enriched or depleted phenotypes according to the hierarchical structure of the phenotypic classification. Finally, due to the paucity of phenotypic data in insect species other than Drosophila melanogaster, DroPhEA supports analyses of genes orthologous to D.melanogaster for all insect species with a fully sequenced genome (17 to date). Through integration with MamPhEA, DroPhEA is also capable of analyzing mammalian genes.
IMPLEMENTATIONMutant fly phenotypic data were retrieved from FlyBase (version FB2011_03) (http://flybase.org/). Phenotypic entries resulting from mutations affecting multiple loci were excluded. FlyBase applies two hierarchically structured and controlled lexicons to describe phenotypes: (i) 'Phenotypic class' (FBcv term) represents the pathology, or the effect of the mutation on the whole organism (e.g. lethal, sterile) and (ii) 'Anatomy' (FBbt term) describes the body part manifested by the mutation (e.g. eye, antenna) (). Phenotypic descriptions of a fly mutant allele are often expressed as a compound statement comprising multiple terms. In such cases, we treated each term in the compound statement individually. In fact, we found that each composite term usually contained only one 'phenotypic class' FBcv term or 'anatomy' FBbt term, and the remaining terms were used as 'qualifiers' (FBcv:0000005; e.g. 'dominant') or 'occurrent' terms (FBdv:00007008; e.g. 'pupal stage P5'), among others. Consequently, most of the compound phenotypic descriptions can
DroPhEAsimply be expressed as a 'phenotypic class' FBcv term, or 'anatomy' FBbt term for subsequent analyses. The analysis of gene sets of other insect species was supported by obtaining orthology information of each species to D.melanogaster from the InParanoid database (version 7.0, http://inparanoid.sbc.su.se/). DroPhEA typically compares two gene sets. When one gene set is provided, it is compared with the rest of the genes in the genome. Genes without a 'phenotypic class' FBcv term or 'anatomy' FBbt term are excluded prior to the analysis. Significantly enriched or depleted phenotypes are detected by Fisher's exact test. P-values can be Bonferroni corrected for multiple tests. DroPhEA allows users to customize phenotypes by combining existing FlyBase controlled lexicons by a keyword search, or by browsing FBcv or FBbt term ontologies. Enrichment analysis applying customized phenotypes gives DroPhEA the capability of exploring complex traits, such as gene essentiality (see Examples 1.1 and 1.2 in Section 3.1 below). Default DroPhEA generates graphical output displaying a hierarchical structure of enriched/depleted phenotypes. DroPhEA also produces classic output in a simple linear text format showing differentially enriched phenotypes. JavaServer Pages (JSP) and MySQL database on an Apache Tomcat server was used to build the web interface.
EXAMPLESTwo examples provided on the DroPhEA website are used to illustrate the use of DroPhEA in hypothesis testing and knowledge discovery.Genes ubiquitous in genomes across a wide range of the phylogenetic spectrum are likely to perform fundamental biological functions throughout different taxa and taxonomic levels, and are therefore expected to be more critical to individual fitness (survival or reproduction). For the fruit fly, genes vital to fitness (essential genes) can be defined by association with the lethal or sterile mutant phenotype (). Therefore, we created the 'essentiality' phenotype by combining the controlled lexicons FBcv:0000351 (lethal) and FBcv:0000364 (sterile). Consistent with our expectation, the results indicated 3151 Drosophila genes with one human ortholog (retrieved from BioMart version 61) exhibited a strong enrichment in the customized phenotype 'essentiality' relative to the genomic background (P = 1.17E-4). Similarly, we examined 7852 fly lineage-specific genes, defined as genes without an ortholog in the human genome based on the BioMart annotation. Contradictory to the results of the fly-human one-to-one orthologs, the fly lineage-specific genes were significantly depleted with the 'essentiality' phenotype (P = 1.91E-40). This example demonstrates that DroPhEA is a promising bioinformatic tool to explore complex traits.
Essentiality
Genes associated with mosquito blood-feeding behavior (Example 2)Blood-feeding behavior is an important characteristic of mosquito species. To elucidate the genetic components in the insect genome that have been acquired or are associated with the adaptation
CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVEDroPhEA is an online tool used to explore insect functional genomics through enrichment analysis of D.melanogaster phenotypes. Modules for enrichment analyses on phenotypes of model organisms other than mouse and fly will be added with increased availability and improved annotations of eukaryotic phenotypic data in the future. The backend databases of DroPhEA are automatically updated every 2 months. The tutorial of DroPhEA is available online at http://evol.nhri.org.tw/phenome/.
Funding: National Health Research Institutes Intramural Fund and
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
