Motivation: Drug repositioning, which aims to identify new indications for existing drugs, offers a promising alternative to reduce the total time and cost of traditional drug development. Many computational strategies for drug repositioning have been proposed, which are based on similarities among drugs and diseases. Current studies typically use either only drug-related properties (e.g. chemical structures) or only disease-related properties (e.g. phenotypes) to calculate drug or disease similarity, respectively, while not taking into account the influence of known drug–disease association information on the similarity measures. Results: In this article, based on the assumption that similar drugs are normally associated with similar diseases and vice versa, we propose a novel computational method named MBiRW, which utilizes some comprehensive similarity measures and Bi-Random walk (BiRW) algorithm to identify potential novel indications for a given drug. By integrating drug or disease features information with known drug–disease associations, the comprehensive similarity measures are firstly developed to calculate similarity for drugs and diseases. Then drug similarity network and disease similarity network are constructed, and they are incorporated into a heterogeneous network with known drug–disease interactions. Based on the drug–disease heterogeneous network, BiRW algorithm is adopted to predict novel potential drug–disease associations. Computational experiment results from various datasets demonstrate that the proposed approach has reliable prediction performance and outperforms several recent computational drug repositioning approaches. Moreover, case studies of five selected drugs further confirm the superior performance of our method to discover potential indications for drugs practically. Availability and Implementation: http://github.com//bioinfomaticsCSU/MBiRW. Contact:
IntroductionThe last decades have witnessed impressive advances in genomics, life sciences and technology. However, drug discovery process is still time consuming, risky and tremendously expensive (). Even with the continuously increasing investments of research and development (R&D), the number of new drugs approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has been declining since the late 1990s (). In light of the challenge in traditional drug discovery, identifying new indications for existing drugs, also known as drug repositioning or drug repurposing, has attracted increasing interests from both the pharmaceutical industry and research community (). Drug repositioning can speed up the process of drug development and reduce risk, as repositioning candidates have already passed all necessary tests common to de novo drug discovery and development. Therefore, drug repositioning has consequently become a major strategy and played a key role in drug discovery and development. In addition, several successful repositioned drugs (e.g. Sildenafil, thalidomide, raloxifene) have generated historically high revenues for their patent holders or companies (). The goal of drug repositioning is to find potential new uses for existing drugs and apply the newly identified drugs to the treatment of diseases other than the drug's originally intended disease (). Recently, some computational methods have been proposed to predict direct drugdisease associations for drug repositioning. For example, Chiang and Butte (2009) developed a network-based, guilt-by-association method, to predict potential drugdisease associations. This methodology recommended the novel use of a drug based on the assumption that if two diseases share some similar treatment profiles, then the drugs used for only one of the two diseases could also be used for the other. However, the method is biased toward both older drugs with diverse uses and diseases with diverse treatments.conducted multiple drugdrug and diseasedisease similarity measures to construct discriminate features, and implemented a classification algorithm named PREDICT to predict novel drug indications.constructed a weighted disease and drug heterogeneous network based on known diseasegene and drugtarget relationships, and applied network clustering to identify drug candidates.proposed a novel heterogeneous network model which integrated drug repositioning and target prediction into one unified computational framework. Based on the framework, an iterative algorithm was developed to rank candidate drugs for each disease.developed a network-based prioritization method named DrugNet, which simultaneously integrated information about diseases, drugs and targets to perform drugdisease and diseasedrug prioritization.formulated drug disease association prediction problem as recommending preferable diseases for drugs and adopted two existing recommendation methods, ProbS and HeatS, to infer drugdisease associations directly. Most of these approaches usually perform drugdisease prediction by exploiting drug similarity and disease similarity, while similarity measures are often based on some important drug-or disease-related properties. However, previous studies seldom utilized the known drugdisease interaction information of dataset for defining similarity measures, and yet can be exploited to improve similarity measures. In this study, we present a novel prediction method MBiRW, which adopts effective mechanism to measure similarity for drugs and diseases, respectively, and applies Bi-Random walk (BiRW) algorithm to predict potential indications for existing drugs. In the new similarity measures, similarity calculated based on drug-or disease-related properties is improved in two aspects. First, as previous studies () have found that weak similarity provides little information for interaction inference, we adjust those weak similarities which are not informative for drugdisease prediction by correlation analysis. Second, two drugs are considered to be more similar if they have common indications, or there exist other drugs which have common indications with them simultaneously. Drugs and diseases are clustered based on their shared commons, and similarity for drugs or diseases which belong to the same cluster is adjusted. What's more, as it has been demonstrated better performance than other random-walk methods on disease gene prioritization, BiRW algorithm () is adopted to predict potential associations between drugs and diseases in this study. Furthermore, we compare and evaluate the performance of MBiRW on various datasets by adopting common metrics. Experimental results demonstrate that MBiRW has the superior capability to discover potential disease indications for drugs.
Materials and methodsIn this section, the dataset used in this study is firstly presented. Then, based on the assumption that similar drugs often indicate similar diseases, a novel approach of integrating comprehensive similarity measures with Bi-directional Random Walk(BiRW), referred to MBiRW, is proposed to predict potential associations between drugs and diseases. Generally speaking, the overall prediction procedure of MBiRW consists of three steps described as follows. Based on the collected dataset, comprehensive similarity measures are firstly implemented to measure similarity for drugs and diseases. Then, a heterogeneous network consisting of drug similarity network, disease similarity network and drugdisease interactions, is constructed. Last, based on the heterogeneous network, BiRW is implemented to rank candidate diseases for drugs.
DatasetThe gold standard dataset used in this study is obtained from the Supplementary Material of paper, which collected comprehensive associations between drugs and diseases from multiple data sources. For this dataset, there are 1933 known drug disease associations involving 593 drugs registered in DrugBank () and 313 diseases listed in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) ().
Similarity measuresThe similarity measures can be described briefly as follows: first, calculate drug similarity Sim r p and disease similarity Sim d p based on some drug-related properties and disease-related properties, respectively; second, analyze and evaluate the predictive power of various similarity values calculated above, and adjust these similarity values based on the analysis results to obtain new drug similarity Sim r l and disease similarity Sim d l ; last, cluster drugs and diseases based on the known drugdisease associations, respectively, then according to clustering results, Sim r l and Sim d l can be further improved to obtain comprehensive similarity measures Sim r for drugs and Sim d for diseases.
Drug similarity measureBased on the description above, the similarity between drugs can be measured in three steps.Step 1: Similarity measured based on drug-related properties. In this study, drug similarity Sim r p is calculated based on their chemical structures. SMILES (Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry Specification) is a line notation for describing chemical structures, the Canonical SMILES () of all drugs are downloaded from DrugBank, and the Chemical Development Kit () is used to calculate the similarity of two drugs as the Tanimoto score () of their 2D chemical fingerprints. According to Sim r p , known drugdisease association information is incorporated to improve drugs similarities in the following steps.Step 2: Analysis of similarity. According to the findings that weak similarities provide little information for prediction in previous researches, we analyze the correlation between similarity Sim r p of two drugs and the existence of their common diseases, and transform similarity Sim r p which is not informative for prediction into some value close to zero. The correlation analysis procedure can be described as follows:(i) the range of value of Sim r p , which is, is divided into ten equal subranges. For each subrange, the percentage of drug pairs sharing common diseases is calculated. (ii) All values of Sim r p are randomly permutated for drug pairs using Fisher-Yates shuffling () to form randomized drug similarities, and the percentage is calculated in the same way as step one. Overall, the average of 10 randomized results is used as a control for background signal. (iii) Based on the above results, a similarity threshold LSim is determined. That is to say, values of drug pairs whose similarity value is smaller than LSim has a small probability of sharing common diseases and thus is not informative for prediction. For Si m r p of the gold standard dataset, the drug similarity correlation analysis result is shown in(A). In our work, we adjust Sim r p by applying the logistic function which has been used byto modify the phenotypic similarities between diseases associated with genes. The logistic function is defined as follows,where x denotes the value of Sim r p value, c and d are the parameters which can be tuned to control the adjustment of Sim r p. Those small similarity values can be transformed into some values close to zero. At the same time, those large similarity values will be enlarged by logistic function. By applying the above procedure, drug similarity Si m r p is transformed to new similarity Sim r l. graph of drugdisease interactions. A prototype example of the heterogeneous network is illustrated in.
Implementation BiRW algorithm for ranking candidate diseases for each drugThe drugdisease prediction process is modeled as a random walk on the drug similarity network and disease similarity network simultaneously. Considering the diverse topology and structure characteristics of different networks, the optimal number of random walk steps on the two networks may be different. Therefore, two parameters l, r are introduced as the numbers of maximal iterations in the left and right random walks on these two networks. The iterative random walk process is described as follows. Left walk in the drug network: left RD t  a  MR  RD t1  1  a  ARight walk in the disease network:where MR mm , MD nn and A mn denote adjacency matrices of drug similarity network, disease similarity network and drugdisease association network, respectively, m and n represent the number of drugs and diseases, respectively. left_RD t and right_RD t represent the predicted drugdisease associations based on walking on drug similarity network and disease similarity network, respectively. The value of element left_RD t (i,j) and right_RD t (i,j) denotes the probability that drug r i associates with disease d j. In the iteration process, RD t is the averaged output from left walks and right walks in each step. The larger the value of RD t (i, j), the greater the probability that drug r i associates with disease d j is. The complete MBiRW algorithm for inferring potential drugdisease associations is outlined as in.
Experiments and resultsIn this section, we firstly introduce several common metrics used to measure the performance of various prediction methods. By applying these evaluation metrics, we performed a comprehensive comparison of MBiRW with the other three methods on the gold standard dataset. Then, case studies are conducted to confirm the ability of MBiRW to find potential indications for drugs. After that, to test the generalization ability of MBiRW, systematic evaluation experiments are further conducted with the other two different datasets.
Evaluation metricsTo systematically evaluate the performance of different methods, we conduct tenfold cross validation, de novo prediction and independent dataset test. In the tenfold cross validation, all known drug disease associations in gold standard dataset are randomly divided into ten subsets with equal size. In each cross validation trial, one subset is taken in turn as the test set, while the remaining nine subsets constitute the training set. After performing prediction, each association is given a predicted score. According to the final predicted scores, each known association between drug i and disease j in the test set is ranked relative to the candidate associations (all associations which have not been verified to associate with drug i experimentally until now). For a specified rank threshold, TPR (true positive rate) is the fraction of known associations that are correctly predicted, FPR (false positive rate) is the fraction of unknown associations that are predicted, Precision is the fraction of known associations that are ranked within the rank threshold, and Recall is equivalent to TPR. By varying the rank threshold, we can calculate various TPR (true positive rate), FPR (false positive rate), Precision and Recall values. Then receiver operating curve (ROC) and precision-recall curve (PRC) can be drawn based on these measure values to show the performance of the different prediction approaches. Considering the fact that the predicted top-ranked results are more important in practice, we also measure the performance of all prediction methods in terms of the top-ranked results, i.e. the numbers of correctly retrieved true drugdisease associations based on various top portions. Usually, it is regarded as more effective if the method can rank more true associations in top portions. Currently, there are many experimental and withdrawn drugs which have no explicit indications in drug-related database, whileA two-layer drugdisease heterogeneous network consisting of drug drug similarity network, diseasedisease similarity network and drugdisease interactions while two networks are connected by the drugdisease associations. In drugdisease heterogeneous network, the weights of solid lines denote the intra-similarities, the dashed lines denote the known drugdisease associationsDescription of algorithm MBiRW. It takes R, D, A, the decay factor a, left walk steps l and right walk steps r as the inputs, then performs drugdisease association prediction by iteratively updating the values of matrix RD according to matrix MR, MD, A. In algorithm MBiRW, matrix SimR and SimD are normalized by Laplacian normalization. For SimR, a diagonal matrix D SimR is defined such that D SimR (i, i) is the sum of row i of SimR. We set normalized matrix MR as SimR 1=2 *D SimR *SimR 1=2 , the elements of MR is defined as MR(i,j)SimR(i,j)/ ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffi D SimR i; i  D SimR j; j p . The same normalization procedure is applied to matrix SimD, and then constructs the normalization matrix MD these drugs have the potential to indicate some diseases. In our study, de novo prediction test is performed to evaluate the effectiveness of the prediction methods when predicting potential diseases for new drugs (which have no any known associated indications).
Comparison with other methodsMBiRW is compared with the other three network-based prediction methods: NBI (), HGBI () and DrugNet (). NBI conducts prediction based on a two-step diffusion model on a bipartite graph. HGBI is introduced based on the guilt-by-association principle and an intuitive interpretation of information flow on the heterogeneous graph. Although NBI and HGBI were originally developed for drugtarget association prediction, while the authors have mentioned that these prediction methods can also be applied in prediction of drugdisease network. In addition, for drug repositioning applications, they have been used to perform drugdisease association prediction in. DrugNet is a network-based drug repositioning method, which is able to perform both drugdisease and disease drug prioritization. In this paper, these methods are evaluated and compared using the same datasets, by cross-validation, independent test set and de novo drugdisease prediction analysis.
Drug and disease similarity analysisBased on the procedure of analysis on similarity described in previous section, we firstly perform the correlation analysis on drug similarity Sim r p by considering known drugdisease associations information of the gold standard dataset, the result is depicted in(A). Then, we conduct the similar analysis on disease similarity Sim d p in the same way, and the result is depicted in(B). As we can see from, drug pairs with similarity values smaller than 0.4 have an insignificant probability to indicate common diseases, and drug pairs which have similarity values larger than 0.7 have a a significant probability to indicate common diseases. Then for drug similarity values x 2 0; 0:4, we set Lx % 0, L(0)  0.0001 and L0:4 < 0:01, which determines d as log(9999), and c as-11 in logistic function (1) for drug similarity. Regarding(B), disease pairs which have similarity values lower than 0.3 have an insignificant probability to share drugs, and those which have similarity values higher than 0.6 have a significant probability to share drugs. Then for disease similarity values x 2 0; 0:3, we set Lx % 0, L(0)  0.0001 and L0:3 < 0:01, which determines d as log(9999), and c as 15 in logistic function (1) for disease similarity. Finally, we performed similarity transformation by using logistic functions determined above to obtain adjusted drug similarity and disease similarity, respectively.
Tenfold cross validationThe impact of parameters used in MBiRW on the prediction performance is first investigated by conducting cross validation, and the detailed performance measurement results with various parameter settings are reported in Supplementary Table S1. It shows that parameter a ranging from 0.1 to 0.7 has little effect on the prediction performance, and MBiRW achieves better performance when setting parameter l equal to r. In this study, we set the parameter a to 0.3, and l, r to 2 for MBiRW. The parameter (a  0.4) of HGBI is set to be that used in (). The evaluation results of all methods in terms of ROC curves and top-ranked results of all the drugdisease associations, are reported in. It should be pointed out that, in each cross validation trial, we analyze drug similarity and disease similarity, and cluster drugs and diseases again, without using the information about the test drugdisease associations. In terms of AUC (the area under of ROC curve), MBiRW (AUC: 0.917) performs better than other methods. Moreover, the number of correctly retrieved drugdisease associations is shown in(B). For a specified top-ranked threshold, a true drugdisease association is considered as correctly retrieved if the predicted ranking of this association is higher than the specified top-rank threshold. Obviously, when focusing on the top-one results, MBiRW significantly outperforms the other three methods. For example, among the 1933 true drugdisease associations, 586 of them are predicted at the top one based on MBiRW. The top-ranked predictions are particularly important in practice, so MBiRW can be more useful than other methods. We also report the experiment results in terms of the precision-recall curves depicted in Supplementary, and MBiRW also shows better performance than other methods in precision and recall analysis. In general, the prediction results of MBiRW illustrates that the adjusted drug and disease similarities by integrating some prior interaction information can significantly enhance performance of prediction.
De novo drugdisease predictionTo evaluate the capability of MBiRW in predicting potential indications for new drugs, we conduct the de novo drugdisease prediction test. In de novo prediction test, for each queried drug i, all known drugdisease associations with drug i are removed. The performance of a prediction method is evaluated by the rank of the removed drugdisease associations relative to candidate associations with drug i. In the gold standard dataset, each drug has at least one known associated disease, then we perform de novo prediction test for all drugs. The other three methods compared with MBiRW can also be applied to predict potential diseases for new drugs. The experiment results in terms of ROC curves and top-ranked results are reported in.
MBiRWAs we can see from, MBiRW achieves an AUC value of 0.842, which is better than that of other methods in the same experimental scenario too. Meanwhile, when focusing on the topranked prediction results, among the 1933 known drugdisease associations, MBiRW predict 209 of them at the top one. For PR curves analysis results in Supplementary, it shows that MBiRW also exhibits the optimal predictions. Overall, all de novo prediction results show that our method can achieve the superior performance.
Independent test setWe also investigate the performance of the various methods for drugdisease association prediction on the independent test set. In order to create the independent test set, the published drugdisease associations are derived from KEGG () database and literature () firstly. Then an independent test set with 144 new drugdisease pairs for 115 drugs can be obtained after removing those associations existing in the gold standard dataset. The test of independent dataset is conducted to measure the performance of all prediction methods, by predicting new drugdisease associations in the independent dataset. The test results are reported in Supplementaryin terms of ROC curves, top-ranked analysis and PR curves. From these results, we can clearly see that MBiRW achieves the best AUC value of 0.831, and 15 new associations are ranked at top one. In addition, MBiRW also outperforms other methods in terms of PR curves, and achieves the highest precision. All these results shows that MBiRW achieves the best performance on independent test set, which is consistent with the evaluation on the gold standard dataset.
Measuring the effects of the comprehensive similarity measuresThe computation of comprehensive similarity measures includes three steps as described in Section 2.2. We compare four methods (BiRW1, BiRW12, BiRW13 and MBiRW) by cross-validation expereiments. In these methods, various similarity calculation steps are considered in similarity measures. For BiRW1, step one is involved in similarity measures, which means only the drug-or diseaserelated property information is used to calculate similarity. For BiRW12, both step one and step two were implemented in similarity measures, which means similarity measured by step one is adjusted by corresponding similarity analysis. For BiRW13, both step one and step three are taken in measuring similarity, which means similarity measured by step one is adjusted by taking known drugdisease associations into account. For MBiRW, all three steps are involved in similarity measures. The comparison results in terms of ROC curve and top-ranked results by these methods are depicted in Supplementary. Itshows that BiRW1 is inferior to that of all other methods. The AUC value of BiRW1 is 0.87, and only 166 associations can be correctly retrieved at the top one. While the AUC values of BiRW12 and BiRW13 are 0.896 and 0.897, respectively, which means that prediction performance can be improved by integrating known association information into similarity measures. MBiRW outperforms all other methods in terms of AUC values, top-ranked results and PR curves, which further demonstrate the effectiveness of the comprehensive similarity measures.
Case studiesAfter confirming the excellent performance of our method based on cross validation, the capability of MBiRW in predicting novel drug disease associations is further examined here. To predict novel indications for drugs, all the known drugdisease interactions in the gold standard are used as the training set, and the remaining drug disease pairs which are not known to be associated in our gold standard dataset formed the set of candidate drugdisease associations. By applying the method of MBiRW, we can obtain the prediction scores for all candidate drugdisease pairs. MBiRW can predict the potential associations for all the drugs simultaneously. For each drug, the candidate diseases are ranked based on the prediction scores, and the top-10 predicted diseases as prediction results are collected. The predictions for all drugs are listed in Supplementary Table S2. Here, we randomly choose several drugs and present their predictions to conduct case studies. The prediction results are confirmed based on some public databases, current clinical trails and literatures. The public databases include KEGG (), DrugBank and CTD (). In these databases, some new added drugdisease associations provide a foundation for our validation. For each of the selected drugs, the top-5 potential diseases and evidences for the associations with the specified drug are listed in Supplementary Table S3. We find that some top-ranked predictions have been confirmed by existing researches. For instance, Levodopa is predicted to treat Alzheimer's disease, which has already been tested in clinical trail (ClinicalTrials\.gov, 2006a). Doxorubicin, indicated for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), is predicted to treat small cell lung cancer (SCLC). This prediction is confirmed by CTD. In addition, for Doxorubicin, the prediction to treat prostate cancer has been tested in clinical trail (ClinicalTrials\. gov, 2006b). Cabergoline, indicated for Hyperprolactinemia, is predicted to treat Migrane, and this prediction has been studied in literature (). Amantadine, indicated for Parkinson's disease, is predicted to treat Alzheimer's disease, and this treatment has been studied in literature (). In addition, Memantine, an amantadine derivative, is an N-methylD-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist used in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. These successful prediction instances further confirm that MBiRW has the potential to predict novel disease indications for drugs.
Experiments on other datasetsMost existing studies always conduct performance evaluation experiments based on one specified dataset, and the adaptability of algorithms for different datasets is ignored. To make the prediction results more convincing, experiments mentioned above are further conducted on another two datasets. First, one new dataset, named as DNdatasets, is obtained from paper (), which contains 4516 diseases annotated by Disease Ontology (DO) terms, 1490 drugs registered inis measured based on anatomical therapeutic chemical (ATC) codes, and disease similarity Si m d p is measured based on Disease Ontology (DO) terms. In Cdatasets, drug similarity Sim r p is measured based on chemical structures and disease similarity Sim d p is measured based on phenotypes using MimMiner. The performance of MBiRW on DNdatasets and Cdatasets is evaluated in terms of tenfold cross validation and de novo prediction, respectively.
Validation on DNdatasetsFirstly, we perform tenfold cross validation to validate the performance of our method on DNdatasets, the experiment results are depicted in Supplementary. The parameters used in MBiRW are the same as those in experiments for evluating the gold standard dataset mentioned above. Here, the parameter settings may not be optimal for DNdatasets, and can be tuned to achieve the best results. According to the cross validation results, the performance of MBiRW and DrugNet is better than other methods, and the AUC value of MBiRW and DrugNet is 0.958 and 0.948, respectively. Although MBiRW only has slight better performance compared with DrugNet in terms of ROC curves and AUC values, while there has significant superiority of MBiRW over other methods in terms of top-ranked analysis and precision results. Moreover, de novo prediction test is also conducted on DNdatasets. In DNdatasets, there are 550 drugs which have at least one known association, so we perform de novo prediction for these 550 drugs. The prediction results are shown in Supplementary. Compared with tenfold cross validation results above, the AUC values of all methods in de novo prediction results improve slightly. The reason may be due to the fact that DNdatasets includes many drugs which have only one known association. In tenfold cross validation, all known associations are divided into ten parts, each part is taken in turn as the test set, and the remaining nine parts are served as the training set. So there exists more than one drug, which has only one related disease and is considered as drug without known associations. However, in each de novo drugdisease prediction, only the known drugdisease associations for the queried drug are removed. That is to say, the number of drugs which have no known disease indications in de novo prediction may be less than that in tenfold cross validation.
Validation on CdatasetsFor Cdatasets, the tenfold cross validation experiments for drugdisease association prediction are implemented, and evaluation results are shown in Supplementary. It can be seen from the results, MBiRW obtains AUC value of 0.934 and higher precision, outperforming all other methods significantly. As seen from topranked results, among the 2352 known drugdisease associations,
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Step 3: Clustering drugs based on known drugdisease associations. As mentioned above, drug similarity Sim r l has been obtained by adjusting Sim r p according to the similarity analysis results. Next, based on the assumption that two drugs are more similar if they share indications, or there exist other drugs which share indications with them simultaneously. The known sharing information can be further utilized to improve drug similarity Sim r l as follows. First, we construct a new weighted drug sharing network named as SdrugNet based on the known drugdisease associations. In SdrugNet, let SR  fr 1 ; r 2 ;. .. ; r m g denote the set of m drugs, and edge weight denotes the number of common diseases shared by corresponding drug pair. After that, we cluster SdrugNet to identify potential drug clusters, and improve Sim r l between drugs that belong to the same cluster. As a graph clustering method, ClusterONE (Nepusz et al., 2012) can identify cohesive modules in weighted networks and has been used to detect meaningful modules for drug repositioning (Wu et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2015). In view of its good performance in generating overlapping clusters for weighted networks, ClusterONE is adopted to identify clusters in our research. The cohesiveness of a cluster V is defined by ClusterONE as follows: f V  W in V W in V  W bound V  PV (2) where W in V denotes the total weight of edges within a group of vertices V, W bound V represents the total weight of edges connecting this group to the rest of graph, and P(V) is the penalty term. The quality of each identified cluster can be evaluated by cohesiveness of the cluster. We suppose that drugs belonging to the same cluster tend to behave more similarly. Here, for drugs r i and r j locating in the same cluster C, QC represents the cohesiveness of cluster C, the comprehensive drug similarity Sim r between r i and r j is defined as w  Sim r l , where parameter w is set as 1  QC. Moreover, for comprehensive similarity between two different drugs which is equal or greater than 1, we replace it with 0.99. 2.2.2 Disease similarity measure Disease similarity Sim d p based on disease phenotypes is calculated using MimMiner (Van Driel et al., 2006), which measure disease similarity by computing similarity between MeSH terms (Lipscomb, 2000) appearing in the medical description of diseases from the OMIM database. Next, diseases similarity Sim d p is improved based on the adjusted approaches used in drug similarity measure. The correlation between the similarity of two diseases and the existence of their common drugs is firstly analyzed by taking known association information into account, and new disease similarity Sim d l is obtained by adjusting Sim d p based on the correlation analysis. Then, disease sharing network named as SdiseaseNet is constructed based on known drugdisease associations. In SdiseaseNet, let SD  fd 1 ; d 2 ;. .. ; d n g represents the set with n diseases, and edge weight denotes the number of common drugs shared by corresponding disease pair. Diseases are clustered by applying ClusterONE on SdiseaseNet, and Sim d l between diseases which locate in the same cluster is enhanced to obtain comprehensive disease similarity Sim d in the same way as for drugs. 2.3 Construction of the heterogeneous network Based on the aforementioned similarity measures for drugs and diseases, drug similarity network and disease similarity network are constructed. In drug similarity network, let R  fr 1 ; r 2 ;. .. ; r m g denote the set of m drugs. The edge between drugs r i and r j is weighted by comprehensive similarity Sim r between the two drugs. In disease similarity network, let D  fd 1 ; d 2 ;. .. ; d n g denote the set of n diseases. The edge between diseases d i and d j is weighted by comprehensive similarity Sim d between the two diseases. Besides, the drugdisease associations can be modeled as a bipartite graph G(V, E), where VG  fR; Dg; EG R  D; EG  fe ij , edge between drug r i and disease d j g. If there exists a known association between drug r i and disease d j , the weight of edge between r i and d j is initially set to 1, otherwise, it is initially set to 0. Obviously, the drugdisease network can be considered as a heterogeneous network, which is constructed by connecting the drug similarity network and disease similarity network via the bipartite MBiRW
associations can be predicted at the top one by MBiRW. In contrast, only 427, 148 and 84 known associations are predicted at top one by HGBI, NBI and DrugNet, respectively. Each drug has at least one known indication in Cdatasets, so we perform de novo prediction for all drugs, and the results are depicted in Supplementary Figure S8. Compared with tenfold cross validation, we can find both the AUC values and top-ranked results become worse in de novo test. For instance, the AUC value obtained in tenfold cross validation achieved 0.934, however, the AUC value only achieved 0.842 in de novo prediction. The number of top-one predicted associations become 241, which is significantly less than that in tenfold cross validation. The superior performance evaluation results on DNdatasets and Cdatasets, further demonstrate MBiRW is reliable in predicting potential drugdisease associations. According to the above experiments, we conclude that the prediction performance can be improved by integrating more useful information in similarity measures and adopting BiRW algorithm. 4 Conclusion Drug repositioning is a promising alternative for the drug development. In this work, we have presented a novel method named MBiRW uncovering the potential associations between drugs and diseases. The main contribution of our study is that we have devised novel similarity measures for drugs and diseases by integrating known drugdisease associations information effectively, and performed drug repositioning based on BiRW algorithm. The procedure of the similarity measures involve calculating drug and disease similarities based on some prior biological features; conducting correlation analysis on similarity values, and adjusting similarity by a logistic function based on the analysis results; clustering drugs and diseases based on the known drugdisease associations, and improving drug and disease similarity based on the identified clusters. Based on the calculated comprehensive similarities, drug network and disease network are constructed. Furthermore drug network is connected with disease network via known drugdisease associations to construct a drugdisease heterogeneous network. Finally, BiRW algorithm is adopted to prioritize candidate diseases for each drug and the effectiveness is validated on the collected datasets. In cross validation, all experimental results show that our method can effectively improve prediction performance compared with other approaches. Case studies about several drugs indicate that potential drugdisease association predicted by MBiRW could be more useful for biomedical research. MBiRW is one powerful computational method that can predict candidate diseases for different drugs simultaneously, and also can predict novel disease indications for drugs without any known associated diseases information effectively. We have validated its prediction power in terms of cross validation and case studies. While the results of our approach are promising, its limitations should be acknowledged. First, MBiRW only uses the known drugdisease association information to improve the similarity of drug pairs and disease pairs. It should be noted that there exists more prior biological relevant information which can be reasonably utilized to improve similarity measures. Second, considering that there exists substantial targets data related with drugs and diseases, so we plan to construct comprehensive heterogenous network for drug repositioning by taking target information into account. Funding: This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 61232001, No.61370024, No. 61428209, and the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University under Grant NCET-12-0547. Conflict of Interest: none declared.
