served as the 10th [BC] 2 Basel Computational Biology Conference, the annual meeting of the Swiss computational biology community. It was preceded by two satellite meetings, six workshops and five tutorials. Details of the conference are available through the conference website (http://www.eccb12.org) and will later be archived at eccb.iscb.org/2012/. ECCB is the top European conference in computational biology and bioinformatics, and together with ISMB and RECOMB one of the major international conference series in computational biology. The conference brings together scientists working in a broad range of disciplines, including bioinformatics, computational and molecular biology, medicine and systems biology. It covers computational methods for analysis of the tremendously growing amount of data in the life sciences, and approaches for modeling and simulation of increasingly complex systems in molecular biology, medicine and pharmaceutical research. The scope of the conference evolves each year to address the latest developments in biological applications of mathematical modeling and computational methods. ECCB is held in a different country or region each year, and incorporates the annual national or regional meeting where it is held. Every other year, it is held jointly with the Intelligent Systems in Molecular Biology (ISMB). Past editions of ECCB have been held in Vienna (AT) (with ISMB), Ghent (BE), Stockholm (SE) (joint with ISMB), Cagliari (IT), Vienna (AT) (with ISMB), Eilat (IL), Madrid (ES), Glasgow (UK) (with ISMB), Paris (FR) and Saarbrücken (DE). The ECCB 2012 conference featured keynote lectures by distinguished speakers: The opening keynote lecture was delivered by Nobel price laureate Aaron Ciechanover (Technion-Israel Institute of Technology), followed by Barry Honig (Columbia University, New York), Laurent Keller (University of Lausanne), Gene Myers (MPI of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden), Mihaela Zavolan (Biozentrum University of Basel & SIB) and the EMBO keynote lecture by Søren Brunak (Technical University of Denmark). The conference topics span all areas of methodological developments for computational biology and innovative applications of computational methods to molecular biology. This year, the conference was organized in 11 topic areas: 'Applied
ECCB 2012Sixteen exhibitor stands were open throughout the conference in the main conference halls, presenting the latest scientific literature in the field of computational biology, bioinformatics, modeling and simulation, as well as new hardware, software and technology developments. ECCB 2012 also hosted the first technical meeting of ELIXIR chaired by Sren Brunak (chair of the ELIXIR Interim Board). During the weekend preceding the conference, two satellite meetings, six workshops and five tutorials were organized: on Saturday, 8 September, a special symposium celebrated the 10th anniversary of the UniProt project: in 2002, 40 years after the first comprehensive collection of protein sequences, the 'Atlas of Protein Sequence and Structure', was published, the SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL protein sequence databases at theanalysis and modeling of cancer and its therapy. Special focus was laid on recent developments in optical microscopy, small animal and clinical imaging, data analysis tools, mathematical models and computations of cancer formation and progression. The workshop 'Detecting Transcription Factor Binding Sites with ChIP-Seq Data and Predicting Damaging Cis-Regulatory Variations' addressed genome re-sequencing data analysis for the prediction of variations within cis-regulatory sequences. The program was organized by Wyeth W. Wasserman (University of British Columbia, Canada), Virginie Bernard (Curie Institute, Canada), Jonathan Lim and Anthony Mathelier (University of British Columbia, Canada). The purpose of the tutorial program at ECCB is to provide participants with lectures and hands-on training covering topics relevant to the bioinformatics field. It offers participants an opportunity to learn about new areas of bioinformatics research, to get an introduction to important established topics, or to develop advanced skills in areas they are already familiar with. At ECCB 2012, tutorials on six different topics were organized: 'Applications of Bio-Ontologies in Large-Scale DataDriven Science: A Practical Introduction' bythe participation of young scientists has always been a central goal of the ECCB conference because the conference is a great opportunity for education and networking for early stage scientists. Thanks to contributions from several academic sponsors, our host organizations, previous editions of ECCB and our commercial sponsors, we could provide 114 conference fellowships to PhD and postdoc applicants from all over the world.
ECCB 2012Systems Biology Initiative SystemsX.ch. We are especially grateful to our platinum sponsors Basel Area and IBM. We would like to thank all our partner and sponsors: the Netherlands Bioinformatics Centre NBIC, CONVEY Computers, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, HP, BBRC, Interpharma, FMI Friedrich Miescher Institute, Bioalps, Competence Center Computational Sciences University Basel, Novartis Pharma, Syngenta, BASF, Merck Serono and the canton of the city of Basel. We would like to thank EMBO for supporting the EMBO keynote lecture by Soren Brunak. It is our pleasure to thank all the people and organizations that made ECCB 2012 possible. Our first thanks go to the program committee of reviewers and co-reviewers, and in particular the area chairs. A swift and effective review process is at the heart of a conference like ECCB. Reviewing 340 proceedings manuscripts and 100 highlight paper submissions in just a few weeks is truly challenging, especially since many members of the program committee had been involved in reviewing for ISMB shortly before. The dedication and hard work of the program committee was quite simply the key to the high quality of the conference. We are grateful to the ECCB steering committee for their support to the organization of the conference: in particular, the advice and guidance from previous organizers Anna Tramontano, Yves * Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 50 / 70CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland Moreau and Michal Linial was crucial. Anna, thank you so much for answering our questions at any time of day (and night)! Logistics is crucial for a successful conference. We are grateful to the Oxford University Press production team for the preparation of this special issue, to Congress Center Basel for the venue organization. The local administration team at the Biozentrum of the University of Basel did an incredible job, and we owe them a great debt: Katja Jenni, Rita Manohar, Sarah Gthe, Lorenza Bordoli and Yvonne Steger for preparing the meeting and organizing the registration, Markus Stckli from Billboard for the poster and website design, Andrew Waterhouse for the registration and poster submission system, Jan Welker and Konstantin Arnold for IT support, Jocelyne Boquet for handling the financial administration. Finally, the most important ingredient to the success of a conference are the scientific contributions and discussions: we are grateful to the authors of all submitted manuscripts, keynote speakers, presenters of selected papers, tutorial lecturers, workshop organizers and contributors, poster authors and to all the participants. Thank you for making this conference a success.
The Author(s) 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Presenters and contributors to oral presentations were given priority. Unfortunately, several applicants had to be turned down due to limitations of available resources. Organizing ECCB would not be possible without the generous support by partner organizations, funding agencies and sponsors. We are especially grateful to the Swiss Foundation for Excellence and Talent in Biomedical Research, SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, ISCB International Society for Computational Biology, the University of Basel, the Swiss Academy of Medical Sciences and the [BC] 2 Basel Computational Biology Conference for funding 114 fellowships to facilitate the participation of young talented scientists early in their career. We highly appreciate the support by our host institutions, the SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, the Biozentrum University of Basel, and the Swiss i304 at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
