ELASPIC is a novel ensemble machine-learning approach that predicts the effects of mutations on protein folding and protein–protein interactions. Here, we present the ELASPIC web-server, which makes the ELASPIC pipeline available through a fast and intuitive interface. The web-server can be used to evaluate the effect of mutations on any protein in the Uniprot database, and allows all predicted results, including modeled wild-type and mutated structures, to be managed and viewed online and downloaded if needed. It is backed by a database which contains improved structural domain definitions, and a list of curated domain–domain interactions for all known proteins , as well as homology models of domains and domain–domain interactions for the human proteome. Homology models for proteins of other organisms are calculated on the fly, and mutations are evaluated within minutes once the homology model is available. Availability and implementation: The ELASPIC webserver is available online at http://elaspic.kim
IntroductionSequence variation in the human genome is a crucial aspect in biomedical research. Many variants can directly cause Mendelian diseases and can confer susceptibility or protection to more multifactorial diseases, such as cancer (). To unravel the mechanism behind those phenotypic effects we first need to understand the biochemical impact of mutations. A number of computational tools have been developed to predict the effect of mutations on protein stability or binding (). However, those tools require a resolved crystal structure of the protein, precluding their application on a proteome-wide scale. There are webservers which use structural information to predict the effect of mutations (), and which map mutations to proteins in a 3D protein interaction network (). However, none of those resources predict the effect of mutations on protein protein interaction affinity. Here, we present a webserver that can be used to predict the effect of mutations on protein stability and protein interaction affinity, for any protein for which a homology model can be constructed. The webserver is based on the ELASPIC pipeline (), but drastically simplifies the experience for the end user.impact results for all human mutations implicated in hereditary diseases and cancers. New mutations are evaluated within minutes if homology models are available, and under an hour if those models are to be generated. The webserver offers a streamlined and intuitive interface for analyzing the results, and makes all predictions and structures available for download.
Methods
Domain boundary definitionIn order to generate structural models, structurally sound domain boundary definitions are needed. For this, we generated the Profs pipeline that unifies domain definitions obtained from CATH and Pfam. Profs domain boundaries are optimized to be both structurally and evolutionarily consistent. Unlike Gene3D (), which uses hidden Markov models (HMMs) that are based on CATH, Profs uses HMMs that are based on Pfam. Therefore, all functional annotations that have been assigned to Pfam domains can easily be transferred to Profs domains. For more information, see the Supplementary material.
ELASPIC pipelineELASPIC constructs homology models of domains and domaindomain interactions, and it uses those models, together with sequential and other features, to predict the energetic impact of a mutation on the stability of a single domain or the affinity between two domains. A more detailed description of the ELASPIC method, including cross-validation and comparison with existing approaches, can be found in the Supplementary material and the original publication.
Webserver implementationThe ELASPIC webserver was implemented using the Django framework. Its database contains over 800 million protein cross-references, imported from Uniprot, allowing it to recognize protein input in different formats.
OverviewUnlike previous methods, ELASPIC takes advantage of homology modeling to create protein structures. Therefore, the webserver only requires a protein or gene identifier and a point mutation. An alternative batch input page is available, which takes a list of point mutations with the standard form <protein>.<mutation> either by direct input or as a file upload. The users can still submit their own PDB structure if required. The main output of the webserver is the predicted change in the Gibbs free energy (DDG) of folding and/or binding for every domain and interface affected by the mutation. A specific domain or interface can be selected to display more detailed information, including a graphic showing the location of the domain in the protein, a Jmol applet showing superimposed wild-type and mutant structures (e.g.) and, for interface mutations, an interactive connectivity network showing the affected interactions. The structures can be downloaded for further inspection or calculations.
Case studyWe applied our approach to a list of somatic mutations found in cancer and catalogued in the COSMIC database. EP300, a transcriptional coactivator, is mutated with a high frequency in different cancer types. ELASPIC predicts those mutations to decrease the stability of EP300 and decrease its affinity to downstream hypoxiaregulators HIF1A and EPAS1, and the SRC/p160 nuclear receptor coactivator family proteins NCOA1, NCOA2 and NCOA3. Interaction models created by the ELASPIC webserver show the structural changes that lead to the loss in affinity (). The p160 family proteins are thought to promote EP300-mediated HIF1A and EPAS1 activation (). ELASPIC predicts that the. Structural model of mutated interaction between EP300 (blue) and NCOA3 (red), as presented by the ELASPIC webserver. Mutation R2088W destroys an important salt bridge to aspartic acid residues of NCOA3 in the binding interface, resulting in a severely decreased binding affinity increase in cancer susceptibility caused by mutations in EP300 is due to those interactions being hindered. Indeed, it has been shown that disrupting the interaction between EP300 and HIF1A inhibits apoptosis and promotes renal cancer cells survival (). A more in-depth analysis is available in the Supplementary material.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
D.K.Witvliet et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
