Motivation: Computational inference methods that make use of graphical models to extract regulatory networks from gene expression data can have difficulty reconstructing dense regions of a network, a consequence of both computational complexity and unreliable parameter estimation when sample size is small. As a result, identification of hub genes is of special difficulty for these methods. Methods: We present a new algorithm, Empirical Light Mutual Min (ELMM), for large network reconstruction that has properties well suited for recovery of graphs with high-degree nodes. ELMM reconstructs the undirected graph of a regulatory network using empirical Bayes conditional independence testing with a heuristic relaxation of independence constraints in dense areas of the graph. This relaxation allows only one gene of a pair with a putative relation to be aware of the network connection, an approach that is aimed at easing multiple testing problems associated with recovering densely connected structures. Results: Using in silico data, we show that ELMM has better performance than commonly used network inference algorithms including GeneNet, ARACNE, FOCI, GENIE3 and GLASSO. We also apply ELMM to reconstruct a network among 5492 genes expressed in human lung airway epithelium of healthy non-smokers, healthy smokers and individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease assayed using microarrays. The analysis identifies dense sub-networks that are consistent with known regulatory relationships in the lung airway and also suggests novel hub regulatory relationships among a number of genes that play roles in oxidative stress and secretion. Availability and implementation: Software for running ELMM is made available at
INTRODUCTIONA combination of microarray and next-generation sequencing are producing data on the gene expression profiles that characterize the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. genomic and regulatory states of cell populations (). These data contain information that can be mined to identify regulatory relationships responsible for genomic profiles and that are important for understanding processes underlying disease development (). A variety of algorithms making use of probabilistic graphical models, both directed and undirected, have been used to recover putative network structure from such data (). These approaches have been successful in recovering networks with broad-scale topology which are consistent with gene and pathway annotations, where some of the predicted relationships have been verified by experiments (). To deal with the high dimensionality and small sample size of training data that is typical of gene expression experiments, researchers have used various strategies, including regularized estimation of parameters (), learning sparse networks (), empirical estimation of testing statistics () and mutual information methods (). These approaches were shown to improve the accuracy of the network inference especially when the recovered network is sparse. In spite of these advances, the goal of highly accurate recovery of regulation networks, which are not necessarily sparse, remains a difficult problem (). In this article, we present a new algorithm, Empirical Light Mutual Min (ELMM), for reconstructing undirected networks from gene expression data, which has properties well suited for recovering dense network regions when the size of the observed samples is small. ELMM is a variant of Bayesian network (BN) inference approaches that include reconstruction of an undirected graph, the skeleton of the BN, using conditional independence (CI) testing (). ELMM uses an empirical Bayes approach to learn the independence/dependence parameters from gene expression data, an approach that has been found to have good properties for dealing with small samples and noisy data (). In addition, ELMM uses a heuristic relaxation of independence testing that aims at easing the effects of the multiple testing problem when recovering densely connected sub-graphs. We assessed the performance of ELMM using 10 in silico networks simulated based on known regulatory mechanisms and network topologies in yeast and Escherichia coli. The analysis shows that ELMM has a higher accuracy compared with popular network recovery algorithms including GeneNet (Copyedited by: SK MANUSCRIPT CATEGORY: ORIGINAL PAPER
R.Mahdi et al.2006), ARACNE (), GLASSO (), FOCI () and GENIE3 () in terms of both overall network inference and identification of hub genes. We also present results from using ELMM on the network inference challenge of DREAM5 with a comparison to the best performing methods (see Supplementary materials). In addition, to demonstrate the utility of this method for real-world applications, we applied ELMM to model interactions among 5492 genes expressed in the human lung airway measured in a sample that included healthy non-smokers, healthy smokers and individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Analysis of the recovered network based on the literature shows an overall enrichment for connecting functionally similar genes four times higher than expected at random. In addition, further analysis of dense sub-networks shows that they are consistent with known regulatory relationships and pathways. A number of suggestive functional annotations and relationships among genes in the recovered network are discussed, including novel regulatory relationships among a number of genes modulated by NRF2 that operate in oxidative stress response and a suggestive hub role of CREB3L1 which operates in mucus secretion in the lung.
BACKGROUND: NETWORK INFERENCE WITH CONDITIONAL INDEPENDENCE GRAPHSAs with related algorithms that use graphical models to recover regulatory networks (), we assume that regulatory relationships among variables can be divided into direct and indirect relations. Assuming a case where relevant network variables have been measured, conditional independence testing provides a theoretically sound approach for disentangling these relations. For example, consider the hypothetical directed regulatory relationships represented by the solid arrows in. When measurements of gene expressions generated by such networks are analyzed, a correlation can be observed among pairs of directly interacting genes, as well as the indirectly related genes. Using tests of conditional independence, the dependence between indirectly related genes can be negated by conditioning on a set of variables along the paths through which the indirect relation is propagated (). For example, genes B and C inare expected to be correlated because they are co-regulated by gene A, but conditioning on A can reveal that B and C are independent. Similarly, in, genes D and G become independent when conditioning on either E or F. When the indirect effect is propagated through multiple paths, such as the case of the genes K and L in, a higher order conditional independence test is needed where K and L can only be found independent when conditioning on the genes H and M simultaneously. In contrast, directly interacting genes cannot be found conditionally independent when conditioning on any set of other genes. Using the properties of direct/indirect relations, the graph of direct interactions can, in theory, be recovered from observational data by recovering a graph, i.e. consistent with the dependencies and conditional independence entailed by the observed data. This type of graphs is typically referred to as a CI graphs. CI inference algorithms typically construct the graph by connecting all correlated pairs of variables, unless they can be found conditionally independent when conditioning on any set of other variables ().Usually, the graph is constructed iteratively and the search for possible conditional independence is restricted to conditioning on locally neighboring nodes in the graph. Under the faithfulness assumption () and when using the appropriate independence testing method, CI inference is proven to recover the correct graph in the asymptotic limit. However, in spite of this theoretical soundness, there are known challenges for the application of such methods for reconstructing regulation networks from gene expression data: 1. Due to non-ideal sampling, such as non-independence among samples and batch effects during the measurement process, standard parametric conditional independence testing that ignores these contributions can be unreliable for constructing accurate graphs from gene expression data (). 2. Edges in dense areas of a graph are more likely to be incorrectly rejected due to multiple testing ((); R. Mahdi and J. Mezey, submitted for publication). For example, to correctly connect the parent node A into all of its child nodes 17, all independence tests for each edge, when conditioning on all subsets of all other neighbors, must be correctly rejected. This conservative approach causes the probability of rejecting a true edge to increase with the number of neighboring variables.3. For highly connected genes, conditioning on all subsets of all neighboring genes can be computationally impractical.
METHODS: EMPIRICAL LIGHT MUTUAL MIN ALGORITHMELMM reconstructs an undirected graph representing regulatory network relations using an iterative constraint-based approach. The algorithm incorporates two new interconnected components aiming at improving the inference of the graph. First, a mutual dependence criterion is used to measure the unexplainable dependence between pairs of variables. The proposed criterion is an extension of the empirical Bayes approach previously proposed for graphical Gaussian model (GGM) inference (), where the goal is to assess the mutual dependence relationships among variables in a manner that empirically adjusts for non-ideal sampling conditions. Second, to ease the multiple testing problem in dense areas of the graph and the associated high computational complexity, we use a heuristic procedure for relaxing independence constraints by selectively allowing only one gene of a pair with a putative relation to use the other gene in independence testing. This relaxation also results in a fast learning that can scale for large network recovery (see Supplementary material for complexity analysis).
Conditional Independence Graphs for Network Recovery(a) (
Mutual dependence criterionIn order to rank candidate edges, we use an estimate of the joint conditional posterior probability that the dependence between the corresponding two variables cannot be explained by conditioning on any of their neighbors, which is equivalent to the posterior probability that the two variables are connected in the correct graph. This criterion is defined as follows:where E ij is an edge between nodes i and j, CP i and CP j are the sets of neighboring variables of i and j, respectively, and D is the observed data. In equation (1), P(E ij |CP i ,D) is a one-sided conditional posterior probability that the variables i and j are not conditionally independent when conditioning on any subset of CP i. The factorization of the joint conditional posterior in equation (1) is approximate because it ignores a possible correlation between the results of independence tests when conditioning on subsets of CP i or subsets of CP j. We also refer to P(E ij |CP i ,CP j ,D) as a conditional posterior because we condition on a certain graph structure that implies CP i and CP j are the neighbor sets of i and j, respectively. For the rest of the article, we refer to P(E ij |CP i ,D) as the one-sided conditional posterior probability of dependence (CPPD) of i on j and we refer to P(E ij |CP i ,CP j ,D) as the joint CPPD between i and j. A critical part of the approximation in equation (1) is the need to estimate the one-sided conditional posterior probability P(E ij |CP i ,D) that a variable i is not conditionally independent from a variable j when CP i is thought to be the set containing the parent and child variables of i (and similarly for variable j). In this work, without loss of generality, the partial correlation method is used for conditional independence testing, an approach that is appropriate for the continuous measurements typical of gene expression data. Partial correlations can also be computed efficiently, which in turn makes large-scale network inference more practical. The partial correlation  ij is a measure of the statistical dependence between two variables i and j, while the conditional partial correlation  ij|S is a measure of the dependence between i and j that cannot be explained by the set of variables S. Since the true partial correlations cannot be computed exactly from limited data, we will have to rely on independence tests based on the sample partial correlations (i.e   ij ,In order to compute P(E ij |CP i ,D) from the sample partial correlations, we need to compute the probability that none of the true partial correlations is insignificant when conditioning on all subsets of CP i. Although there does not seem to be simple and unique formulation of such a conditional posterior, it is intuitive that it should have an inverse relation with the evidence that one or more partial correlations are zero. For example, one way to approximateis to use the probability that the least significant conditional partial correlation is actually significant as follows:Using equation (2) to approximate P(E ij |CP i ,D) is equivalent to the approach used by regular constraint-based methods (), where i and j are inferred to be not directly related if at least one conditional independence test is not rejected. However, this approach can be dependent on the size of CP i , where P (1) (E ij |CP i ,D) tends to decrease as CP i becomes larger due to the increasing probability of finding small sample conditional partial correlations by chance due to the large number of tests. To ease this issue, we use a smoother dependence function that combines multiple partial correlations instead of the overall minimum as follows:What is important to recognize about either approximation (2) or (3) is that when given a large enough sample, both of them will approach zero if and only if CP i contains a subset of variables that fully explains the dependence between i and j (S  CP i s.t. i  j|S), whereas, they will go to 1 if such a subset does not exist. In other words, both of these approximations are sufficient to recover the correct graph in the asymptotic limit (R. Mahdi and J. Mezey, submitted for publication). However, when given a small sample data, the approximation in equation (2) is expected to be sensitive to multiple testing, while the approximation in equation (3) eases this issue by taking the geometric average over the least significant partial correlations resulting from considering different sizes of the conditioning sets. This provides a smoothing effect that eases the problem that different nodes in the graph have different numbers of neighbors.
Semi-parametric independence testingTo
R.Mahdi et al.mixture of a null and an alternative distribution (H 0 :  = 0 and H A :  = 0). Using Bayes rule of posterior probability, P( ij|S = 0|0| 0| ij|S ) is computed as follows:wher  ij|S is the sample partial correlation, f 0 and f A are the distribution of the sample partial correlations under the null and the alternative hypothesis, respectively, while  0 and  A are the corresponding prior probabilities. Since the sample partial correlation between truly related variables is likely to be dependent on the true structure of the network, which is typically unknown, for the alternative hypothesis (H A :  ij|S = 0), we make use of a simplifying assumption that the sample partial correlations follow a uniform distribution in the range(f A (   ij|S ) = 0.5, ). On the other hand, from, when the true partial correlation is zero (H 0 :  ij = 0), the sample partial correlationcorrelation correlation ij has the following distribution:where is the gamma function and  is the distribution degree of freedom. Under the assumption of ideal sampling conditions, the degree of freedom becomes the number of observations ( = n) and when i and j are conditionally independent upon knowing the set S \i,j (H 0 :  ij|S = 0), the sample conditional partial correlation  ij|S also follows the same distribution but with a degree of freedom (N |S|+1). However, since ideal sampling conditions do not hold for gene expression data, the actual degree of freedom  of the null distribution is unknown and could vary considerably from the expected value. To estimate  and the unknown mixture proportions of the null and alternative hypotheses  0 and  A , as in Schfer and Strimmer (2005), we use likelihood maximization of observing the zero-order sample partial correlations (conditioning on the empty set:) generated from the mixture model as follows:is the likelihood of observing the partial correlationcorrelation correlation ij generated by the mixture model. In this work, we take this approach a step further and empirically estimate the degree of freedom, for every single variable separately, for both partial correlations and conditional partial correlations separately as follows:wher  i,h is the degree of freedom of the null distribution of the conditional partial correlations of the variable i with other variables when conditioning on sets of size h. This approach has the added benefit of adjusting the degree of freedom when the conditioning sets vary in size. In addition, it is anticipated that, as with gene expression measurements data, the effect of latent variables and noise in measurements is likely to vary between genes. Therefore, the actual degree of freedom is expected to be different for different genes and sizes of conditioning sets. Note that the likelihood estimation in equation (8) is performed over the sample conditional partial correlations between a variable i and all other variables when conditioning on sets of variables found to be the most correlated with i. To maximize equations (6) and(8), we use a grid search to maximize the log likelihood.
Heuristic relaxation of independence constraintsEven with the smoothing approximation of equation (3), when a node in the graph becomes highly connected, the chance that at least one conditioning independence test will be accepted by accident increases due to the large number of tests. As a result, the approximation of the one-sided conditional probability P(E ij |CP i ,D) in equation (3) will tend to decrease as the number of neighboring variables of i increases. To control for this issue, we incorporate a heuristic relaxation of independence constraints that aims at limiting the decrease in the one-sided conditional posterior that occurs as the number of neighbors of a given node increases by adaptively limiting the number of neighbors used for conditional independence testing. In general, since every node in any graph has its own neighbor set, it is anticipated that most pairs of variables will have asymmetric one-sided dependence (i.e.), where the node with the lower one-sided CPPD is more likely to be the node with the larger neighbor set. ELMM algorithm takes advantage of this asymmetry to identify node with the lower one-sided CPPD as the node that might be suffering from multiple testing when assessing edges connecting to this node. Those edges, in turn, become candidates for constraint relaxation. To do this, the algorithm relaxes independence constraints as the graphGgraph graphG is being constructed by allowing only the node with the higher one-sided CPPD to become aware of a newly added edge E ij as follows:As a result of this procedure, during network recovery, a node connected to many neighbors will only be aware of a fraction of them, while a node with a small number of connections will tend to be aware of most or all of its neighboring nodes (see supplement for the complete pseudo-code). For example, when recovering an undirected graph of the network inwhere a hub such as B regulates many genes (514), B will become connected to many nodes, but it will only use a fraction of them for independence testing. In contrast, all the child nodes will be aware of the hub B and will use it for testing of conditional independence. The undirected graph inis one possible output of ELMM where a solid circle at the end of the edge indicates that the node is aware of the neighbor at the other end of the edge. Since most of the child nodes will be aware of their parent nodes (the hub genes), dependencies among child nodes will be negated due to the common parent being used in conditional independence tests and false edges among child nodes can be correctly rejected. An additional benefit of this relaxation is that every node will condition on a smaller number of neighboring subsets. This property allows ELMM to perform fast network reconstruction and to scale well for high dimensional networks (see Supplementary material for complexity analysis). In the proposed approach, the graph is constructed iteratively, where in every iteration, edges are ranked using equation (1). The algorithm starts with an empty graph and edges with the highest joint conditional posterior are iteratively added until a maximum number of edges is reached. Afterward, edges with the least joint conditional posterior are successively deleted, and the order at which edges are deleted is then used to rank all candidate edges. The complete pseudo-code is presented in the Supplementary material.
SIMULATIONS AND DATA
In silico simulated networksTen in silico networks were simulated using the GeneNetWeaver (GNW) simulation tool version 3.0 (). The first network was part of the Dream5 challenge for assessing network recovery algorithms (). We additionally simulated nine more networks based on transcription regulatory networks of E.coli (bacteria) and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast). The simulation is based on a kinetic model of gene regulation and translation activities with
Conditional Independence Graphs for Network Recoveryboth independent and synergistic gene regulation. In addition, the simulation incorporates models of noise at both levels, network dynamics and expression level measurements. The 10 network were further split into two sets based on the number of genes used in the simulation. The first set contains six network with sizes ranging from 1400 to 1656 genes each, while the second set contains four networks of sizes ranging from 2000 to 2500 genes each. A detailed description of the simulation is made available in the supplementary material and the reader is referred toand Schaffter et al.(2011) for further details.of the Supplementary material provides summary statistics of the 10 networks.
Lung airway datasetThe gene expression dataset used in this study is composed of 272 samples obtained by bronchial brushing from two different locations: large airway and small airway (). All samples were analyzed using Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 microarrays. To avoid the problem of probe sets mapping to multiple genes, we used the custom mapping provided byto convert chip probes expression measurements into a single expression measurements for genes with unique Entreznumbers. The participating individuals were characterized as nonsmokers or smokers and were further labeled as healthy or having COPD. The Supplementary material provides complete details of the demographic information of the samples. The analyzed microarray data include data on 23,000 proteincoding genes, an unknown subset of which are operating in the regulation and response behaviors of the pulmonary environment. Even with the scaling properties of ELMM, simultaneous genomewide network inference is not computationally feasible. We therefore used the following selection procedure to limit the number of genes considered for network inference: 1. Genes that were not present (expressed) in at least 40% of the microarray samples were filtered out leaving 10,900 genes. 2. Hierarchical clustering was performed among the 10,900 remaining genes and a subset of linked clusters containing a total of 5492 genes was selected. The hierarchical clustering cutoff was selected to group approximately half of the genes.The first of these filtering steps removed lowly expressed (or unexpressed) genes and the second identified a subset of genes that are expected to be enriched for intra-regulatory interactions. We additionally added extra variables to represent the following known covariates: age, gender, smoking and COPD status (see Supplementary meterial). Additionally, we applied ELMM in two phases. First, unconstrained network inference was applied among all the 5492 genes. Afterward, all genes were ranked based on the number of their interactions. In the second phase, the 550 most connected genes were selected and ELMM network inference was reapplied such that every selected edge must connect to at least one of the predetermined 550 hub candidate genes. This strategy was adopted to leverage the known hub-like topologies in regulation networks and to provide a network that is easier to analyze. Assessing the performance of network inference when analyzing gene expression data of a human tissue is difficult, given the lack of large number of verified interactions and the many unknown tissue specific gene regulation. We therefore relied on gene annotation databases and published literature to assess the recovered network. Specifically, we used the semantic similarity tool provided bywhich uses the Gene Ontology database of gene annotations. We also performed further analysis of the most connected 20 hub genes recovered using the Gene-Card database and the DAVID analysis tool. Finally, we used known lung regulatory relationships reported in the primary literature to assess individual hubs.
RESULTS
Analysis of in silico dataThe 10 in silico networks were used to assess the performance of ELMM for network reconstruction compared with five popular network inference methods: GeneNet () based on empirical graphical Gaussian model (GGM), GLASSO () based on sparse GGM, ARACNE () based on mutual information, FOCI () based on low-order partial correlations and GENIE3 (Huynh) based on decision trees for feature selection.shows the average precisionrecall (PR) curves for each of the methods for recovering the two sets of network. In our evaluation, the correct undirected graph was considered to be the graph where there is an edge between the two genes if and only if there was a direct regulatory relationship between the two genes. Based on the PR curve evaluation, on average ELMM outperformed the other five methods in recovering the two sets of networks. Although ARACNE was competitive to ELMM in recovering the second set of networks, its performance seems to drop steeply if someone is considering higher than 15% recall. On the other hand, GENIE3 that was the winner of the Dream5 network inference challenge performed poorly in this evaluation. We believe this is due to the fact that the set of transcription factors was not known to any of the methods as in the Dream5 challenge. In sum, when considering the unconstrained case of network inference, regardless as to whether the goal is minimizing the percentage of false positives or for correctly recovering a greater proportion of the true network, ELMM had better overall performance. The better performance of ELMM was also clear when considering the ability of each method to identify hub genes (). For each network, we determined a hub gene to be any gene that directly regulates more than six other genes, where the choice of six was made mainly to focus evaluation on the most connected genes. By this criterion, the number of hub genes in the first set of networks was 123, 94, 90, 88, 90 and 88, while in the second set of networks it was 135, 84, 79 and 78. To assess performance for hub gene identification, we used the output of each algorithm to rank genes based on the number of other genes to which they are connected (see Supplementary material for details).presents a plot of the percentage of correctly identified hubs (Y-axis = recall) versus the number of retrieved hubs (X-axis) normalized by the actual number of all true hubs from each network. Based on these results, ELMM showed a superior accuracy in retrieving hub genes. For example, if we are to retrieve 1X (X = true number of hubs) of the most significant candidate hub genes, we would be able, on average, to retrieve 24% of the actual hub. Average PR curves for network recovery when ELMM, FOCI, GLASSO, GeneNet, ARACNE and GENIE were applied to recover two sets of in silico networks (Set-1 and Set-2). Precision = TP/(TP + FP) is plotted on the Y-axis versus recall = TP/(TP + FN) on the X-axis where TP is the number of true positives, FP is the number of false positives and FN is the number of false negatives) versus the number of identified hub genes (X-axis = number of top candidate hub genes being considered) when using ELMM, FOCI, GLASSO, GeneNet, ARACNE and GENIE to recover the in silico networks of the two sets (Set-1 and Set-2). X-axis is normalized by the number of all true hubs from every network genes in the first set of networks and 44% of the hub genes in the second set of networks.of the Supplementary material shows a representative sub-network of 1500 genes of the inferred network. The graph also highlights the genes affected by smoking and shows a high co-localization among those genes. This topology was expected, since genes up-or down-regulated as a group due to smoking will result in induced dependencies between the expression levels of those genes. However, genes that respond to the effect of smoking are likely to share common regulation control mechanisms (), and the topology of the recovered network suggests regulatory relationships and possible hub genes that may be involved in evoking the smoking response.
R.Mahdi et al.
Analysis of the human lung airway epithelium
Lung airway epithelium network and gene ontology analysisFor every inferred relationship (pair of connected genes), the semantic similarity tool provided bywas used to assess the similarity of annotations in the gene ontology database between the two genes for three criteria: molecular functionality, biological processes and cellular location. This analysis showed that among the top 10,000 inferred interactions, 1063 pairs of connected genes were found to have the same annotation (semantic similarity of 1.0) along at least one of the three criteria. When compared with 10,000 randomly selected connections among the 5492 genes, only 244 pairs were found to be functionally similar. Although it is unclear how such annotation similarities map to the actual regulatory network, we expect there to be some correspondence, such that a higher annotation similarity of the recovered network compared to random is consistent with the recovered network providing useful information concerning the true underlying network regulatory relationships responsible for the observed gene expression covariation.Analysis of the most connected 20 hub genes recovered also indicated the network was consistent with broad-scale annotation. For example, the most connected gene was CEACAM5, which is known to play a role in intracellular signaling (). CEACAM5 is also considered one of the best markers of cancer and is believed to activate integrin pathways (). The second most connected gene was GPX2, which plays a role in protection from toxicity. GPX2 was connected to many genes regulated by the transcription factor NRF2 (). Being itself regulated by NRF2 that becomes active only after phosphorylation, the expression of GPX2 is likely to be serving as a mirror of the regulatory effects of the phosphorylated NRF2. Other genes in the top 10 most connected genes were AKR1B10, SNAI2, FOS and IFIT3. In, AKR1B10 was shown to play a role in cell growth and the silencing of its expression was shown to inhibit the growth of colorectal cancer cells. Both SNAI2 and FOS are known to encode transcription factors (), while IFIT3 was previously reported to be crucial for the phosphorylation of the IRF3 transcription factor which in turns triggers anti-viral response ().
Conditional Independence Graphs for Network Recovery
Analysis of hubs and sub-networksFor a more detailed analysis of the most dense 20 sub-networks composed of hub-like structures, we performed a literature search for known relations between these genes that have been identified in the lung airway epithelium. A number of these sub-networks were found to be consistent with known pathways or regulatory relationships operating in the lung. In this section, we present two examples.shows a sub-network of 23 genes, where 14 of these genes are known to be regulated by the NRF2 transcription factor in the lung airway (). NRF2 is an oxidant-responsive transcription factor known to induce detoxifying and antioxidant genes. Although the network inference did not predict that NRF2 is directly connected to these genes, NRF2 only becomes functional when phosphorylated, so it is not necessarily surprising that NRF2 transcription is not reflective of the regulatory properties of this gene. Given this high enrichment for known NRF2-regulated genes in the recovered sub-network, the other nine genes, including MUCL1, HGD, SDCBP2, CBR3, HTATIP2, SLC7A1, CHST15, LRRC8D and AKR1C3 seem to be candidates for being regulated by NRF2 or by one of the genes regulated by NRF.shows a hub sub-network including 18 genes that are connected to the transcription factor CREB3L1, whose Drosophila homolog CREB3LA is the major regulator of secretory capacity (). Nine of these genes were reported to be associated with airway goblet cell differentiation, mucus production or cell secretion (). This high enrichmentrecovered sub-network, where shaded genes are involved in airway goblet cell differentiation, mucus production or cell secretion. Only the most 19 significant edges are displayed also suggests that the other nine genes, including SERINC2, UCP2, ALPL, GMNN, PCNP, CYP4X1, SNRK, RFC5 and Znf467 might also play a role in secretion pathways.
CONCLUSIONSELMM is a scalable network recovery algorithm that has properties well suited for both edge recovery and identification of hub genes when dealing with gene expression data. The comparative accuracy in the identification of hub genes is of particular value for at least two major reasons. First, there are a number of indirect and direct lines of evidence that hub-rich topologies may be common in regulatory networks (). Second, identification of hubs may provide information on genes that tightly associated, even if the direct mode of interaction is hidden. Although the analysis of real data cannot determine properties of the candidate hubs beyond their putative position at the center of a set of genes that are co-regulated by the same control mechanisms, such highly connected hub genes are candidates for being a causal gene that affects the expression of other genes or as indicators of an underlying causal mechanism that co-regulates the set of genes connected to the same hub. In general, accurate and scalable methods for network inference such as ELMM will be increasingly important with the increasing availability and the improved quality of gene expression data.
REFERENCES
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Akavia,U. et al. (2010) An integrated approach to uncover drivers of cancer. Cell, 143, 10051017. Aliferis,C. et al. (2003) Causal Explorer:Causal Probabilistic Network Learning Toolkit for Biomedical Discovery. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Mathematics and Engineering Techniques in Medicine and Biological Scienes, METMBS '03, June 2326, 2003, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, pp. 371376. Bansal,M. et al. (2007) How to infer gene networks from expression profiles. Mol. Sys. Biol., 3. Baralla,A. et al. (2009) Inferring gene networks: dream or nightmare? Ann. NY. Acad. Sci., 1158, 246256. Blencowe,B. et al. (2009) Current-generation high-throughput sequencing: deepening insights into mammalian transcriptomes. Genes Develop., 23, 1379.
