Motivation: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are considered the most frequently occurring DNA sequence variations. Several computational methods have been proposed for the classification of mis-sense SNPs to neutral and disease associated. However, existing computational approaches fail to select relevant features by choosing them arbitrarily without sufficient documentation. Moreover, they are limited to the problem of missing values, imbalance between the learning datasets and most of them do not support their predictions with confidence scores. Results: To overcome these limitations, a novel ensemble computational methodology is proposed. EnsembleGASVR facilitates a two-step algorithm, which in its first step applies a novel evolutionary embedded algorithm to locate close to optimal Support Vector Regression models. In its second step, these models are combined to extract a universal predictor, which is less prone to overfitting issues, systematizes the rebalancing of the learning sets and uses an internal approach for solving the missing values problem without loss of information. Confidence scores support all the predictions and the model becomes tunable by modifying the classification thresholds. An extensive study was performed for collecting the most relevant features for the problem of classifying SNPs, and a superset of 88 features was constructed. Experimental results show that the proposed framework outperforms well-known algorithms in terms of classification performance in the examined datasets. Finally, the proposed algorithmic framework was able to uncover the significant role of certain features such as the solvent accessibility feature, and the top-scored predictions were further validated by linking them with disease phenotypes. Availability and implementation: Datasets and codes are freely available on the Web at
INTRODUCTIONUnderstanding the relationship between genotype and phenotype is a fundamental problem in biology and biomedicine. Today, genome-wide sequencing combined with high-throughput platforms deliver significant improvements over older methods for identifying DNA sequence variations (). One of the most common types of genetic variation in humans is the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). A particular subcategory of SNPs called non-synonymous coding SNPs (nsSNPs) or missense SNPs refers to a single base substitution in a coding region that causes an amino acid substitution in the corresponding protein. The effects of nsSNPs in molecular function range from complete neutrality to disease susceptibility and lethality (). Coding-region SNPs not only characterize human evolution and diversity () but are also associated with drug sensitivity () and disease susceptibility (). Classifying nsSNPs according to their phenotypic effects has an important insinuation for understanding several diseases and exploring genetic ancestry, evolution and diversity among species (). Consequently, the effective characterization of polymorphic variations emerges as a challenging area of research. Testing experimentally the relationship between nsSNPs and diseases is not a trivial task and has several disadvantages in terms of cost and time (). For this purpose, several computational methods have been developed (). From the algorithmic perspective, there are two types of existing methodologies. The first type concerns the sequence homology methods that apply conservation analysis of amino acids substitutions among evolutionarily related proteins (). In principle, highly conserved residues in the polypeptide chain seem to be intolerant to amino acid substitutions, whereas positions with low degree of conservation allow more substitution without affecting protein functionality. The latter type regards Machine Learning (ML) methods that reformulate the characterization problem to a classification task and categorize polymorphisms into neutral or pathogenic based on structural, functional, sequential and evolutionary attributes. Up to now, several classification techniques have been applied including Artificial Neural Networks (), Random Forests (), Na ve Bayes classifiers *To whom correspondence should be addressed.() and Support Vector Machines (SVM;). Although these methods have led to the characterization of a great number of SNPs and achieve high classification performance, they have so far been limited by several disadvantages (). For instance, features used for classification are chosen arbitrarily without sufficient documentation (). Furthermore, the feature selection process, which is of great importance for several bioinformatics problems (), is not systematized (). Additionally, handling imbalanced pathogenic and neutral datasets is another obstacle that the existing methodologies fail to tackle efficiently (). Similar to other bioinformatics applications, the problem of missing values is also present and restricts the generalization ability of the developed models. The effective imputation of missing features without loss of information or expensive computations are aspects that require further consideration. In this study, a novel ML methodology called EnsembleGASVR is introduced. EnsembleGASVR is an embedded classification technique, which combines an Adaptive Genetic Algorithm (GA) with nu-Support Vector Regression (nu-SVR), through an ensemble algorithmic framework. EnsembleGASVR predicts whether a given nsSNP is pathogenic or neutral, based on an extensive feature set that contains the most indicative features proposed in the literature. The feature selection component is integrated to the learning phase of the methodology and uses an adaptive GA for selecting relevant feature subsets. Simultaneously, the GA optimizes the nu-SVR parameters using a novel objective function tailored to the problem-related requirements. Also, to deal with the problem of missing values in the datasets, alleviate the class imbalance lying in the examined datasets and raise the algorithm's overall performance, EnsembleGASVR combines eight individual classification models that extend the proposed algorithm to function as an ensemble technique. Specifically, for the classification of a single SNP, only models for which this particular SNP has missing values below a predefined threshold are deployed to classify it. By training multiple classifiers and using a fitness function specialized for imbalanced bioinformatics datasets, we take advantage of our full dataset distribution, while at the same time we reduce the effects of class imbalance. The combined action of multiple classifiers enables the acquisition of an extremely robust regression technique, which could be used to classify SNPs and assign scores for every prediction. Moreover, by varying the ensemble classification threshold, EnsembleGASVR becomes tunable in terms of sensitivity and specificity. Experimental results indicate that the proposed algorithmic technique outperformed existing methods in the datasets, which were used in this study, and leads to the automatic identification of a small and consistent subset of polymorphic features. EnsembleGASVR achieves a correct prediction rate of 87.45% and a geometric mean of 82%, tested on an independent human nsSNPs dataset. A set of four features appears to be present in all the eight extracted independent SVR models, and useful conclusions are made about their role in characterizing SNPs. Moreover, one newly introduced feature, Protein Essentiality, is selected in six of the eight SVR models indicating its importance in classifying nsSNPs.
METHODS
Datasets and featuresThe data generation process follows the methodology described in a comprehensive review of nine computational prediction methods (). The pathogenic dataset was extracted from PhenCode database and contains non-synonymous SNPs that affect human phenotype (September 2012 registry) (). Only nsSNPs annotated as disease causing in SwissProt () were included. SwissProt provides high-quality curated information about potential relationship of missense mutations and diseases and enhances the pool of pathogenic samples in our collection. The neutral dataset contains nsSNPs that have not yet been associated with any disease according to dbSNP database (). dbSNP is freely accessible and provides data in a variety of formats. From the dbSNP FTP service, we downloaded the ASN.1 flat files (Build 135, September 2012 registry), containing detailed information about all human genetic variants, grouped according to their chromosomal site. Then, the entries were filtered to meet the following criteria: (i) only non-synonymous (missense) SNPs are contained; (ii) have been validated and have not been withdrawn (validated = YES, notwithdrawn); (iii) have not been annotated as pathogenic or probablepathogenic; (iv) have minimum allele frequency 40.01; and (v) have been reported in at least 25 individuals (50 chromosomes). By applying these constraints, we tried to eliminate the number of disease-associated variants in our neutral dataset. dbSNP entries that contained links to Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database were discarded. Finally, the two datasets were compared and duplicate records in both sets were removed, to minimize the probability of false-negative and falsepositive cases in the neutral and pathogenic sets, respectively. We ended up with a pathogenic dataset of 17 743 nsSNPs, obtained from 2147 different protein sequences and a neutral dataset of 48 684 nsSNPs, obtained from 16 534 different protein sequences. Regarding the feature set construction, we studied features proposed by nine computational methods (). From this big pool of proposed characteristics, 87 representative attributes that have adequate documentation and describe the amino acid sequence, protein functionality, structural properties and evolutionary conservation were selected. The computation of the feature vector was accomplished deploying existing tools and scripts written by us for the cases where no publicly available program existed. Additionally, one new characteristic was also introduced: protein essentiality that describes whether the nsSNPs are obtained from essential proteins (DEG database data were used). The essential proteins are vital for the maintenance of life, as their malfunction can be fatal for the organism. It has been also indicated that mutations in the corresponding essential genes are directly related to the occurrence of many diseases (). The protein domains feature, which refers to nsSNPs that belong to a conserved protein domain, was computed for the first time using the InterProScan v5 software package (). The utilization of InterProScan decreased the feature's missing values compared with its calculation using only Pfam domains software (). Protein domains are conserved protein regions that can perform their specific function independently or in coordination with neighboring domains. Therefore, the specific location of nsSNPs within the protein can be crucial for characterizing their impact ().presents the feature set categories, and a detailed description of the features can be found in the Supplementary.
GASVR algorithmEnsembleGASVR is an embedded classification system that uses a hybrid combination of GA and nu-SVR classifier. SVR classifiers are a common form of SVMs of broad applicability to many pattern recognition problems. In principle, SVR presents high classification performance and low complexity because it relies on a subset of training data and uses a simplified cost function for building the model (). In contrast to regular SVM classifier, the nu-SVR outputs are real values that can be used as scores to support predictions. In addition, based on the application requirements, nu-SVR models become tunable in terms of sensitivity and sensitivity by modifying the decision threshold. GAs are stochastic meta-heuristic optimization algorithms that have been inspired by evolutionary biology principles (). The most relevant aspect of GAs is their ability to explore efficiently large search spaces and identify possible solutions, without getting trapped in local optimal. Moreover, they present high abilities to explore the search space and locate near-to-optimal solutions. In EnsembleGASVR's first step, an adaptive GA is deployed to tune nu-SVR parameters, which are as follows:(i) classifier parameters C and nu; (ii) Radial basis kernel bandwidth gamma; and (iii) classification threshold. Additionally, the combination of nu-SVR and GA systematizes the feature selection process and identifies relevant subsets of features under the embedded feature selection setting. In the GA framework, each chromosome is a binary string that encodes feature subset and parameters values. Specifically, a 142-bit string is used where 88 bits encode features, 10 bits represent each of the parameters nu and threshold (integer and decimal part), 14 bits correspond to gamma value and 20 bits are used for the parameter C. A rank-based roulette wheel selection method controls the selection of the best candidates in each GA generation (). This selection mechanism is preferred compared with the single roulette wheel selection to raise the selection pressure toward better solutions when all solutions of the population have present similar fitness values. Elitism is used to force the best solution of each population to be selected at least once in the next generation. The evaluation of each chromosome in the population is performed according to the following fitness function:where Accuracy is the nu-SVR's accuracy, GeometricMean refers to the geometric mean of sensitivity and specificity, MSE is the mean square of errors, Features represent the size of selected feature set and SupportVectors is the number of support vectors, included in the trained nu-SVR model. The geometric mean is used to handle the imbalance between positive and negative training examples (). The term SupportVectors in the fitness function allows EnsembleGASVR to use technical information of the nu-SVR classification model, in contrast to other wrapper methods that have been recently proposed in the literature, which use only the classifier's performance. Specifically, smaller and simpler SVR models are preferred, as they present better generalization properties. The range of the examined variables in the proposed fitness function where Accuracy 2, GeometricMean 2, MSE 2, Features 2, where Max_Features is the maximum number of features that can be selected by our method (in our case 88), and SupportVectors 2, where Training_Size is the number of training examples. These variables were multiplied with certain constants to normalize their values to range from 0 to 1. The constants a, b, c, d and e in Equation (1) are userspecified weights. The following values were assigned without experimentation: a = 0.5, b = 0.5, c = 0.01, d = 0.005 and e = 0.001. These values were selected to reflect the priorities of the goals for classifying missense SNPs. Using these values, EnsembleGASVR achieves high classification performance and simultaneously generates a simple and effective model. The order of our objectives significance may be extracted by observing the weight value of each separate goal. So, the classification accuracy, the geometric mean and the MSE of the classifier are the most significant, with the number of selected features being less significant and the number of the support vectors being the least significant objective. To avoid overfitting problems, we did not attempt to optimize these values. Then the differentiation operators, crossover and mutation are applied to the top-ranked candidate solutions to create a new population. The crossover operator applies 2-point crossover to obtain a new offspring from two parents. In our current implementation, the crossover rate is constant and set to 0.9. This rate increases the variability of the crossover operator and with a small probability candidate solutions pass to the next generation unaffected. This property is essential when good solutions emerge in early stages of the algorithm. To achieve the desired trade-off between exploration and exploitation, EnsembleGASVR uses an adaptive mutation rate. The mutation rate iswhere n is the current generation, P S is the population size and MAX G is the maximum generation, as defined by the termination criteria, and A_S is the average similarity between the members of the population and its best member. The proposed adaptive mutation operator attempts to perform global optimization in its first iterations while gradually switching its behavior to local optimization. The value 0.2 was selected in the Equation (2) as an extremely high-mutation probability value that transforms the proposed algorithm to a random search algorithm in its first steps. To avoid getting trapped in local optima, the average similarity of each chromosome with the best individual of the population is estimated in each generation. If this average similarity exceeds 90%, the mutation probability is increased by a factor of (0.21/P S )/(MAX G ), instead of being reduced. When the average similarity of the chromosomes within a population is over 90%, there is a high possibility that the proposed algorithm has stacked in a local optimal solution. The overall flowchart of the GASVR algorithm is presented in. The size of the initial population was set to 30 chromosomes. Further experiments using the training set were conducted to optimize this parameter, but the results were not improved significantly. The termination criterion was the convergence of the population. The population is considered converged when the average fitness across the current population is 55% away from the best fitness of the current population. The maximum number of generations was set to 150 after observing that most of the proposed algorithms executions were terminated in $100120 generations when the convergence criterion was activated. EnsembleGASVR is implemented in Matlab version R2011a, and all source code and datasets are available at http://prlab.ceid.upatras.gr/ EnsembleGASVR/dataset-codes.zip.
EnsembleGASVRTo alleviate the problem of missing values, to take advantage of our full imbalanced dataset and to improve the overall classification performance, the aforementioned algorithm was extended to function as an ensemble technique, named EnsembleGASVR. Ensemble methodologies () are used to increase the effectiveness of individual classifiers and maximize the performance by training multiple classifiers and combining their decisions into a single output. The main profit of ensemble methodologies is the improvement of efficiency and accuracy: each classifier introduces errors, but the combination of different classifiers, as they have been trained on different subsets of the original data, outperforms a single classifier (). The development of several classifiers for each sub-training set is not affected by the heterogeneity of the whole imbalanced training set in contrast to a single classifier trained with whole training examples (). The problem of missing values isalso tackled effectively owing to the extraction of classifier-specific features subsets. The final prediction of test samples takes into account only those classifiers that do not have high percentage of missing variables in their feature vector. In contrast to existing methodologies, which discard data samples or use complicated imputation techniques, the aforementioned approach provides significant computational savings, and offers an elegant way of imputing missing values, without any loss of information. Taking advantage of the initial dataset for constructing more efficient classifiers, we divided randomly the initial dataset into two equal size sets for training and testing, both containing 33 208 nsSNPs. The training set was further partitioned randomly into n subsets of equal size. The random partitioning procedure ensures that the ratio between positive and negative samples was kept the same as in the original dataset. A classifier was trained for each training subset, applying the hybrid training process described in the previous subsection. The number of independent classifiers (n) was selected through an internal trial and error procedure that attempted to use most of the available features (495% of them) in at least one classifier, while maintaining a reasonable sample size (41000 samples for the minority class). In specific, the number of the classifiers, starting with two independent classifiers, was in each step increased by one until the above criteria are satisfied. This fact enabled the proposed methodology to use most of the available information, extracting a set of diversified classifiers. The minimum number of independent classifiers (n) that satisfied the above criteria has been found equal to eight. The size of the training subset for this setting (1109 pathogenic and 3042 neutral examples, respectively), which was used to train every independent classifier, was sufficient to avoid the problem of overfitting because of using small datasets (Lenth, 2001), (). The eight nu-SVR models were combined to form an ensemble classification model, which can be applied to predict the pathogenicity of new and unseen nsSNPs. Regarding the testing process, the new instances are classified by the eight nu-SVR models, and the ensemble majority voting process is applied. A prediction value, a classification threshold and the feature subset used for classification are returned after the execution of each of the eight classifiers. However, if a feature subset of a classifier contains features with missing values, in a percentage 47.5%, then the output of the classifier is considered as low confident and is not taken into account for the final prediction (). The threshold for discarding a classification model because of missing values was optimized experimentally using only the training dataset. In general, the proposed methodology uses models with a small percentage of missing values. These missing values are calculated using the KNearest Neighbor (KNN)-impute methodology (). Finally, an average prediction value and an average classification threshold are calculated based on the output of those classifiers that satisfy the above criterion. If the average prediction value is higher than the classification threshold, EnsembleGASVR predicts nsSNP as pathogenic, otherwise it predicts it as neutral. The way the eight individual models are combined to classify a new nsSNP is summarized in.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Comparison with existing methodsThe quality of EnsembleGASVR prediction was evaluated according to seven metrics: accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, geometric mean of sensitivity and specificity, Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC), precision and area under the curve (AUC). It is evident that the values of sensitivity and specificity of a classifier depend on the specified classification threshold between neutral and pathogenic classes. In our case, the regression nature of nu-SVR models enables EnsembleGASVR model to be flexible in terms of sensitivity and specificity. By changing the classification threshold, different rates between sensitivity and specificity can be achieved. For the case of imbalance learning, the geometric mean of sensitivity and specificity is the most adequate metric to assess the performance of a classifier (). EnsembleGASVR was compared with the following four wellknown predictors of pathogenic nsSNPs: MutationAssessor, Polyphen-2, PANTHER and SIFT. The main reason we chose the aforementioned methods for our benchmarking, is that they are widely used, frequently updated and also enable real-time analysis of large lists of nsSNPs (). MutationAssessor computes a functional impact score and estimates the effects of mutations using evolutionary conservation criteria (). This score derives from a set of evolutionarily conserved residues that are computed by clustering into subfamilies multiple alignments of homologous sequences. Polyphen-2 () uses a Na ve Bayes classifier that has been trained using two different datasets (HumVar and HumDiv) and it is up to users which of the two training sets will be selected for the classification. In this study, Polyphen-2's performance was evaluated, deploying both its alternative training sets. SIFT uses a homology-based approach to predict whether an amino acid substitution affects protein functionality and alters the phenotype (). SIFTfor i: 1 to 8 do: compute predictioncompute thresholdcompute missing_percentageif missing_percentage5 7.5% then total_prediction total_prediction + predictiontotal_threshold total_threshold + thresholdtotal_classifiers total_classifiers + 1 end if end for average_prediction total_prediction / total_classifiers average_threshold total_threshold / total_classifiers if average_prediction4average_threshold then Classify test example as pathogenic elseClassify test example as neutral end if end for aligns a query protein with homologous sequences, using the PSI-BLAST algorithm, and then it assigns a score in every residue, according to the probability of the occurrence of the given residue at the specific position in the alignment. Mutations in highly conserved positions more likely lead to disease-associated phenotypes, whereas mutations in not-conserved sites have neutral effects. Similarly, PANTHER () predicts the impact of nsSNPs based on position-specific evolutionary conservation scores, obtained from multiple sequence alignments of related proteins. As evolutionary information was incorporated in our classification, using features derived from the PANTHER output, PANTHER method provides a baseline measure for our benchmarking. To present a fair comparison with respect to all the other methods, we tested the performance on two independent datasets:. To assess the robustness of the proposed algorithm approach, EnsembleGASVR was run 10 times, training 10 different models. During the training procedure, the training set was partitioned randomly into eight equal-size subsets. The average classification performance and the standard deviation of the trained models are presented in Tables 3 and 4. From the comparison, we excluded HumDiv dataset that contains non-human mammalian homologs as negative sample. The non-human HumDiv negative dataset has different characteristics compared with the human ones, and the training and testing of our method in such a dataset is out of the present article's scope. However, Polyphen-2's latest version presented significant advantages and reported high classification performance on that dataset. Figures 2 and 3 present the receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curves analysis for both studied datasets. Extended experimental results are included in Supplementary Tables S3 and S4 containing classification performance of all the studied methods in HumDiv as well as the accuracy for the latest dbSNP registry (build 139). Apparently, EnsembleGASVR outperforms the other methods in accuracy, specificity, geometric mean, precision, MCC and AUC in both datasets. Polyphen-2, on the other hand, achieves higher sensitivity in both datasets but much lower performance in all other examined metrics. That fact indicates that EnsembleGASVR tackles more effectively the class imbalance problem. As it has already been mentioned, the geometric mean gives better and more reliable insight on the predictive power of a classifier. One reason for this advantage of our method is its ability to combine features disregarding of the existence of mutual information among them. In opposite, Polyphen is based on the Naive Bayes classifier, which assumes independence between the deployed features. Moreover, we observe that PANTHER and SIFT that rely on alignment with homolog proteins achieve high specificity in both datasets but much lower sensitivity. That fact can be attributed to the absence of homologs in their libraries for all of the tested cases. To verify the informative power of specific attributes, the feature subsets used by each individual classifier were compared and those that presented great discriminatory ability were identified. Relative Solvent Accessibility, probability of wild-type residue in PANTHER library (P wt ), message column of PANTHER output and protein functional annotation, based on Gene Ontology terms (Gene Ontology log-odds (LGO) score LGO), were used by all the classifiers, and therefore, they present great discriminatory ability. It is also noteworthy that the attribute (protein essentiality) was included in six of the eight extracted feature subsets. This observation denotes the discriminative ability of this feature, highlights its effectiveness and recommends its usage in the nsSNPs classification problem. More details about the selected features of each individual classifier can be found in Supplementary Table S2.
Exploring the value of the predicted scoreIt was mentioned previously that SVRs, when used for classification problems, support prediction with real value scores that could be exploited as confidence scores (extreme high and low values indicate more reliable predictions and values near zero represent uncertain predictions of low confidence). To validate this finding, we obtained the confidence scores of the EnsembleGASVR model that achieved the highest geometric mean value in the training set, and we studied the top-10scored predictions coming from our independent test set. We found that all these predictions belong to the class of diseases-associated nsSNPs, and all of them are reported in the dbSNP database. The top-10scored mutations are presented in. From this table, it is observed that all these mutations have been connected with specific pathogenesis. A more detailed search in OMIM database revealed that all of the top 10 predictions are associated with rare single gene diseases and six of them belong to the class of autosomal disorders. Moreover, 4 of the 10 mutated proteins are expressed highly in vital organs such as liver, brain and colon. Regarding their functional effects, 50% is lethal and death occurs in the early childhood. The rest cause severe syndromes, such as Li-Fraumeni syndrome and Xeroderma pigmentosum, and in some cases the risk of developing cancer is highly increased. These observations demonstrate that EnsembleGASVR prediction scores are extremely effective in measuring the confidence of the derived predictions. Then, as an alternative validation procedure, we studied whether these predictions are associated with genome-wide association studies (GWAS) based on the latest catalog (https://www. genome.gov/26525384). As the scope of this article is to study nsSNPs, the GWAS SNPs were filtered to keep only the nonsynonymous ones excluding the intergenic and intronic SNPs. GWAS latest version () includes 628 nsSNPs. The whole batch of our predictions was scanned, and 198 matches were found achieving a statistically significant coverage of 31.52%. Next, we investigated the possibility that the extracted confidence score could act as a metric for the severity of the polymorphism for the disease it causes. To achieve this, we used the annotations provided by UniProt for the pathogenic SNPs. In particular, the pathogenic SNPs can be characterized as Severe, Moderately Severe, Intermediate form, moderate, Mild and Not Characterized. We intended to compare the 1000 highest scored pathogenic SNPs with the 1000 lowest scored pathogenic diseases. However, only 49 among the highest scored and 58 SNPs among the lowest scored were actually characterized for their severity. Because of the limited data samples, an additional binning of characterization categories was required. The Severe, Moderately Severe and Intermediate characterization categories were combined to form the first group, and the Mild and Moderate characterizations formed the second one. The results are presented in. Applying the Fisher's Exact statistical test, a statistical significant difference (P = 0.01611) was uncovered between the two groups of mutations. Despite this significant finding, it is obvious that the limited total number of the severity characterized SNPs does not allow for more general conclusions and more firm findings could be extracted as this number rises.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKA novel computational framework was introduced for predicting neutral and pathogenic polymorphic variations. The important component of the proposed methodology is the utilization of a two-phase algorithm that combines multiple nu-SVR classifiers under the ensemble setting. The utilization of a GA optimizes the ensemble framework parameters, the nu-SVR classifier parameters and reveals compact feature subsets. Moreover, a problemspecific scoring function was introduced that maximizes the classification performance and simultaneously produces interpretable and relative simple classification models. Although, allthese concepts are not new in the field of pattern recognition, this is the first time they are deployed in one unified framework that comfortably predicts nsSNPs and outperforms well-known existing methodologies. The performance superiority can be attributed to the ensemble nature of the method, which achieves high classification performance, rebalances the learning datasets, ignores overfitting issues and presents great generalization capabilities. In addition, the combination of decisions coming from different classifiers provides an elegant way of manipulating missing values without loss of information. Except for the problem of classifying missense SNPs, the proposed computational technique is general enough and it can be applied to different bioinformatics problem where the class imbalance and the missing values problems are present. Besides, an extensive study was performed for the most relevant features to the problem of classifying SNPs, and an 88-features superset was proposed. This superset contains attributes, coming from several categories, which capture all the adequate information of functional proteins and can characterize efficiently pathogenic or neutral variations. In contrast to the ad hoc selection of features, the systemization of the feature selection process is a valuable tool for linking specific protein characteristics with functionality and pathogenicity. The embedded feature selection component of EnsembleGASVR revealed a small feature subset, which is stable, and always present in the ensemble models with 100% frequency. This subset contains four features mostly related to evolutionary and functional information. Furthermore, the new feature that describes vital properties was selected with 75% frequency. Regarding the non-selected features, only two features (whether the nsSNP occurs in the close environment of T-phosphorylation site and whether the wild-type or mutant residue is Valine) were not selected, and this could be attributed to the mutual information shared by many of the examined features. Another significant contribution of this work is the publication of a high-quality novel dataset. Moreover, the implementation of the proposed methodology is publicly available and can be run on commodity computers in a reasonable amount of time. Nonetheless, there still is room for improvement. The main drawback of EnsembleGASVR is the slow execution time required for training (up to 24 h for an i5 processor workstation). However, this is not a restricting factor for the application of the trained model, as it requires only 1525 s to classify a single new SNP. The high-computational cost of the training phase is attributed to the current implementation of the ensemble framework and the GA implementation, which is sequential. However, the ensemble nature of EnsembleGASVR and the evolutionary properties of the GA optimizer are ideal for parallelization. In our ongoing research, we are developing a master/slave program that can run in multicore architectures and can take advantage of cloud-oriented infrastructures. Another limiting factor is the lack of well-characterized non-damaging human homologs datasets that can serve as negative examples. Another interesting future idea is the prediction of diseaserelated intronic and intergenic SNPs using GWAS data. Regarding the biological part of this work, our future plan is to study more extensively the linkage between the confidence scores of our predictor and the pathogenicity of SNPs. The preliminary results for this task indicated that our predicted
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
EnsembleGASVR at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
T.Rapakoulia et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
