Motivation: Antibodies are an important class of biological drugs, but with limitations, such as inadequate pharmacokinetics, adverse immunogenicity and high production costs. Synthetic pep-tides for the desired target represent an important alternative to antibodies. However, no computational tool exists to guide the design of these peptides. Results: To identify the interacting residues in a given antibody–antigen (Ab–Ag) interface we used Interface Interacting Residue (I2R), a selection method based on computed molecular interactions. The aggregation of all the molecular interactions between epitope and paratope residues allowed us to transform the 3D Ab–Ag complex structures into interface graphs. Based on these data and the probability of molecular interaction we developed EPI-Peptide Designer tool that uses predicted paratope residues for an epitope of interest to generate targeted peptide ligand libraries. EPI-Peptide Designer successfully predicted 301 peptides able to bind to LiD1 target protein (65% of the experimentally tested peptides), an enrichment of 22% compared to randomly generated peptides. This tool should enable the development of a new generation of synthetic interacting peptides that could be very useful in the biosensor, diagnostic and therapeutic fields. Availability and implementation: All software developed in this work are available at
IntroductionProteinprotein interactions are at the heart of biological processes and protein functions are highly related to their binding properties (). For instance, the immune response relies on antigen recognition by a specific antibody and the antibodyantigen (AbAg) complex represents a specific type of proteinprotein interaction characterized by high affinity and specificity. Identifying the key residues and interaction patterns on the AbAg interface could help improving antibody humanization as well as the design of new antibodies () and peptide ligands based on the antibody properties. The use of peptides for therapeutic purpose instead of antibodies has plenty of advantages such as lower manufacturing costs, less immunogenic profile, greater stability and better organ/tumor penetration. Several chemical approaches have been generated to overcome therapeutic peptides limitations such as low oral bioavailability and V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com biodistribution (). Indeed, much research effort is focused on the use of peptide ligands as a viable alternative to antibodies in targeted therapies (). For instance, mimetic peptides derived from the anti-HER2/ERBB antibody can inhibit the tyrosine kinase activity of this receptor and consequently impair tumour growth (). Presently, over 50 peptide drugs are approved for clinical use (). To guide the design and increase the affinity and specificity of these peptide drugs, different tools, based on various methodologies (e.g. directed evolution, high-throughput protein screening or rational design based on proteinpeptide interactions) have emerged (). In silico rational design of peptides based on molecular interactions is also a fundamental proof-of-concept for the current understanding of the physical-chemical basis of molecular recognition. Moreover, this approach could become a powerful complement to the current librarybased screening methods because it allows targeting specific patches on the surface of a protein (). Computational design also gives the opportunity to program proteinprotein interactions for specific applications. However, currently no computational methodology to design this kind of peptides is available. In this work, we propose a computational method to generate libraries of peptide ligands or paratope mimetics based on the epitopeparatope interaction (EPI) patterns and on a target epitope input sequence. This software, called EPI-Peptide Designer, uses a set of AbAg complex structures from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) () and the Blue Star STING server and STING_DB () containing hundreds of interaction descriptors reported in residue by residue fashion to compute the Bayesian probabilities of molecular interactions between epitope and paratope. EPIPeptide Designer generates peptide binder sequences based on the epitope sequence entered by the user and the patterns extracted from the AbAg interfaces. The method was experimentally validated using as target a dermonecrotic protein LiD1 from the brown spider venom. We have synthesized a library of 460 peptides and 65% of them were able to bind to LiD1. In addition, 460 random peptide were designed in which 43% of them were positives. These results indicate an enrichement of 22% in ligand peptides designed using EPI-Peptide Desginer. This is, to our knowledge, the first generator of peptide ligand libraries based on epitopeparatope interface.
Methods
Dataset extraction and interface selectionStructures from AbAg used in this work were extracted from SAbDab (). Were selected all structure with protein/peptide antigen and from this set, only structures resolved by X-ray and a resolution lower or equal to 3 A  were kept. To analyze the interface of AbAg complexes, we used three different interface selection methods. First, in the selection based on the distance between atoms of the antigen and the antibody (distance-based selection, DBS) (), an amino acid of the antigen is considered to be part of the Distance Selected Epitope (DSE), if one or more of its atoms are at a distance below a chosen cut-off (in our study, from 3 to 8 A  ). The distance selected paratope (DSP) is selected in the same manner. Second, in the approach based on the difference of solvent accessible surface (DSAS), interfaces are selected based on the loss of solvent accessibility between the separated and the complexed protein (). Third, we developed a selection method in which the interface computed molecular interactions are extracted from STING RDB (). In this method, the interface is defined by all the amino acids that are involved in the molecular interactions between the antigen and the antibody chains and that are called, therefore, interface interacting residues (I2R). The selected antibody residues form the I2R paratope and the selected antigen amino acids constitute the I2R epitope.
Computation of the interface molecular interactionsMolecular interactions (salt bridges, hydrogen bonds, aromatic stacking and hydrophobic interactions) were taken from STING RDB IFR (). This tool identifies all potential intra-and inter-protein chain contacts stored in STING RDB () by (i) classifying the atoms in groups according to their electrostatic behavior and position in the amino acid (main or side chain) and (ii) by then selecting atoms based on the type of contacts they potentially can make and on the experimentally defined distance restrictions ().
Redundancy removalTo extract meaningful information from the interface dataset, one firstly removed structure with the same antigen name and keeping the lowest resolution one and secondly removed redundancies by selecting only the DSE and DSP sequences from the complex (with a cut-off of 6 A  ). Using the CD-Hit global sequence identity score (), we only selected interfaces with a score lower than 0.90 for both interface sides. Global sequence identity score is define as the number of identical amino acids in alignment divided by the length of the shorter sequence. The selected files were manually curated to confirm their quality. This provided us with a non-redundant dataset composed of 272 PDB structures, 51 antibodypeptide complexes (here, peptides are defined as molecules smaller than 30 amino acids) and 221 antibodyprotein complex.
Interface statistical analysisTo compute the percentage of occurrence (% Occ) of the epitopes and paratopes selected by I2R one used:where n is an amino acids, %Occ n is the percentage of occurrence of n, Occ n is the occurrence of n and Occ total is the occurrence of all the residues. The results were compared to all STING RDB protein protein interaction () occurrence values after exclusion of our 101 PDB Files. The statistical comparison of the amino acids was done using a t test of differential distribution and was considered significant when the P-value was lower than 0.01.
Comparison of the interface selection methodsTo compare the interface residue selection by the three methods we computed the Receiver operating prime curve (ROC') of the performance of the distance-based selection and DSAS, using various cut-offs, against I2R. As the aim was the comparison of selected interface residues, the true negatives were not considered. We computed the ROC' curve as follows. The true positive rate (TPR), also called recall, was computed as: TPR  TP TP  FN EPI-peptide designerand the false discovery rate (FDR) as: FDR  FP FP  TP where TP is the true positive, FP the false positive and FN the false negative.
Computation of the most frequent interface partners using graph analysisTo analyze the interface in a multi-level manner, we developed interface to graph generator (IGG). IGG is a BioJava program that takes as input PDB codes and two sets of chains. Molecular interactions between those two sets are recovered from PDB structures using STING RDB (). The interface is automatically transformed into a graph, where all I2Rs are vertices and all interactions are edges. The vertex label holds the information concerning the interface side and the amino acid type (). The edges are labelled according to the type of interaction, such as hydrogen bonds, salt bridges, hydrophobic interactions and aromatic stacking. Using GASTON (), the most conserved subgraphs were extracted from the complete set of interfaces containing two and three nodes. Subgraphs plot was done using R (R Development Core) and the 'igraph' package ().
Assessment of paratope residue predictionBased on the Bayesian probabilities extracted from the epitopeparatope graphs, the amino acid sequence and the interaction of a given paratope were predicted using a given epitope sequence. To evaluate the prediction of residues and interactions, using a 10-fold cross validation on the complete dataset. The evaluation considered each residue from the input epitope and defined as True Positive (TP) a correct 'interaction type and paratope residue' couple, as false positive (FP) any interaction where the interaction type or the residue group was incorrect, as false negative (FN) any existing couple not added by the program and as true negative (TN) any possible not existing and not added interaction type-paratope residue couple.
EPI-peptide design toolUsing all the AbAg interaction patterns and the residue occurrence data obtained in this study, we developed EPI-Peptide Designer in BioJava. EPI-Peptide Designer includes the IGG program described above. The program takes as input a real or putative epitope sequence (linear or conformational; gaps in the sequence can be represented by-), a cut-off score representing the importance of the epitope sequence in the design and the number and size of peptides needed by the user. To design peptide ligands, EPI-Peptide Designer uses the Base Residue Library (BRL) composed of all residues from all the paratopes in the input dataset. The computed probabilities include: probability of an epitope residue type to do an interaction and, for each type of interaction, the probability of the target paratope residue type and the influence of the epitope neighbour residues on the interaction. Using these probabilities and the input sequence, EPI-Peptide Designer ranks the predicted paratope residues in decreasing order of likelihood. The paratope residues are then added according to the decreasing order of likelihood to the BRL until the defined cut-off score is reached (i.e. for a BRL of 100 residues and a cut-off score of 10%, EPI-Peptide Designer will add 10 residues to the BRL). The thus obtained biased amino acid library (i.e. modified to become specific for a given epitope sequence) is then used to generate random EPI-peptide sequences of the length and in the number defined by the user.
EPI-peptide design and random peptides generationIn order to test the effectiveness of the method, 800 EPI-Peptides were generated using the protein LiD1 (GI: 33348850,) catalytic sequence epitope ( 37 FDDNANPEYTYHGIP 51 ) and default parameter of EPI-Peptide Designer (Ab-peptide dataset, length of 15 amino acid and a score of 50). To ensure solubility, only sequences which contained less than 50% hydrophobic residues; at least 25% of charged residues and less than 75% of D, E, H, K, N, Q, R, S, T and Y were selected and synthesized (Following recommendations from Life technologies peptide solubility website, http://www.lifetechnolo gies.com). Random peptide sequences were generated using the expasy tool RandSeq () using the average amino acid composition from the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database and filtered following the same methodology than the EPI-pepitde. The statistic used by the program for the different amino acids are: Ala: 8.26, Gln: 3.93, Leu: 9.66, Ser: 6.59, Arg: 5.53, Glu: 6.74, Lys: 5.83, Thr: 5.34, Asn: 4.06, Gly: 7.08, Met: 2.41, Trp: 1.09, Asp: 5.46, His: 2.27, Phe: 3.86, Tyr: 2.92, Cys: 1.37, Ile: 5.94, Pro: 4.71, Val: 6.87.
Peptide synthesis on cellulose membranes and binding assayTwo membranes with four hundred and sixty peptides each were synthesized on a cellulose membrane as previously described by. One of the membranes corresponding to Epipeptides and other to random peptides. The membranes were blocked by incubation with 137 mM NaCl, 2.68 mM KCl, 3% sacarose, 5% bovine serum albumin, 0.1% tween 20 in 50 mM Tris base at room temperature overnight. Then membranes were probed LiD1 covalently linked to biotin at a concentration of 20lg/ml in blocking buffer at room temperature for 90 min. Biotinalytion of LiD1 was conducted using commercial available Biotinylation kit (SigmaAldrich, BK101). Protein binding was revealed by incubation (at room temperature for 90 min) with alkaline phosphataseconjugated avidin (1:10 000) and 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate (BCIP) plus 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) as substrate. To remove molecules and precipitated blue die attached, membranes were sequentially treated with dimethylformamide, 1% SDS, 0.1% 2-mercaptoethanol in 8 M urea, ethanol/water/acetic acid (50:40:10, vol/vol/vol) and, finally, methanol and further employed in other assays. Peptide reactivity was assessed based on manual reading and consensus of triplicate assays. Positive sequences were analyzed by GibbsCluster () and Weblogo () tools. Statistical analysis comparing the success of binding were done using binomial test.
Results
Analysisof the interface interacting residues (I2R) allows evaluating the distance-based selection and the difference of solvent
accessible surface methodsTo compare the three interface residue selection techniques, we selected interfaces from the 272 PDB structures by computing the Euclidean distance DBS, the DSAS and the interface molecular interactions (I2R). We then compared the selections made with the DBS and DSAS methods against the I2Rs by computing the ROC' curves (). Comparison of the selection made based on the Euclidean distance with the extracted I2Rs showed that the maximum precision was obtained with a 3 A  distance, while the maximum TPR (also called Recall) was reached with 8 A . The DBS had a higher surface under the curve and the highest value of TPR  FDR was reached for a distance of 3.8 A . Most DBS-based AbAg structure studies use a cut-off between 4 and 6 A . For a distance of 5 A  , with this plot, 91.4% (TPR) of interacting residues were selected; however, 36% of the selected residues did not do any kind of interaction. Surprisingly, to reach the maximum TPR, a distance cut-off of 8 A  was needed. As most of the molecular interaction maximum distances are lower than 6 A  , we further investigated the interaction repartition. As all interface interactions are not selected by the 5 A  cut-off, we were interested in the interaction repartition in function of the distance. The bar plots () of the interactions relative to the chosen distance showed that the distance of 5 A  , as expected based on the previous results, allowed the selection of most interactions, but still missed 3.9% of them, specifically 6.7% of all salt bridges, 4.5% of all hydrogen bonds and 7.8% of all aromatic stacking, but none of the hydrophobic interactions. The hydrogen bonds with a distance bigger than 5 A  were all water-mediated, thus explaining the unusual long distance. The cumulative bar plot of the interactions () showed that the hydrophobic interactions were quantitatively the most important, followed closely by hydrogen bonds. Conversely, salt bridges and aromatic stacking were less frequent on the antibodyantigen interface.
Amino acid occurrence in epitopes and paratopes selected with the interface interacting residue (I2R) methodCompared to all interacting residues in STING RDB, I2R paratopes (grey columns in) were significantly enriched in Tyr, Ser, Trp, Gly, Asn and Thr. I2R paratopes were depleted of most of the other amino acids, but for Ala, Asp and Phe the occurrence of which was not significantly different compared with all STING RDB interacting residues. I2R epitopes (black columns in) were enriched in Gly, Pro, Asn, Gln, Ser, Thr and Cys and depleted of Glu, Arg, His, Phe and Tyr.A bipartite graph representation of the paratope-epitope interactions indicated that the interacting residues had a very asymmetric distribution (). In the paratope, Tyr, the most frequent residue, interacted with almost all the epitopic amino acids via different types of interactions. Tyr interacted most frequently with hydrophobic amino acids, particularly Pro, Gln, Gly, Phe and with the charged Lys and Arg in the epitope. Indeed, paratopic Tyr interacted with positively charged epitopic residues via cation-p interactions and with negatively charged epitopic residues via hydrogen bonds. The Ser in the paratope seemed important for establishing a network of hydrogen bonds with charged amino acids and also with Gln and Ser in the epitope. Among the charged amino acids in the paratope, a high prevalence of salt bridges done by Arg and Asp was observed. More heterogeneous interactions were observed among the epitope residues. Although Arg was less frequent than in other kinds of proteinprotein interactions (), it was the most frequent residue in epitopes and was involved in all kinds of interactions. Epitopic Arg interacted mostly with Tyr residues in the paratope via aromatic stacking, hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions. It also formed salt bridges preferentially with Asp, but also with Glu, and repulsive salt bridges with Arg in the paratope. Lys in the epitope formed a similar network with Tyr in the paratope.
The most conserved subgraphs highlight the importance of cation-p interactions in the epitope paratope interfaceThe extraction of the most conserved subgraphs from the complete dataset with two of the three nodes showed that paratopic aromatic residues (Tyr) predominantly interacted with positively charged residues in the epitope through an aromatic stacking interaction (cation-p interaction) (). Specifically, 224 of the 272 selected structures contained at least one cation-p interaction in which the positive charge was hold by the epitope. In addition the six most conserved subgraphs with three or more nodes all contains a cation-p with another molecular interaction. 59 structures contain a double cation-p interaction () composed of a positively charged residue in the epitope that interacted with two aromatic amino acids from the paratope.. Each cell contains one of the six most common subgraphs with two (A) or three or more nodes (B) from the interface graphs based on the 272 PDB structures dataset. The title indicates in how many interfaces the motif was observed at least once
Assessment of the paratope residue predictionUsing these antibodyantigen graph patterns, we then developed a new methodology to design antibody mimetics using the antigen sequence. First, we computed the Bayesian probability of all kinds of interactions to predict the residue-interaction couples. Then, to test the predictions, we used the full dataset and a 10-fold cross validation method with all the interactions and the seven residue groups (). The prediction program includes two tuning parameters. First, the probability cut-off which determine if an interaction is added or not and the 'influence' corresponding to the weight of the neighbour residues on the probability value. Those two parameters were tuned in order to obtain maximum sensitivity. The best results was reached with a probability cut-off of 0.1, and an influence of 3.5 obtaining a sensitivity of 66% and a specificity of 70%. These results indicate that the residues selected to compose the predicted ligand peptides are not random.
EPI-peptide designer toolFrom a set of user-defined AbAg complexes (), the EPIPeptide Designer computed the graph representation of the interfaces (). Then, from the set of graphs, the program computed the amino acid occurrence in the second side (in our study the paratope) and the interaction probability (and D). To demonstrate how the EPI-Peptide Designer works, we used the epitope from the LiD1 protein. Using a score of 50% (representing the importance of the epitope sequence in the design), the percentage of occurrence of five amino acids from the BRL was modified by at least 2% (see).
Predicted EPI-peptides are able to bind to target LiD1 proteinTo test the ability of EPI-peptide designer to successfully predict peptides able to bind to the epitope ( 37 FDDNANPEYTYHGIP 51 ) of LiD1 protein, 460 peptides were predicted (Supplementary), chemically synthesized and assayed against biotinylated LiD1. From 460 sequences synthesized, 218 were considered highly positive (47% of sequences, squares on) and 83 had a lower reactivity (18%), a total of 301 reactive peptides. 159 peptides (35%) presented no reactivity. Highly positive peptides were clustered in two groups and a graphical representation of the patterns from each multiple sequence alignment was computed (). Cluster 1 (Supplementary) contains 107 sequences and shows two conserved tyrosine at position 9 (59%) and 10 (41%) as well as two conserved arginines (positions 14 and 15). The second most frequent amino acid in those positions is also aromatic (Trp). Similarly, the cluster 2 (Supplementary) includes two conserved tyrosines at position 14 and 15 (53 and 54% respectively). In order to address the ability of EPI-peptide Designer to perform a better peptide prediction compared to random generate peptides, 460 random peptides were generated using Swiss-Prot/Uniprot amino acid statistic (Supplementary) and tested against LiD1-biotin using the same experimental conditions. From these peptides, 128 were considered highly positive (28% of sequences) and 71 presented lower reactivity (15%), a total of 199 reactive peptides, corresponding to 43% of reactivity (102 less than Epi-peptide prediction). 261 peptides (57%) were not reactive (Supplementary). The peptides were also probed against biotin alone (Supplementary) without any reactivity observed. With these results, we can conclude that EPI-peptides show an increase of 22% of the success in term of binding corresponding to a P-value of 2.2e 16 using a binomial test compared to the randomly generated peptides.). (D) Interaction probability. (E) Based Residue Library (BRL) is modified acording to epitope sequence using the previously computed probabilities. The size of the amino acid font represents the occurrence percentage in the libraries. The star represents amino acid frequencies that have been modified by at least 2% based on the epitope sequence specificity (biased library). EPIPeptide are synthesized and binding is validated using immunoassay techniques
EPI-peptide designerTo overcome the many antibody limitations, such as their inadequate pharmacokinetics, poor tissue accessibility and adverse immunogenicity including high production costs, enormous efforts have been focused on finding alternative strategies (), such as non-peptidic protein binders (), smaller antibody fragments that retain the original binding property () and even peptidomimetics inferred from the antibody Complementarity Determining Region (CDR) (). The generation of CDR-derived peptidomimetics is challenging, but it would pave the way to larger biomedical (therapeutic and diagnostic) applications (). However, it has been shown that some positions within the CDRs never participate in antigen binding and some off-CDR residues often contribute critically to the interaction with the antigen (). For this reason, the present work proposes a new in silico methodology to design targeted libraries of ligand peptides that is not based on CDRs, but on the amino acids that are important for the interaction with the antigen. The design of these peptides is not arbitrary, but based on the antigen sequence. The first step to develop this methodology was to better understand the AbAg interactions. Specifically, we identified the amino acids that are most frequently present in the epitopeparatope interactions, the most frequent physicochemical types of interactions and the most frequent partners in these interactions. The amino acid frequency in the AbAg interface was analyzed in several previous works. However, different cut-offs and methodologies were used to determine the interface boundaries, such as the distance between atoms of the antigen and the antibody (DBS) and the difference of solvent-accessible surface (DSAS). Here, we developed a new method based on the interface molecular contact (I2R) to extract from the AbAg interface only the amino acids that make interactions, using the STING database (). By comparing the selections obtained using the I2R, DBS and DSAS methods, we show that DBS and DSAS missed part of the interacting residues that are important for the interface. Indeed, with a distance cut-off of 8 A  , more than 60% of the amino acids that do not interact are selected in addition to the amino acids that do interactions. With a distance cut-off of 4 A  , more than 8% of interacting residues are not selected and more than 20% of selected residues are not involved in interactions. The I2R method also allowed studying the type of interactions and gave an approximation of the residue energetic contribution tothe interface in a fast and easy way. Moreover, this selection method could be used to select targets for free-energy perturbation (FEP) (), or to identify binding hot-spots to facilitate the humanization of mouse antibodies (). As previously noted with other selection techniques (), we found that the paratope was significantly enriched in Tyr, Ser and Trp residues. However, by comparing the occurrence of the I2R-selected amino acids and of all proteinprotein interactions found in the STING database (), we found that the occurrence of most of the AbAg interface residues was significantly different (but not for Ala, Glu and Phe), thus characterizing the antigen-antibody interface as a special kind of proteinprotein interaction. Concerning the extraction of the most frequent partners, we highlighted the importance of the cation-p interaction.previously reported that this type of interaction represents only 5% of the AbAg interfaces, whereas in our study 224 of the 272 structures contained at least one cation-p interaction, where the positive charge is hold by the epitope. Moreover, 59 of them contained a double cation-p interaction composed of a positively charged residue in the epitope that interacted with two aromatic amino acids from the paratope. These results suggest that the cation-p interaction is highly conserved in antigen-antibody interfaces but with low frequency as showed by Dalkas et al. Besides gaining insights into the antigen-antibody interface characteristics, in this work we also describe a methodology to design peptide ligands based on the epitopeparatope interface. In addition, this methodology was experimentally validated showing an enrichment of 22% of reactive peptides comparing to random generate peptides. The most reactive EPI-peptides designed contain two consecutive conserved Tyr, a key residue in paratopes. Moreover, those Tyr could interact with hydrophobic amino acids from LiD1 epitope sequence (Phe37, Pro 43, Gly 49, Pro 51) or positively charged residue (Hys 48) via cation-p or even negatively charged residues via hydrogen bond (Asp 38 and Asp 39). The computational design protocol is far from perfect because it does not take into account the antibody structural properties. However, strategies, such as cysteine-constrained peptides, could be employed to mimic antibody loops as shown byand thus force a constrained conformation of our predicted peptides. In conclusion, our study provides insights into the principles that guide AbAg interactions and describes an original methodology (EPIPeptide Designer) to design ligand peptide libraries, based on a given antigen sequence. These targeted peptide ligand libraries might be useful for proteomic and high-throughput analyses for antigen characterization because they minimize the work to produce antibodies in vivo. Finally, this methodology might guide the development of a new generation of biosensors as well as therapeutic and diagnostic molecules.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
B.Viart et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
