Motivation: Researchers worldwide have generated a huge volume of genomic data, including thousands of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and massive amounts of gene expression data from different tissues. How to perform a joint analysis of these data to gain new biological insights has become a critical step in understanding the etiology of complex diseases. Due to the polygenic architecture of complex diseases, the identification of risk genes remains challenging. Motivated by the shared risk genes found in complex diseases and tissue-specific gene expression patterns, we propose as an Empirical Bayes approach to integrating Pleiotropy and Tissue-Specific information (EPS) for prioritizing risk genes. Results: As demonstrated by extensive simulation studies, EPS greatly improves the power of identification for disease-risk genes. EPS enables rigorous hypothesis testing of pleiotropy and tissue specific risk gene expression patterns. All of the model parameters can be adaptively estimated from the developed expectation–maximization (EM) algorithm. We applied EPS to the bipo-lar disorder and schizophrenia GWAS from the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, along with the gene expression data for multiple tissues from the Genotype-Tissue Expression project. The results of the real data analysis demonstrate many advantages of EPS. Availability and implementation: The EPS software is available on https://sites.google.com/site/
IntroductionAs of April 2015, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified more than 15 000 disease-associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at a genome-wide significance level (i.e. P-value < 5  10 8 ). Despite these discoveries, these SNPs can only explain a small fraction of the genetic contribution to diseases (). It is widely agreed that this phenomenon is due to polygenicity of complex phenotypes and the large number of risk variants with weak effects that remain undiscovered (). Growing evidence suggests that there are many genetic variants that may affect the multiple, seemingly different phenotypes (traits/ diseases) (). In fact, a term named 'pleiotropy' was introduced to describe such a phenomenon more than 100 years ago (). The original definition of 'pleiotropy' only V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com concerns the nonzero effect of a locus on different phenotypes and allows the effect direction to be either the same (i.e. the risk allele increases the risk of two diseases) or different (i.e. the risk allele increases the risk of one disease while decreases the risk of another disease). For example, the G allele of rs6983267 increases the risk for prostate cancer and colorectal cancer () but the G allele of rs12720356 increases the risk for Crohn's disease and decreases the risk for psoriasis (). A closely related but different concept is 'genetic correlation' (also known as 'co-heritability'Cross-Disorder Group of the Psychiatric). This refers to the correlation between the genetic effect sizes of two phenotypes and thus the direction of these effects plays a role. To be clear, when referring to 'pleiotropy' in this article, we adopt its original definition. We are interested in the substantial overlap of genetic factors that underlie the multiple, seemingly different phenotypes. Fortunately, more GWAS results are becoming publicly available from GWAS repositories, such as the GWASGRASP (). This offers us an unprecedented opportunity to explore pleiotropic effects. Besides an enormous amount of GWAS data, diverse data resources for biological processes at different layers are also becoming available (). For example, the ongoing Genotype-Tissue Expression project (GTEx) is generating a comprehensive atlas of gene expression and regulation across multiple human tissues (). This provides abundant information to quantify biological processes that occur at the cellular level and thereby helps us to dissect the etiology of complex diseases. Moreover, the comprehensive gene expression data in multiple tissues may avoid the potential bias of the 'candidate tissue approach'. For example, in the study of obesity, the affected tissue is fat, but the causal tissue is, in some cases, the hypothalamus (). This suggests that the integration of GWAS data and gene expressions from multiple tissues may advance our understanding of complex diseases. At present, the accumulating evidence on pleiotropy () and vast, publicly available data on tissuespecific gene expression [e.g. TiGER () and GTEx (require novel statistical approaches to gain a deeper understanding of complex diseases (). Statistical approaches that take pleiotropy into consideration have recently become very active (), such as the conditional false discovery rate (FDR) approach (), and linear mixed model-based approaches (). Various statistical methods have also been proposed to analyze tissue-specific gene expression data (), such as joint eQTL analysis in multiple tissues () and covariate-modulated FDR (CMFDR) (). More recently, a statistical approach named 'GPA' () was proposed to simultaneously integrate both pleiotropic information and functional annotation. Although GPA has demonstrated a very promising direction for the integration of multiple sources of genomic information, it does not fully account for the effects of linkage disequilibrium (LD) and only allows binary annotation as its input. These disadvantages may limit its use in the integrative analysis of large-scale genomic data. In this article, we propose an Empirical Bayes approach to integrating Pleiotropy and Tissue-Specific (EPS) information for prioritizing risk genes. Compared with some existing approaches (), EPS has several merits. First, EPS only requires the summary statistics at the gene level, rather than the genotype data at the individual level. The LD effects are carefully accounted for when grouping the SNP-level summary statistics into the gene level summary statistics by using reference panel data (e.g. 1000 genome data). Second, EPS is able to integrate both pleiotropy information and gene expression data (e.g. GTEx data), which greatly improves the power of risk gene prioritization. Third, EPS provides rigorous hypothesis testing to evaluate the significance of pleiotropy and tissue-specific patterns. These merits are demonstrated via extensive simulation studies and real data analysis.
EPS: basic model, algorithm and inference
Basic modelSuppose we have the P-values of all SNPs from one GWAS. Instead of working at the SNP level, we group the P-values at the SNP level into the P-values at the gene level using VEGAS (). There are several advantages to working at the gene level. First, the signals at the gene level are often more visible than those at the SNP level (). Second, the gene itself is highly consistent across populations, which leads to more consistent results across a population and thus increases the replication rate (). Third, it is more convenient to integrate expression data from multiple tissues with GWAS data at the gene level. We demonstrate these advantages in the real data analysis below. Let us start with the simplest case. Consider P-values at the gene level: P 1 ,.. .,P g ,.. .,P G , where G is the number of genes. We use the 'two-group model' () and assume that the P-values come from the mixture of a null and a non-null distribution, with a probability of p 0 and p 1  1  p 0 , respectively. Let Z g  Z g0 ; Z g1  be the hidden variable indicating whether the P-value for the gth gene is from the null or non-null group, i.e. Z g0 2 f0; 1g; Z g1 2 f0; 1g, and Z g0  Z g1  1 (a gene can be either null or non-null). Here, Z g0  1 means that the gth gene is not associated with the trait (null) and Z g1  1 means that the gth gene is associated (non-null) with the trait. Thus, we have p 0  PrZ g0  1 and p 1  PrZ g1  1. Next, we model the conditional distribution of P-values given Z as: P g jZ g0  1 $ U0; 1 and P g jZ g1  1 $ Ba; 1, where U0; 1 is the uniform distribution on, and Ba; 1 is the Beta distribution with parameters a and 1, where 0 < a < 1. For the ease of presentation, we demonstrate the model for the case with two GWAS datasets but the generalization to more than two GWAS datasets is straightforward. Suppose, we have P-values from two GWAS datasets at the gene level and denote them by P  P gk  2 R G2 , where g 2 f1;. .. ; Gg is the index for the gene and k 2 f1; 2g is the index for the GWAS dataset. Similar to the aforementioned basic model, we introduce the hidden variable Z g  Z g00 ; Z g10 ; Z g01 ; Z g11  indicating the association between the gth gene and the two traits: Z g00  1 means the gth gene is associated with neither of them, Z g10  1 means it is only associated with the first trait, Z g01  1 means it is only associated with the second trait, and Z g11  1 means it is associated with both traits. Then, we extend the two-group model to the following 'four-group model'.where 0 < a k < 1; k  1; 2. Since the LD among SNPs has been taken into account by using simulation based on the LD structure of Empirical Bayes approach to integrating pleiotropya set of reference individuals from 1000 genome in VEGAS2 (), it is reasonable to assume the independence of gene markers. Therefore, the joint distribution can be written aswhere P g is the gth row of P and L  f00; 10; 01; 11g. To incorporate the gene expression from multiple tissues, we extend model (1) as follows. Suppose we obtain expressions of G genes from T tissues and denote it by E 2 R GT. Without loss of generality, we assume that each of G gene expressions is normalized tissue by tissue (in column of E) with mean equal to 0 and variance equal to 1. Similar to the distribution of P-values, given hidden variable Z g , we have E g jZ g0  1 $ Nl 0 ; R and E g jZ g1  1 $ Nl 1 ; R;where E g is the gth row of E representing the gth gene expression across multiple tissues, l l is a length-T vector representing the mean of gene expression across T tissues in the lth group (l 2 f0; 1g in the two-group model), and R is a T  T covariance matrix. Note that model (2) is very similar to linear discriminant analysis (LDA): conditioning on the indicating variable Z g ; E g is normally distributed with different mean but the same covariance. However, a fundamental difference between model (2) and LDA is that Z g is not directly observed here, which makes our problem much more challenging. Regarding the Gaussian distribution on gene expression data, it is a reasonable assumption as long as gene expression data is appropriately normalized (). Like the way we model G gene expressions in two-group model, we have E g jZ gl  1 $ Nl l ; R; l 2 L  f00; 10; 01; 11g in the fourgroup model. Then, the joint distribution can be written aswhere P g and E g are the gth row of P and E. The first equality holds by assuming the independence among genes. The second equality holds by assuming the independence between P g and E g , conditional on Z gl. The independence among genes could be a strong assumption. To evaluate the impact of this assumption, we set up simulation studies using the real datasets from GTEx. The details of simulation studies are given in Section 4.1 and the Supplementary materials.
EM algorithmIn this section, we describe an EM algorithm to estimate parameter based on the joint model (Based on the complete likelihood, the E-step and M-step in the sth iteration of the EM algorithm involves the following calculations.status category are estimated as:The parameter a in the Beta distribution can be estimated as:in the Gaussian distribution are estimated as:l and l 2 L.
Statistical inference
False discovery rateAfter the parameters in the EPS model are estimated, genes can be prioritized based on their local FDRs (). For single GWAS without incorporating gene expression, the estimated FDR of the gth gene is the probability that the gth gene belongs to the null group given its P-value, i.e.For the joint analysis of two GWAS, we are interested in the three estimated local FDR of the gth gene if it is claimed to be associated with the first GWAS, the second GWAS and both GWAS, respectively.where E g is the gth row of expression matrix E. Based on the known relationship between local FDR and global FDR (), we can easily convert the estimated local FDR to global FDR usingwhere j is a pre-specified threshold for local FDR, function I is the indicator function which returns 1 if the argument is true, 0 otherwise, and the resulting global FDR is smaller than s. By doing so, it is convenient for users to control FDR either in terms of global FDR or local FDR.
Hypothesis testing of risk genes differentially expressed in a tissue-specific mannerIt is also very important to test whether the risk genes are differentially expressed in a tissue-specific manner, which offers us more biological insights on etiology of complex diseases. First, we consider evaluating whether the risk genes from a single GWAS are differentially expressed in the tth tissue. Let l 0;t and l 1;t be the mean expression values of genes from the null and non-null groups, respectively. Whether l 0;t and l 1;t are significantly different from each other can be evaluated via the following hypothesis testing:The likelihood ratio test (LRT) statistic is given bywhere P is the P-value vector of one GWAS, E t is the standardized gene expression from the tth tissue, H t 0 is the parameter estimates obtained under the H 0 and its superscript t indicates the tth tissue. Based on the asymptotical theory (), the test statistic K t asymptotically follows the v 2 df1 under the null. This hypothesis testing allows us to evaluate whether risk genes are differentially expressed in a specific tissue. In such a way, we can marginally scan all tissues one at a time. When there are two GWAS, the null hypothesis of testing with respect to the tth tissue can be naturally extended as follows:The LRT test statistic asymptotically follows the v 2 df3 under the null.
Hypothesis testing of pleiotropyIt is of great interest to test pleiotropy between two different traits/ diseases. Based on the definition of pleiotropy, we are interested in whether there exists a significant overlapped genetic factor that underlies the two phenotypes. Under the null, there is no pleiotropy, i.e. the proportion of shared genes in two GWAS is independent of each other. Statistically, this can be evaluated by testing whether the joint probability of fZ g00 ; Z g10 ; Z g01 ; Z g11 g equals to the product of their marginal probability:where the superscript (P) indicates that the test aims at evaluating pleiotropy and ^ H P 0 is the parameter estimates obtained under H 0. Under the null, the test statistic K P asymptotically follows v 2 distribution with df  1, denoted as v 2 df1 .
Empirical null for inflated P-valuesIn the case that the P-values are inflated, it is inappropriate to assume that the P-values from null group follow Uniform distribution on(). Alternatively, we may use P g jZ g0  1 $ Ba null ; 1 to accommodate the inflation. The parameters a null in null distribution can be estimated using P-values close to 1, e.g. Pvalue ! 0:5. Then we use Ba null ; 1 to replace U0; 1 as the null distribution and keep a null unchanged during the EM updates. The strategy adopted here is similar to the one in the previous models (1) and (3) using the empirical null.
Extended model
Integrating a large number of tissuesIf a large number of tissues are involved for gene expressions, the proposed model may not be appropriate because the number of parameters in R increases quadratically with respect to the number of tissues T (see Equation (2)). To overcome this difficulty, we propose a stage-wise approach when T is large, where penalized LDA is used to regularize our model. In this section, we describe this stage-wise approach. Let us begin with a single-GWAS analysis, with the extension to a joint analysis straightforward. We fit the model only with the P-value vector P from one GWAS and obtain the first-stage posterior probability for all G genes: z  z 1 ; z 2 ;. .. ; z G  2 R G2 , where z g  z g0 ; z g1 ; g  1;. .. ; G. Treating the first-stage posterior probability z as a response matrix, we use the penalized LDA () to find a sparse linear discriminant vector, denoted as ^ B 2 R T , to separate the null (z g;0 ) and non-null (z g;1 ) group. The purpose here is to use a sparse discriminant vector to select the most useful tissue types and reduce the effects of irrelevant tissues. Using the discriminant vector ^ B, we can update the gene expression based on the sparse projection as ~ E  E ^ B 2 R G. The details of our modified LDA are given in the following section. We fit model (4) using ~ E, a sparse compression of gene expression, to replace the original high-dimensional gene expression E 2 R GT (T is large), and then compute the second-stage posterior probability withTo extend the model to the joint analysis of two-GWAS, we need to find three sparse projection vectors ^ B 2 R T3 because there are four groups L 2 f00; 10; 01; 11g. As a result, ~ E  E ^ B is a G  3 matrix. In this case, it is still applied to fit the model (4) using ~ E to replace E.
Empirical Bayes approach to integrating pleiotropy
Penalized LDAWe need to modify penalized LDA proposed by Witten and Tibshirani (2011) because here we only have the first-stage posterior probability (z g ) of each gene from the null and non-null groups with no knowledge of its exact group membership. Taking this uncertainty into account, the within-class covariance matrix R w is estimated using the first-stage posterior probability:where ^ l l is the sample mean in the lth group:Similarly, the between-class covariance matrix can be estimated asThe remaining part is the same as the original paper (Witten and). For completeness, we describe more technical details of penalized LDA in the Supplementary materials.
Results
SimulationIn this section, we report the simulation results to evaluate the performance of the model. We generated a gene expression matrix E 2 R GT for G genes from T tissues, where each entry of E was from the standard normal distribution. Let y g  E g b  g be the latent variable controlling the membership of the gth gene, where b 2 R T1 is the effect sizes of genes from T tissues, E g is the gth row of E, and g is the random noise, g  1;. .. ; G. After generating y g , we dichotomized the G genes into the null and non-null groups using a probit model. Denote the proportions of the null and non-null genes of both GWAS as p 0 and p 1 , respectively. The P-values for the first GWAS were simulated as:where q p0 (p 0  0.8 and 0.9) is the quantile of interest. To simulate the P-values of the second GWAS, we took pleiotropy between two GWAS into account. Specifically, we used 0 c 1 to control the number of genes with pleiotropic effects as Gp 1 p 1  cp 0 . When c  0, the number of genes shared by two GWAS equals Gp 2 1 which is exactly the shared proportion when the two GWAS are independent of each other. When c  1, the number of risk genes shared by two GWAS equals Gp 1 , i.e. all of the risk genes are shared by the two GWAS. The risk genes of the second GWAS were randomly selected such that the total number of genes with pleiotropic effects was Gp 1 p 1  cp 0  (note that the total proportion of risk genes in the second GWAS was kept to p 1 for simplicity). After the group membership was generated for each gene, the P-values of the second GWAS were simulated from Ba 2 ; 1 and U0; 1 for risk genes and null genes, respectively. First, we evaluated the type I errors of testing tissue-specific differential expression in a separate-GWAS analysis (9) and a joint-GWAS analysis (10), and the type I errors of testing pleiotropy (11). In this simulation, we set the number of genes G  20 000, the number of tissues T  5, the effect size b  0, and the pleiotropy controlling parameter c  0. For simplicity, we chose a 1  a 2  a 2 f0:3; 0:4; 0:5; 0:6g (the smaller a, the stronger GWAS signals) and p 0 2 f0:8; 0:9g. For each parameter setting, we ran the EPS 500 times. The experimental results are shown in. Clearly, all type I errors were well controlled at the nominal level (P  0.05). We noticed that the test of pleiotropy was underpower when the GWAS signal was weak (e.g. a ! 0:5) and the proportion of risk genes was small (e.g. p 1 ! 0:9). More detailed information on these three tests is summarized in the QQ-plots in Supplementary Figures S1 and S2. Next, we conducted a simulation to evaluate the power of the proposed method. We started with a small number of tissues, i.e. T  5. We simulated y g  E g b  g , where the variance of g was specified such that the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) was controlled at around 2 (note that the SNR is defined as ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffi VarE g b=Var g  p ). We varied c to check the influence of pleiotropy on the performance of gene prioritization. To quantitatively evaluate the performance of EPS, we calculated the area under the curve (AUC) and the power with the global FDR controlled at 0.2. The results are shown in. Comparing the red boxplots (separate-GWAS analysis with gene expression) with the blue ones (separate-GWAS analysis without gene expression), we observed a clear improvement after incorporating informative gene expression data from T tissues. The benefit of integrating pleiotropy was also confirmed by comparing the green boxplots (joint-GWAS analysis without gene expression) with the blue ones (separate-GWAS analysis without gene expression). Integrating both pleiotropy and gene expression from multiple tissues further improved the performance of EPS, as indicated by the yellow boxplots (joint-GWAS analysis with gene expression). However, there are two remaining concerns: how are the results of the joint analysis affected when there is no pleiotropy, and how is the analysis affected when all of the incorporated tissues are non-informative? For the first concern, as shown in, the joint analysis in EPS showed comparable performance with a separate. Evaluation of type I errors of testing pleiotropy (11) and testing enrichment in single-GWAS (9) and two-GWAS (10) with parameter setting: G  20 000, T  5, p0 2 f0:8; 0:9g; a 2 f0:3; 0:4; 0:5; 0:6g (Color version of this figure is available at Bioinformatics online.) analysis in the absence of pleiotropy (c  0), suggesting that EPS can adapt to available pleiotropic information and avoid overfitting. To address the second concern, we performed a simulation study in which all of the tissues were non-information. As shown in Supplementary, EPS performed robustly when a small number of non-informative gene expressions were incorporated into the analysis. As observed in, inclusion of too many noninformative variables will generate too much noise, and thus degrade the performance. In such a case, we advocate using the extended model (Section 3), which uses penalized LDA to adaptively remove irrelevant tissues. To evaluate the performance of the extended model, we simulated gene expression from T  100 tissues, only five of which were informative. The simulation results (Supplementary) suggest that the extended model performed very well for gene prioritization, even when most of the issues were non-informative. In addition to performance comparison, we investigated the accuracy of parameter estimation. These results are shown in Supplementary Figures S5 and S6. We compared EPS with CMFDR, which was designed to integrate one GWAS with functional annotation. The results shown in the left panel of Supplementarydemonstrate that EPS performs better than CMFDR in terms of the AUC (top panel of Supplementary). CMFDR seems to have a greater power (middle panel of Supplementary), but it suffers from an uncontrolled FDR (lower panel of Supplementary). Another issue with integrating multiple GWAS is the overlap of control samples. Although we did not take this issue into account in our analysis, we investigated its potential effects on EPS using simulation studies. The empirical results (shown in Supplementary) indicate that the FDR of EPS is indeed inflated in some extreme cases, but the inflation is small or moderate for the majority of cases (the true FDR is 0.3 where nominal FDR is 0.2). We plan to address this limitation in our future work.Empirical Bayes approach to integrating pleiotropyreplicated these findings. According to the GTEx data, PGBD1 had a relatively high expression in the braincerebellum and braincortex, suggesting that PGBD1 may be more active in the brain than in other tissues. Another risk gene NKAPL had a relatively high expression in the testis, which explained why EPS detected some differentially expressed genes in the testis. These tissue-specific expression patterns of PGBD1 and NKAPL are shown in Supplementary Figures S10 and S11. When incorporating the gene expression data into our analysis, we did not use only the gene expression data from the significant tissues because using data twice may lead to a selection bias (). Instead, we incorporated the gene expression data from all tissues, and performed the analysis using penalized LDA as discussed in Section 3.2. The EPS results suggest that the gene FLOT1 may be a risk gene for SCZ, but not for BPD, which is consistent with a very recent large sample study (). In fact, the GTEx data suggest that FLOT1 is highly expressed not only in the blood, but also in adrenal-gland, indicating that FLOT1 may be related to the functioning of the hypothalamicpituitaryadrenal axis. To demonstrate the possible benefits of leveraging the pleiotropic effects among different traits, we compared the separate GWAS analysis and the joint SCZBPD analysis without incorporating gene expression. In the joint analysis, EPS detected strong pleiotropy between SCZ and BPD, as indicated by the P-value < 1  10 30 [the estimated proportions are ^ p 00  0:972; ^ p 10  0:001; ^ p 01  0:001 and ^ p 11  0:026, then the test statistic (12). Leveraging the pleiotropic effects enabled EPS to identify many more risk genes than the separate analyses of SCZ and BPD, as shown in Supplementary Table S2. For example, the identification of the gene CACNA1C in the joint analysis is consistent with a recent GWAS with a larger sample size (Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric) and a study using the conditional FDR (). The gene CACNA1C, which encodes an alpha-1 subunit of a voltage-dependent calcium channel, has played an important role in the development of calcium antagonist drugs. As reported in, this finding has been highlighted in clinical trials of calcium antagonist drugs, which are potentially effective in the treatment of psychiatric disorders. Finally, we performed an integrative analysis of BPDSCZ with the gene expression data from all tissues. As shown in Supplementary Table S2, the incorporation of the gene expression data enhanced the association signals of some genes. For example, FNDC4 and NT5DC2 were observed to be highly expressed in adrenal-gland, based on the GTEx data (Supplementary Figs S10 and S11). EPS also indicated that SCZ and BPD risk genes tend to be differentially expressed in the adrenal-gland. Combining all of these pieces of evidence, the strength of association between FNDC4 and NT5DC2 was adaptively enhanced by EPS. The association signals may also be weakened after incorporating gene expression data into the analysis. For example, HIST1H2BN is non-significant with a local FDR 0:1 because its expression levels are very low in all of the tissues from the GTEx data. To the best of our knowledge, there is no strong evidence that HIST1H2BN is a risk gene for SCZ or BPD. By incorporating gene expression data, EPS was able to reduce the association strength and possibly avoid a false positive finding.
ConclusionWe have presented a statistical approach, named EPS, that can integrate pleiotropy information from GWAS data and tissue-specific gene expression data. Compared with some existing approaches, such as linear mixed models, which require genotype data at the individual level, EPS only requires summary statistics for analysis. More importantly, EPS provides statistically rigorous evaluations of tissue-specific gene expression patterns and pleiotropic effects via hypothesis testing. These merits make EPS an attractive and effective tool for the integrative analysis of GWAS data with gene expression data from multiple tissues. Despite the promising statistical improvements we have made, the biological implications need to be independently replicated. One limitation of EPS is that it does not take into account overlapping samples. Addressing this issue in integrating multiple GWAS is an important area for future work.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
J.Liu et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
tissues using hypothesis testing (9) (a complete list of the test results is given in Supplementary Table S1). The test results suggested that the risk genes for BPD are differentially expressed in braincerebellar hemisphere and braincerebellum. Although a number of studies have suggested that the cerebellum plays a critical role in emotion processing (Hoppenbrouwers et al., 2008), its importance in BPD is still uncertain (DelBello et al., 1999; Mills et al., 2005). A recent study based on quantitative T1q mapping (Johnson et al., 2015) investigated brain abnormalities in BPD and highlighted the critical role of the cerebellum in BPD, which is consistent with the result of our analysis. The risk genes for SCZ also showed differential expression in adrenal-gland, pituitary, EBV-ETL cells, spleen, testis and whole-blood, in addition to the brain cerebellum regions. The significance in both the adrenal-gland and pituitary supports the important role of the hypothalamicpituitaryadrenal axis function in SCZ (Walker et al., 2008). The evidence that differential expression of SCZ risk genes in 'CellEBVETL' supports the recently discovered link between SCZ and the immune system (Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, 2014). Although the biological explanation of the differentially expressed genes in the spleen, testis and whole blood remains elusive, our method suggests that they warrant significant consideration. We briefly explain the reason for this in the next paragraph where we discuss the gene prioritization results of our method. The gene prioritization results with or without the inclusion of gene expression data are summarized using Manhattan plots in Figure 3. To control false positive findings, we use the local FDR 0:1 as the criterion to report risk genes in the remainder of this section [the threshold for the local FDR, set at 0.1, is more stringent than the default setting of 0.2 in the classical local-FDR approach (Efron, 2010) (also see the 'locfdr' R package). In fact, setting the threshold for the local FDR at 0.1 often leads to a global FDR of around 0.05 (Efron, 2010)]. Without gene expression, EPS identified the same nine risk genes for both SCZ and BPD (see Supplementary Table S2 for details). For example, EPS identified two genes at 6p21-p22.1: NKAPL and PGBD1. These two genes have been identified as SCZ-risk genes in the Han Chinese population (Yue et al., 2011). In this Han Chinese population, rs2142731 is the most significant variant in PGBD1, while its P-value is 0.7387 based on the PGC samples from European ancestry. Similarly, the P-value of rs1635 in an exon of NKAPL is 6:91  10 12 in the Han Chinese population, while its P-value is 0.7866 in the PGC samples. As genetic variants may have different allele frequencies and LD structures across different populations, it is difficult to replicate GWAS findings at the SNP level. However, genes can be highly consistent across ancestry (Neale and Sham, 2004). Here, EPS made use of the P-value at the gene level and successfully Fig. 3. Manhattan plots of BPD and SCZ. From top to bottom: separate analysis of BPD and SCZ without the GTEx gene expression data; separate analysis of BPD and SCZ with the GTEx gene expression data. Joint analysis of BPD and SCZ without the GTEx gene expression data; joint analysis of BPD and SCZ with the GTEx gene expression data. The red and blue lines indicate local FDR  0.05 and 0.1, respectively. See detailed explanation in the main text
