Motivation: Molecular dynamics simulations provide detailed insights into the structure and function of biomolecular systems. Thus, they complement experimental measurements by giving access to experimentally inaccessible regimes. Among the different molecular dynamics techniques, native structure-based models (SBMs) are based on energy landscape theory and the principle of minimal frustration. Typically used in protein and RNA folding simulations, they coarse-grain the biomolecular system and/or simplify the Hamiltonian resulting in modest computational requirements while achieving high agreement with experimental data. eSBMTools streamlines running and evaluating SBM in a comprehensive package and offers high flexibility in adding experimental-or bioinformatics-derived restraints. Results: We present a software package that allows setting up, modifying and evaluating SBM for both RNA and proteins. The implemented workflows include predicting protein complexes based on bioinformatics-derived inter-protein contact information, a standardized setup of protein folding simulations based on the common PDB format, calculating reaction coordinates and evaluating the simulation by free-energy calculations with weighted histogram analysis method or by phi-values. The modules interface with the molecular dynamics simulation program GROMACS. The package is open source and written in architecture-independent Python2.
INTRODUCTIONEnergy landscape theory and the principle of minimal frustration stipulate that biomolecular evolution results in an effective overall bias of a macromolecule's energy landscape being funnelshaped toward its global minimum at the native folded state (). Native structure-based models (SBMs, also often referred to as G " o-models) realize an idealized minimally frustrated folding funnel devoid of any energetic traps by a simple Hamiltonian () that allows molecular dynamics simulations to reach biologically relevant timescale. The SBM potential is based on the native folded structure and native contact information. The number of formed native contacts in a structure is the dominant reaction coordinate typically called Q. The Q value can be used as a reaction coordinate to investigate folding paths or as an order parameter for the weighted histogram analysis method (). The SBM can be combined with coarse-graining approaches. Proteins can be represented by single beads at the positions of their C atoms. Accordingly, there exist formulations of the SBM at an all-atom () and C () graining level (see Supplementary Information). Bioinformatics-derived contact information () or experimental measurements () can be added as restraints to SBM. Eventually, the SBM defines a force field that results in computationally tractable simulations that facilitate simulations on the effective timescale of seconds (for small proteins even on single CPUs) in combination with extensive sampling. Existing web-based solutions like the SMOG-server () allow a straightforward setup and evaluation of standard SBM. Our open source eSBMTools extends the customization options enabling the setup of automatized workflows and strong modifications of SBM by, e.g. adding arbitrary additional contacts, protein/RNA structures, novel ligand topologies or manipulating force field parameters.
FUNCTIONALITYeSBMTools is organized in modules that can be loaded into Python projects. The modules and their input and output files interface with tools that are part of the standard GROMACS software package (). It can be used at all stages in the context of SBM simulations: from generating the SBM itself, over manipulations of the model and configuration file generation, to extensive post-processing of simulation data. Several examples can be found in the Supplementary Information. The SBM is generated starting from a PDB structure with the help of an XML-based topology definition that introduced the bonded interactions via bonds, angles and dihedral angles. eSBMTools provides topology definitions for DNA/RNA or protein systems in an all-atom or a C formulation. The XML format allows the user to easily extend the existing topology definitions by custom additions of arbitrary ligands or experimental markers (for example FRET-fluorosphores). The nonbonded interactions via inter-atomic contacts are implemented by a simple cut-off formulation. Two atoms are considered to form a contact when the distance between the atoms is below *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com a certain threshold. A contact map represents every contact between two atoms by an entry, as in. The generated SBM can be modified according to the requirements of the user's system of interest. The contact information can be manipulated to include, e.g. predicted contacts () or the energetics of all contacts can be re-weighted by, e.g. by amino acid interaction matrices (), shown in. Two SBMs can be merged to set up combined systems for, e.g. complex formation simulations (). Once all the files that describe the system of interest are prepared, eSBMTools generates the required configuration files for GROMACS simulations. This generation can be customized within Python to adjust simulation parameters, e.g. temperature, duration or resolution to steer simulations within a workflow. The simulation output by GROMACS can be processed in various ways depending on the desired evaluation protocol. The root-mean-square deviations along the trajectory of the simulation can be generated and included in further postprocessing. Similarly, the Q values (the number of formed native contacts) can be generated from a trajectory. The Q values can be used to generate time-depending contact maps or filtered by certain ranges to follow the folding process of substructures within the system of interest. Based on histograms of Q values, it is possible to calculate values () that give a measure for a residue's stability in the transition state. eSBMTools can also be used to perform a more demanding analysis of Q value and energy histograms: the weighted histogram analysis method (). This method yields the free-energy landscape GQ, T over the sampled Q values and a chosen temperature range, based on a finite number of simulations at distinct temperatures, preferably around the folding temperature. In addition, it is possible to calculate the heat capacity over the temperature range, which allows the user to determine the folding temperature.. Contact maps of protein HigA in the standard homogeneous formulation and the MiyazawaJernigan formulation. Each square stands for a contact between residue i and j in the native structure of HigA. The upper left contact map represents the homogeneous energetics of the standard SBM formulation. However, the lower right contact map illustrates the possibility of weighting each native contact by Miyazawa Jernigan factors (
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CONCLUSIONS We present the full release version of our Python2-based software package for SBM simulation pre-and post-processing. The package provides a comprehensive tool box to perform and evaluate simulations in the field of SBMs. The open source package interfaces with a standard build of the GROMACS software suite, which is a state-of-the-art software for molecular dynamics simulations. The combination of a high-performance simulation software with a user-defined Python2 framework makes eSBMTools versatile yet compact. Computationally tractable SBM can be set up in a platform-independent manner as workflows for extensive sampling on both HPC systems and local computers. Funding: AS recognizes support from the Helmholtz Association within the 'Impuls-und Vernetzungsfond'. Conflict of interest: none declared.
B.Lutz et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
