It is now easy and increasingly usual to produce oriented RNA-Seq data as a prokaryotic genome is being sequenced. However, this information is usually just used for expression quantifi-cation. EuGene-PP is a fully automated pipeline for structural annotation of prokaryotic genomes integrating protein similarities, statistical information and any oriented expression information (RNA-Seq or tiling arrays) through a variety of file formats to produce a qualitatively enriched annotation including coding regions but also (possibly anti-sense) non-coding genes and transcription start sites. Availability and implementation: EuGene-PP is an open-source software based on EuGene-P integrating a Galaxy
INTRODUCTIONProkaryotic genome sequencing and expression quantification using RNA-Seq or tiling arrays are becoming routine. However, existing prokaryotic gene finders are either ab initio gene finders that identify only coding regions () or purely RNA-Seq-based gene finders predicting transcripts () and are much less effective than their ab initio competitors for Coding DNA Sequence (CDS) prediction (). Reconciling conflicting predictions is a tedious work, which is incompatible with the growing prokaryotic genome sequencing rate. There is a need for new prokaryotic gene finders that would directly integrate all available information to produce an enriched and precise structural annotation identifying CDS but also (possibly antisense) non-coding genes and transcription start sites (TSSs), avoiding tedious reconciliation. We have shown inthat this can be accomplished by finely adapting conditional random field-based integrative eukaryotic gene finding technology () to prokaryotic specificities (overlapping genes, operons). The resulting software, EuGene-P, simultaneously exploits statistical properties of sequences, existing annotations, similarities to proteins and oriented RNA-Seq data to produce an enriched annotation with a better delineation of functional genomic elements, and therefore improved expression quantification.
APPROACHTo facilitate the application of EuGene-P, we designed a fully automatic pipeline, described in, that allows any user to directly apply EuGene-P starting just from genomic sequences and oriented sequence-based expression data (RNA-Seq or tiling array). The resulting Perl-based EuGene-PP(ipeline) has no parameter to tune (by default), accepts a variety of protein and expression datasets of different types under most usual formats and feeds EuGene-P with the following: Markov models of coding regions trained on regions with strong similarities with a reference protein databank. Regions of similarity with different protein databanks. A set of CDS predictions produced by a reliable self training ab initio gene finder. We use Prodigal (). A set of predicted non-coding RNA genes (ncRNA). We use tRNAscan-SE (), rfam_scan () and RNAmmer (). A set of thresholded and rescaled profiles of measured expression on each strand along the genome (either RNA-Seq or tiling arrays) showing transcription. A set of potential transcription start sites, defined as points of sudden increase in expression identified by the derivative of a smoothed version of the expression profile (). EuGene-PP can run using just FASTA genomic sequences and expression data (provided as oriented Single/Pair-end reads in either FASTQ/FASTA format, mapped reads in Bam/Sam, Bed or Wig format, or tiling array data in ndf/pair files). Protein databanks for similarity detection are configurable and may include organism-specific proteomes. EuGene-PP is provided with a Galaxy configurationto deploy EuGene-PP through a Web interface. The probabilistic model used by EuGene-P () integrates all this information and its own Ribosome Binding Site predictions to segment the genome in possibly overlapping coding regions, untranslated regions (UTR) and non-coding genes. The integration of expression data leads to more reliable *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com transcripts and TSSs prediction. Prediction is performed independently on each strand, allowing for the prediction of antisense genes.). For CDS, the two annotations were highly consistent, with 497% of shared CDSs (same STOP). This is consistent with the reliability of Prodigal ab initio CDS. For each annotation, we report the percentage of shared stops, the number of ncRNA genes (Rfam and predicted), the total number of bases represented, the number of reference genes covered on450% of their length by predicted genes (cover) or with a reciproqual hit covering at least 50% of both regions (recip.)Note: Both annotations show comparable quality albeit for a better behavior of the curated annotation of () for reciprocal hits. This is explained by split/ merged genes in Eugene-PP. Also, the curated annotation includes 56 GenBank annotated ncRNA genes, each with a perfect match in the reference set. On three additional genomes, EuGene-PP recovers a similar fraction of the Rfam set.prediction. We therefore focused our evaluation on ncRNA transcript prediction. We used rfam_scan to produce a set of 207 reference ncRNA genes. We separately applied EuGene-PP using a subset of all tiling-arrays and removing all input from rfam_scan, RNAmmer or tRNAscan-SE. The comparison of the automated annotation of EuGene-PP with the curated annotation of Nicolas et al. (2012) with reference to this reference gene set is given in. On three additional genomes, EuGene-PP recovers a similar fraction of the reference genes. These results also show the flexibility of EuGene-PP that exploits a variety of information sources, under most usual formats, to produce an annotation comparable with a curated semiautomated structural annotation, especially on ncRNA genes, which are still difficult to predict.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
E.Sallet et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Next-generation prokaryotic gene finding at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
