Motivation: Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are spherical bilayered proteolipids, harboring various bio-active molecules. Due to the complexity of the vesicular nomenclatures and components, online searches for EV-related publications and vesicular components are currently challenging. Results: We present an improved version of EVpedia, a public database for EVs research. This community web portal contains a database of publications and vesicular components, identification of orthologous vesicular components, bioinformatic tools and a personalized function. EVpedia includes 6879 publications, 172 080 vesicular components from 263 high-throughput datasets, and has been accessed more than 65 000 times from more than 750 cities. In addition, about 350 members from 73 international research groups have participated in developing EVpedia. This free web-based database might serve as a useful resource to stimulate the emerging field of EV research.
IntroductionAlmost all living organisms on earth shed extracellular vesicles (EVs) into their microenvironment. EVs are spherical bilayered proteolipids with an average diameter of 201000 nm (). Cells release EVs either constitutively or in a regulated manner and these vesicles harbor a specific subset of proteins, mRNAs, miRNAs, lipids and metabolites reflecting their originating cell types and conditions (). EVs are also found in various biological fluids, such as amniotic fluid, ascites, breast milk, plasma, saliva, semen, serum and urine (). Recent advances in this fast growing field () have facilitated several insights: (1) EVs play multifaceted functions in intercellular communication (; (2) EV-mediated intercellular communication is an evolutionarily conserved phenomenon (); (3) EVs are rich sources of biomarkers for non-invasive diagnosis and prognosis of various human diseases (); and (4) Diverse therapeutic approaches have been pursued to utilize EVs and their mimetics for vaccine, chemotherapeutic drug and siRNA delivery (). Publications on EVs have grown rapidly during the last several years, indicating that the field of EVs is expanding intensively (). The identification of vesicle-specific cargos could help us to unravel the molecular mechanisms underlying the cargo sorting and biogenesis of EVs. In addition, this will lead to better comprehension of the pathophysiological functions of EVs, and discovery of EVbased potential biomarkers of human diseases. Therefore, many EVpedia: a portal for extracellular vesicles researchinvestigators have focused on categorizing these complex vesicular components by various high-throughput technologies, such as mass spectrometry-based proteomics and lipidomics as well as microarray-and next-generation sequencing-based transcriptomics (). Together with conventional biological approaches, these multiomics-based analyses of EVs derived from various cell types and body fluids have identified several thousands of different vesicular components. EV secretion and EV-mediated intercellular communication are evolutionarily conserved (). Researchers in this field have coined dozens of different names for EVs, especially for more complex eukaryotic cell-derived EVs as listed in Box ('Extracellular Vesicles: Diverse Nomenclature') (). Nevertheless, there is progress toward a single nomenclature, since the different names in use make it difficult to follow the progress in the field. In addition, most vesicular components identified by multiomics-based high throughput analyses are presented in the supplementary information of published articles. Taken together, online searches for EV-related publications and vesicular components are currently challenging, especially for start-up researchers in this field. Therefore, a comprehensive public repository of EV-related publications and vesicular components will help the community of EV research to understand various aspects of these complex extracellular organelles.
Databases that store EV dataThe explosion of EV data has justified the need for databases that catalog proteins, nucleic acids and lipids associated with EVs. Currently, three databases exist for EV research including ExoCarta (), EVpedia () and Vesiclepedia (). These existing databases have made large-scale bioinformatics analyses feasible and provide an ideal platform for EV-based biomarker studies. EVpedia provides additional benefits compared with ExoCarta and Vesiclepedia. EVpedia is the only resource that contains data on both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In addition, EVpedia allows for Gene Ontology enrichment analysis, network analysis of vesicular proteins and mRNAs, and set analysis of vesicular datasets by ortholog identification. Other databases do not have any such embedded analysis tools.
Launch of EVpediaEVpedia (http://evpedia.info) was first launched in January 2012 (). To construct this public web-based database, we first collected publications on prokaryotic and eukaryotic EVs through a combination of NCBI PubMed searches (http://www. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed) for text-mining solutions and manual curation using all nomenclatures assigned to EVs described in Box (see also). Based on these EV-related publications, we constructed the comprehensive and integrated database of proteins, mRNAs, miRNAs, lipids and metabolites for systematic analyses of prokaryotic and eukaryotic EVs.
Overview of current EVpediaSince the launch of EVpedia, we have improved this database by continually collecting additional EV-related publications and datasets, by adding more tools for systematic analyses of EVs, and by supplementing the menu bars for 'Top 100 EV markers', 'User forum' as well as 'My EVpedia'. Through closed and open beta tests, we built an 'EVpedia Community' (about 350 world-wide EV researchers) and updated EVpedia most recently in May 2014. The updated EVpedia has five functional modules for systematic analyses of EVs derived from prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells ((i) a database of publications and principal investigators, (ii) a database of vesicular proteins, mRNAs, miRNAs, lipids and. Publication trend of EV studies. This graph shows the number of publications on EVs per year, indicating that the field of EVs is expanding rapidly metabolites, (iii) identification of orthologous vesicular components, (iv) an array of tools for bioinformatic analyses including sequence search, set analysis, Gene Ontology enrichment analysis and network analysis, as well as (v) 'My EVpedia', a personalized function of EVpedia. Using 'My EVpedia', users privately store their own datasets, analysis results and publications of interest by creating their own accounts. New functions of this updated EVpedia are indicated in red texts in.We invite the research community to submit EV-related multiomics data and publications to EVpedia. As of May 2014, a total of 6879 EV-related publications with 3336 principal investigators have been cataloged in EVpedia. In addition, a total of 172 080 vesicular components from 263 highthroughput datasets are listed (). All of these vesicular components could be searched by their sequences and browsed. Furthermore, in the 'Top 100 EV markers' menu, the current vesicular components are sorted in the descending order of their identification counts, which are the numbers of datasets identifying those vesicular components or their orthologs.
Community participation and annotation in EVpediaAfter the initial launch in January 2012, EVpedia has been globally accessed more than 65 000 times from more than 750 cities (). For community annotation of EVpedia, we built 'EVpedia Community'. About 350 members from 73 international EV research groups have joined this community, in which they can exchange EV-related information and submit their multiomics data via the 'User forum' and 'Upload' menu bars in EVpedia, respectively. In addition, non-members can easily join the 'EVpedia Community' by adding their information via clicking the 'Sign In' menu. Moreover, EVpedia has been cross-linked with the website of the 'International Society of Extracellular Vesicles' (http://www.isev. org).
Concluding remarksEVpedia is a comprehensive database of EVs derived from prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Currently, a total of 6879 EV-related publications and 172 080 vesicular components (proteins, mRNAs, miRNAs, lipids and metabolites) are deposited in this public repository. For the systematic analysis of EVs, EVpedia also provides integrated systems biology research tools such as 'Experiment', 'Browse', 'Analysis', 'Top 100 EV markers' and 'My EVpedia' menu bars. In the future, additional multiomics datasets and publications will be deposited, and we expect more researchers to join the 'EVpedia Community' and to share their research data. The community database is scheduled to be updated every 3 months. EVpedia, a community web portal for EV research, should serve as a useful resource to stimulate the emerging field of EV biology research and to help us to elucidate the fundamental roles of these complex extracellular organelles.. Overall structure of EVpedia. EVpedia provides a comprehensive database for (i) publications and principal investigators, (ii) vesicular proteins, mRNAs, miRNAs, lipids and metabolites and (iii) identification of orthologous vesicular components. For systematic analyses of vesicular components, there is an array of tools for sequence search, set analysis, Gene Ontology enrichment analysis and network analysis. 'My EVpedia' is a personalized function of EVpedia to deposit the user's own datasets, analysis results and publications of interest. Note that red texts indicate newly included functions in the updated version of EVpedia EVpedia: a portal for extracellular vesicles research
Database: High-throughput datasets
H. sapiens
FundingThis work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP), the Ministry of Health and Welfare grant funded by the Korea governmentand a grant from KRIBB Research Initiative Program. D.-K. K is supported by a National Junior Research Fellowshipand Y. J. Y by BK21 PLUS programfunded by Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Republic of Korea.Conflict of Interest: none declared.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
D.-K.Kim et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
