Mobile technologies provide unique opportunities for ubiquitous distribution of scientific information through user-friendly interfaces.
in situ hybridization images containing spatial patterns of gene expression from Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly) embryogenesis. Using this application, scientists can visualize and compare expression patterns of 44000 developmentally relevant genes. The FlyExpress app displays the expression patterns of the selected gene for different visual projections (e.g. lateral) and displays them according to their developmental stages, which shows a gene's progression of spatial expression over developmental time. Ultimately, we envision the use of FlyExpress app in the laboratory where scientists may wish to immediately conduct a visual comparison of a known expression pattern with the one observed on the bench top or to display expression patterns of interest during scientific discussions at large. Availability: Search ''FlyExpress'' on the Apple iTunes store Contact: s.kumar@asu.edu Received on July 14, 2012; revised on August 13, 2012; accepted on August 14, 2012 Ubiquitous access to information has become a part of everyday life in commercial and personal spheres. However, access to a vast majority of the scientific knowledge is primarily restricted to complex websites that frequently require the use of desktop computers. Today, the need to access primary scientific data and results extends far beyond personal desktops, as the scientific data and knowledge are needed on-the-go not only during scientific discussions outside of a formal meeting setting, but also on the laboratory benches that are not always equipped with general personal desktop computers. At these venues, mobile devices, such as smartphones, are always at hand and present a medium for effective access to information to accelerate discovery and enrich discussion. Applications developed for mobile devices serve as a new window to disseminate existing data, and they represent an alternative to traditional software technology. Mobile applications compel developers to focus on specific data cross-sections, which simplifies data and user navigation for even non-experts (e.g., Kumar and Hedges, 2011; James et al., 2012). One may argue that the use of personal devices to deliver scientific knowledge to experts and non-experts is the next frontier to disseminate information in this age of digital biology. Therefore, we have developed a new mobile application for the iPhone to access images capturing spatial patterns of gene expression during the development of an embryo in the fruit fly. Our application uses the large digital library of expression patterns available in the FlyExpress resource (Kumar et al., 2011). In the first version, we provide spatial patterns in the FlyExpress resource, from high throughput studies: 48 190 images from Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project (BDGP data) and 30 095 images from Fly-FISH resource data (LecuyerLecuyer et al., 2007; Tomancak et al., 2002). These data capture the spatial patterns of thousands of genes (Konikoff et al., 2012). In FlyExpress, all original expression images from BDGP and Fly-FISH resources have been size standardized and aligned, which is necessary for their developmental comparison (Kumar et al., 2011; Konikoff et al., 2012). In addition, FlyExpress makes available information on the anatomical view of each image as well as the developmental stage annotations. Easy access and exploration of all of these data are available at the user's fingertips as soon they download the FlyExpress application from the Apple iTunes store. Once downloaded, a user launches the application where they are presented with the main screen that has a gene name search bar, where the user submits a query to the main FlyExpress database. In addition, the user has the option for querying based on a gene name synonym, such as 'giant' (Fig. 1A). In both cases, the user is presented with a list of related gene names (Fig. 1B). Selecting a gene of interest by tapping the row produces a list of embryo expression patterns image thumbnails (Fig. 1C), The embryo image are sorted by their developmental timing, such that they reveal the change in the pattern of gene expression over time. For any image, detailed scientific information is readily available by selecting the appropriate row (Fig. 1D). This includes a larger expression pattern image, information on experimental protocol, link-out to image source, and controlled vocabulary terms (Fig. 1D). In the development of the FlyExpress app, we used the industry standard XML and HTTP protocols to access the database server remotely. To circumvent potential performance challenges presented by downloading images remotely over the network, we used asynchronous callbacks to load images in the background allowing the user interface to remain interactive even in the case of slow network connection and to display images in a smooth *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
S.Kumar et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
