The protein structure prediction approaches can be categorized into template-based modeling (including homology modeling and threading) and free modeling. However, the existing threading tools perform poorly on remote homologous proteins. Thus, improving fold recognition for remote homologous proteins remains a challenge. Besides, the proteome-wide structure prediction poses another challenge of increasing prediction throughput. In this study, we presented FALCON@home as a protein structure prediction server focusing on remote homologue identification. The design of FALCON@home is based on the observation that a structural template, especially for remote homologous proteins, consists of conserved regions interweaved with highly variable regions. The highly variable regions lead to vague alignments in threading approaches. Thus, FALCON@home first extracts conserved regions from each template and then aligns a query protein with conserved regions only rather than the full-length template directly. This helps avoid the vague alignments rooted in highly variable regions, improving remote homologue identification. We implemented FALCON@home using the Berkeley Open Infrastructure of Network Computing (BOINC) volunteer computing protocol. With computation power donated from over 20 000 volunteer CPUs, FALCON@home shows a throughput as high as processing of over 1000 proteins per day. In the Critical Assessment of protein Structure Prediction (CASP11), the FALCON@home-based prediction was ranked the 12th in the template-based modeling category. As an application, the structures of 880 mouse mitochondria proteins were predicted, which revealed the significant correlation between protein half-lives and protein structural factors. Availability and implementation: FALCON@home is freely available at http://protein.ict.ac.cn/ FALCON/.
IntroductionThe protein structure prediction problem is concerned with the prediction of three-dimensional structure of a protein from its primary sequence of residues. Based on whether homologous templates exist for the query protein, the prediction approaches can be categorized into template-based modeling (TBM, including homology modeling and threading) and free modeling (FM). Specifically, a threading approach recognizes the most likely fold of the query protein and reports its alignments to known structural templates as output. This strategy has been relatively successful for various proteins; however, the existing threading approaches have performed poorly for remote homologous proteins. Thus, improving the fold recognition for remote homologous proteins remains a challenge to protein structure prediction (). In addition, currently available prediction servers, such as ROSETTA, I-TASSER () and RaptorX () are far from meeting the needs of high-throughput structure prediction from the community. More servers supporting proteomewide structure prediction are in high demand. In general, the sequences of remote homologous proteins show a relatively weak signal of native structures. However, this does not indicate a lack of sequence conservation features for structure. In fact, during the evolutionary process of homologous proteins, some regions are conserved while some regions are relatively variable in term of structure and sequence. The conserved regions are known as common structural frameworks that are shared by homologous proteins. Note thatsuccessfully utilized the concept of conserved region in the design of RAPTOR. This observation is also supported by the success of multiple-templates threading strategy (). Thus, based on this observation, we have proposed a novel threading approach to improving remote homologue identification and further developed a high-throughput protein structure prediction server called FALCON@home.
ImplementationThe FALCON@home server consists of two major modules, namely, TBM and ab initio modules (Supplementary). The TBM module was designed to recognize the homologous templates for the query protein sequence and to report alignments with identified homologous templates. Specifically, for each template, all of its homologous proteins were first identified based on sequence and structure similarity. Next we employed an integer linear program to calculate the common structural frameworks shared by these homologous proteins (). Then we aligned the query protein against the common structural frameworks, which helps to avoid vague alignments rooted in the structurally variable segments of templates. Finally, the full-length alignments between query and templates were generated by using the tree conditional random field (Tree-CRF) model () (see SI Section 2 for details). If the TBM module failed to identify homologues for the query protein, FALCON@home activates the FALCON ab initio module () to generate models from the very beginning. Briefly speaking, the FALCON ab initio module employs a statistical model to describe the local structural preference for each residue and uses a position-specific hidden Markov model to describe the dependencies of neighboring residues (see SI Section 3 for details). To accelerate the computational process, we deployed the TBM modules onto the Berkeley Open Infrastructure of Network Computing (BOINC) volunteer computing platform. In particular, a total of about 50 000 common frameworks were split into 32 clusters. Each BOINC client aligns the query protein against the common frameworks in a certain cluster and returns the alignments to the BOINC server for further selection. Currently, FALCON@home has over 20 000 volunteer CPUs from all around the world and can process over 1200 proteins per day.
Results
CASP11 evaluationIn the CASP11 competition, the FALCON@home-based server, FALCON_TOPO, was ranked 12th over the TBM category and 17th over the FM category. An enhanced version of FALCON@home, FALCON_EnvFold, was ranked 9th over the TBM category (see SI Section 4). The results indicated the advantage of FALCON@home in remote homologue identification. Take the CASP11 target T0678 as an example. The challenge was to determine how to align the three N-terminal strands. Using the pre-calculated common frameworks, FALCON@home successfully identified the most similar template as 4gt6_A and finally generated a high-quality prediction model with a TM-score of 0.84 (see Supplementary).
Application in the investigation of protein half-lifeRecently, we applied FALCON@home to investigate the relationship between protein half-life and protein tertiary structure. In particular, we used FALCON@home to predict structures for a total of 6033 mouse proteins in 6 days, including 442 proteins expressed in mouse liver mitochondria, 438 proteins expressed in mouse brainstem mitochondria, and 5153 nucleic proteins. Then we calculated the surface residue ratio as the number of residues on protein surface over the total number of residues in the protein. Analysis of the 880 mitochondrial proteins revealed a strongly negative correlation between the surface residue ratio and protein half-life (correlation coefficient is around 0.81). Thus, in other words, with the increase in the ratio, the protein is more likely to be degraded quickly.
Conclusions and discussionWith the rapid growth of protein sequences, the needs for structure prediction have also increased. FALCON@home provides free and high-throughput service for protein structure prediction. The experimental results in CASP11 evaluation have presented the advantages of using FALCON@home in remote homologue identification. In addition, the application in the investigation of protein half-life also demonstrates that FALCON@home can be used in the proteomewide prediction.
Funding
V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 462 Bioinformatics, 32(3), 2016, 462464 doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv581 Advance Access Publication Date: 10 October 2015 Applications Note at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
