Motivation: Currently, the best RNA–RNA interaction prediction tools are based on approaches that consider both the inter-and intramolecular interactions of hybridizing RNAs. While accurate, these methods are too slow and memory-hungry to be employed in genome-wide RNA target scans. Alternative methods neglecting intramolecular structures are fast enough for genome-wide applications, but are too inaccurate to be of much practical use. Results: A new approach for RNA–RNA interaction was developed, with a prediction accuracy that is similar to that of algorithms that explicitly consider intramolecular structures, but running at least three orders of magnitude faster than RNAup. This is achieved by using a combination of precomputed accessibility profiles with an approximate energy model. This approach is implemented in the new version of RNAplex. The software also provides a variant using multiple sequences alignments as input, resulting in a further increase in specificity.
INTRODUCTIONThe status of RNA in molecular biology has changed dramatically over the last decade. Instead of taking on a rather marginal role as messenger of genomic information, they are now considered as key regulatory elements in a wide spectrum of cellular processes. As of 2008, the number of known non-coding RNA sequences reached an overwhelming 29 million grouped into 1300 distinct families (). Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) frequently function by binding to other RNAs. For example, snoRNAs mediate pseudouridylation and methylation of rRNAs and snRNAs () and can influence the splicing of pre-mRNAs (). ncRNAs are also involved in the editing of other RNA sequences (Benne, * To whom correspondence should be addressed. 1992), transcription and translation control (siRNA, miRNA, stRNA) () or plasmid replication control (). While siRNAs are often fully complementary to their targets, most other ncRNAs interact in a more intricate manner, which does not involve perfect hybridization. For example in Escherichia coli., OxyS, which is involved in oxidative stress response, interacts with its target mRNA, fhlA, through formation of a two sites kissing complex (). Although there is statistical evidence that a plethora of ncRNAs interacts with other RNAs (The Athanasius F.), targets remain unknown for most of them. The prediction of RNARNA interactions, therefore, has become an important field in computational biology. RNARNA interactions are primarily governed by the same types of hydrogen bonds and stacking interactions as RNA secondary structure formation. The problem can, therefore, be tackled by similar algorithmic approaches and the same parametrization of the interaction energies. We may distinguish two distinct ways of addressing the RNARNA interaction problem. The most straightforward way consists in concatenating both sequences and subsequently folding them as a pseudo-single sequence. The precision of this kind of approach depends greatly on how the concatenation is handled. The crudest approaches use linker sequences to connect both RNA strands (). This can lead to erroneous structure prediction as the linker may interfere with the interacting sequences. Alternatively, a small modification of the folding algorithm keeps track of the concatenation point(s) and uses adjusted energy parameters for the loops in which the junctions occur (). A combinatorially different model, known as RNARNA interaction problem (RIP), covers a larger set of possible structures (). The second type of approaches conceptually decomposes the RNA hybridization process into two stages: (i) the unfolding of the interacting regions of the two partners and (ii) the direct interaction of the exposed binding sites. In practice, one first computes the probability of being unpaired for each region (sequence interval) in both sequences. These probabilities are equivalent to the free energy necessary to expose the regions. In the second step, the interaction energy between each combinations of regions is evaluated (). This approach was,of the ompAmicA hybrids predicted with and without considering intramolecular structures. (a) Hybrid structure predicted with RNAplex without considering the intramolecular structures of the RNA sequences. The hybrid extends over 67 and 69 nucleotides on ompA and micA, respectively, and has an hybridization energy of 42.3 kcal/mol. Still the energy needed to unfold both binding regions on ompA and micA amounts 22.7+26.8 = 49.5 kcal/mol, larger than the energy gained through binding. (b) ompAmicA interaction predicted by RNAup. OmpAmicA hybrid is shown on the right hand side, with the micA sequence represented by a bold line. Even though the hybrid is much smaller than the interaction in (a), it has a lower total interaction energy (ddG) of 12.25 kcal/mol, due to the fact that the interacting regions are less structured. in particular, applied successfully to sRNAmRNA interactions in bacteria. While both types of algorithms proved useful in predicting the correct interaction structure of a ncRNA with its (known) target, they are computationally expensive, requiring at least O((n+m) 3 ) operations, where n and m are the size of the target and query sequences, respectively, and hence are impractical for genome-wide target predictions. A drastic reduction in computational complexity can be achieved by omitting the computation of secondary structures within the monomers, as demonstrated by RNAhybrid (), which runs in O(mnL 2 ) when restricting the maximum loop length to L. RNAplex, a conceptually very similar approach (), further reduces the time complexity to O(mn) by using a modified energy model. Neglecting the internal structure of the interacting sequences leads to a drastic decrease in specificity; however, see. This issue is roughly addressed by RNAplex in that it mimics the effect of the competition between intra-and intermolecular interactions by adding a fixed per-nucleotide penalty (). Currently, one therefore has to choose between precise but impractically slow methods or fast but imprecise methods for ncRNA target search, a situation that is quite unsatisfactory. In this contribution, we extend the RNAplex approach Tafer and Hofacker (2008) to tackle this problem. We mimic the effect of the competition between intra-and intermolecular interactions by adding a position-dependent per-nucleotide penalty instead of a fixed penalty. This penalty is derived from precomputed accessibility profiles produced by RNAplfold () or RNAup (). More explicitly, these profiles contain the probabilities that any subsequence of arbitrary length is unpaired in thermodynamic equilibrium. These probabilities are converted to free energies that then enter as position-dependent penalties in the computation of the interaction energies, preserving RNAplex O(mn) run time. The main advantage is that the accessibility profiles can be precomputed and stored, making this approach particularly attractive for largescale screening studies. In addition, we extended RNAplex so that it can also handle multiple alignment. This inclusion of comparative information into the target prediction process leads to a substantial increase in specificity.
METHODS
RNAplex noveltiesThe extension of RNAplex brings two novelties that increase its specificity. First, we introduce position-specific per-nucleotide penalties that approximate the effects of the competition between intra-and intermolecular interactions. Second, RNAplex is now able to compute the interactions between two alignments, allowing RNAplex to favor evolutionary conserved interactions. Similar to the single sequence version, the multiple sequences alignment version can also consider the accessibility of the targets.
Approximate opening energiesWe first outline the design of RNAplex, which employs a two-steps approach. In the first step, the scanning phase, RNAplex identifies positions where putative interactions may end. For small interior loops (11, 21 and 22), as well as bulges of size 1, RNAplex still employs the original look-up tables provided by the Turner Energy Model. For larger interior loops and bulges, however, RNAplex uses a linear approximation of the size dependence of loop energies (). The resulting energy model is exact for small loops and slightly overestimates the loop energies of large interior, bulge loops and strongly asymmetric loops. A further advantage of the linear energy model is that RNAplex needs to store only the last four columns of the dynamic programming matrix during the scan phase. Once all high-scoring interactions are localized along the target sequence, RNAplex uses the standard energy model to recompute the energy and structure of the putative hybrids. During the scan phase, in order to extend a hybrid by one nucleotide, we need to know the cost of freeing this nucleotide from all the intramolecular interactions it might be involved in. In thermodynamic equilibrium, this energy cost can be derived from the probability that the interacting stretch of nucleotides is unpaired. Since it is too expensive to compute this for all intervals, we seek a step-wise procedure. Consider an intermediary hybrid structure S x y between two sequences x and y that starts at base pair (x i ,y j ) and spans w x nucleotides of sequence x and w y nucleotides of sequence y. We need to determine the conditional probability wx P x uthat nucleotide x i+wx is not involved in any intramolecular interaction, given that its predecessors i+w x 1 is unpaired, and the analogous quantity. The subscript u emphasizes that the nucleotides x and y are supposed to be unpaired. Note that this is not the same as the problem of assessing the probability P uthat the individual nucleotides x i+wx is unpaired, because base pairing probabilities of adjacent nucleotides are highly correlated (). The desired conditional probability can be written as:where the notation means that the interval [i,i+w x 1] is unpaired. An analogous expression holds for sequence y. Using the definition of thePage: 1936 19341940
H.Tafer et al.conditional probability, we can write:(2)Equation (2) tells us that the conditional probability wx P x udepends only on the probabilities P x u [i,i+w x ] and P x u [i,i+w x 1] that the corresponding intervals are unpaired. Conversely, the probability that an intervals is unpaired can be computed from the conditional probabilities and the probabilities that individual nucleotides are unpaired:A closer look at Equation (2)shows that the exact start position of the hybrid S x y has to be known in order to compute the desired conditional probability. Since RNAplex stores only a small number (four) of columns of the dynamic programming matrix, this cannot be done exactly. Instead we employ the approximation(4)where  represents the number of nucleotides considered prior to nucleotiderepresents the conditional probability that x i+wx is unpaired for a given . This approximation is exact for  = w x and becomes worse with decreasing . This is a direct consequence of the fact that the state of the nucleotides in the interval [i,i+w x +1] is not taken into account for the computation of the conditional probability of nucleotide x i+wx. Equation (3) can now be rewritten in the formThe probability P x u [i,i+w x ] of being unpaired is related to a corresponding opening energyThe energy cost of adding one nucleotide to the hybrid therefore can be written asThe opening energy of a region of size of w thus is given bySince RNAplex only stores the current four columns of the recursion matrix, we set  = 4 in practice.
Modified recursions of RNAplexThe energy 4 G x u [i] of freeing nucleotide x i from all its intramolecular interactions can now easily be integrated into the dynamic programming recursion of RNAplex. Let C i,j be the best interaction energy between the subsequences x 1 ...x i and y j ...y m. Similarly, B x i,j and B y i,j store the optimal interactions energy given that residue x i or residue y j , respectively, is part of a bulge; I i,j stores the optimal interaction energy given that x i and y j are in an interior loop. The asymmetry penalty A models asymmetric extension of interior loops. S(i,j,i1,j +1) represents the energy gained by stacking base pair (x i ,y j ) onto (x i+1 ,y j1 ). M(i,j,i1,j +1) represents the mismatch energy of the unpaired nucleotide (x i1 ,y j+1 ) adjacent to the pair (x i ,y j ). The energy contribution of the small interior loops is represented by I. Furthermore, we use the following abbreviations for the opening energies:. The full dynamic programming recursion then reads
Hybrid structure and hybrid energyThe computation of the hybrid structure and interaction energy follows the strategy of RNAup. We assume that the binding region may contain mismatches and bulge loops. Thus, the most stable interaction between two segments (x i ,y j ) and (x k ,y l ) is obtained by minimizing over all possible interior loop closed by (x p ,The overall most stable interaction is then obtained by minimizing over both duplex closing pairs (x i ,where n and m are the length of sequences x and y, respectively. This leads to a theoretical run time of O(n 3 m 3 ) and a memory footprint of O(n 2 m 2 ). Here we should note that one end of the hybrid, namely the base pair (x i ,y j ), was already found in the scanning phase of RNAplex. As a consequence, we only need to minimize over one closing pair instead of two. Equation (10) can thus be rewritten as:Equations (10) and(11) show that the knowledge of base pair (x i ,y j ) allows to reduce memory and run time by a factor nm. Furthermore, the size ofThis grows to 120 s if one considers the time necessary to compute the accessibility profile. RNAplex-a is 1000 times faster than IntaRNA () and 2422 times faster than RNAup (). the interaction regions as well as the size of interior loops can be limited to arbitrary lengths  and L, respectively, leading to a run time of O( 2 L 2 ) and a memory usage of O( 2 ), that is, the same complexity as RNAduplex or RNAhybrid.
AccuracyWe evaluated the performance of RNAplex at two levels. First, we looked at how well the opening energy derived by RNAplex from RNAup profiles matched the original RNAup values. Within the model of RNA secondary structures, this assess the quality of the approximations outlined in the previous section compared with the exact unpairing energies. Note that a comparison with experimentally measured opening energies is not possible since such measurements do not appear to be available in the published literature. The second test surveys how well RNAplex recovers the boundaries of known duplexes. This evaluates how well the different approximations made in RNAplex influence the quality of the predictions. The knowledge of the exact localization of RNARNA interactions is important, because ncRNAs may regulate their targets in different ways depending on the location of the binding sites. In order to investigate the accuracy of the accessibility profiles, we used a set of 11 460 randomly generated sequences of length 400 nt for which the accessibility profiles was computed with RNAup. For each sequence, we then determined the difference of the RNAup opening energy and the RNAplex opening energy for the region located between nucleotides 181 and 200.shows the relative energy differences between both models as bar plots for different values of . The largest variations are seen for  = 1 with differences larger than 100%. R 2 (triangle) and the Pearson's correlation coefficient (square) reach their minimum there (0.09 and 0.37, respectively). Both coefficients then steadily improve with  and reach their theoretical maximum of 1 for  = w. For <w, our approximation slightly overestimates the opening energy. This can be seen for  = 4, the value used in RNAplex in the scatterplot in the middle of. Half of the relative deviation are contained between +7% and 14%. The accuracy of the energy model (interaction and opening energy) used in RNAplex was compared with that of RNAup, biRNA (), and the old version of RNAplex (RNAplex-c) on a dataset of 17 known bacterial small RNAmRNA interactions () (see Supplementary Material). In this dataset, both the opening energy of the interacting sequences and the hybridization energy affects the prediction. RNAplex-c (old version) missed four interactions, while all RNAplex-a (with accessibility information) predictions overlapped with the corresponding experimentally determined interactions, as did the predictions of RNAup and biRNA (see Supplementary). These results emphasize the importance of accessibility for the correct prediction of RNA RNA interactions. Furthermore, it confirms that the approximations used in RNAplex are sufficient to reach a level of accuracy similar to that of RNAup and biRNA. The location of the predicted closing pairs was compared to the confirmed locations. For each prediction tool, the average over all 17 interactions of the sum of the magnitude of the deviation between the predicted and confirmed locations of the four closing nucleotides was computed. All three accessibility-based methods performed similarly with an average deviation of 16.76 for RNAup, 19.88 for biRNA and 20.60 for RNAplex-a, much smaller than the average deviation of RNAplex-c (59.76 nt) (see Supplementary). It should be noted that RNAup and RNAplex, in contrast to biRNA, cannot handle interactions involving two or more interacting regions, such as the two kissing-hairpin complexes found in OxyS-fhlA. Still, in contrast to RNAup, RNAplex can return suboptimal predictions, without run time overhead, that can be used to identify disjoint interaction regions. For OxySfhlA, the confirmed binding regions are located at positionsandon OxyS andandon fhlA, in accord with the two best suboptimals returned by RNAplex which are located onandon OxyS andandon fhlA.
Computational efficiencyThe run time of the new version of RNAplex was compared with that of the old version (RNAplex-c, no accessibility), RNAup and IntaRNA () on a dataset containing 19 E.coli sRNAs and 100 E.coli mRNAs (see Supplementary Material). For each gene, we defined the putative target region as the sequence interval from 200 nt upstream and 1000 nt downstream of the start codon. RNAplex completed this task in 36 s, while IntaRNA and RNAup needed 34150 and 86487 s, respectively. The run time of RNAplex thus is reduced by a factor of 2400 and 950 compared with RNAup and IntaRNA, respectively. If we count the time needed to compute the accessibilities needed by RNAplex, the total run time reaches 120 s, still more than two orders of magnitude less than the other tools ().We further compared the run time and the memory consumption of RNAup and IntaRNA against that of the new RNAplex, by generating a set of random target sequences of size 400, 800, 1600, 3200 and 6400 nt and query sequences of size 100, 200, 400 and 800 nt and searching for targets with all three tools. On this dataset, the new RNAplex is between 575 and 1600 times faster than IntaRNA and between 1500 and 65 400 times faster than RNAup. The memory consumption is also drastically reduced. RNAplex needs at least 17 and at most 1330 times less memory than IntaRNA , and 15626 times less memory than RNAup (see Supplementary). Compared to the old version without accessibilities, the new RNAplex needs only four times more memory.
Conserved interactionsThe absence of conserved target site in closely related species may indicate that the proposed interaction does not occur in nature. The presence of compensatory mutations between the sRNA and the target site, on the other hand, can lend further credibility to single sequence target predictions (). Alignments thus can improve the specificity of target search by focusing on evolutionary conserved interactions. We, therefore, extended RNAplex to alignments. The approach follows the same idea as RNAalifold (), where a thermodynamic energy minimization folding algorithm is coupled with a simple scoring model to assess structural evolutionary conservation. Base pairs are, therefore, restricted to pairs of positions in the alignments in which most or all sequences can form canonical pairs. The evolutionary model used in RNAplex, while straightforward, performs well in predicting consensus secondary structure. Its simplicity allows it to be integrated into RNAplex without run time overhead (see Supplementary Material). A potential weakness is the RNAalifold scoring model, which was trained and optimized for intramolecular interaction, instead for the intermolecular interactions to which it is applied here. More complex scoring schemes such as the one used in PETfold and PETcofold, where a maximum expected scoring approach combines the evolutionary probabilities of a consensus structure given an alignment with the thermodynamic probabilities of the associated structures in each sequence (), perform slightly better than the RNAalifold scoring scheme. However, they can be incorporated only at the cost of a greatly increased run time, and thus are incompatible with the purpose of RNAplex. Similar to the single sequence version, the alignment version of RNAplex only allows interior loops in the RNARNA hybrids. Like the single sequence, accessibility can be taken into account by averaging the positiondependent extension costs computed for the individual sequences in the alignment (see Supplementary Materials for a full description of the recursion).
DatasetsA complete description of all datasets used in this study can be found in the Supplementary Materials.
APPLICATIONAs an application example, we consider the genome-wide prediction of sRNA targets in E.coli. As a reference set, we use the experimentally confirmed interactions published by. We expect that, for a given sRNA, the number of predicted interactions with other (false positive) targets should decrease when accessibility of the target mRNA in included. Ideally, it should reach the low levels observed for RNAup (). For each sRNA, the amount of false positives was estimated by counting genome wide the number of sRNA-target interactions that are more stable than the experimentally reported sRNA-target duplex. For each 4463 E.coli genes, a mRNA of length 1200 nt, including 200 nt upstream and 1000 nt downstream of the start codon were defined. Accessibility profiles were computed with RNAplfold, with a folding windows (option-W) of 240 nt and a maximal base pair distance of 160 (option-L). An interaction was reported if the corresponding sRNAmRNA interaction energy is smaller than the experimentally confirmed interaction, and if it occurs in region encompassing 80 nt, 50 nt upstream and 30 nt downstream of the start codon. The inclusion of the accessibility profiles in the new version of RNAplex leads to a substantial improvement as can be seen from. All native interaction sites are among the predictions, and the detailed target site localization is improved. Most importantly, the number of predictions with better interaction energies, i.e. the false positives, is reduced to a level similar to that of RNAup. In order to better assess the number of false positives, the same method was applied on the dinucleotide-shuffled sRNAs and mRNAs. To this end, we compared the interaction energy of the non-shuffled, experimentally confirmed interactions, to the energy distribution of the shuffled sequences. Interestingly, in seven out of nine cases, the number of false positives is smaller (see Supplementary Material) in the shuffled case than in the non-shuffled one. This can be explained by the fact that in various bacteria, the region around the ribosomal entry site, which is also the preferred region of sRNA binding, is more accessible than the rest of the mRNA (see Supplementary Material). This in turn implies that compared with shuffled sequences, sRNAs have a greater chance to bind to the region around the start codon in non-shuffled mRNAs. Depending on the ncRNAs, one can expect between 7.510 7 false positives per nucleotide for micC and 1.5104 false positives for gcvB (see Supplementary Material).
Multiple alignmentWhile RNAplex recovers all interactions, some of them like RyhBsodB or GcvB-oppA are ranked lowly. A comparative version of RNAplex was designed (see Section 2) to reduce the number of false positives. Similar to consensus RNA folding, the quality of the input alignments is crucial to obtain meaningful results (). The comparison of the performance of the single sequence with the comparative version of RNAplex was achieved by generating multiple sequences alignments clustalw () for the eight sRNAs fromand with MUSCLE (for the 4463 E.coli mRNAs. The list of bacteria used for the alignment are found in the Supplementary Material. In many cases, MUSCLE and clustalw were not able to satisfactorily align the sequences. This was caused e.g. by misannotations of the start codon as for the ompA gene in E.coli APEC 01, which was incorrectly annotated 70 nt upstream of the true start codon. In order to better handle these cases, we devised a method to produce multiple alignments of highly similar and strongly binding target sites (see Supplementary Materials). Because highly conserved interactions are more credible than nonconserved interactions, ranking of interactions based on multiple sequences alignments should not only take the interaction energy into account, but also the number of organisms (in which a predicted interactions is detectable). This can be achieved by using Z-scoresThe first and second columns show the name of interaction partners. Columns 3 and 4 give the predicted and experimentally reported binding regions, respectively. Columns 5 and 6 report the binding G computed by RNAup and RNAplex, respectively. The numbers in parenthesis in the sixth column represent the number of interactions, located within a window of 80 nt centered around the start codon, with a lower interaction energy than the experimentally reported interaction for the predictions made by RNAplex with and without considering the opening energy, respectively. Column 7 gives the interaction energy for the multiple sequences interactions. The numbers in parenthesis in column 7 represent the number of sequences in the final alignments. Column 8 shows the rank of the interaction when looking only at the interaction energy. Column 9 shows the rank of the interactions based on the Z-score corrected for the number of sequences in the alignment. Finally, column 10 shows the rank of the interaction based on the Z-score, given that only interactions with a greater or equal number of sequences in the alignment are taken into account. The number in parenthesis in the last column represent the number of better scoring elements in the case of alignment when no accessibility information are taken into account. as alternative ranking criterion. The Z-scores can be computed for all interactions having the same number of sequences in the alignments. This is important as highly conserved interactions tend to have a higher consensus interaction energy than interactions that are conserved in only few organisms (see Supplementary). In this way, extremely stable interactions can be compared without having to worry about the number of sequences in the alignments. The main drawback of this method is that highly conserved interactions with more than 10 sequences are rare, making the Z-score analysis unreliable. This is the case, for example, for the micA-ompA pair, which has the highest interaction energy among the interactions involving 14 species. In this case, the rank of MicA drops from 2 for the single sequence approach to 11 for the alignment approach.shows that the rank based on the interaction energy or the Z-score is similar to that of the single sequence energy ranking. However, when considering only interactions having a greater or equal number of sequences and a higher Z-score (column 10), the number of interactions that score better than the native one in the single sequence case (column 6) decreases significantly, with the greatest reduction being seen for ryhB. This is especially interesting because the ryhB-sodB is difficult to predict, probably due to its dependence upon Hfq, a protein known to facilitate sRNA mRNA duplex formation (). Similar to the single sequence case, the use of accessibility information in the case of multiple sequences alignments allows to improve the rank of the known interactions. This can be seen in the last column of. It should be noted that some false positives turned out to be real interactions: for example, iscS and acnB score better than sodB as targets for ryhB and are true targets (). Similar trends can be seen if the Z-score threshold is set to 0 and the number of sequences in the multiple alignment remains unchanged. If we look at the gene ontology of these targets in the case of ryhB (43 targets), we see that 35 are involved in catalytic activities (P = 0.006), 9 are involved in ironsulfur cluster binding (P = 0.007), 39 are involved in binding (P = 0.01). ryhB targets are also significantly overrepresented in the CO 2 fixation (P = 0.0001) as well as citrate cycle cellular pathways (P = 0.0002), in line with the gene ontology analysis. More examples can be found in the Supplementary Materials.
RNAplex
DISCUSSIONWe presented a new version of RNAplex, a tool designed to rapidly and reliably predict RNARNA interactions. Compared with the previously published version, RNAplex now considers target site accessibility, by using accessibility profiles generated by RNAplfold to approximate the energy of removing a nucleotide from all intramolecular interactions. The introduction of positionspecific, structure-dependent extension cost allows to greatly improve the specificity of RNAplex, bringing it close to that of RNAup, without modifying the linear run time of the original RNAplex. Clearly, the main feature of RNAplex is its run time efficiency. On a dataset of 19 ncRNAs and 100 target mRNAs on length 1200, RNAplex runs 2400 faster than RNAup without noticeably loss of specificity, thus making ncRNAs target searches more affordable. In its present implementation, RNAplex can be used not only to predict ncRNA targets in small genomes, but can also be used to find miRNA targets and siRNA off-targets in large mammalian genomes and transcriptomes and it can be applied to microarray probes design. In contrast to RNAup or RNAhybrid, RNAplex can return suboptimal solutions efficiently on the fly without the need of recomputing the full recursion matrix. The ability of RNAplex to perform comparative target search allows to discard poorly conserved interaction and to lend further credibility to interactions showing compensatory mutations. Based on a dataset of experimentally confirmed interactions, we show that RNAplex in its present form is an useful tool to predict new sRNA targets. We further show that suboptimal predictions from RNAplex may actually be real targets. Application of the comparative version
H.Tafer et al.of RNAplex on larger genomes and other ncRNAs, e.g. miRNAs, is straightforward. In order to make RNAplex more usable for the community, we plan to set up a web server especially designed to predict targets for sRNAs in bacteria. We further plan to use RNAplex to better understand the regulatory circuits found in E.coli (). Finally, a probe design method based on RNAplex is currently being developed.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
