Motivation: Abstract shape analysis allows efficient computation of a representative sample of low-energy foldings of an RNA molecule. More comprehensive information is obtained by computing shape probabilities, accumulating the Boltzmann probabilities of all structures within each abstract shape. Such information is superior to free energies because it is independent of sequence length and base composition. However, up to this point, computation of shape probabilities evaluates all shapes simultaneously and comes with a computation cost which is exponential in the length of the sequence. Results: We device an approach called RapidShapes that computes the shapes above a specified probability threshold T by generating a list of promising shapes and constructing specialized folding programs for each shape to compute its share of Boltzmann probability. This aims at a heuristic improvement of runtime, while still computing exact probability values. Conclusion: Evaluating this approach and several substrategies, we find that only a small proportion of shapes have to be actually computed. For an RNA sequence of length 400, this leads, depending on the threshold, to a 10–138 fold speed-up compared with the previous complete method. Thus, probabilistic shape analysis has become feasible in medium-scale applications, such as the screening of RNA transcripts in a bacterial genome. Availability: RapidShapes is available via http://
INTRODUCTION
Motivation
From minimum free energy folding to abstract shape analysisSecondary structure prediction, based on thermodynamics, for RNA molecules has become an indispensable tool in RNA research, despite its well-known shortcomings (). There are limitations in the underlying energy model () (with respect to ion concentration, temperature and entropic effects), influences of co-transcriptional folding () and mechanisms such as RNA thermometers and riboswitches (), where the prediction of an 'optimal' * To whom correspondence should be addressed. structure, even when correct, tells only half the story. Hence, much past and ongoing work is devoted to improving this state of affairs. Comparative analysis of several (related) RNA sequences opens many routes for improvement (, only to name a few), but when studying only a single sequence, the only way forward is to give a more complete account of the folding space of the molecule. Abstract shape analysis is a fairly recent attempt in this direction. For shortness, here we discuss only those approaches which it is directly based upon. The first method analyzing the complete folding space in order to assess the relevance of a secondary structure was introduced in. This approach uses the partition function to address this property. In general, the partition function provides a measure of the total number of states (structures) weighted by their individual energy at a particular temperature. For an RNA sequence s and the set F(s) of all possible secondary structures for this sequence, it is defined as follows:where E x is the energy of structure x in kcal/mol, R is the universal gas constant (0.00198717 kcal/K) and T is the temperature in Kelvin. In words, the partition function is the sum of Boltzmann weighted energies of all structures. The probability Prob of a certain secondary structure x  F(s) is defined as:Intrinsic to this approach is that the probability is proportional to the (Boltzmann-weighted) energy of a structure. This approach does not provide further information on structural relevance. There is no possibility that an individual structure has a higher probability than a structure with lower free energy, and the minimal free energy (MFE) structure is always the most probable one; albeit with an individual probability that is often very close to zero. This problem has already been stated in, and the author also provides a means to alleviate it. Instead of computing the probability of a complete structure, the probabilities of atomic structural elements, i.e. base pairs, are computed by what has become known and widely used as the McCaskill algorithm. The RNAsubopt program, released by, can give a non-heuristic enumeration of near-optimal structures. However, there is an 'embarrassingly large' (McCaskill) number of such structures in the vicinity of the energy minimum, and the problem remains how to derive significant observations from this information.Page: 633 632639
Faster computation of exact RNA shape probabilitiesInand Ding and Lawrence (2003), the authors introduced a statistical sampling algorithm that is implemented in the tool SFOLD. In each step of the recursive backtracing procedure, base pairs and the structural element they belong to are sampled according to their probability, obtained from the partition function. Features of the sampling procedure are that each run is likely to produce a different sample and that the same structure can be sampled multiple times, where the MFE structure has the highest probability. Still, the MFE structure is not guaranteed to be present in the sample, especially for long sequences. Sampled structures are clustered, and cluster centroids can be considered as representing the relevant structural alternatives in the molecule's folding space. The idea of producing a structure which reflects the entire distribution of structures (more properly than the MFE or maximum likelihood structure does) has been further extended by studying a variety of centroid estimators in) implements a similar idea in a very different way. Rather than enumerating structures and clustering them thereafter, structures are classified a priori into abstract classes called shapes. Abstract shapes correspond well to human characterizations such as 'a cloverleaf structure' or 'a stem-loop with a bulge in the 5 side'. Abstract shapes have a clean mathematical definition that allows for different levels of abstraction. In this article, we only use the most abstract level (5). Each shape describes a class of structures, and within each class, the structure of minimum free energy is defined as the shape representative structure, called shrep for short.
Computation of shape representative structuresThe RNAshapes program computes an arbitrary number of representative structures of different shapes, ranked by their energy. The top ranking shape, naturally, has the MFE structure as its represenative. Still, knowing the energies of the shape representative structures does not tell us about the Boltzmann probability of the structures corresponding to either shape. One might naively assume that the top ranking shape also achieves the highest overall probability. This may often be true, but it does not hold in general. Let us consider an example. We present structures in the simple dot-bracket notation made popular by the Vienna RNA package (), where dots denote unpaired residues, and matching parentheses denote paired bases. Inspired by this notation, in abstract shapes, arrangements of complete helices are denoted by square brackets. Consider the two top ranking shapes in the following example, taken from Rfam ():))))......In this example, the second-ranking shrep of AY579432 indicates the family consensus, and hence, more likely constitutes the functional structure. However, the computed information provides no hint to this situation.Such a calculation shows that shape[] is more populated than shapeand dominates the Boltzmann ensemble. Furthermore, this analysis shows that structures of all other shapes ranked 3 or above are unlikely to play a functional role. Computation of shape probabilities is implemented in the second release of the RNAshapes program ().
Computation of shape probabilities
Properties and uses of shape probabilitiesCompared with plain folding energies, shape information has several advantages: shape probabilities are independent of sequence length and base composition, and hence are meaningful across related sequences from different organisms. For example, shape probabilities have been used to assign significance levels to predicted miRNA precursors in large-scale studies (). Consensus shapes for a set of sequences can be determined quickly and have been used as the basis of consensus structure prediction (). Finally, it has been determined that Rfam families can be indexed by their shape spectra, which leads to a significant speed-up of Rfam searches ().
Computational cost of probabilistic shape analysisWhile standard MFE folding algorithms have the asymptotic runtime of O(n 3 ), where n is the sequence length, probabilistic shape analysis has a runtime of O(rn 3 ). The value r is the (expected) number of all shapes encountered in the folding space of the analyzed RNA sequence. The aymptotic number of all shapes of all sequences of length n has recently been determined to be 1.20 n 5.13n 3 2 (), but the expected number of shapes encountered for an individual sequence is not known. Rudimentary measurements in () indicate a value of r  1.1 n. As a consequence of this exponential factor, probabilistic shape analysis for a sequence of length 400 requires 11.5 h and 2.7 GB memory on present day hardware. It is clear that when computing the probabilities of all shapes, a factor related to the number of shapes cannot be avoided. But in practice, we are interested only in a handful of top-ranking shapes. We can compute the top k shapes ranked by shrep energy in O(kn 3 ) timeso it may seem surprising that this should not be possible for shapes ranked by probability. The explanation is that shape probabilities add up from many small contributions, and there is no way to determine early which subshapes may later contribute to the top-ranking ones. In other words, Bellman's Principle of Optimality (), the prerequisite of dynamicPage: 634 632639
S.Janssen and R.Giegerichprogramming algorithms, does not apply for shape probability computation. There may be a different approach to compute shape probabilities in polynomial time, but the chances do not look good: problems of this type are closely related to the path labeling problem for hidden Markov models, shown to be NP-hard in. For this reason of computational expense, the RNAshapes program also provides two heuristics: one is a low probability filter that excludes subshapes of very low probability, e.g. <10 6. This implies that the overall partition function appears smaller than it is. The other heuristic is a sampling mode, akin to SFOLD, but defining clusters a priori as shapes. Still, sampling gives up on computing exact probabilities, and also becomes expensive for longer sequences when a large number of samples must be drawn. Therefore, we set out here to provide a runtime heustistic to compute the shapes of highest probability. A runtime heuristic means that we still compute the exact probabilities, efficiently in many cases, but with no guarantee for polynomial runtime in general.
Outline of ideasLet s be the sequence under consideration, and length(s) = n. The partition function Q(s) of the complete folding space F(s) can be computed efficiently in O(n 3 ) time. Now consider a specific shape p, such as. All the structures of shape p constitute a subspace F p (s)  F(s). The probability of p isThis means that Q p (s) is itself the partition function of F p (s), and with a special program that folds s exactly and only into the structures of F p (s), we can compute Q p (s) efficiently in O(n 3 ) time. A program folding an RNA sequence into a restricted set of structures, using the standard energy model, is called a thermodynamic matcher (TDM) (). Such TDMs are produced, for example, via the tool Locomotif , where a user composes pictures of annotated RNA structures, which are then compiled into programs for RNA motif search (). We use a similar TDM generator which, given an abstract shape p, generates the TDM for p, which computes the partition function. The overall idea is as follows:(1) We compute(2) We enumerate (heuristically) a series of promising shapes p 1 ,p 2 , .
.. .(3) For each p i , we generate TDM i as a program coded in algebraic dynamic programming (ADP) style ().(4) We compile TDM i and execute it to compute Q p i (s) in O(n 3 ), and obtain Prob(p i ,s) according to Equation (3).(5) We continue until a specified portion of the shape probabilities is exhausted.Since the time for TDM generation and compilation is small compared with their execution time, overall runtime of this heuristics is O(tn 3 ), where t is the number of TDMs (shapes) used. We call this approach RapidShapes.
A METHOD FOR FASTER SHAPE PROBABILITY COMPUTATION
Basic problem: shapes with a least T% probabilityHere, we define the standard problem we want to solve efficiently; later we shall discuss variations of it. Let us set up a probability threshold T for the shapes of interest, say 0.9 or 0.6 as used in, or maybe as low as 0.1. Given T , only a constant number of shapes (1 with the first two settings, 9 for the third or 1/T 1 in general) can meet the threshold independent of the sequence length n. Note that there may be no shapes at all meeting the threshold. On the other hand, there is a large population of shapes living in sub-thresholdia, their number growing exponentially with n.
Problem definitionGiven an RNA sequence s of length n and a threshold 0 < T  1, compute all shapes p of s with Prob(p)  T , together with their shape representative structures and free energy. This definition permits that some shapes with subthreshold probability will also be computed, but the goal is, of course, to minimize our efforts spent on those. We have to solve two subproblems, namely the analysis of subspaces F p (s) and the generation of a good list of 'promising' shapes.
Analysis of the folding space partitioned by shapeA TDM folds a sequence only to a restricted set of structures. For RapidShapes, such a restricted set of structures comprises all structures of a particular shape (and no other). A TDM can compute the partition function value Q p (s) of its restricted folding space F p (s) in O(n 3 ) time, just as the unrestricted RNA folding program does for the complete folding space F(s). Since Q p (s) is the sum of all structures in F p (s), and F p (s) is a precise subset of F(s), we have to ensure that a TDM folds exactly those structures constituting the shape class p. Our strategy is to generate such programs on demand.
Representing structures and shapes as grammarsRNA structures are conveniently described by context-free grammars (), where the parses of an RNA sequence s indicate all its possible foldings F(s). Parses implicitly assign a score with each structure, be it probabilities from a stochastic model, base pair counts or thermodynamic energies. Here, we use tree grammars to describe structures. Tree grammars make explicit the semantics of each grammar rule, and can be compiled directly into executable code using the ADP technology (). An expository simplification of the tree grammar that we use to compute F(s) is given in. The left part ofshows one of the candidate structures, tree t 1 , which this grammar assigns to the input sequence ACCAAAGG. The operators root, last, stack and hairpin will be used to compute all relevant properties of this structure candidate. The actual grammar used in RNAshapes as well as in RapidShapes uses 26 rules and 35 operators to accomodate the thermodynamic energy model, including dangling bases. We can imagine the progress of an RNA folding program based on tree grammars in two phases. Phase one is the generation of all candidate structures (trees), while in the second phase a score is assigned to each candidate. The score of a candidate depends on the scheme that describes how the tree operators must be evaluated in phase two. For example, if we want to assign a Vienna DotBracket representation as a score to t 1 , we can apply A dotBracket Page: 635 632639. Tree grammar for folding all RNA structures G all : terminals are colored in blue, where base is a single unpaired base, region is a possibly empty stretch of unpaired bases and region3 has at least three unpaired bases. Non-terminals are black. The axiom start is written in boldface. The operators are given in green. The subscript basepairing indicates that the outmost bases have to form a base pair. All structures are either unpaired or consists of one (last) or many (next) consecutive stems. A stem can be a hairpin or a multiloop, which both can be extended by a stack. stack includes internal loops, bulges and stacked base pairs, depending on whether two, one or none of both regions are empty.) and the shape string of level 5 is. Right: grammar G Gen to generate specialized tree grammars: operators, non-terminals and terminals are coloured as in. Instead of an RNA sequence, the input for this grammar is a shape string.
Faster computation of exact RNA shape probabilities+ is string concatenation and ... |m| means one '.' for each base in m. a and a are the two partners of a base pair. The resulting Vienna Dot-Bracket string for t 1 would be .((...)). Since G all is semantically unambiguous with respect to A dotBracket , there is only one structure that can form this specific Vienna-Dot-Bracket representation. The shape representation for t 1 is ''. Since A shape5 does not account for unpaired regions or the number of base pairs in a stack, many structures, generated by G all , will have the same shape representation. to get the string .((...)) (). By exchanging A dotBracket with A shape5 , we getfor t 1. Other schemes are used to calculate thermodynamic energies, probabilities or base pair counts.
Generating grammars from shapesGiven shape p, we generate the specialized grammar G p. We do so using another tree, the only parse of '[]' with G Gen. On the right side is the generated grammar Gwith five rules depicted that is constructued by applying the evaluation scheme A Gen to the operators of t. To see the similarities the backbone of both trees are colored in red. grammar G Gen , see right part of, which parses a shape representation as its input. The rules of G Gen follow the intention of the shape abstraction: the allowed submotifs (comp) are either adjacent helices (cons), or embedded helices within multiloops. An exception is the completely unpaired structure (unpaired). For our example p ='[]' (see left part of), t[] is the unique parse of. The details of this generation exceed the scope of the present article. Equations for A Gen are available in the Supplementary Material. The result is shown in the right part of. The important difference to G all is that the non-terminals are now position specificor better helix specificby the addition of suffices to their names. Furthermore, the alternatives are reduced for some positions. For example, the rule componentslacks the last alternative, while componentslacks next. Since a grammar is a set of rules, the identical rules in,namely stem, can be handled by the same matrices in the dynamic programming code, which saves some memory space as well as runtime.
Using the standard energy model Although Q(s)and Q p (s) are computed by two independent programs, they have to fold the same structures and evaluate them to the same energy values, i.e.
Page: 636 632639
S.Janssen and R.GiegerichBoltzmann weighted energies. We can assure this by using the identical evaluation scheme for both programs. This comes for free, because the operators in G all and G p are always the same.
Heuristic shape selectionTo run RapidShapes for a given sequence s, we construct a list L(s) of 'promising' shapes. For each shape p  L(s), we construct TDMs and compute Prob(p,s) in O(n 3 ) time. Ideally, L(s) would only contain the shapes above the threshold, but this is exactly the problem to be solved.
Selection by shrep energiesThe simple shape analysis for a given sequence s computes the top k shapes ranked by the energy of their shreps (cf. Section 1). Although shape ranks by shrep energy and shape ranks by probability do not agree, there is a positive correlation between shrep energies and shape probabilities. We start with a small k to compute L(1T , we repeat the simple shape analysis with larger k to extend L(s).
Selection by sampled frequenciesSampling of structures to estimate shape probabilities can be done very fast, but the results are not exact. However, the reported shapes may be the most likely ones, in spite of their probabilities being incorrect. To combine both advantages, we use the quickly calculated shapes from the sampling as members for L(s) and precisely determine their probabilities via TDMs. Sampling requires a bound on the number of samples drawn, which was set to 1000 for this study. This might overlook shapes with probability T , but this chance can be decreased by drawing more structures.
AsymptoticsTo satisfy the problem definition, given in Section 2.1, RapidShapes must calculate the probability, the shrep structure and its free energy for all k shapes with Prob(p)  T. All three values can be computed for one shape by using specialized evaluation schemes with the TDM, where Prob(p) is Q p (s) divided by Q(s), which must be calculated just once. For the sake of speed, we seperate the computation of shape probabilities for all shapes in L(s) from the computation of shrep structures and free energy values for all k shapes, with Prob(p)  T , because usually |L(s)| >> k. This leads to an asymptotic runtime of O(n 3 +|L(s)|n 3 +k n 3 +l).
EVALUATION
Evaluation setupOur evaluation uses a random and a 'real' test set. The random testset is constructed to uniformly cover a sequence length of 51000 nt in steps of 5 nt. We use two sequences for each length, so the test set contains 400 sequences. The realistic test set contains 1092 candidates from a recent experimental screen for bacterial non-coding RNAs (Schlter,J.-P. et al., manuscript in preperation).
OracleTo mark the theoretical maximum speed up for RapidShapes, we assume an oracle that a priori denominates the shapes for L(s), ordered by their shape probabilities. This would allow to use the minimum number of TDMs for any choice of T. Of course, such an oracle does not exist, but we can determine what it would have returned by dropping subthreshold shapes from L(s) after their evaluation.
Results on random dataThe performance evaluation of RapidShapes has two aspects: the effective number of shapes that have to be evaluated, and the absolute gain in runtime.is a comparison of the growth of F(s) and L(s) for different methods to fill this list with promising shapes. As expected, just a very small number of all existing shape classes in F(s) (cyan colored curve) seems to account for a major part of all structure probabilities. The number of TDMs, which must be generated, compiled and executed for RapidShapes, is strikingly smaller than |F(s)|, regardless of the method for filling L(s). The Selection by shrep energies (red curve) is not perfect, because the green curve of the omniscient oracle is somehow below, but the distance is not too wide and it follows the trend of the oracle. Selection by sampled frequencies (blue curve) runs the risk of not creating enough shapes, due to the limited sample size. Sampling 1000 structures can result in at most 1000 different shapes, and normally much less. For larger sequences the accumulated probability of these shapes may not be sufficient to cover 1T. Where this strategy needs even less TDMs than the oracle, it comes with an increasing proportion of unexplored parts of F(s). The amount of unaccounted folding space for the Selection by sampled frequencies method is indicated by the blue dotted curve in. It is interesting that the sampling strategy becomes faster than the energy-based strategy exactly where it starts missing shapes above the threshold. We conclude that there lies no real advantage in the sampling strategy when computing all exact shape probalities above the threshold is required.
Required number of TDMs
Runtime speed-up Differentshape strings result in different TDMs, i.e. different grammar sizes. The larger the grammar, the higher is the runtime for generation, compilation and execution, independent of the input sequence. To include these effects into the evaluation results,shows our analysis of empirically measured runtimes. While computing a probabilistic shape analysis, the program RNAshapes uses a filter to exclude all subshapes with a very low probability (0.000001 by default), although they might contribute to highly probable shapes. This means the results are no longer exact, but this threshold is wisely chosen. The error for the probability values is very small and the speed-up is significant. Without the filter, RNAshapes exceeds memory for sequences as small as 130 nt (cyan colored curve in). With activated filtering, valid input sequences can have up to 400 nt (magenta curve). This comes with a Page: 637 632639the growing numbers of shapes in F(s) and |L(s)|, which is the number of shapes used in RapidShapes. The x-axis is sequence length, the logarithmic scale right y-axis is |L(s)|. F(s) is measured by RNAshapes with low-probability filter set to 10 6 , colored in cyan, and without filtering, colored in magenta. We tested three different methods to fill L(s) for T = 0.1. The green colored L oracle (0.1,s) is the optimal choice of shapes for RapidShapes. 'Selection by shrep energies' L energy (0.1,s) is colored in red and 'Selection by sampled frequencies' L sampling (0.1,1000,s) for 1000 samples per sequence is colored in blue. The previous curves result from the random data, while the black (T = 0.1) and gray (T = 0.5) curves arise from the real dataset, when applying the 'Selection by sampled frequencies' method. 'Selection by shrep energies' for the real dataset is shown by the dashed black and gray curves. The left y-axis depicts the amount of unaccounted folding space, i.e. the accumulated probability of all evaluated shapes minus (1  T ). The dotted blue curve corresponds to L sampling (0.1,1000,s), while the dotted green curve result from the most probable 1000 shapes, which are too few to cover 1  T for sequences longer than 550 bases. (B) Runtime comparison illustrates actual runtimes of the various methods instead of counting shapes. The logarithmic scale y-axis is here runtime in seconds. The newly introduced orange curve depicts the runtime for the pure sampling process via RNAshapes of 1000 structures. (C) Runtimes for different thresholds show the influence of selecting different values for the threshold T. All curves are smoothed via the gnuplot option 'smooth bezier'. For more details on the curves, consider the online-only Supplementary Material. We stopped our evaluation at sequence length 700 after consuming 574 CPU days.
Faster computation of exact RNA shape probabilities
Page: 638 632639
S.Janssen and R.Giegerichmean squared error between true and calculated shape probabilities of 4.62  10 11 (tested with 750 sequences of both testsets < 130 bases). For short sequences, the overhead of constructing TDMs prevents RapidShapes from being useful, but with input sequences > 208 nt there is a growing speed-up, compared with RNAshapes. Furthermore, the heuristic makes it possible to compute shape probabilies for sequences > 400 nt, where RNAshapes runs out of memory. The achieved speed-up depends on the choice of threshold T. Our previous measurements were made for a rather low threshold of T = 0.1. In practice, a threshold of 0.6 or even 0.9 makes sense when checking for the existence of a dominant shape. The larger the T , the faster is RapidShapesthis is demomstrated by the different red and blue curves infor 'selection by shrep energies' and 'selection by sampled frequencies', respectively.
Results on real dataNatural RNAs, whether functional or not, are not random sequences. Functional non-coding RNAs are known to be optimized for good folding energy, although this signal is not strong enough to discern functional from non-functional RNA. All natural RNA has a bias toward lower folding energy than random sequences. (, and the long debate summarized therein). We can expect this bias to favor a small number of shapes with a high probability over a more even distribution in real RNAs. This fact must lead to RapidShapes requiring a smaller number of TDMs and hence becoming faster. This result is confirmed on our real data testset. It consists of 1092 candidates from a bacterial screen for non-coding RNAs, identified via deep sequencing and microarray expression analysis. Returning to, consider the black and the gray line, computed with T = 0.5 and T = 0.1, respectively. The smaller number of required TDMs also results in a moderate speedup. Out of these 1092 sequences, are 98 >208 nt, the break-even point (for T = 0.1) where RapidShapes starts to become faster than RNAshapes. While RNAshapes with activated filtering consumes 67.5 h to calculate shape probabilities, RapidShapes takes only 7.3 h of runtime.
DISCUSSION
Speed-ups and brake-even points achievedAbstract shape probabilities, as computed by RNAshapes, provide useful information beyond MFE folding. Due to the large computational cost, previously, a sampling heuristic had to be used for sequences longer than about 200 bases. This heuristic, however, has the disadvantages that (i) it does not return exact probabilities, (ii) does not account for the part of the folding space not covered by the sampling and (iii) does not return shape representative structures. The mean squared error between sampled and exact shape probabilities for all test sequences is 1.64  10 4. In a case where a particular shape clearly dominates all others, these disadvantages do not really matter, as this shape will be sampled many times (dwarfing the probabilities of other shapes), and the shape representative structure has a good chance to be in among the sample. However, one cannot know beforehand whether this situation applies. The approach RapidShapes presented here overcomes these limitations and enables the computation of shape probabilities a much wider sequence range. It is a runtime heuristici.e. the computed probabilities are exact, we obtain the shape representative structures, and we know about the uncovered amount of probability in the folding space. What cannot be guaranteed is polynomial runtime in a strict asymptotic sense, but the evaluation shows that RapidShapes performs well in practice. .5The speed-up achieved by RapidShapes depends on the threshold and on the sequence length. Using a very relaxed threshold T = 0.1, RapidShapes becomes faster than the traditional method (using its low-probability filter) at sequence length 208 nt. At sequence length 400 nt, RapidShapes is faster by a factor of 10. Taking a more stringent threshold at T = 0.6, RapidShapes becomes faster at sequence length 159 nt, and at sequence length 400 nt, the speed-up factor is about 138. Independent of threshold, RapidShapes is the only practical method to compute exact shape probabilities for sequences > 400 nt.
Expected numbers of shapes above a probability thresholdThe combinatorics of shapes has found considerable interest recently, but the expected number of shapes of a sequence of length n is still unknown. Our large-scale evaluation has produced some empirical data in this respect. Assuming a simple exponential growth pattern of O( n ), we can estimate . Our data () suggest that  = 1.096439 n for the number of all shapes of a sequence of length n (cyan curve),  = 1.020742 for all shapes with a probability > 10 6 (magenta curve), and  = 1.011290 n for all shapes with probability larger than T = 0.1 (green oracle). RapidShapes computes  = 1.011341 n shapes (red curve) and hence is quite close to optimal. For T = 0.5, the oracle value is  = 1.005604 (data not shown).
Problem variants
k best shapesAs explained initially, we can efficiently compute the k best shapes of sequence s ranked by shrep energy, but not ranked by probability. In order to compute the k best shapes ranked by probability, we compute shape probabilities according to the L energy strategy. Assuming K  k shapes have been computed, and p 1 ,...,p k are the best k shapes seen so far, we can stop computation as soon as 1
Best shape onlyIf we ask for the best shape no matter how small its probability is, we can do no better than to apply the above strategy for k = 1. However, if we are interested in the existence of a dominant shape, loosely defined here as one which is more likely than all the rest together, we just solve the standard problem with threshold T = 0.5.
Implementation alternatives
Algorithm parameterization versus generationFrom an algorithmic point of view, or method of generating, compiling and running algorithms for subproblems on the fly appears somewhat unusual. As an alternative, one could think of modifying the code of the traditional method to accomodate a target shape p as an extra parameter, and restrict the folding to structures which match p running through list L energy. This would turn the general method into the equivalent of a TDM for p. However, this would slow down the inner loop of an O(n 3 ) algorithm, whereas generating and compiling takes O(n) time (empirically: less than 7.76% of the overall process) to yield an O(n 3 ) TDM algorithm without such a slowdown.
AndPage: 639 632639
Faster computation of exact RNA shape probabilitiesbesides, generating TDMs from shapes has other applications, e.g. in RNA motif search.
Other shape enumeration heuristicsWe have experimented with other ideas of enumerating promising shapes, such as (i) using a precompiled library of frequently encountered shapes, or (ii) always computing low complexity shapes (such as) first. Neither of these ideas has provided an improvement. When computing shape probabilities for abstraction levels i < 5, a good strategy may be to first compute best shapes of level i+1 and then computing their subshapes at level i. This is possible since shape abstraction levels form a perfect hierarchy. However, this idea has not been further explored yet.
Open problemsGiven a particular TDM, it is easy to generate a scanning version to find high probability instances of its shape in a longer sequence. An adaptive window size, subject to a reasonable upper bound, also seems feasible. However, thinking of for RNA gene prediction based on dominant shapes, we would need a scanning version that dynamically changes the shape as it moves along the sequence. This presents a challenge for future research. Our technique does not depend on the concrete information that is accumulated for each shape. Recent approaches such as CONTRAfold () and CG () replace the classical thermodynamic model by stochastic models, trained from structural data via machine learning techniques. To benefit from our aproach, these methods need to be augmented to support shape abstraction. Technically, they are based on different grammars than RNAshapes. For these grammars, shape abstraction functions need to be defined and implemented. Then, our TDM generator and the strategies described here should carry over without change.
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
