
INTRODUCTIONBiomedical scientists need to access figures to validate research facts and to formulate or test novel research hypotheses. However, figures are difficult to comprehend without associated text (e.g. figure legend and other reference text). Our evaluation has shown statistically significant differences in figure comprehension when varying levels of text were provided (). When the full-text article is not available, presenting just the figure+legend left biomedical researchers lacking 3968% of the information about a figure as compared to having complete figure comprehension; adding the title and abstract improved the situation, but still left biomedical researchers missing 30% of the information. When the full-text article is available, figure comprehension increased to the highest 8697% (). The results indicate that there is information in the abstract and in the full-text that biomedical scientists require to understand the figures that appear in biomedical articles (). On the other hand, we also found that the associated text of a figure is typically distributed across the full-text body and is frequently redundant in content (). For example, the following three redundant sentences in the abstract, introduction, and caption describe an image () of the article (We hypothesize that a succinct and structured summary will allow biomedical researchers to comprehend the figure data efficiently and to access relevant figures in a timely manner.We first found that biomedical researchers prefer a structured summary that follows the IMRaD format (Introduction, Methods, Results and Discussion) (). We developed a supervised machine learning classifier to automatically classify sentences appearing in a full-text biomedical articles into the IMRaD format with an F1-score of 91.55% (). We then developed a simple information retrieval approach that selects one sentence from each of the IMRaD categories based on cosine similarity between the sentence and the image caption (). We generated a manual gold-standard for 44 figures in 7 articles by asking annotators to select sentences from the article that best summarize the figure. We then evaluated our figure summarizer using the ROUGE score (recall-oriented understudy for gisting evaluation) () and obtained an average ROUGE-1 score of 0.70. In comparison, the abstract of the article attained a ROUGE-1 score of 0.33. In the future, we plan to conduct a cognitive evaluation as we have done in (
S.Agarwal and H.Yu
IMPLEMENTATIONWe implemented figure summarization program into extensions for the following web browsers: Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome and Apple Safari (extensions available from: http://figuresearch .askhermes.org/articlesearch/extensions.php). The extensions are written in JavaScript and implemented using Ajax. The summaries have already been generated and are stored on our servers. When the user loads a figure on PubMed Central, the extension makes a call to our server with the article's PubMed Central ID and the figure's ID. If the summary for the figure is available, our server sends it to the extension. The extension then injects HTML code under the caption to display the summary (). As the summaries have been preprocessed, no time is spent on generating the summaries. We use Ajax to obtain and display the summary as this allows the figure page to load even if the summary is unavailable or while the summary is obtained from the server. As the extension is based on JavaScript, we have also made it available as a Greasemonkey user script (http://userscripts.org/scripts/show/90065). The web browser extensions we developed insert a summary for the figure under the caption of the figure (). The summary is retrieved from figuresearch's servers by the extensions using Ajax. If an article is not open-access or has not been processed and stored in figuresearch's servers, then the figure is displayed as it would have been without the extension. We believe that use of this extension will allow biomedical researchers to access figure summaries in their traditional workflow, which involves use of PubMed Central.
LimitationsAs only the open-access subset of PubMed Central is freely available for download, figuresearch includes summaries for figures from these open-access articles only. As a result, summaries are displayed for figures from open-access articles only.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [12:27 30/5/2011 Bioinformatics-btr194.tex]
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
