Motivations: De novo sequencing of genomes is followed by annotation analyses aiming at identifying functional genomic features such as genes, non-coding RNAs or regulatory sequences, taking advantage of diverse datasets. These steps sometimes fail at detecting non-coding functional sequences: for example, origins of replication, centromeres and rDNA positions have proven difficult to annotate with high confidence. Here, we demonstrate an unconventional application of Chromosome Conformation Capture (3C) technique, which typically aims at deciphering the average 3D organization of genomes, by showing how functional information about the sequence can be extracted solely from the chromosome contact map. Results: Specifically, we describe a combined experimental and bio-informatic procedure that determines the genomic positions of centro-meres and ribosomal DNA clusters in yeasts, including species where classical computational approaches fail. For instance, we determined the centromere positions in Naumovozyma castellii, where these coordinates could not be obtained previously. Although computed centromere positions were characterized by conserved synteny with neighboring species, no consensus sequences could be found, suggesting that centromeric binding proteins or mechanisms have significantly diverged. We also used our approach to refine centromere positions in Kuraishia capsulata and to identify rDNA positions in Debaryomyces hansenii. Our study demonstrates how 3C data can be used to complete the functional annotation of eukaryotic genomes. Availability and implementation: The source code is provided in the Supplementary Material. This includes a zipped file with the Python code and a contact matrix of Saccharomyces
INTRODUCTIONDe novo sequencing of genomes is typically followed by analyses aiming to identify functional genomic features such as genes, non-coding RNAs or regulatory sequences. This important socalled annotation step raises non-trivial questions, and led to the development of complex bioinformatics approaches taking advantage of multiple datasets. For instance, transcriptome analysis is conveniently used to annotate expressed coding sequences (), and synteny conservation between related species can reveal or confirm the presence of regulatory elements (). Complementary to automated annotation through comparative approaches, experimental approaches such as ChIP-seq or MNase-seq have been conveniently used to map epigenetic marks, replication origins or other functional elements of the genome (). However, such tools are sometimes unable to detect noncoding functional sequences: for example, origins of replication, centromeres and rDNA positions have sometimes proven difficult to annotate with a high degree of confidence in genomes. A compelling example is the failure of comparative genomics to identify the centromeres of the hemiascomycetes species Naumovozyma castellii through comparative genomics (). As another example, the number of rDNA clusters in the genome of Debaryomyces hansenii is not known precisely, but only estimated to lie between one and three and not currently annotated in the genomic sequence (). Genomic chromosome conformation capture (3C) assays measure the physical contact frequencies between DNA sequences (), providing important insights into both genomic organization and topological changes of chromatin domains that accompany cell differentiation or development. 3C data are typically analyzed in light of epigenetic marks and other genomic annotations. In an alternative application, 3D contact can be interpreted as an indicator of co-linearity of two DNA segments, and was recently used to improve the scaffolding of the human genome (; Kaplan and yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.). Here, we use genome-wide 3C data to unveil functional elements of eukaryotic genomes that escape comparative genomic analysis. Specifically, we take advantage of nuclear architecture features to precisely determine the positions of centromeres in the yeast species N.castellii (). We show that this bioinformatic approach discriminates ambiguous results from bioinformatics analysis, such as in K.capsulata. Finally, it also allowed us to complete the annotation of rDNA in the D.hansenii genome and confirm its centromere annotation ().
METHODSCentromeres and rDNA clusters lead to characteristic architectural features in the yeast nucleus. Taking advantage of these features, we developed a robust approach to characterize computationally centromere and rDNA positions from 3C data. Yeast centromeres are tethered near a pole of the nucleus via microtubules attached to the microtubule organizing center (MTOC, or Spindle Pole Body in yeast), leading to centromere clustering. In the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, this clustering causes distinct peaks of interchromosomal contact frequencies in the raw genome-wide contact matrix, reflecting the convergence of 32 chromosomal arms toward a discrete region of the nucleus (). We developed an algorithm that automatically recognizes these specific contact enrichments and estimates the genomic coordinates of centromeres. Centromeric positions are therefore determined based on their core biological function, rather than by sequence motif recognition, as is usually done. This approach can discriminate between multiple candidate positions obtained by sequence analysis. Ribosomal DNA is organized as a cluster of repeats in the genome of all eukaryotes sequenced so far. These rDNA repeats give rise to the nucleolar compartment(s), which in S.cerevisiae, and other species, consists in a single subnuclear volume located opposite the SPB. This organization, combined with the large size of the rDNA cluster, creates an apparent intra-chromosomal barrier within the contact matrix of the chromosome carrying the rDNA locus. The position of an rDNA cluster in a genome is therefore easily identifiable, even in the absence of any annotation or sequence in the reference sequence. We developed an algorithm to identify the presence of rDNA clusters in these genomes. The flowchart inprovides an overview of the experimental and computational workflow, each of which will be described in a distinct subsection below.C, respectively). For small genomic bin sizes R, the limited signal-to-noise ratio of these matrixes can complicate the identification of contact frequency enrichments. Computing a correlation matrix, as initially done in (), allows to strongly increase the contrast of contact patterns. We then computed a new matrix C from M, where C(i,j) is defined as the Pearson correlation coefficient of the rows i and j of M:
GenerationMi, l is the average value of row i of matrix M. To remove the chromosome length bias, the correlation was computed from the interchromosomal parts of the matrix ().
Rough pre-localization of centromeric regions from cis contactsIn the correlation matrix C, the blocks corresponding to intrachromosomal (cis) contacts within pericentromeric regions exhibit a characteristic 'cross'shape pattern (see diagonal inand E). This pattern can be explained by the clustering of centromeres near the spindle pole body (SPB) and the polymer brush-like organization of chromosomes in this region, whereby the two chromosome arms are stretched out away from the SPB (). As a result, the centromere is sequestered away from other loci along the chromosome, leading to a depletion of contacts along the yellow dotted lines in, while loci on opposite arms located at similar genomic distances from the centromeres tend to be in proximity, leading to contact enrichments along the 'anti-diagonal' (pink dotted line in). We took advantage of this pattern for the automated identification of centromeres by defining a 'centromere score' as:Cl, 2l  i alternatively using only the trans contact submatrix involving one other chromosome. However, as contact matrixes are histograms obtained from a limited number of reads, they are subject to Poisson noise, which imposes a fundamental limit to the localization accuracy (much as in single molecule localization, see e.g.). For improved localization accuracy, we therefore took advantage of the redundancy provided by the N chr  1 distinct trans contact patterns available for each of the N chr centromeres (N chr  16 for S.cerevisiae). This approach was applied both on the raw contact matrix M and on the normalized matrix N, obtained as described in (). Briefly, this normalization step aims to correct for experimental biases affecting the transformation from ligation product counts into contact frequencies (a different approach from the procedure described in (). The procedure uses an iterative algorithm that enforces all rows and columns to have unit sum, i.e. it ensures that P m i1 N i, j    1 for all j  1::m and P m j1 N i, j    1 for all i  1::m, where m is the size of the matrix. For details, see (), or () for a related approach. The normalization has the overall effect to increase the contrast of the contact data, and to attenuate noise in the raw data (). Specifically, for each chromosome, we carved out N chr  1 submatrixes of size 40  40 kb corresponding to trans contacts and defined by the k 0  20kb;k 0  20kb intervals obtained above (if necessary, the size of this matrix was reduced to that of the smallest interval, such that all submatrixes had the same size). In computing the superposed matrix, we did not use the intrachromosomal contact data because of the bias for acrocentric chromosomes mentioned above. These submatrixes were then summed, yielding a single 'superposed' contact matrix A k (for the centromere of chromosome k;):Mi L l:::i R l, i L k:::i R k 5 For normalized data, M is simply replaced by N (). The next step consists in projecting this summed contact matrix into a 1D profile F k i    P p j1 A i, j   As apparent from, normalization typically produces a less noisy profile, allowing more accurate identification of the centromererelated peak. Finally, to accurately estimate the centromere position, we implemented a Gaussian fitting procedure similar to that commonly used for single molecule localization (). Specifically, we used an iterative algorithm that aims to minimize the mean squared difference: H a, b, i c ,between F and the Gaussian function:where a, b, i c and are the parameters to be fitted, i.e. we seek:Thus, the final estimated position of the centromere for chromosome k is given by ^ i c. Application of this procedure to our normalized S.cerevisiae contact data and comparison with the genomic annotation revealed that the centromeres could be localized with a mean absolute error of only 627 bp (1232 bp without normalization), demonstrating that this functionally important locus can be accurately located from the contact data alone ().
Confidence intervals and effect of coverage and normalization on localization accuracyTo provide a robust roadmap for future studies, we next quantified centromere localization accuracy and how it is affected by coverage (i.e. sequencing depth), binning and the normalization procedure. We used a bootstrapping approach to estimate confidence intervals of the computed centromere localization and to examine the influence of coverage. Specifically, we simulated many contact frequency matrixes with an expected total number of reads either equal to, or smaller than the experimentally obtained matrix M (which for S.cerevisiae totals N reads,Sc  21 457 086). To do this, we generated N bs  500 contact matrixes M bs,k , k 1..N bs where M bs,k (i,j) is a random integer value drawn from a Poisson distribution of density i, j  fMi, j, where f 1 indicates the coverage relative to the original matrix. Thus, the expected total number of contacts in M bs,k is fN reads. We then used each of the random contact matrixes M bs,k to compute an independent estimate of the centromere positions. Centromere position confidence interval. For f  1, the distribution of these estimates provides a measure of the uncertainty with which the centromere positions have been determined from the original contact data. We compared the distribution of localization errors for the 16 centromeres of S.cerevisiae with the normal distribution of mean 0 and variance given by the bootstrap samples. The two distributions cannot be distinguished by a KolmogorovSmirnov test (P  0.12;). This suggests that the confidence intervals determined by the bootstrap estimates correctly reflect actual localization uncertainties. Effect of coverage, normalization and binning. To examine the effect of coverage (or sequencing depth), which determines the total number of reads involved in contacts in the matrix, we applied the bootstrapping method to a range of f smaller than 1 (i.e. to experimental matrixes where contact events have been down-sampled), specifically: f  0.8, 0.6, 0.4, 0.2, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001. For each value of f, we computed the centromere position error from the N bs samples (relative to the ground truth) and the mean over the 16 centromeres and the N bs samples.plots this mean error as function of the mean number of reads in the bootstrapped samples ( fN reads ). As expected, the localization accuracy generally improves with coverage, provided that the contact data are binned at adequate genomic resolution and that the qualities of the libraries are equivalent. Also, normalization improves localization accuracy for high coverage (N reads 42:10 6 ), but gives much poorer results for low coverage, where(B) Summed trans-contact matrixes corresponding to the submatrix of size w () for chromosome 2. On the right side of each sub-matrix we plot the distribution of the centromere localizations obtained using bootstrapping. The true centromere position is indicated with a red line. The diagram below represents the distribution of the 16 centromere positions as estimated from raw and normalized data (blue and red circles, respectively). x-axis: distances along the chromosome, centered on the position of the centromere (scale bar  1 kb) the raw data should be preferred and provide more consistent accuracy. This result underlines the complexity of 3C contact data analyses and the need to take into account sequencing depth, binning and bias correction. However, it also shows that an $1 M reads contact map is sufficient to identify with high accuracy centromeric positions. The graph provides a tool to determine the likely optimal choice of binning and normalization options for the DpnII enzyme applied to a yeast genome. Using bins smaller than $3 kb does not significantly affect localization accuracy of normalized data ().
Identification of rDNA loci in chromosome contact matrixesWe next proceed to show that contact matrixes can also allow the characterization of ribosomal gene clusters. First, a contact matrix of S.cerevisiae was generated where the bins containing the two rDNA repeats of the reference genome were removed (chromosome 12 region comprised between 450 000 and 470 000 of the reference genome was removed, encompassing the two rDNA units positioned between coordinates 451 575 and 468 931 and reflecting the 100200 repeats of total rDNA). The pair-end reads were remapped on this modified genome (including the mitochondrial DNA; bin size  10 kb). We then selected in the pool of ''leftover reads'' all the pairs where one mate maps unambiguously on the genome (mapping quality above 30), while the other mate does not eliminating reads containing unknown bases (N). These unmapped sequences were blasted on a sequence dataset containing yeast ribosomal sequences retrieved from the NCBI server (parameters: blast2-p blastn-e 2e-30) to keep only highly significant hits. The corresponding mates were then mapped along the genome divided into bins (). The peak in the distribution was clearly apparent on chromosome 12 ($10 000 hits compared with an average of 20 along the rest of the genome). Zooming in the distribution along an unmodified genome (bin size  10 bp) clearly shows that the peaks lie within chromosome 12 region comprised between 450 000490 000 bp, adjacent to the position of the ribosomal gene cluster (; note the 5S variants lying between 470 000 and 490 000 positions of the cluster per se do not allow high quality mapping of the reads and appear also as a blank area along the genome).
RESULTS
Discriminating true centromeres among computational predictions in Kuraishia capsulataCentromeres of yeast species have mainly been characterized so far through computational analysis approaches aiming at identifying landmarks in the sequence likely to predict centromeres positions with high confidence level. A classical approach consists in searching for the consensus sequences specific to most Saccharomycetaceae species studied so far, and related to the point centromeres of the well-studied yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (). These centromeres are very compact (125 bp) and present a consensus sequence composed of three centromere DNA elements (CDEI, II, III;). CDE I and III present a strong consensus core region and flank CDEII, which is characterized by a strong AT-rich content but a high sequenceously along the genome and the other maps in a rDNA sequence. The scale bar of the y-axis is different for chromosome 12 to adjust to the increase in contacts observed in the region around $450 kb. (B) Distribution of interactions a rDNA sequence and another sequence in the region of chromosome 12 around position 450 000 kb (bin size: 10 bp). The genome used for the distribution encompasses the rDNA repeat cluster position (gray squares)variability (490%). Not all yeast species exhibit such distinguishable point centromeres, and an alternative analysis searching for local composition-bias in low-GC content was recently described (). Drop in GC content is likely to reflect a drop in recombination frequency, and coincides with the positions of centromeres experimentally characterized in Yarrowia lypolitica (), as well as putative centromeric regions made of clusters of retrotransposon Tdh5 in Debaryomyces hansenii, for instance. The genome of the nitrate assimilating yeast K.capsulata has been recently sequenced and assembled into seven chromosomes (Morales et al., in press). A search for CDEI and III consensus sequences failed to identify putative centromeres. However, a search for low-GC content regions as described in () led to the characterization of nine putative centromeric regions (with chromosome 4 containing three;). To confer an experimental validation of these results, and see if we could discriminate between ambiguous sequences, we performed a genomic 3C experiment on K.capsulata and sequenced the resulting library. The quality of the matrix was relatively poor despite an important coverage (N reads,Kc  16 446 227;), as seen by the''flatness'', or lack of contrasts, of the matrix and as quantified by the ratio between mitochondrial and genomic DNA interactions (A.C. and R.K., personal communication). Despite the apparent noise, each chromosome still exhibits a discrete region presenting a strong enrichment in interactions with the corresponding other chromosomal regions, similar to centromeric behavior in S.cerevisiae (pink arrowheads,). We followed the procedure described above and characterized for each of the seven chromosomes cis-contact matrixes the genomic intervals w containing centromeric regions. Given the low coverage in informative reads of the matrix, we opted for a binning of 2191 kb (9 RF) and assessed from the analysis above that little, if any, improvement would result from SCN normalization. We proceeded to superpose the trans-submatrixes containing the centromeric regions defined from the cis-contacts (). A Gaussian fit was applied as described, and the coordinates of centromere positions along with the precision calculated (and). Quite remarkably, the regions identified experimentally through this approach overlapped exactly with those obtained after computational analysis for the six chromosomes exhibiting a single, unambiguous putative centromere position (). In addition, the region identified on chromosome four as the centromere overlapped with only one of the three putative positions identified from the composition bias analysis, allowing the annotation of this position as the true centromere. This analysis indicates that careful handling of a contact matrix can successfully back up computational annotation, experimentally confirming and disambiguating weak predictions.
Identification of centromeres in Naumovozyma castelliiWe then turned to N.castellii, an organism in which centromeric regions remained elusive to date, despite thorough and repeated investigation using different computational approaches (). We built a genomic 3C library of N.castellii CBS 4309 strain and generated the corresponding contact matrix (N chr  10; N reads,Nc  3 265 947 contacts;). Following through the procedure described above, we characterized for each of the ten chromosomes cis-contact matrixes the genomic intervals containing centromeric regions (). From the S.cerevisiae analysis, we estimated that the optimal binning for a 3 M reads raw contact matrix to 3696 kb bins (9 RF) and that normalization through SCN was likely to improve the results (). Therefore, we generated this matrix and proceeded to superpose the trans-submatrixes containing the centromeric regions defined from the cis-contacts. The Gaussian fit was applied as described, and the coordinates of centromere positions along with the precision calculated (). N.castellii, although positioned within a clade of species that present the CDE consensus sequences characteristic of point centromeres, is an intriguing exception in this regards. We hypothesized that CDE sequences may have escaped from former investigations because of important divergence of the consensus sequence, and performed a computational analysis focusing on the centromeric region identified through genomic 3C. First, the intergenic sequences of the coding DNA sequences (CDS) found within these coordinates were recovered and submitted to the motif finder algorithm MEME () under the zoops (zero or one motif per sequence) or the oops (only one motif per sequence) modes. No significant motif could be identified from these first analyses. To guide the motif finder program, intergenic sequences from N.castellii were). The centromere position can be assessed from the matrix by the ''break'' it generates in the matrix. (H) Distribution along the genome of reads with one pair mate maps with a good quality score and the other does not but correspond to ribosomal DNA. The peak observed on chromosome 7 marks the position of the rDNA cluster included into a set of 63 intergenic regions known to contain centromeres from eight other yeast species from the Lachancea clade. These regions were used as a validation of the CDE I and III detection approach. MEME was then able to identify CDEI and CDEIII consensus sequences () but all of these motifs corresponded to centromere regions of Lachancea species, whereas no CDEI and only a very weak CDEIII signal was observed for N.castellii regions (and no signature of a CDEII region was found upstream of CDEIII). For an independent verification, and to test whether the centromeric regions of N.castellii have retained their ancestral positions, we analyzed the synteny conservation of pericentromeric regions between N.castelii and two related species, S.cerevisiae and Zygosaccharomyces rouxii. To do so, we defined synteny blocks between pericentromeric regions, encompassing 10 protein-coding genes in the two related species and the genome of N.castellii. We then looked if the coordinates of the conserved synteny blocks in the genome of N.castellii overlapped the coordinates of the centromeric regions defined from the contact map (;). Four out of 10 centromeres in N.castellii belonged to the first category. Of the remaining six, two additional centromeric regions in N.castellii were found to lie right next to a synteny breakpoint with the genome of either S.cerevisiae or Z.rouxii, and therefore were also compatible with ancestral centromeric locations. For the four remaining centromeric regions, we found that multiple rearrangements having occurred in these regions have hidden the evolutionary relatedness between these regions. In summary, at least 6 of 10 centromeric regions in N.castellii correspond to orthologous regions in other species that contain point centromeres. Therefore, the majority of the centromeres in N.castelii have retained their ancestral positions since they diverged from their last common ancestor with S.cerevisiae and Z.rouxii. This demonstrates that if all 10 consensus centromeric motifs have evolved beyond recognition in N.castellii, centromeres positions are conserved for at least six of them. It is likely that extending this approach to more closely related species with recognizable point centromeres will unveil more synteny links and increase this number. Interestingly,had sought without success for consensus centromere sequences at putative ancestral centromeric locations in N.castellii. Here, we show that the centromere function remains nevertheless linked to these ancestral positions for at least 6 of 10 chromosomes although CDE regions are not identifiable within these regions. This suggests that the centromeric binding proteins and/or the mechanisms involved have evolved significantly in this lineage. Interestingly, and perhaps not coincidently, RNA interference is also conserved in this species.
Identification of ribosomal DNA locus in Debaryomyces hanseniiThe genome of D.hansenii, a cryotolerant and osmotolerant marine yeast important in the agro-food industry, lacks annotation of the ribosomal DNA locus and has centromeres predicted through computational analysis (). We generated a genome-wide contact matrix of the seven chromosomes (N reads , Dh  7 020 925 contacts, bins of 3.2 kb corresponding to 9 RF;). First, we confirmed the position of the centromeres that were predicted through a genomic computational approach (). We then searched for ribosomal DNA locus (see Section 2) and found a peak on chromosome G in the distribution of reads along the genome for which the other mate corresponds to rDNA (). By zooming in the distribution, the position of the ribosomal DNA cluster of D.hansenii was identified at 1 354 000 bp (). This region corresponds to an intergenic region containing a pseudogene and a gap, according to the published reference genome (Deha2G::1353661 1356925, www.genolevure.org). This region was blasted on the NCBI database, revealing two small (75 bp) regions matching with ribosomal DNA at positions 1 354 446 and 1 355 863. We therefore inferred the position of a large, unique ribosomal DNA cluster within this window on chromosome G, ruling out the hypothesis regarding the existence of three intrachromosomal clusters in this genome. We then compared the chromosomal location of the rDNA between the genomes of D.hansenii and two other genomes for which rDNA location is known (Pichia stipitis and Yarrowia lipolytica;) using SynChro (). No synteny conservation could be found between these three genomes. In addition, we checked if any rDNA annotation could be retrieved from the genomes of 11 species belonging to the CTG clade at the locus corresponding to D.hansenii rDNA using the CGOB database (). No such information was present in the database. In conclusion, no indication of synteny conservation of the rDNA locus between D.hansenii and other yeast species could be identified, consistent with the hypothesis that rDNA is mobile in the Candida clade (). Overall, we showed that genome-wide chromosome conformation capture can be used to unveil important functional elements that sometimes escape standard genomic analyses. After validating the procedure on the well-known yeast S.cerevisiae genome, we successfully determined centromere positions in Naumovozyma castellii, where these coordinates could not be obtained previously. Although computed centromere positions were characterized by conserved synteny with neighboring species, no consensus sequences could be found, suggesting that centromeric binding proteins or mechanisms have significantly diverged. We also applied our approach to choosing among multiple predicted centromere positions in K.capsulata, and to identifying rDNA positions in D.hansenii. Thus, our study demonstrates how 3C data can be used to complete the functional annotation of eukaryotic genomes with a bioinformatic approach. The sequencing depth necessary to reach this goal does not have to be high ($3 M reads proved largely sufficient for N.castellii and S.cerevisiae). It is likely that our standardized procedures will allow identifying other functional elements from contact data matrixes in the genome of microorganisms, and potentially in metazoans. Combined with the recent application of 3C to genome assembly, this study confirms the helpfulness of tri-dimensional information to genomic analysis.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
C libraries of the yeast species S.cerevisiae (BY4741), N.castellii (CBS4309), D.hansenii (CBS767) and K.capsulata (CBS1993) were generated from log-phase cells growing in YPD medium and as previously described (Dekker et al., 2002; Oza et al., 2009), but using a frequently cutter enzyme (DpnII) as in (Sexton et al., 2012). Briefly, the cells were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde, and resuspended in DpnII restriction buffer, which were subsequently processed into Illumina libraries. 3C libraries were sheared, and resulting fragments with sizes between 400 and 800 bp were sequenced using 100 bp pair-end sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq2000. The raw data from all 3C-seq experiments were then processed as follows: first, short reads were mapped on the genomes of S.cerevisiae (GCF_000146045.1), N.castellii (GCF_000237345.1), D.hansenii (GCF_000006445.1) and K.capsulata (Morales et al., in revision) using bowtie 2 in local and very sensitive modes (Langmead and Salzberg, 2012). Only pairs of reads with a Mapping Quality above 30 were retained, and contact reads mapping on the same fragment were discarded (Cournac et al., 2012). PCR duplicates were also removed. All rejected reads (except PCR duplicates) were included in a pool of 'leftover reads'. These filtering steps generally remove 1520% of the initial set of raw reads. After alignment of individual reads on the reference genome, we built a 2D histogram, where the value of each 2D bin (pixel) indicates how many reads fall into the corresponding pair of genomic segments. The genomic partition defining these segments was based on the restriction enzyme cutting sites, rather than on constant genomic intervals. For the S.cerevisiae, the DpnII restriction enzyme leads to a contact matrix M 0 of size m 0  m 0 , with m 0  35 914. At this resolution, however, the contact matrix is very sparse, and hence noisy. The signalto-noise ratio can be improved at the expense of genomic resolution by binning the reads into larger genomic intervals. We therefore considered three additional matrixes, M k (k  1,2,3) obtained by summing nonFig. 1. Experimental and computational workflow
H.Marie-Nelly et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
p P p j1 Cl, j for l  1, 2,. .. Ep  1=2  2 and Sl  1 2pl1 P p i2lp Cl, 2l  i 1 p P p j1 Cl, j for l  Ep  1=2  1,. .. , p  1, p 3 where p is the number of rows of the submatrix and E(x) denotes the largest integer x. Thus, for each genomic bin l, S(l) is the ratio of the average correlation along the anti-diagonal passing through C(l,l) and the average correlation along the row l of C. The 'centromere score' S(l) is expected to be largest for l near the actual position of the centromere (Fig. 2E). For acrocentric chromosomes, the peak of S can differ significantly from the true centromere position. Therefore, for each chromosome k, we used the location of this maximum, l 0  arg max Sl, to define a genomic interval i L k; i R k  l 0  20kb; l 0  20kb  4 along the chromosome that we expect to contain the centromere. The size of the interval is arbitrary and depends on the size of the chromosome: it must be kept within the chromosome boundaries, and must be large enough that the Gaussian fit can be applied correctly (see below). For S.cerevisiae, we used window sizes of 40 kb. A more accurate localization of the centromere is performed in the next step, as described in the next section. 2.3 Refined estimation of centromere position from trans contacts In principle, the position of a given centromere could be obtained using only the cis contact submatrix for the corresponding chromosome, or Fig. 2. Contact frequency matrixes M 1 , M 2 and M 3 , for S.cerevisiae, at three levels of genomic resolution: (A) R 1  1233 bp (3RF), (B) R 2  3696 bp (9 RF), (C) R 3  11 034 bp (27 RF). The 16 chromosomes of S.cerevisiae are labeled from I to XVI. The strong diagonal is due to intrachromosomal contacts. Note the peaks corresponding to contacts between centromeres from different chromosomes. (D) Correlation matrix for S.cerevisiae: each element of the matrix is the Pearson coefficient between the vectors i and j of the matrix of contacts (bin size of 3696 kb). (E) Zoom on the intra-chromosomal correlation map of chromosome 4. The centromere score S(l) for each bin l is plotted along the sub-matrix (scale bar  100 kb). The peak of this distribution defines the center of a 40 kb window w likely to contain the centromere
Filling annotation gaps in yeast genomes at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
