The DNA in eukaryotic cells is packed into the chromatin that is composed of nucleosomes. Positioning of the nucleosome core particles on the sequence is a problem of great interest because of the role nucleosomes play in different cellular processes including gene regulation. Using the sequence structure of 10.4 base DNA repeat presented in our previous works and nucleosome core DNA sequences database, we have derived the complete nucleosome DNA bendability matrix of Caenorhabditis elegans. We have developed a web server named FineStr that allows users to upload genomic sequences in FASTA format and to perform a single-base-resolution nucleosome mapping on them. Availability: FineStr server is freely available for use on the web at http:/www.cs.bgu.ac.il/∼nucleom. The site contains a help file with explanation regarding the exact usage. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONDNA accessibility plays an important role in the regulation of processes such as transcription, replication, recombination and DNA repair. DNA accessibility in turn depends on the chromatin structure, of which the building blocks are nucleosomes. It is generally accepted that the segment of DNA double helix which is wrapped around the histone octamer forming the nucleosome should possess sequence-dependent bendability properties that would provide a stabilizing contribution to the free energy of the nucleosome 3D structure. We have discovered the sequence pattern characteristic for nucleosome DNA of Caenorhabditis elegans and, apparently, applicable to the nucleosomes of all eukaryotes (). As described in the cited work, the C.elegans pattern is identical to the pattern uniquely defined by DNA deformability properties. In particular, it is dictated by minimization of unstacking of DNA bases and base pairs in the nucleosome DNA. Accordingly, we built a web server FineStroctamer is measured from 0 to 1 as a ratio of the actual score to the maximal possible score for the probe.
IMPLEMENTATIONAll numerical calculations are performed with PHP code that uses the complete bendability matrix data to perform the nucleosome mapping on a given sequence. The presentation interface was implemented using HTML and javascript on the client side and PHP on the server side. In order to generate charts, we have used the GFlot 0.9.1 package. Computational time (seconds) depends on the sequence length presented to the server, and this length is currently limited to 10 000 letters to reduce the informational load on the clients' browser that is responsible for the presentation of the charts of the nucleosome positioning predictions using javascript.
OPTIONS AND CONTROLSThe FineStr server web interface enables the user to submit the sequences of interest for analysis either by pasting the sequences into the text box or by uploading a file containing the sequences in FASTA format. For each sequence submitted, the server generates the nucleosome probe score distribution along the sequence, pointing to the places with higher likelihood to place a nucleosome. The server response includes a graphical representation of the results () and an option to download a file containing the numerical representation of the results. The plot indisplays a typical example of two nucleosomes mapped on sequence chosen for the illustration purpose from the first chromosome of C.elegans. Alternative nucleosome center positions are seen around the central maxima. This corresponds to physical realitysliding of the nucleosomes to alternative positions with the same rotational setting ().
RESULTSCrystallography at atomic resolution at present time is the most accurate way to map nucleosome position on the sequence. Respectively, any other mapping technique to be tested should use the crystallography data as reference. In order to test our sequence-directed algorithm that uses the nucleosome mapping probe, we took all known nucleosomes crystallized with unique sequences, where the central base is determined with atomic resolution. These are protein data bank (PDB) structures: 1AOI (), 1EQZ (), 1KX4, 1KX5 () and 2NZD (). Comparison of the nucleosome positions calculated by our probe with the crystallography data showed an exact match within 1 base.
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTSThe software allows for modifications and extensions, e.g. expected small species specific changes in the matrices. Another interesting extension would be the incorporation of modified matrices that can help in the detection of various functionally active special nucleosomes positions (e.g. epigenetic nucleosomes).
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. could use in order to map nucleosomes to genomic sequences of interest with a single-base-resolution. 2 METHODOLOGY Crystallography data suggest that nucleosome DNA sequence is wrapped around histone octamer, having 12 close contacts of oriented inward minor groove with arginines of the histones (Arents et al., 1993; Harp et al., 2000). That makes at least 11 periods of DNA helix turns tightly wrapped around the octamer. To reveal the full 11 periods bendability matrix, we used the previously published 10.4 base nucleosome DNA repeat sequence structure (Gabdank et al., 2009) and nucleosome core DNA sequences database (Johnson et al., 2006). We concatenated the 10-matrix 11 times, placing the nucleosome dyad axis on the base rather than on interbase (Davey et al., 2002). In order to make it we had to duplicate the central matrix element, dinucleotide AT, and to place it in the positions 1 and 0, by that we ensured preferential positioning of the dinucleotide in the positions 1, 0 and 0, 1. Similarly the local dyads at the positions 26 and 26 we have duplicated the matrix element CG and at the positions 52 and 52 the AT dinucleotide. The base central local dyad positions 26 and 52 correspond to 2.5 and, respectively, five 10.4-base period distances from the main dyad of the nucleosome DNA. To accomodate the stretching/compression of nucleosome DNA by 1 to 2 bases (Ong et al., 2007), we have derived two additional matrices M 1 and M +1 , by shifting the original matrix one base left and right. Three matrices where combined to produce the M comb matrix by choosing the maximal value for each position M comb (i) = max{M 1 (i), M 0 (i), M +1 (i)}. The nucleosome mapping probe M final was completed by symmetrization of the combined matrix M comb. Values for complementary dinucleotides (AA/TT, GA/TC and GG/CC) were taken from the i-th (for any given dinucleotide XY) and (116-i)-th positions (for its complementary dinucleotide), averaged and put back in the i-th and (116-i)-th positions of the M final. For the selfcomplementary AT and CG dinucleotides, the symmetrized values were calculated by averaging the values of the i-th and (116-i)-th positions for the given dinucleotide. The suitability of any DNA sequence to the bending in the nucleosome structure can be evaluated using the probe M final simply by aligning the matrix with the sequence and summing the scores at all 116 matrix positions. The 'strength' of the nucleosome that would be formed by wrapping DNA with the given sequence on histone  The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
