Motivation: Feedback circuits are important motifs in biological networks and part of virtually all regulation processes that are needed for a reliable functioning of the cell. Mathematically, feedback is connected to complex behavior of the systems, which is often related to bifurcations of fixed points. Therefore, several approaches for the investigation of fixed points in biological networks have been developed in recent years. Many of them assume the fixed point coordinates to be known, and an efficient way to calculate the entire set of fixed points for interrelated feedback structures is highly desirable. Results: In this article, we consider regulatory network models, which are differential equations with an underlying directed graph that illustrates independencies among variables. We introduce the circuit-breaking algorithm (CBA), a method that constructs one-dimensional characteristics for these network models, which inherit important information about the system. In particular, fixed points are related to the zeros of these characteristics. The CBA operates on the graph topology, and results from graph theory are used in order to make calculations efficient. Our framework provides a general scheme for analyzing network models in terms of interrelated feedback circuits. The efficiency of the approach is demonstrated on a model for calcium oscillations based on experiments in hepatocytes, which consists of several interrelated feedback circuits.
INTRODUCTIONOrdinary differential equations are used in essentially all scientific fields to describe dynamic behaviors of physical, biological or technical systems. An analysis of these systems usually starts with an investigation of their limit sets, in particular, the fixed points and their local phase portraits. In order to calculate the fixed points of a system  x = f (x) with x  R n , algorithms such as Newton's method and related approaches () are commonly used. Besides the well-known problems of those methods concerning convergence, they require the calculation of the Jacobian matrix in each step, which can in most cases only be done via numeric approximations. Consequently, these methods are often computationally expensive, especially if n is large. It is thus difficult to investigate, for example, the dependence of fixed point coordinates on model parameters, which requires calculating the fixed points for multiple parameter values. In many applications the differential equation system describes the dynamics of interacting components, and a component is usually not influenced by all other components, but by a subset of these. These dependencies can be illustrated by a directed graph: if  x i is influenced by x j , we indicate this with a directed edge from vertex v j to vertex v i in the graph, and the dynamics, in particular, the fixed point coordinates of x i , depend on x j. Thus, all fixed point coordinates of components in a circuit are dependent, and the idea of our approach is to exploit these dependencies in order to reduce the dimension of the fixed point equations f ( x) = 0. The concept of our approach will be explained in the context of biological networks. More precisely, we consider intracellular regulation processes with underlying directed graph structure, such as gene regulatory networks (RNs). These systems are commonly based on chemical reaction kinetics, resulting in nonlinear models that cannot be solved analytically. Fixed points play an essential role in those models, since the emergence of complex behavior is often related to local bifurcations of those points. Bi-or multistability, which comes along with phenomena such as switching behavior, decision processes or memory effects, are generically caused by saddle-node bifurcations. Biological examples for these phenomena are numerous: switching mechanisms in multisite protein phosphorylation, which play a role in eukaryotic signaling cascades (), lysis or lysogenic pathway selection by phage -infected Escherichia coli cells (and references therein) cellular differentiation processes () or epigenetic differences caused by transient signals such as the state of the lactose operon in Escherichia coli (). Oscillations are generically created by Hopf bifurcations of fixed points () and all those behaviors have been related to circuits in the underlying interaction graphs (I-graphs) (). Besides a calculation of fixed points for constructing bifurcation diagrams, investigating the fixed points of intracellular networks is also facilitated by experimental data, since in many settings only fixed point measurements under different perturbations are available, while kinetic data are missing (). Along these lines, analysis methods which operate on the fixed points of these networks have been developed in recent years. Examples are robustness analysis with respect to kinetic perturbations, that is,Page: 2875 28742880
Fixed points of complex biological networksperturbations which leave the steady state fluxes invariant (), or sensitivity analysis locally about fixed points. All these methods require a calculation of the fixed points in advance. In this article, we consider RN models, which are systems of differential equations with underlying I-graphs. Vertices in these graphs correspond to variables, and edges indicate any kind of regulation. We introduce the circuit-breaking algorithm (CBA), which constructs one-dimensional circuit characteristics whose zeros correspond to the fixed point values of RNs. The principal idea of our approach is to exploit the dependencies among fixed point coordinates of variables in a feedback circuit and to describe the set of fixed points with a minimal set of independent variables. We show that the cardinality of this set is related to the number of independent elementary circuits in the I-graph. Therefore, the circuits in the graph are broken, the fixed points of the acyclic system are analyzed, and characteristics are constructed by iteratively closing the circuits. The algorithm operates on the graph topology, and results from graph theory are used to optimize efficiency, which is mainly determined by the structure of interlinked circuits. Thus, our approach provides a connection between graph theory and dynamical systems theory and is applicable in a very general setting. The article is organized in the following manner: first, we introduce the modeling framework for RNs. Then the CBA for fixed point calculation in those models is explained. Finally, we show an application of the method to a RN model for calcium oscillations based on experiments in hepatocytes ().
MODELING FRAMEWORKWe consider differential equation models for RNs of the formwith state vector x  R n and continuously differentiable vector field f : U  R n  C 1 defined on an open subset U  R n. The corresponding initial value problem with initial state x(t = 0) = x 0 has a unique and smooth solution (t,x 0 ) defined on an interval I x 0 (). System (1) should have a finite set of fixed points with at least one element, which is required later on to ensure termination of the algorithm. We consider this assumption not as a strong restriction. It is fulfilled for nearly all models based on chemical reaction kinetics. Since the existence of a compact and positively invariant set implies the existence of a fixed point inside, which is an extension of the Brouwer Fixed Point Theorem (), it is often sufficient to show that such a set exists. We will work with the system's underlying network structure. More precisely, we consider the I-graph G(V ,E) with vertex set V ={v 1 ,...,v n } corresponding to the variables of the system and an edge set E defined in the following way:e ij  E,i = j  x  U such thatThe I-graph is a digraph that might contain loops in case of positive auto-regulations. This definition of a RN model is very general and includes as a special case models in which the partial derivatives f i /x j , i = j, have constant signs independent of the system's state or, equivalently, the off-diagonal elements in the Jacobian matrix of the system have constant sign structure. This is a well-investigated model class () with I-graphs that have sign-labeled edges. Signs of (semi)paths or (semi)circuits are defined within this class as the product of signs of edges belonging to the paths or circuits, respectively. They have been proven useful for the analysis of these models in many respects. However, since this monotonicity constraint is not always fulfilled in biological examples, we do not want to be too restrictive at this point and allow for sign changes and zeros of the partial derivatives as well. Thus, some edges in the I-graph might have sign-labels, others do not. This relaxation is a crucial extension to previous work, since many graph-theoretical considerations strongly rely on these monotonicity constraints (). To conclude, a RN is defined here as a tuple (D,G) of a dynamical system D and an underlying digraph G(V ,E), called the I-graph, which is completely determined by D. Edges of G might be labeled if the respective partial derivative has a constant sign independent of the system's state.
THE CBA
IdeaThe idea of our approach is that fixed points of a circuit are completely characterized by knowing the fixed point coordinate of just one of the variables in the circuit. To illustrate the point, we consider the following single circuit system with n vertices:) i = 2,...,n.The procedure is shown infor three vertices. According to our definition of RNs, the diagonal elements of the Jacobian matrix are nonpositive here (otherwise the system had loops). In order to calculate the fixed points of the system, in a first step we break the circuit by cutting the edge from vertex v n to vertex v 1 and fixing variable x 1 to a value  1. The fixed point coordinates of this directed acyclic graph (DAG) can now be calculated as functions of  1. Here, the set ) is implicitly given byand we proceed iteratively for the remaining vertices, such that
N.RaddeWe keep in mind that this iterative calculation scheme for fixed point coordinates in dependence of the values of the parent vertices can be applied to any RNs with acyclic I-graphs. The circuit is closed by solving the equationleading to a set of solutions  x 1 , which are the fixed point values of x 1. Subsequently, we will refer to f 1 ( 1 ,  x n ( 1 )) as circuit-characteristic c( 1 ) associated with variable x 1 and to solving Equation (8) as circuit-closing step, which is the important step in our algorithm. Solutions generally have to be calculated numerically. The input of the function f 1 is the value  1 and the set  x n ( 1 ), which also might have to be calculated numerically. Since the sets  x i ( 1 ), i = 2,...,n, are uniquely determined by  1 , we can also skip this second input in Equation (8), bearing in mind that c( 1 ) does not necessarily describe a function of  1. The set  x n ( 1 ) are the fixed point branches of a bifurcation diagram with  1 as bifurcation parameter and might be empty or contain several elements depending on the value of  1. Having determined the set  x 1 , all other fixed point coordinates can again iteratively be calculated by inserting elements of this set into Equations (6) and (7), in the same order as before. Thus, the zeros of c( 1 ) completely characterize the fixed points of the system. A similar scheme for a single negative circuit oscillator model and analytically calculable set  x n was used in, which was not explicitly stated there. Note that we could as well have started by fixing another variable in the circuit, which would have led to a different characteristic, but we will see that some properties are completely determined by the graph topology and are independent of the chosen associated variable. The idea of constructing a one-dimensional characteristic whose zeros correspond to the fixed points of an RN model by breaking the circuits in the I-graph can be generalized for RNs with arbitrary I-graph topology. In the following, we will set up the scheme for constructing such a characteristic given the I-graph G(V ,E), and we call this procedure the CBA. The main difference when going to more complex graph topologies is that the circuit characteristic cannot always be constructed in a single circuit-closing step. Generally, we have to do the procedure several times, depending on the I-graph topology. We will often make use of graph-theoretical algorithms for efficient calculations.
Generalization to strongly connected graphsGiven an RN (D,G) with strongly connected I-graph G(V ,E), the CBA proceeds as follows to construct a circuit characteristic and to calculate the set of fixed points of the system.
Find set C of elementary circuitsWe start by listing the elementary circuits in G(V ,E) in a set C of subsets of vertices. Elementary circuits are circuits in which each vertex is encountered only once while moving along the circuit. Several algorithms have been proposed for finding this set C (), which can be done in O(|V |+|E|(|C|+1)) time, where |V |, |E| and |C| denote the number of vertices, edges and elementary circuits in G, respectively.
Determine minimal circuit-covering vertex set VSecond, we determine a minimal circuit-covering vertex set V for C, that is, a minimal subset V of V such that each element in C contains at least one vertex in V. We denote the number of elements in V by M. M is crucial for the efficiency of the algorithm, since it determines the minimal number of circuit-closing steps needed for the calculation of the fixed point set  x of the system. Let the elements in V be V ={v m 1 ,...,v m M }. The rest of the vertices is collected in the setBoth sets are changed during the CBA: in each circuit-closing step, one element in V is shifted to V , and finally V = and V = V .Proof. Instances of the vertex cover (VC) problem can be translated into finding a minimal circuit-covering vertex set V. A VC of an undirected graph is a minimal subset V *  V of vertices such that each edge in the graph is incident to at least one vertex in V * . Finding such a set V * is an NP-hard optimization problem (). It is easy to verify that the problem of finding a VC in an undirected graph corresponds to finding a minimal circuit-covering vertex set V in the corresponding digraph, which is constructed by replacing all edges in the undirected graph by two edges of opposite direction. This is illustrated inby a graph with four vertices that has VC-number 2. The vertices marked in white are a VC in the undirected graph (, left panel), and at the same time also a minimal circuit-covering vertex set V in the respective digraph (, right panel). Note that if the I-graph had loops, the corresponding vertices can be included into the set V a priori, since they have to be contained in each minimal circuitcovering vertex set in any case, and the problem of finding V can be reduced by operating on the subgraph induced by the rest of the vertices.
Calculate the circuit-characteristic c( M )In the next step, we use the set V to determine a circuit-characteristic c( M ) associated with variable x m M , which is afterwards used to calculate the fixed points  x of the RN model. To this end, all circuits in G are broken by fixing the vertices in V , i.e. setting x m j =:  j , j = 1,...,M. For convenience, we summarize all  j in a single vector   R M. This vector  serves as input for the circuit-free system, and, since the acyclic I-graph has a topological order, the fixed point coordinates of the remaining vertices {v l 1 ,...,v l L } V can iteratively be calculated as functions of the input . This translates to solving L equationsfor  x lp. The solutions of these L equations are collected in a set  x V (). In the next step, the circuits are closed one after another by releasing vertices in V : for all j = 1,...,M, we calculate the zeros of the partial circuit-characteristics p j ( j ,), which is done by first reducing the set V by vertex v m j and the vector  by component  j and then solving the implicit equationfor x m j to obtain a set  x m j () of fixed point coordinates for variable x m j in dependence of the values  of vertices in the set V. Thereby circuits containing x m j are closed. Similar to, for fixed , the set  x V (, j ) describes fixed point branches of a bifurcation diagram with bifurcation parameter  j. Having determined the solution set  x m j (), vertex v m j is shifted to V. The cardinality of the set V , which determines the dimension of the respective partial circuit characteristic, is reduced by one in each circuitclosing step, such that we finally end up with a one-dimensional circuit characteristicassociated with variable x m M .
Calculate set of fixed points
Fixed points of complex biological networksto obtain the fixed point coordinates of the other variables in the original set V. Respective fixed point coordinates of the vertices that have originally been in V can be calculated as well by inserting those values into  x V (), such that we have reconstructed the set  x of zeros from the characteristic c( M ). The I-graph and signs of circuits contain information about the circuitcharacteristic independent of the associated variable. Proposition 2. If only negative circuits of a strongly connected graph G are closed by releasing vertex v m j , the corresponding partial circuit characteristic p j ( j ,) is strictly decreasing with respect to  j. Proof. We consider the derivative of the partial circuit characteristicwith respect to  j for arbitrary  =  * :The last term is non-positive from the definition of the I-graph, which would have a positive loop otherwise, contrary to the assumption. Moreover, all terms in the sum are negative: The partial derivative is positive if the respective regulator v lp is an activator of the released vertex v m j , but in this case the path from v m j to v lp must be negative for the circuit to be negative, which translates into a negative derivative d  x lp /d j. Contrary, if v lp is an inhibitor of v m j , the partial derivative is negative, but then the path from v m j to v lp must be positive, such that the product is again negative. Consequently, all terms in the derivative are negative. It follows immediately that systems lacking positive circuits have at most one isolated fixed point, which was also proven in a different way by Gouz (1998) and Snoussi (1998).
Generalization to arbitrary graph topologiesThe CBA can be extended to RNs (D,G) with I-graph G(V ,E) that is not strongly connected. Without loss of generality, we still assume connectedness of the graph. We have to consider the fixed point coordinates separately for each strongly connected component (SCC). In order to construct the set  x from the individual fixed point sets of each component, we introduce the concept of fixed point paths.
Find SCCsIn the first step, we partition the vertex set V into subsetssuch that the subgraphs G k induced by V k are the SCC of G. This can be done in O(|V |+|E|) time by a depth first search algorithm as originally described by(for a more recent improved algorithm see also). Contracting the vertices of SCCs yields a DAG, which has a topological order. Therefore, the fixed point coordinates can be calculated iteratively for each SCC, starting with the component on top of the hierarchy. When doing so, the fixed points  x k of a component k serve as constant inputs for calculating the fixed point coordinates of subsequent components. We assume that the subgraphs G k are already hierarchically ordered, with G 1 being on top. Then we proceed by iteratively calculating the fixed point coordinates of each subgraph in the way explained before. This has to be done for each possible input, that is, for each fixed point set  x z , z = 1,...,k 1 of the previous SCCs.
Determine fixed point pathsHaving calculated  x k for all k, these define the fixed point set  x of the system. The following example illustrates how to achieve the set  x of fixed points of the system from the sets  x k :The I-graph of the system and its SCCs with respective circuit sets and minimal circuit-covering vertex sets are shown in. The fixed pointThe paths not ending with an empty set define the fixed points of the system, here given by  x = (1,1,0). graph is illustrated in. It is a DAG whose nodes correspond to the fixed point coordinates of the SCCs. Fixed point paths are the paths in this graph which do not end with an empty set. Here the only path is (1,1,0), and the system has one fixed point  x = (1,1,0).
APPLICATION OF THE CBA TO A MODEL FOR CALCIUM OSCILLATIONSWe illustrate the CBA on a network model for cytoplasmic calcium oscillations based on experiments in hepatocytes, which is described in):denoting concentrations of an active G-protein-linked receptor, active phospholipase C enzyme, free calcium in the cytoplasm and calcium in the endoplasmic reticulum, respectively. The functions m(x,) = x/(x +) are MichaelisMenten terms, and all rate constants k and Michaelis constants  are non-negative. The model can show periodic oscillations and bursting. We are interested in the fixed points of the system in the positive orthant for parameter values given by). Since the positive orthant R 4 + is invariant for the flow, as can easily be seen by showing  x i (x i = 0)  0 for i = 1,...,4, we set U = R 4 +. The vector field is continuously differentiable in this region. We note that U is not a trapping region for all initial Page: 2878 28742880
N.Radde, leading to the set  x 1 , and then into , a property that can also be recognized by our characteristics. The I-graph of this system () is strongly connected, i.e. K = 1, and we skip the index k here. All edges except e 43 are sign labeled, which is indicated by arrows (activation) and blunt ends (inhibition). The circuit set consists of seven elements including three positive, three negative and one unsigned circuit, C = {{1,2,3,4},{1},{3},{1,2},{1,3},{3,4},{1,2,3}}. Since G contains positive and negative circuits, only from the topology neither multiple fixed points nor periodic behavior can be excluded a priori. A minimal circuit-covering vertex set is V ={1,3}, and we identify M = 2, m 1 = 1 and m M = 3. Vertices in the set V are marked in white in. First, we break the circuits by setting x 1 =:  1 and x 3 =:  2 , and calculate the fixed point values of variables in the set V , here x 2 and x 4 , as functions of the input vector   R 2. This can be done analytically, and we obtainThe first set of circuits is closed by releasing vertex v 1. We note that the subgraph induced by v 1 and v 2 has the structure of an activator-inhibitor oscillator model (with input  2 , a typical structure which is capable of producing oscillations and bistability (). Mathematically, we reduce V by v 1 and  by  1 , such that V ={v 3 } and  ={ 2 }, and calculate the zeros  x 1 ( 2 ) of the partial circuit characteristichere given byHaving solved this equation, v 1 is shifted to V. The characteristic p 1 is shown in, along with the contour p 1 = 0, which defines the solution set  x 1 ( 2 ) that is used as input for the final circuit characteristic. The sets ) are shown in(left panel, 13 figures from top). These graphs are bifurcation diagrams with  2 as a bifurcation parameter. The graph shows that the subsystem consisting of the vertices v 1 and v 2 has a bistable range due to the positive auto-regulation of v 1 for  2 , with a lower stable fixed point  x 1  0 (red line) and an upper one between 4 and 8 (blue line). These are separated by an unstable fixed point branch (green line). Since x 1 activates x 2 ,  x 2 ( 2 ) has qualitatively the same course. The graph  x 4 ( 2 ) shows several peculiarities of the x 4-dynamics: given  2 , x 4 is produced with a constant synthesis rate s = k 11 m( 2 , 6 ) and is degraded with a rate  = k 7  x 2 ( 2 ) 2 m(x 4 , 4 ) that has an upper bound k 7  x 2 ( 2 ) 2 independent of x 4. The bifurcation diagram  x 4 ( 2 ) has poles at s =  (here two), and takes positive values only between these, which correspond to the upper stable fixed point branches of  x 1 and  x 2 (blue lines). This restricts first of all the range of possible values  x 3 to the range of values where positive solutions  x 4 > 0 exist, and second, it also shows that the positive auto-regulation of x 1 does not lead to two distinct stable steady states in the positive orthant for the complete system, since there are no positive solutions  x 4 for the lower stable fixed point branch  x 1. For constructing the final circuit characteristic c( 2 ) associated with variable x 3 , we release vertex v 3 , leading toThe characteristic c( 2 ) is shown in(bottom left panel). Most importantly, it has one zero at  x 3 = 0.215, and consequently the system has one fixed point,  x = (6.43,9.9,0.215,34) 1 , which is calculated by inserting,2,4. Graphically, this translates into simply reading off the respective values in the graphs  x i ( 2 ) in, indicated by the blue dashed line here. Moreover, the characteristic indicates that the system might have the potential to show bistability for certain parameter values, since by shifting the curve to the positive y-direction, it eventually has three fixed points. We verified this by introducing a basic synthesis rate s 3 = 95 for x 3 , which causes the desired shift of the characteristic. The value was read from the graph c( 2 ).
Page: 2879 28742880
Fixed points of complex biological networks
CONCLUSIONThis article considers RN models, which are described as systems of ordinary differential equations with an underlying directed graph structure, the I-graph. We have introduced the CBA for the characterization of fixed points of these models. The CBA exploits the dependencies of the fixed point coordinates in a connected graph in order to find a minimal characterization. Based on this idea, we constructed a one-dimensional circuit characteristic by breaking all circuits in the graph and iteratively closing them again. These circuit-closing steps correspond to solving implicit equations, whose dimensions are related to the circuit-structure of the graph. We demonstrated that this dimension is bounded from below by the cardinality of a minimal subset of vertices that covers the elementary circuits and explained how to construct the fixed point set of the system from the zeros of this circuit characteristic. Our approach has several advantages over purely numerical methods: first, in comparison to solving an n-dimensional equation f (x) = 0,x  R n , the dimension of the equations in the CBA can be much smaller, especially for sparse graphs. Second, we have demonstrated on a biological network model of interlocked feedback circuits that the influence of parameter variations on the fixed points can also be investigated by our algorithm. Thus, the constructed characteristics are, for example, useful to find bifurcations and parameter regions in which the system has a certain number of fixed points. In this article, we applied the CBA to a network of four components. It can also be used to investigate fixed points of larger networks. The efficiency and superiority to Newton-type methods depend on the graph topology and increase when the cardinality of the minimal circuit-covering vertex sets decrease. We expect this to correlate with the sparsity of the graph, but it is not yet clear how we can further characterize the topology and behavior of such graphs. For larger networks, we expect that the computation of the SCCs, their circuit sets and especially the minimal circuit-covering vertex sets, is not negligible any more and increases the running time. We believe that our approach can especially facilitate the analysis of fixed point sets of smaller network models, and their dependence on parameter values. If the network consists of several interrelated feedback structures, it is in practice applicable to models of only few (say <10) components. Finally, our approach is based on a very general framework and can be applied to a large class of differential equations. Complex dynamic behavior is related to circuits in the I-graphs, and the CBA provides an analysis method in terms of subnetworks with interrelated circuit structure. While in the past methodology has been developed for single feedback circuits, only few approaches exist that can handle complex feedback, and our method is a contribution in this direction. Recent studies indicate that complex network structures are often related to functional robustness, and methods to analyze these networks are thus highly relevant also from a biological point of view. Several interesting question will guide our future work, most importantly, we believe that the circuit characteristics contain information about asymptotic properties of the system such as stability of the fixed points.
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Precision is chosen according to the numeric values in the data files.
Before plotting, the files 'test1.dat' and 'test1b.dat' that are created by these programs were sorted, and line breaks between different branches were inserted manually. The formatted files are also available as Supplementary Material in rtf format.
