Images containing spatial expression patterns illuminate the roles of different genes during embryogenesis. In order to generate initial clues to regulatory interactions, biologists frequently need to know the set of genes expressed at the same time at specific locations in a developing embryo, as well as related research publications. However, text-based mining of image annotations and research articles cannot produce all relevant results, because the primary data are images that exist as graphical objects. We have developed a unique knowledge base (FlyExpress) to facilitate visual mining of images from Drosophila melanogaster embryogenesis. By clicking on specific locations in pictures of fly embryos from different stages of development and different visual projections, users can produce a list of genes and publications instantly. In FlyExpress, each queryable embryo picture is a heat-map that captures the expression patterns of more than 4500 genes and more than 2600 published articles. In addition, one can view spatial patterns for particular genes over time as well as find other genes with similar expression patterns at a given developmental stage. Therefore, FlyExpress is a unique tool for mining spatiotemporal expression patterns in a format readily accessible to the scientific community.
S.Kumar et al.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. have an unprecedented opportunity to identify co-regulated genes by comparing spatial expression profiles, whose similarity is the first significant clue about potential joint roles in developmental processes. With the increasing size of image datasets, such spatial pattern comparisons have become increasingly more useful, because genes with similar and overlapping patterns can now be found with a much higher probability, for example, to predict functions for new genes or to understand newly discovered patterns for existing genes. However, classical manual inspection of spatial patterns for matches does not scale well for such large datasets, which in turn hampers the discovery of gene interactions and hypotheses generation. Computer assisted approaches using annotations of images with textual controlled vocabulary, while useful, are subject to serious limitations because it is virtually impossible to describe all aspects of a spatial pattern by words alone. Furthermore, the text of published literature rarely contains controlled vocabulary descriptions of spatial patterns and Google-like text searches produce limited results. We have developed a unique resource for mining the gene expression patterns visually for a given developmental stage and visual projection. This is intended to enable biologists to interrogate specific coordinates in a developing embryo and to quickly reveal genes expressed at that location (Fig. 1A) as well as a list of published research articles that contain spatiotemporal gene expression at the selected location (Fig. 1B). A user can select multiple locations simultaneously, and the genes and publications are ranked by the number of locations. The outcome is a set of links to individual gene expression pattern images as well as publications. For each developmental stage and visual projection, the user is presented with a global view of gene activity [Genomewide-Expression-Maps, (GEMs)]. They are constructed by the aggregation and normalization of spatial expression patterns that share the same developmental stage and view (see Methods in Konikoff et al. 2011). The normalized spatial aggregates are then rendered into heat-maps with the darkest regions showing the largest numbers of expressed genes. Using this procedure we generated 18 GEMs from 48 190 images for Tomancak et al. (2002) data (BDGP; 3 views  6 stage ranges; Fig. 1A), 15 GEMs from 30 095 images for Lecuyer et al. (2007) data (Fly-FISH; 3 views  5 stage ranges), and 44 GEMs for 5977 images from more than 2600 published articles  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [12:34 7/11/2011 Bioinformatics-btr567.tex]
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
