Motivation: While there are numerous programs that can predict RNA or DNA secondary structures, a program that predicts RNA/DNA hetero-dimers is still missing. The lack of easy to use tools for predicting their structure may be in part responsible for the small number of reports of biologically relevant RNA/DNA hetero-dimers. Results: We present here an extension to the widely used ViennaRNA Package (Lorenz et al., 2011) for the prediction of the structure of RNA/DNA hetero-dimers.
INTRODUCTIONNucleic acids have many important functions in biological systems, such as information carriers, catalysts and regulators. Both variants, DNA and RNA, can form complex structures by base pair interactions. The pattern of WatsonCrick or wobble base pairs a molecule forms is called the secondary structure. A main difference between RNA and DNA is due to their usage in biological systems: while DNA builds a dimer with its reverse complement almost all the time, RNA, being mostly single stranded, is more prone to fold back onto itself. However, if DNA is single stranded (e.g. during replication, transcription, repair or recombination), it will also form intramolecular base pairs. There are several examples where RNA and DNA interact via base pairing, generating a structure called R-loop. They protect CpG (CG dinucleotide regions in the genome) islands from being methylated (). The stability of DNA/mRNA hybrids is reported to have an influence on the copy number of repeats () and can impair transcription elongation, promoting transcription-associated recombination (). Moreover, during the intensive search for new functional transcripts, rendered possible by next-generation sequencing technology, at least 1000 novel lincRNAs were identified that may act as regulators of transcription, and one possibility to do this is via base pairing between RNA and DNA (see Guttman and Rinn, 2012 for a recent review). As a final biological example, DNA/RNA hybrids play a role within the CRISPR pathway in bacteria and archaea (). On a technical side, RNA/DNA dimers are often used in micro-array or PCR experiments. The ability to computationally investigate the properties of the structures of interacting RNA and DNA molecules would help in the analysis of these dimers. While a number of programs exist that can predict RNA or DNA secondary structures (For a review, see e.g.) or even their dimers, there is, to our knowledge, no program that also includes the possibility to predict the full secondary structure of RNA/DNA hetero-dimers. This may be due to the lack of compiled energy parameters, as there are only stacking energies available today. We introduce here a possibility to predict the secondary structure of such hetero-dimers within the widely used ViennaRNA Package.
APPROACH
Adaptation of the ViennaRNA packageFor the prediction of RNA/DNA hetero-dimers, three distinct energy parameter sets (RNA, DNA and mixed) are necessary. In order to keep the changes within the inner recursions of the algorithm minimal, we use 8 instead of 4 bases and 24 instead of 6 types of WatsonCrick or wobble base pairs for the energy computations. The look-up tables for the energy parameters grow accordingly. However, this does not significantly contribute to memory consumption. Finally, we demand a fixed order for the input sequences: RNA first, DNA last.
Energy parametersSince we are only considering RNA/DNA hetero-dimers, not co-polymers, we only need a subset of the energy parameters necessary for the full computations in the RNA or DNA case: we do not encounter stacking of a RNA on a DNA base, for example. In contrast, stacking parameters of RNA/DNA base pairs, multi-loop penalties and the interior loop parameters are needed. For stacked pairs, i.e. perfect helices, the parameters have been determined experimentally (). Stacking parameters are the most important part of the energy model, as they account for the majority of RNA/DNA binding free energy. Unfortunately, for other mixed RNADNA loops no experimental data are available. As no high-quality dataset of RNA/DNA structures exists, parameters cannot be trained, and the performance of different parameter sets cannot be evaluated. The data we have are not sufficient to chose a function for the derivation of the energy *To whom correspondence should be addressed. parameters (Supplementary), so we simply use the average of RNA and DNA E R=D  E R  E D   =2 for all missing values. We are aware that this formula gives an at best crude approximation of the actual folding energies, but note that new parameters can easily be incorporated. We hope that the availability of prediction tools for RNA/DNA hetero-dimers will encourage experimentalists to provide the missing energy parameters.
Inclusion into the ViennaRNA packageOur approach to just adapt the energy computations enabled us to easily include the RNA/DNA hetero-dimer support into all parts of the ViennaRNA Package that compute dimer structures, namely, RNAcofold (), RNAup (Muckstein) and RNAduplex (). RNA/DNA hetero-dimers are supported for both the minimum free energy as well as the partition function-based calculations. Furthermore, all programs can read in user-supplied energy parameters. In particular, this allows to make immediate use of any newly determined parameters for mixed RNADNA loops, or enables scientists to easily evaluate different energy models as soon as sufficient RNA/ DNA structure data are available.
RESULTSIn the absence of programs that can deal with RNA/DNA dimers, researchers have resorted to simply treating both parts of the dimer as RNA. To test the effect of applying the right (DNA or RNA) parameters to the single molecules and using explicit RNA/DNA interactions, we chose ANRIL, a long non-coding RNA that is suspected to have a DNA target sequence, and one of its putative targets. In order to simulate the size of the transcription bubble, we chose a sliding window approach with DNA pieces of length 50, step size 25 for our computations. Even though ANRIL (1500 nt) is much longer than the pieces of DNA bound to it, we sometimes observe a dramatic effect on the structure of the hybrid molecule. The tree edit distance of the hybrid structures predicted with RNA parameters and with our hybrid approach rises up to 900, and the structure of the binding site can vary greatly (Another example for the usefulness of the mixed parameters is the strand dependency of R-loop formation (). A r GAA   n trinucleotid repeat can form R-loops while its reverse complement r UUC   n cannot. The non-symmetric mixed parameters can explain that: addition of another trinucleotid will give 4.1 kcal/mol for r GAA  , but only 2.6 kcal/mol for r UUC  . In contrast to RNA or DNA parameters, the mixed parameters can also explain the changes in R-loop formation of other trinucleotides investigated (see Supplementary).
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Hybrid duplex at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
