Motivation: It is well known influenza viruses recognize and bind terminal sialic acid (SA) on glycans that are found on the cell surface. In this work, we used a data mining technique to analyze the glycan array data of influenza viruses to find novel glycan structures other than SA that may be involved in viral infection. Results: In addition to SA structures noted previously, we noted the sulfated structures in the mining results. For verification, we overex-pressed the sulfotransferase that is involved in synthesizing these structures, and we performed a viral infection experiment to assess changes in infection in these cells. In our results, we found that there is a 70-fold increase in these cells compared with the control. Thus, we have found a novel pattern in glycan structures that may be involved in viral infection. Availability and implementation: The Glycan Miner Tool is available from the RINGS resource at http://www.rings.
INTRODUCTIONInfluenza viruses cause highly contagious respiratory disease in humans with potentially fatal outcomes, and millions of people are affected by influenza every year. In addition, many animal species, including birds, swine, horses, dogs, cats, whales and seals, can be infected by influenza viruses. Viruses of all known hemagglutinin (H1H16) and neuraminidase (N1N9) subtypes are maintained in aquatic birds, and therefore, they are considered the natural reservoir of influenza viruses. In humans, the known pandemics inwere caused by the H1, H2 and H3 viruses, respectively (). The known epidemics from 1977 until now were associated with viruses of the H1 and H3 subtypes. Although not yet pandemic, the first human infections with chicken H5N1 viruses were reported in 1997 in Hong Kong (). Influenza viruses bind to sialic acids (SAs) on the cell surface to initiate infection and replication. Human influenza viruses preferentially bind to N-acetylneuraminic acid (i.e. SA) attached to the penultimate galactose sugar by an 2,6 linkage (SA 2-6 Gal), whereas avian viruses preferentially bind to SA with an 2,3 linkage (SA 2-3 Gal) (). The receptor specificity is shared by the majority of human and avian viruses, but it has been reported that the receptor-recognition of some avian viruses was affected by the third saccharide and more distant moieties of the (SA 2-3 Gal)-terminal receptor (). In addition, sulfation of the saccharide core has been shown to produce no effect on binding of duck viruses, but chicken and human viruses isolated in 1997 in Hong Kong showed increased affinity to a sulfated sialyl-Lewis structure (). Thus, it has been shown that negatively charged groups, such as SA and sulfate groups, on glycans might function in binding to viruses. In this work, we used a data mining method called-closed frequent subtree mining () to analyze glycan binding data as produced by glycan array experiments (), which are available on the web by the Consortium for Functional Glycomics (CFG). After data mining of those glycan structures with high binding affinity, we noted that sulfated structures were found in the results in addition to other terminal SA and sialyl-Lewis structures, as illustrated previously in other works (). In this work, however, we focused only on sulfation, and to verify the effects of sulfation as shown from these results, we overexpressed the sulfotransferase that is involved in synthesizing these structures. Then we performed a viral infection experiment to assess the change in the level of viral infection using the overexpressed cells. In our results, we found a surprisingly large increase in viral infection using our overexpressed cells. We were particularly surprised because we only overexpressed the sulfation and did not modify any sialyltransferases. From these results, we can claim that we have found a novel pattern in glycan structures that is involved in viral infection using our glycan mining tool. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
BACKGROUND
Glycan arraysThe study of glycan binding patterns has been much aided by the development of glycan arrays () and the availability of such data on the web (). For example, the CFG provides mammalian glycan arrays to analyze the glycan binding specificity of lectins, antibodies, antisera, microorganisms and viruses, to name a few. Samples are fluorescently labeled to detect primary binding to the glycans on the array. To generate the array, a library of natural and synthetic mammalian glycans with amino linkers is printed onto N-hydroxysuccinimide-activated glass microscope slides (SCHOTT Nexterion), forming covalent amide linkages. The current CFG glycan arrays contain 4600 glycan structures, as listed at http://www.functionalglycomics.org/static/consor tium/resources/resourcecoreh8.shtml. Among these structures, $10% are sulfated structures. Previous studies using glycan arrays have confirmed that SA is an important component in influenza virus binding (). It has also been shown using a solid-phase binding assay that 6-sulfo sialyl Lewis X is recognized by H5, H6, H7 and H9 influenza viruses (). Therefore, the data from these technologies have been shown to be effective in analyzing glycan binding affinity.
Enzymes involved in glycan structure synthesisThe glycan structures expressed on the cell surface are synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus by a series of glycosyltransferases and sulfotransferases. Overexpression or RNA interference of a glycosyltransferase or a sulfotransferase is generally used to remodel glycan structures on the cell surface (). For example, overexpression of a sulfotransferase can increase a specific sulfation on a saccharide core (). Therefore, in this work, to perform our viral infection experiment, in preparing the cell culture, it was important to identify those structures in the extracted data for which glycosyltransferases and/or sulfotransferases were known.
Data mining for glycan analysisThe Resource for INformatics of Glycomes at Soka (RINGS) is a web resource providing a variety of data mining and algorithmic tools for glycomics data analysis (). The data mining method we used in this work is implemented by the Glycan Miner Tool () in RINGS. This tool uses the-closed frequent subtree algorithm () for glycan structures. Details of this algorithm are provided in Methods. For the data, we used the glycan array data of influenza viruses from the CFG (). In particular, we selected the data for H1 and H3 influenza viruses that were associated with the epidemics from 1977 until now. In addition, we selected the data for H5 influenza viruses because the first human infections with chicken H5 viruses were reported in 1997 in Hong Kong. These viruses were readily available, such that viral infection experiments could be performed using them.
Glycan structure notationThe graphical notation of glycan structures in this work is based on the symbols proposed by the CFG. In particular, each monosaccharide making up glycans is depicted by each given symbol. Thus, a glycan structure is represented as a tree structure, where nodes are monosaccharides (or sugars) and edges are glycosidic linkages (including an or anomer and two numbers indicating the linkage positions on each sugar).lists the symbols and abbreviated names for the monosaccharides that appear in this manuscript. Glycan structures may be represented using a variety of text formats. In this work, we used KEGG Chemical Function (KCF) format for the input data to the Glycan Miner Tool, which we obtained by converting from International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) format, which is the format used by the CFG. Details of these and other formats can be found in Aoki-Kinoshita, 2010. In brief, KCF format uses a graph notation for glycans by specifying monosaccharides as nodes and glycosidic linkages as edges. It also requires the specification of x-and y-coordinates for each node so that structures can be drawn clearly on a 2D plane. On the other hand, IUPAC format is a linear notation where branches are indicated by parentheses. RINGS provides utilities to convert glycan structures between a number of different formats, and the IUPAC to KCF converter was used in this work.where P is a supertree of T and support(X) refers to the number of times subtree X appears in the input dataset. The Glycan Miner Tool returns the-closed frequent subtrees in order of P-value, which is computed based on the input data. This P-value is obtained by computing the support of randomly generated structures with similar topology to the target subtree. Then the probability of obtaining the target subtree among the randomly generated subtrees is computed.
Cell line and cultureMadin Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) cells were acquired from the Japanese Collection of Research Bioresources Cell Bank (JCRB9029). MDCK cells were cultured in Eagle's minimal essential medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum and antibiotic at 37 C under 5% CO 2 atmospheric conditions.
Establishment of stable transformant expressing hGlcNAc6ST-1The vector construction for the expression of human GlcNAc-6-sulfotransferase-1(hGlcNAc6ST-1) () was prepared according to Invitrogen GATEWAY systems by two-step polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The full-length open reading frame of hGlcNAc6ST-1 was amplified from EST clone 4562846 (supplied by Open Biosystems), by using the forward primer, 5 0-AAAAAGCAGGCTTGGCCGCCA CCATGAAGGTGTTCCGTAGGAAGG-3 0 and reverse primer, 5 0-AGAAAGCTGGGTTTAGAGACGGGGCTTCCG-3 0. For addition of the adaptor sequence necessary to GATEWAY system, the open reading frame fragment was amplified again by using the forward primer, 5 0-GGGGACAAGTTTGTACAAAAAAGCAGGCT-3 0 and reverse primer, 5 0-GGGGACCACTTTGTACAAGAAAGCTGGGT-3 0. The amplified fragment was recombined with the pCXN2 expression vector modified for GATEWAY system to yield pCXN2-hGlcNAc6ST-1. MDCK cells were seeded at 4  10 5 cells/well in a 12-well plate 24 h before transfection. The 3 g of pCXN2-hGlcNAc6ST-1 or pCXN2 (for mock transfectant) was mixed with 9 l of Lipofectamine2000 (Life Technologies, CA, USA) in 200 l of Opti-MEM medium (Life Technologies) and transfected to MDCK cells. From 1 day after transfection, cells were cultured in growth medium containing 0.4 g/ml G418 for selection of the transformants. The transformant cells were passed every 34 days for 20 days, and the increase of hGlcNAc6ST-1 gene expression was checked. Flow cytometry analysis was performed by using MECA-79 monoclonal antibody (sc-19602, Santa Cruz, TX, USA), which is known to recognize 6-sulfo GlcNAc structures ().
Viralinfection to cells and measurement of the amount of viral gene in culture supernatant A human influenza virus, A/Hokkaido/11/2002 (H1N1), was inoculated into cells at a multiplicity of infection of 0.01 in Eagle's Minimal Essential Medium containing antibiotic (minimal medium). After incubation at 37 C for 1 h, the cells were washed twice in phosphate-buffered saline, and cultured in minimal medium with presence of 1 g/ml of acetyltrypsin (SIGMA, MO, USA). At 48 and 72 h post-infection, culture supernatants were harvested. Viral RNA was extracted from 140 l of the supernatant using QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Venlo, The Netherlands) according to the manufacture's protocol. These RNA were eluted in a final volume of 70 l of RNase-free water contains 0.04% sodium azide, and a portion was subjected to real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using LightCycler 480 Instrument (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Primers used to quantitate the amount of matrix (M) gene of virus were forward: 5 0-CCMAGGTCG AAACGTAYGTTCTCTCTCTATC-3 0 , reverse: 5 0-TGACAGRATYG GTCTTGTCTTTAGCCAYTCCA-3 0 , probe: 5 0-ATYTCGGCTTTGA GGGGGCCTG-3 0. The probe was labeled at the 5 0-end with the reporter dye, 3FAM, and at the 3 0-end with the quencher dye, MGB. Reactions were performed using QuantiTect Probe RT-PCR Kit (QIAGEN) as follows: reverse transcription, 30 min at 50 C; amplification, 50 cycles of 15 s at 94 C and 75 s at 54 C.shows the parameters used in analyzing the glycan array data. For each dataset, a value for and minimum support minsup was selected such that the number of subtrees extracted was within the range of 510. In general, ranged from 0.7 to 0.9 and minsup ranged from three to seven. Screenshots of all of the analysis results are provided in Supplementary information. Here, we describe the results that were used as the basis of selecting sulfotransferase in the viral infection experiment; in particular, we focused on the human H1N1 virus strains A/Texas/36/1991 and A/New York/1/1918.and 2 are snapshots of these results, respectively.First, it was interesting to note that in addition to the expected sialylated structures, sulfate itself was retrieved in the results in addition to the same sulfated trimer Gal 1,4 ((S03-) 1,6) GlcNAc in both A/Texas/36/1991 and A/New York/1/1918. Although SA is not included, there is the possibility that the galactose residue is sialylated. However, we were interested in the sulfated structures in the results. Disregarding monomers,summarizes the structures that we selected as candidate structures from the mining results.
RESULTS
Glycan Miner Tool analysis
Overexpression of sulfotransferase in MDCK cellsFrom the Glycan Miner Tool results, Gal 1-4 [(S03-) 1-6] GlcNAc was found in two different H1N1 strains among six H1N1 strains. Five kinds of GlcNAc-6-sulfotransferases (GlcNAc6STs), namely GlcNAc6ST-1 $ GlcNAc6ST-5, have been reported to have the ability to synthesize Gal 1-4 [(S03-) 1-6] GlcNAc (), and GlcNAc6ST-1 shows ubiquitous tissue expression pattern including lung. Therefore, we performed overexpression of GlcNAc6ST-1 in MDCK cells and analysis of viral infection using a H1N1 strain. We confirmed the upregulation of sulfated GlcNAc structures using flow cytometry and found that they were increased by 257%. The mean value of hGlcNAcT6ST-1overexpression cells was 32.72 against empty-vector-transfected cells having a mean value of 12.71. Normal MDCK cells, empty-vector-transfected cells, and hGlcNAc6ST-1-overexpression cells were infected with H1N1 virus (and). At 48 and 72 h post-infection, the amount of viral M gene that was contained in culture supernatant was measured by the method of real-time RT-PCR. At 48 h post-infection, the amount of viral M gene in hGlcNAc6ST1-over-expression cells was approximately 70-fold higher than that in normal MDCK cells. At 72 h post-infection, the amount of viral M gene in hGlcNAc6ST-1-overexpression cells was $13-fold higher than that in normal MDCK cells. The amount of viral M gene in empty-vector-transfected cells was the same as in normal MDCK cells. These results indicate that Gal 1-4GlcNAc structure in cells greatly enhances the infection of H1N1 virus.Note: Sulfation is indicated in bold. The underlined structures are those that were selected for further verification in this study. may be involved in viral infection, which we reproduced in an independent experimental setting. We make note here that the increased viral infection may still involve SAs, but that the change in infection was solely affected by the increased sulfation. We also note that some interesting results have also been obtained regarding H7N9 influenza A viruses from humans (), which we plan on analyzing in the near future for comparison with the results of this work. For future work, we plan on increasing the functionality of the Glycan Miner Tool by adding additional information in the results to indicate the possible classes of glycans (e.g. N-or O-linked, glycosaminoglycans, etc) in which an extracted substructure may be found. The original glycan(s) in which the substructure was found should also be displayed to assist the user in further analysis of the dataset. It may also be useful to indicate the net negative charge of a resulting structure, as such information may be relevant to binding.. Plot of viral production in the three types of cells used in this study. The gray bar is the control, the striped bar is the negative control and the black bar is the MDCK cell with overexpressed sulfotransferase. The actual values are listed in
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
METHODS 3.1 Glycan array data The glycan array data from the CFG were used as the data source for glycan binding affinity information of various influenza strains. We first selected all virus-binding array data, which resulted in 191 datasets. Among these, those virus strains for which virus experiments were feasible were selected, resulting in 15 wild-type strains as listed in Table 2. We then selected those glycans that demonstrated high binding affinity in each dataset (provided in Supplementary Information). The smallest number of selected glycans was 8 (human H1N1; A/South Carolina/1/1918) and the largest was 40 [Equine H3N8; A/equine/MA/2003 (H3N8)]. The human H1N1 virus strains bound to 15 glycans on average. Table 2 also lists the number of glycans selected from each dataset. In general, the top binding glycans were selected, except for those whose structures were not given, such as 'Fibrinogen' and 'Transferrin.' The glycan structure data provided by the CFG are provided in IUPAC format, so it was necessary to convert them to KCF format such that they could be input into the Glycan Miner Tool. Once this was done using the IUPAC to KCF utility in RINGS, and the structures were confirmed to be accurately converted, the data were then ready to be analyzed. 3.2 Glycan Miner Tool The Glycan Miner Tool implements the-closed frequent subtree algorithm (Hashimoto et al., 2008) for glycan structures. In brief,-closed frequent subtrees are defined as those substructures within the input dataset that frequently appear (more than a specified minimum threshold, called the minimum support, or minsup). Those subtrees that appear in at least minsup number of input glycan structures are considered to be frequent subtrees. Moreover, to avoid the retrieval of overly similar subtrees, the parameter was defined to specify the amount of overlap allowed among the retrieved subtrees. Thus, the following condition must be met for a subtree T to be included in the results: support P 5max a support T, minsup,
Frequent glycan structure mining of influenza virus increased viral infection at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
T.Ichimiya et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
DISCUSSION In this work, we show that our tool implementing the-closed frequent subtree method was able to extract a significant pattern from glycan array data, which we proved using a viral infection experiment on cells with modified glycans on the cell surface. This is the first work to our knowledge where experts in bioinformatics, glycobiology and virology collaborated and produced significant and promising biologically-relevant results. The data mining technique involved subtle adjustments of the parameters to obtain results that could be used in wet-lab experiments. The glycobiologists provided expertise in modifying the appropriate glycan structures on the cell surface, and the virologists provided the appropriate cells and viruses by which the overexpressed cells could be experimented. As a result, we were able to illustrate the validity of data mining results by confirming them using wet-lab experiments. More importantly, we show that we have indeed found a novel pattern other than SA in glycan structures that Fig. 1. Screenshot of Glycan Miner analysis results using human H1N1 (New York, 1918) Fig. 2. Screenshot of Glycan Miner analysis results using human H1N1 (Texas)
