Motivation: Binding site identification is a classical problem that is important for a range of applications, including the structure-based prediction of function, the elucidation of functional relationships among proteins, protein engineering and drug design. We describe an accurate method of binding site identification, namely FTSite. This method is based on experimental evidence that ligand binding sites also bind small organic molecules of various shapes and polarity. The FTSite algorithm does not rely on any evolutionary or statistical information, but achieves near experimental accuracy: it is capable of identifying the binding sites in over 94% of apo proteins from established test sets that have been used to evaluate many other binding site prediction methods. Availability: FTSite is freely available as a web-based server at
INTRODUCTIONLocating ligand binding sites is of fundamental importance for a range of applications, such as the structure-based prediction of function, the elucidation of functional relationships among proteins, protein engineering and drug design. A number of methods aimed at ligand binding site identification have been developed; these include geometric analyses, energy calculations, evolutionary considerations, machine learning and various combinations of these approaches. Over the years, improvements in methodology have led to an increase in the success rate of binding site detection as the top prediction from 52% by SURFNET () to 83% by VICE () for the LIGSITE CSC test set of 48 unbound protein structures (), which has been used to evaluate many binding site detection methods. The VICE algorithm () has not been implemented as a server, and the best server currently available is MetaPocket 2.0 (), which seeks consensus among eight different methods and reaches 80% accuracy for the unbound LIGSITE CSC test set. Here we describe the energy-based method FTSite, which is capable of identifying the binding sites with 94% * To whom correspondence should be addressed. success rate as the top prediction for the same LIGSITE CSC test set, and has been implemented as a server.
METHODSThe premise behind FTSite is that ligand binding sites also bind small organic molecules of various shapes and polarity, as observed by nucleic magnetic resonance (NMR) () and X-ray crystallography experiments (). The solvent mapping algorithm () in FTSite is a direct computational analog of these screening techniques. Briefly, computational mapping individually places each of 16 different small molecular probes (Supplementary) on a dense grid around the protein and finds favorable positions using empirical free energy functions. For each probe type, the individual probes are then clustered and the clusters are ranked on the basis of the average free energy (Supplementary Material). Next, consensus clusters are identified as sites in which different probe clusters overlap. The consensus clusters are ranked on the basis of the total number of non-bonded interactions between the protein and all probes in the cluster. The consensus cluster with the highest number of contacts is ranked first; nearby consensus clusters are also joined with this cluster. The amino acid residues in contact with the probes of this newly defined cluster constitute the top ranked predicted ligand binding site (). Clusters with fewer contacts define lower ranked predictions.
RESULTSFTSite was evaluated using apo structures from two test sets of proteins that have been previously used in the evaluation of other binding site prediction methods. These test sets are the LIGSITE CSC set () and QSiteFinder set (). FTSite achieves accuracy rates of 94 and 97% for the LIGSITE CSC and QSiteFinder sets, respectively, when determining the binding site as the highest ranked consensus site. For each test set, we employed the same assessment criteria that were used in the respective previous studies (Supplementary Material). A comparison to other methods is shown in. FTSite was able to identify the ligand binding site using only the top ranked prediction in a number of difficult cases. Two examples are shown in(see the Supplementary Material for other examples); the ligand from the holo structures is superimposed on the results of the apo structures for comparison. In both cases, conformational differences between the holo and apo structures make binding site detection difficult. In the case of -amylase, the loop formed by residues V99, G100 and D101 closes down on the ligand in the holo form, yielding a better defined ligand binding site. Similarly, in the apo form of HIV-2 protease the ligand binding site). Right: HIV-2 protease (PDB ID 1HSI (apo) and 1IDA (holo)). (c) Top: on the LIGSITE CSC test set, FTSite has an accuracy of 94% using only the top ranked prediction of the ligand binding site, and 98% using the top three. Bottom: on the QSiteFinder test set, FTSite has an accuracy of 97% using only the top ranked prediction. is very open, and becomes well formed only upon ligand binding. Despite the poorly defined binding sites present in the apo structures of these two proteins, FTSite identifies the binding site as the top ranked prediction.
Binding site detection by FTSite
DISCUSSIONKey to the success of FTSite is the use of multiple molecular probes rather than a single probe as implemented in most other energybased methods. Screening by NMR and X-ray crystallography shows that the binding sites of proteins possess a tendency to bind small organic compounds that vary in size, shape and polarity, thus improving the robustness of FTSite to conformational changes. Although individual probes may bind to other cavities, the largest clusters of multiple probes occur in ligand binding sites (). Thus, FTSite does not rely on surrogate measures of ligand-binding propensity such as pocket volume, cavity depth or the ability of binding non-polar spheres. Due to its strong biophysical basis, the method provides high accuracy without evolutionary considerations. We note that solvent mapping also had success in identifying druggable binding sites in proteinprotein interfaces ().
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [17:27 20/12/2011 Bioinformatics-btr651.tex]
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
