Connections between disease phenotypes and drug effects can be made by identifying commonalities in the associated patterns of differential gene expression. Searchable databases that record the impacts of chemical or genetic perturbations on the transcriptome—here referred to as 'connectivity maps'—permit discovery of such com-monalities. We describe two R packages, gCMAP and gCMAPWeb, which provide a complete framework to construct and query connect-ivity maps assembled from user-defined collections of differential gene expression data. Microarray or RNAseq data are processed in a standardized way, and results can be interrogated using various well-established gene set enrichment methods. The packages also feature an easy-to-deploy web application that facilitates reproducible research through automatic generation of graphical and tabular reports. Availability and implementation: The gCMAP and gCMAPWeb R packages are freely available for UNIX, Windows and Mac OS X operating systems at Bioconductor
INTRODUCTIONMicroarray and RNAseq technologies enable the study of transcriptional changes triggered by experimental perturbations. Gene expression changes observed after one perturbation often resemble those produced by others, suggesting a shared biological mechanism (). This strategy for establishing links between perturbations can then be used, for example, to identify bioactive compounds (), elucidate their mode of action () or reposition approved pharmaceuticals for use in new indications (). Standalone tools (), modular software libraries () or hosted web applications are available to query the original Connectivity Map (), but tools that allow users to easily compile and search their own reference datasets are lacking. The gCMAP package provides utilities and memory-efficient structures to create, store and query large experimental datasets. gCMAP also provides a unified R command-line interface to multiple gene set enrichment (GSE) approaches, permitting their use for querying user-created connectivity maps as well as more traditional gene set collectionse.g. Gene Ontology, Reactome or WikiPathways (). In addition, the companion gCMAPWeb package provides a customizable browser-based graphical user interface, and can leverage R's built-in web server or be integrated into a production-scale server.
FEATURESTo compile a new connectivity map, users supply expression data in the form of standard Bioconductor ExpressionSet objects. gCMAP provides convenience functions to split large studies into individual perturbation instances and process them in batch, taking advantage of the widely used limma () and DESeq () Bioconductor packages. QC metrics permit removal of unsuitable experiments, e.g. those suffering from normalization artifacts (Supplementary Material). To allow memory-efficient access to large datasets, results are stored on disk and data subsets are loaded on demand. gCMAP represents gene set membership and (optionally) direction of expression change via sparse numerical matrices, enabling efficient GSE analysis using matrix operations. Analysis of complete differential expression profiles, which retains more information than gene sets, is also supported, permitting permutation-based assessment of statistical significance. gCMAP implements several well-established GSE methods, including Fisher's exact test, the original GSEA statistic (), the JG score (), mgsa () and Roast (). All gCMAP implementations use common input and output formats, enabling direct comparisons among the supported statistics. The gCMAPWeb package complements gCMAP by providing a graphical user interface through a distributable web application. gCMAPWeb leverages R's built-in web server, permitting singleuser access on any computer running R, and can also be integrated into an Apache web server in a multiuser environment. To submit queries, users can paste gene identifiers directly into a web form or upload text files (Supplementary File S1). gCMAPWeb returns results in graphical and tabular form, with detail at the gene set and single-gene levels (). Every report, including graphs, tables and a binary R object, is available for download. The gCMAPWeb user interface is automatically configured to match reference datasets but can be easily customized.
EXAMPLESWe used gCMAP to reconstruct the original Connectivity Map, containing 453 individual perturbations in five human cell lines, from raw microarray data (ArrayExpress E-GEOD-5258, Supplementary File S1). We then used gCMAPWeb to query this dataset with genes found to be *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com up-or downregulated in MCF7 cells treated with the NFB inhibitor 15-prostaglandin J2. Top hits included MG-132/ZLeu-Leu-Leu-CHO and celastrol, two known inhibitors of the same pathway (). To assess differential expression from count data, gCMAP leverages the widely used DESeq package (). To re-examine the transcriptional response of HepG2 cells to the carcinogen Benzo
CONCLUSIONThe gCMAP Bioconductor packages combine powerful command-line functionality with a convenient portable web application. The efficient handling of large datasets empowers users to assemble large connectivity maps from private or public data, query them programmatically or through an interactive user interface and store queries and results in a reproducible report.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
T.Sandmann et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
