Gene Slider helps visualize the conservation and entro-py of orthologous DNA and protein sequences by presenting them as one long sequence logo that can be zoomed in and out of, from an overview of the entire sequence down to just a few residues at a time. A search function enables users to find motifs such as cis-elements in promoter regions by simply " drawing " a sequence logo representation of the desired motif as a query. In addition to displaying user-supplied FASTA files, our demonstration version of Gene Slider loads and displays a rich database of 90,000+ conserved non-coding regions across the Brassicaceae indexed to the TAIR10 Col-0 Arabidopsis thaliana sequence. It also displays transcription factor binding sites, enabling easy identification of regions that are both conserved across multiple species and may contain transcription factor binding sites.
INTRODUCTIONSequence logos are a well-known bioinformatic data visualization paradigm for displaying conservation and entropy in aligned sequences (). Each of the residues in a sequence is represented by a series of stacked characters in which the height of the stack signifies the degree of conservation for that position, and the height of the characters signifies the frequency of that residue. Traditionally, sequence logos are generated with tools such as WebLogo () and Seq2Logo () in which any sequence beyond 30 or so bases must be broken into separate rows. This makes it difficult to identify motifs that span multiple rows. Skylign () addresses this problem by generating long sequence logos that can * To whom correspondence should be addressed. be zoomed in and out of, however it is still difficult to identify amino acid motifs when there is " wobble " in one or more of the bases. Gene Slider addresses these challenges by combining the ability to make long sequence logos with a search panel that automatically highlights motifs of interest, even when there is a high degree of wobble. Slider controls assign certainty thresholds for each position of a search query to control whether the search function will recognize partially conserved matches. Up to six different motifs can be searched for, with each motif containing up to eight different bases. A navigation slider at the bottom of the screen indicates which region of the sequence is currently being displayed. Coloured markers along this slider indicate where query motifs have been identified, making it easy to see where multiple matches have been found.shows a portion of an alignment in which there is only one occurrence of the motif AAACA. Without the search function it would be challenging to find this motif because of the entropy in positions 3 and 4 of the match.phens's (1990) application of the Shannon entropy formula. Individual bit scores are summed to make a total bit score for the column. Symbols are then scaled according to the frequency of residues found in each column and drawn to the screen according to the start and end points of the view settings. The usual Shannon logo can be misleading because column heights do not take insertion and deletion events into account. A base that is only found in one sequence while each of the other sequences show a gap will have the same bit score and column height as a base that is conserved across every sequence. Gene Slider provides two modes for visualizing how many sequences are contributing to the bit score for any given base. The first mode uses a horizontal bar indicator, as can be seen inwhere positions 534-539 only have one species with a base in that column. The second mode manipulates the saturation level of each column, which takes advantage of the preattentive ability in our visual cortex to quickly recognize subtle changes in luminance ().motifs in the promoter of KAT1 (At5g46240). It has been shown that the transcription factor SOC1 affects stomatal opening, which is regulated by KAT1 (). The left panel shows a well-conserved SOC1 binding site (yellow) immediately upstream of the KAT1 promoter, while the right panel shows a SOC1 site that is not well conserved. The hypothesis would be that the former is the functional SOC1 binding site. The panels are displayed with the same vertical weighted bit score scale. Gene Slider provides another method for overcoming this problem by introducing a new logotype we call a " Weighted Shannon ". This approach factors the number of sequences contributing to the bit score into the calculation of that position's height by multiplying the bit score with the number of residues in that column divided by the total number of sequences in the alignment. In contrast to the various Kullback-Leibler modifications in Seq2Logo (), this produces a logotype that is similar to the convention, but highly conserved regions are not conflated with ones having just one or two residues in an otherwise gapped region. Work sessions can be saved and reloaded via a dynamically generated URL accessed through the 'Share' button. The 'Screen Grab' button creates high-resolution images suitable for publication. Gene Slider can display DNA or protein FASTA files, as well as GFF files that are uploaded by the user. Gene Slider was written in Processing.js and runs in most web browsers. It can display a large number of sequences of any length, however performance decreases as the sequence length and sequence number goes up. Contemporary laptops can display sequences up to 3000 bases long without noticeable lag. Data can be loaded directly from the users' hard drive, however, conserved noncoding sequence data can be loaded from RESTful web services running on the BAR ().
METHODS
Gene
RESULTTo demonstrate Gene Slider, we have pre-processed 90,000+ conserved non-coding regions across the Brassicaceae (), indexed to the TAIR10 Col-0 Arabidopsis thaliana sequence, for easy identification of regions that are conserved across multiple species. Further, we have mapped transcription factor binding sites from the JASPAR database () and fromto the TAIR10 genome sequence using FIMO () to permit the identification of regions that are both conserved and may contain transcription factor binding sites (). Upon visiting the web site, simply enter the name of the Arabidopsis gene and how many bases upstream and downstream of the gene you wish to load, or select a chromosomal region by entering the chromosome number, start and end point. This data can also be accessed directly as a web service. A link for this can be found on the website's About page. Although FIMO-mapped motifs are found in many places in the genome, a strong positional disequilibrium for a subset of these is found approximately-200 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site in Arabidopsis promoters if a conservation criterion is applied. Such a disequilibrium is consistent with functionally active binding sites. In Arabidopsis, 79% of the TFBSs mapped from thedata set and some other smaller data sets have identical positions in the alignment of the promoter region with three other closely related Brassicaceae species (). This subset shows a marked positional disequilibrium. In the same study, the authors also examined DNAse I hypersensitivity data from, and found a similar disequilibrium in the-200 bp upstream region. For this reason, we have also included a " Link to Regulome " for a set of DNAse I data from
The Author (2016). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com Bioinformatics Advance Access published August 13, 2016 at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
