Motivation: Gene clusters are arrangements of functionally related genes on a chromosome. In bacteria, it is expected that evolutionary pressures would conserve these arrangements due to the functional advantages they provide. Visualization of conserved gene clusters across multiple genomes provides key insights into their evolutionary histories. Therefore, a software tool that enables visualization and functional analyses of gene clusters would be a great asset to the biological research community. Results: We have developed GeneclusterViz, a Java-based tool that allows for the visualization, exploration and downstream analyses of conserved gene clusters across multiple genomes. GeneclusterViz combines an easy-to-use exploration interface for gene clusters with a host of other analysis features such as multiple sequence alignments, phylogenetic analyses and integration with the KEGG pathway database. Availability:
INTRODUCTIONRecent advances in sequencing technology and ortholog detection methods have given rise to several methods for the detection of gene clusters conserved across two or more genomes (). However, gene cluster information obtained from these programs has been very difficult to analyze for bench scientists due to the lack of a more intuitive analysis tool. The visualization of gene clusters in multiple genomes, with respect to their spatial and functional features is a fundamental problem in this area. There are currently several visualization tools that have been developed for a variety of applications in comparative genomics * To whom correspondence should be addressed.. A subset of these have been designed for the visualization of gene clusters. However, these tools are limited in different ways. In some cases, only paired-genome visualization is supported. Even in multi-genome visualization, scalability is a challenge and, thus, limits the utility of web-based tools. Moreover, web-based tools rely on server-hosted data and cannot utilize data provided by users. This is true even in the case of Absynte, a tool that was recently developed specifically for the task of visualizing bacterial and archaeal clusters. Standalone applications overcome these drawbacks but involve cumbersome installation procedures or database setups that demand programming skills beyond that of most end-users. Finally, existing gene cluster visualization tools are limited in their support for further downstream analyses. We have implemented GeneclusterViz, a robust and dynamic standalone tool that provides a global and local view of gene clusters. Moreover, with a host of flexible sequence and function analysis features, we believe GeneclusterViz can be a very useful tool in comparative genomics.
IMPLEMENTATIONGeneclusterViz has been implemented in Java (JDK 1.6). For the construction and depiction of phylogenetic trees, the Phylogenetic Analysis library was used (). To establish a server connection and to communicate with the back-end CGI program, the Jakarta Commons HTTPClient Java library from Apache Commons has been used. The server-side CGI programs and wrappers that run CLUSTAL W (), HMMER v2.3.2 () and KEGG pathway searches have been written in Perl.
FEATURESThe features of GeneclusterViz can be summarized into four broad categoriesinput, visualization, exploration and analyses features. Input: GeneclusterViz accepts output files from the EGGSand PhyloEGGS [part of ISGA;algorithms. These files are mainly tab-delimited plaintext formats that contain NC numbers and NCBI GI numbers as identifiers for genomes and individual gene products, respectively.
V.R.Pejaver et al.
GeneclusterVizGeneclusterViz also accepts gene family files in an in-house file format (GFAM) that was developed to represent genes from common COG families. Visualization: Users can easily zoom-in/out of cluster visualizations with respect to both the X and Y-axes. The 'Connect Clusters' feature displays all the connections between clusters across multiple genomes. Individual clusters can be accessed by clicking on a cluster in the table-pane on the left of the GeneclusterViz window. This highlights the particular cluster on the genome. The 'Connect Genes' feature displays how individual genes are connected in the highlighted cluster. The order in which the genomes are displayed can also be changed through a draggable list. Given a Newick tree file, the 'Phylogeny View' allows for the visualization of genomes in terms of their clades. These orderings are particularly useful if a user is interested in focusing on a subset of the input genomes. Analyses: At the main GeneclusterViz window, upon doubleclicking on a cluster entry in the table-pane, a new window displays a zoomed-in detailed view of that particular cluster. The genes are color-coded as per COG broad functional categories. One can view annotation information for a gene by simply mousing over that particular gene. Clicking on a particular gene in the cluster highlights the connection across the multiple genomes. If this highlighted connection is double-clicked, a new window with the sequences of the gene products is opened. These sequences can then be run through CLUSTAL W to generate a multiple sequence alignment and a phylogenetic tree can be built for their gene products. The corresponding pathway from KEGG can also be obtained. Exploration: Users can search for their genes of interest by providing their names or locus tags. Geneclusterviz can identify which clusters the specified genes are in and generates a table with the input genes against the corresponding cluster number. The clusters can then be accessed directly from the table. Another exploration feature is the capacity to add a new genome, given an existing multi-genome cluster prediction. GeneclusterViz allows for the input of a new genome and incorporates a feature which checks whether a given cluster is present in the new genome or not. It achieves this by establishing a connection to a back-end server that performs a profile-model-based HMM search (using HMMER) to identify conserved cluster members in the new genome. In this case, relaxed criteria for cluster identification have been adopted (HMMER E-value <10 which is the default and no proximity constraint on significant hits). Once the cluster has been identified in the newly input genome, it is displayed in the detailed view, along with the cluster in the other genomes for manual investigation.
DISCUSSIONGeneclusterViz serves not only as a user-friendly tool for the visualization of gene clusters across multiple genomes but also as a workspace for extensive research on these clusters. It tackles the non-trivial task of providing access and information about multiple conserved clusters across multiple genomes. There are several applications that GeneclusterViz can be used for including phylogenetic studies, pathway studies and gene function assignment. Thus, it is expected to help bench scientists in understanding the functional relationship between genes in conserved clusters across the evolutionary spectrum of genomes.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
