Analyzing large-scale interaction networks has generated numerous insights in systems biology. However, such studies have primarily been focused on highly co-expressed, stable interactions. Most transient interactions that carry out equally important functions, especially in signal transduction pathways, are yet to be elucidated and are often wrongly discarded as false positives. Here, we revisit a previously described Smith–Waterman-like dynamic programming algorithm and use it to distinguish stable and transient interactions on a genomic scale in human and yeast. We find that in biological networks, transient interactions are key links topologically connecting tightly regulated functional modules formed by stable interactions and are essential to maintaining the integrity of cellular networks. We also perform a systematic analysis of interaction dynamics across different technologies and find that high-throughput yeast two-hybrid is the only available technology for detecting transient interactions on a large scale.
INTRODUCTIONThe proteinprotein interactome of an organism is the network of all biophysically possible interactions of different proteins in that organism (). It is of key importance to accurately map this network as most proteins function by interacting with other proteins (). Moreover, a better understanding of genotype to phenotype relationships in human disease requires modeling of how disease-causing mutations might affect protein interactions and interactome properties (). Currently, there are two main highthroughput technologies to generate high-quality proteinprotein interactomes on a large scale: yeast two-hybrid (Y2H), where a protein interaction reconstitutes a transcription factor which then activates expression of reporter genes (), and affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry (AP/MS), where proteins bound to tagged baits are co-purified and identified (). High-throughput Y2H maps have been generated for yeast, fly, worm and human, while large-scale AP/MS datasets have * The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. been generated for yeast, worm and human (). An alternative approach, adopted by most databases, is to obtain literature-curated (LC) interactions (). It has been shown that well-controlled Y2H and AP/MS experiments are both of high quality but of complementary nature Y2H identifies direct binary interactions whereas AP/MS determines co-complex associations (). Moreover, gene expression and other functional genomics datasets are routinely integrated with proteinprotein interactions to validate their biological relevancefor example, interactions between proteins encoded by co-expressed genes are often considered to be of high quality (). In these analyses, gene co-expression is normally determined by a high Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC), which really means that the expression levels of the two genes are correlated over most conditions, i.e. they are globally co-expressed (). Previous studies have shown that interacting proteins within stable complexes also tend to be encoded by globally co-expressed gene pairs (). On the other hand, the regulation and coordination of the subcellular machinery is achieved by dynamic transient interactions for example in signal transduction pathways (). Proteins involved in transient interactions are not globally co-expressed. Rather, they share local blocks of co-expression. Transient interactions and their dynamics have significant biological importance, but most genes in these pathways are often co-expressed only under certain conditions (). As a result, these are usually discarded as false positives (). Here, we take advantage of a novel measurement of expression relationships () to directly distinguish stable from transient interactions on a genomewide scale in human and yeast and systematically analyze their topological and biological significance. We also evaluate different technologies in terms of their sensitivity in detecting interaction dynamics on a genomic scale.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Expression dynamics: global versus local co-expressionFor our analysis, we created compendiums of gene expression and high-quality large-scale proteinprotein interaction datasets for human and yeast (Supplementary Note SN1).Local co-expression B
Interaction dynamics: stable versus transientNext, to explore interaction dynamics across different technologies, we compared how successful different experimental techniques were in detecting stable and transient interactions. In agreement with previous studies, stable interactions within subcellular complexes show a strong enrichment of proteins encoded by globally coexpressed genes (Figs. 2A & B, Supplementary). On the other hand, although statistically significant, the enrichment of these globally co-expressed pairs is much less for binary interactions from both large-scale Y2H and LC sources. This lack of global co-expression has often been used as an argument to suggest that high-throughput Y2H interactions are of low quality (). However, a recent study applied orthogonal assays to experimentally confirm that these binary interactions are in fact highly reliable (). Figures 2C and D shows that in both human and yeast, Y2H is the only technology consistently able to identify transient interactions significantly more than random expectation. Surprisingly, binary interactions from the literature are not enriched with transient ones. Given the sociological biases within interactions from the literature (), there might be many compounding factors for this result. Stable interactions are easier to recapitulate under different experimental conditions, whereas transient interactions can only be tested under specific conditions. Therefore, transient interactions are more likely to be considered as false positives and not reported in the literature. In addition, in the post-genomic era, many candidate interaction partners arefirst identified based on gene expression and other genomic features favoring selection of stable interactions over transient ones. This result further highlights the importance of high-throughput Y2H because it is the only technology available to detect transient interactions, confirming that different protein interaction detection technologies capture different modes of biochemical interactions ().
Genome-scale analysis of interaction dynamics
Biological significance of transient interactionsTo assess the biological significance of transient interactions as defined by our algorithm, we computed functional similarity of protein pairs involved in these interactions. We find that transient interactions are significantly enriched for proteins with similar functions and the fold enrichment is comparable to that of stable interactions in both human and yeast (Supplementary.). These results confirm the validity of our definition of transient interactions. We therefore provide the first method to systematically detect transient interactions on a genomic scale. Although our method might miss certain transient interactions, especially extremely transient ones that are virtually impossible to distinguish from random, our results confirm that those detected by our method are high quality and share significant functional similarity.A good example of transient interactions identified by Y2H is the interaction between Sfb2 and Sec23. This interaction has been confirmed in vivo (). Sec23 is a subunit of the COPII complex required for the budding of transport vesicles from endoplasmic reticulum (). SFB2 has a 56% sequence identity with SEC24, an essential component of COPII involved in cargo selection (). Overexpression of SFB2 can rescue the sec24 null mutant cells (). Furthermore, it has been suggested experimentally that Sfb2 may recognize different export signals from those of Sec24 and may be used under non-normal growth conditions (). These results agree with the expression dynamics revealed by our new analysisSFB2 and SEC23 are only co-expressed during stress response ().
Transient interactions key in maintaining network integrityTraditionally, in network analysis, the focus has been on nodes. Hubs are crucial in maintaining the integrity of biological networks (). Interaction networks have two broad categories of hubs. Date hubs have low average PCC with their interactors and hold the key in maintaining the integrity of cellular networks, while party hubs have
Genome-scale analysis of interaction dynamicshigh average PCC with their interactors and are often contained in tightly organized modules (). We find that date hubs have a significant propensity to be involved in transient interactions (Figs. 3B & 3C), suggesting that these play an important role in maintaining the integrity of the networks. To validate this result, we compared the edge 'betweenness' of global and transient interactions (Supplementary Note SN5). Edge betweenness can be used to detect community structure within networks (). Clusters detected by this approach tend to share similar functions (). We find that transient interactions for both human and yeast have a significantly higher betweenness than stable interactions (). This implies that transient interactions hold the key in maintaining the integrity of the underlying cellular network. Disrupting these will partition the interactome into disjoint clusters, unable to perform temporally and spatially well-regulated processes. To further explore topological properties of transient interactions, we examined connectivity in response to progressive edge removal and found that selectively removing transient interactions increased characteristic path length much more sharply than selectively removing stable or random interactions (Figs. 3E & 3F). Biological interactomes are small-world networks and removing a random edge is unlikely to significantly alter connectivity, as most random edges are not essential in maintaining network integrity (). However, selectively disrupting key edges disrupts network structure and increases the characteristic path length significantly. Since removal of transient interactions causes the sharpest increase in path length, these are indeed critical for network integrity.
CONCLUSIONSHere, we utilize a previously described SmithWaterman-like dynamic programming algorithm to segregate transient interactions from stable complexes on a genomic scale directly from gene expression data. For the first time, we distinguish their biological roles and show that although transient interactions are currently underexplored, they perform key biological functions and are essential to maintaining the integrity of cellular networks. Moreover, we find that Y2H is currently the only technology that is able to determine transient interactions on a large scale. Our findings are likely to generate significant interest in designing experiments to detect transient interactions to further explore their properties.
METHODS
Calculating PCC, MIC and LESPCC was calculated in a massively parallel Java program (Supplementary Note SN6) using the Parallel Java framework (). MIC was calculated using a Java implementation provided by. Transient interactions for human and yeast were identified with a similar Parallel Java implementation of a SmithWaterman-like dynamic programming algorithm (Supplementary Note SN7) to calculate LES (). A summarization of the total count and technology-specific count of stable and transient interactions is listed in Supplementary Tables ST1 and ST2.
Calculating betweenness and functional similarityEdge betweenness was calculated using the GirvanNewman algorithm (). Functional similarity was studied using total ancestry measurea metric that takes the entire biological process tree and calculates the association of each gene with a biological process. For each protein pair query, it computes what fraction of all possible protein pairs that share the same set of Gene Ontology () biological pathway terms as the query pair (). The calculations are performed using a massively Parallel Java program (). The implementations and datasets are available through our supplementary website: http://www.yulab.org/Supp/IntDynamics/.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
(Qian et al., 2001). Details of the biological significance of each of these four categories can be found in Supplementary Note SN2. As the cell is in a different state at each of these time points, we are in fact measuring expression under different intracellular conditions. All datasets are carefully normalized to remove potential noise (Irizarry et al., 2003; Johnson et al., 2007; Luscombe et al., 2003; Yu et al., 2007b). We also compiled high-quality large-scale protein protein interaction datasets for human and yeast spanning both high-throughput technologiesY2H and AP/MS. We consolidated high-quality binary interactions in the literature from various databases (Supplementary Note SN3). Although traditionally these LC interactions are considered to be of high quality, recent studies have shown that many of them, especially those supported by only one publication, in fact tend to be false positives (Cusick et al., 2009). To remove unreliable interactions from our analysis, we carefully compiled comprehensive sets of high-quality binary LC interactions supported by multiple publications (named 'LCmultiple') for human and yeast. High-quality LC co-complex associations were obtained from MIPS (Mewes et al., 2011) for yeast and Reactome (D'Eustachio, 2011) for humantwo databases generally considered as gold standards for complexes in the corresponding organisms (Jansen et al., 2002; Lage et al., 2007). From these datasets, we first calculated the PCC for expression profiles corresponding to interacting protein pairs in the high-quality interaction datasets described above. For a pair of gene expression profiles, PCC reports the global correlation of expression levels across all conditions (Qian et al., 2001). A PCC value close to one indicates the pair of genes is globally co-expressed (Fig. 1A), whereas values close to zero indicate random, uncorrelated expression patterns. We find that the different interaction datasets for both human and yeast are significantly enriched for global co-expression as opposed to random gene pairs (Figs. 2A & B). Since PCC is a linear correlation coefficient and certain coexpression relationships could be non-linear, we also used the maximal information coefficient (MIC) (Reshef et al., 2011) to explore global expression dynamics of the different interaction datasets in human and yeast. MIC belongs to a class of maximal information-based nonparametric exploration (MINE) statistics and has been shown to be very robust in detecting a wide range of associations both linear and not (Reshef et al., 2011). Using MIC, we revalidate the global expression dynamics captured by PCCall the high-quality interaction datasets in both human and yeast have significantly enriched global co-expression as opposed to random gene pairs (Supplementary Figure SF1). Interacting protein pairs that have PCC greater than a certain cutoff (Supplementary Note SN4) are defined as stable interactions. However, gene pairs that are only co-expressed under certain conditions could have low and non-significant global PCC/MIC values. These often go undetected in the global nature of the computation, making global correlation an ineffective method for identifying condition-specific characteristics of transient interactions. To define dynamic co-expression relationships, we employed a SmithWaterman-like dynamic programming algorithm as described previously (Qian et al., 2001). For each pair of genes and their expression profiles, this algorithm calculates local expression-correlation scores (LES) to find subsets of conditions with correlated expression levels (Fig. 1B). Interacting proteins that do not pass the global PCC cutoff but have high LES are defined as transient interactions (see Section 4).
