Understanding the effect of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the expression level of genes is an important goal. We recently published a study in which we devised a multi-SNP predictive model for gene expression in Lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL), and showed that it can robustly predict the expression of a small number of genes in test individuals. Here, we validate the generality of our models by predicting expression profiles for genes in LCL in an independent study, and extend the pool of predictable genes for which we are able to explain more than 25% of their expression variability to 232 genes across 14 different cell types. As the number of people who obtained their SNP profiles through companies such as 23andMe is rising rapidly, we developed GenoExp, a web-based tool in which users can upload their individual SNP data and obtain predicted expression levels for the set of predictable genes across the 14 different cell types. Our tool thus allows users with biological knowledge to study the possible effects that their set of SNPs might have on these genes and predict their cell-specific expression levels relative to the population average.
IntroductionIn recent years, individual genotype [i.e. single nucleotide polymorphisms (] data have become readily accessible via directto-consumer genetic testing (DTCGT) companies such as 23andMe, deCODEme and Navigenics. These companies allow users to acquire their allele calls at 0.5 M SNPs across the genome, as well as a report of higher and lower risk for certain diseases, based on their genotyped SNPs. Since we have recently developed methods to robustly predict gene expression solely from genotype (), we decided to enable users to predict their own gene expression across multiple cell types. To this end, we developed GenoExp, a web-based tool where users can upload their raw genotype files obtained from any DTCGT company, and view their predicted gene expression (for a set of predictable genes) across 14 different cell types. To demonstrate the application of GenoExp, we used 23andMe genotype data provided willingly by one individual. We show the resulting predictions of gene expression and highlight examples such as a gene known to play a role in learning and memory that is predicted to be expressed above population-mean in brain cells of that individual.
ResultsOur recently published method () was developed using genotype and gene expression data taken from Lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) of 715 individuals. Therefore, we wished to test whether we could apply it to other tissues or cell types as well. For this purpose, we obtained two additional independent datasets that contained both genotype and gene expression measurements for different individuals: Genotype-Tissue Expression (). Next, we ran our predictive pipeline separately for the data in each of the 14 cell types (Supplementary Figs. S1S4). Specifically, for each cell type we used a strict 5-fold cross-validation scheme to learn a predictive model for the expression of each gene from the genotype of its cis-SNPs across individuals, and evaluated the performance of our models on held-out test individuals from the same gene and cell type. We found that across all cell types, a total of 232 unique genes exceeded an R 2 of 0.25 on test data (i.e. more than 25% of expression variability is explained on held-out individuals) in at least one of the cell types. These genes were therefore defined as predictable genes (Supplementary). Next, to test the generality of our models, we further obtained additional genotype data coupled with gene expression measurements of 381 twin-pairs (i.e. a total of 762 individuals) from the Multiple Tissue Human Expression Resource (MuTHER;). When applying the models learned from LCLs to the MuTHER data, we found that in 79% of cases, we predicted the correct direction of over-or under-expression (see Supplementary text for extended details), strengthening the validity of our predictions. Finally, we wanted to allow users to predict their own gene expression across multiple cell types using our predictive models. To this end, we developed GenoExp, a web-based tool where users can upload their raw genotype files obtained from any DTCGT company (e.g. 23andMe), and view their predicted gene expression (for the predictable genes) across the different 14 cell types (Supplementary). To demonstrate the application of GenoExp, we used 23andME genotype data willingly provided by one individual (Supplementary). We found that for this individual, some genes are predicted as expressed above populationmean in all cell types where prediction is possible (e.g. HLA-DRB5, SNPs used for prediction in skin shown in Supplementary), whereas other genes are predicted as expressed below populationmean (e.g. KCTD10). Clearly, this over-and under-expression does not necessarily imply functional consequences, yet they could be suggestive. For example, the gene CHURC1, which was predicted to be expressed above population-mean in all 4 cell types in the brain, has a homolog that was shown to play a key role in the development of neurons (), and a deletion of the genomic region containing it has been linked to autism (). In addition, the AMFR gene that was shown to be involved in the process of learning and memory in the central nervous system of mice () was also predicted to be expressed above population-mean in the brain cells of the tested individual. of cis-SNPs as covariates in the prediction problem, and learned the predictive model as described in Manor and Segal (2013). However, due to the fact that the K-Nearest-Neighbor model is both memory and computationally intensive, in the web-tool we restricted ourselves to the regularized linear version of the model (Supplementary).
Selecting the set of predictable genesTo select the set of predictable genes, we used the coefficient of determination (i.e. R 2 ) as out threshold. R 2 is a measure of the proportion of variance explained that is widely used when assessing the accuracy of models aiming to predict a continuous variable such as gene expression. The threshold of R 2 0.25 is chosen since explaining over 25% of individual gene expression variability on held-out test data is considered by us to be a useful prediction.
Building a web-based tool to enable users to predict their expressionFor the web tool, we use a combination of Perl and Matlab scripts to do the following: (i) Upload the user's SNP genotypes file (i.e. from 23andMe) from the web form to the server. (ii) Impute the missing SNPs needed by the gene specific models using the IMPUTE2 () software, and using the 1000 Genomes Project together with HapMap data as the genome reference for imputation.
V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Discussion One of the major goals of human genomics and medicine today is to reach the stage of personalized medicine. That is, tailoring the diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of diseases to a specific individual. The connections between gene expression and various human diseases have long been made, and over-and under-expression of specific genes have been shown to promote or protect from certain diseases. In addition, studies have shown that many SNPs are significantly associated with the expression of various genes, although no predictive models are usually offered in these studies, making it impossible for an individual to predict their own gene expression from SNPs. This drawback has led us to recently publish a study where we learn a predictive model of gene expression from multiple SNPs. This modeling framework allows both the combination of different SNPs in the model, and the ability to predict the expression of a gene in unseen individuals given their entire SNP profile. Here, we extend our predictive models to 232 genes where we can explain 25% or more of the expression variability in held-out test individuals in at least one of 14 cell types. As acquiring one's genetic data (i.e. SNP values) to learn more about his or her own disease risks and biology is becoming easier and more prevalent through companies such as 23andMe, we set out to build a web-based tool, that would allow users to input their measured SNP values, and obtain predictions of gene expression across the various cell types in our study. We acknowledge that currently, only individuals that have biological knowledge could potentially benefit from our tool. However, we believe that as more data of genotype and phenotype becomes available, models such as ours can become more sophisticated, allowing more accurate predictions of gene expression profiles and ultimately of organismal phenotypes such as disease risks or possible adverse effects of drugs, thereby enabling users to take more knowledge-based actions when it comes to their well-being. 4 Methods 4.1 Data and pre-processing For the HapMap LCL dataset, we downloaded the SNP genotypes of phase 3 (Altshuler et al., 2010) and obtained gene expression measurements for genes of these individuals from (Stranger et al., 2012). For the GTEx and Brain-eQTL datasets, we downloaded the SNP genotype and gene expression measurements from (Gibbs et al., 2010; Lonsdale et al., 2013) after obtaining approval. For the MuTHER dataset, we downloaded SNP genotype from (Grundberg et al., 2012) and corresponding gene expression measurements from the ArrayExpress website (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/). Except for normalization of expression data discussed below, we did not process the data further than the processing done by the original publications. For each gene, we extracted all cis-SNPs located inside the gene or within 100 kb from the transcription start or end sites (gene locations were downloaded from the UCSC genome browser and SNP locations from dbSNP). We transformed each SNP to a discrete variable with values of 0, 1 or 2, corresponding to the number of minor alleles that each individual carries for the SNP. Therefore, an individual with 0 minor alleles will have a value of 0, etc. 4.2 Data normalization Since the absolute values of gene expression in each dataset could be different given the measurement platforms, to remove dataset specific effects, we normalized the expression of every gene across all individuals in each dataset to have a mean equal to 0 and standard deviation equal to 1. 4.3 Learning a predictive model of gene expression For each gene, we learned a separate predictive model for each of the 14 cell types in which the gene was expressed. We used the set GenoExp: predicting gene expression from SNPs
O.Manor and E.Segal at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
