Motivation: The growing amount of regulatory data from the ENCODE, Roadmap Epigenomics and other consortia provides a wealth of opportunities to investigate the functional impact of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Yet, given the large number of regulatory datasets, researchers are posed with a challenge of how to efficiently utilize them to interpret the functional impact of SNP sets. Results: We developed the GenomeRunner web server to automate systematic statistical analysis of SNP sets within a regulatory context. Besides defining the functional impact of SNP sets, GenomeRunner implements novel regulatory similarity/differential analyses, and cell type-specific regulatory enrichment analysis. Validated against literature-and disease ontology-based approaches, analysis of 39 disease/trait-associated SNP sets demonstrated that the functional impact of SNP sets corresponds to known disease relationships. We identified a group of autoim-mune diseases with SNPs distinctly enriched in the enhancers of T helper cell subpopulations, and demonstrated relevant cell type-specificity of the functional impact of other SNP sets. In summary, we show how systematic analysis of genomic data within a regulatory context can help interpreting the functional impact of SNP sets. Availability and Implementation: GenomeRunner web server is freely available at http://www.inte grativegenomics.org/. Contact:
IntroductionThe success of genome-wide association studies (GWASs) in finding causative single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for Mendelian disorders is hindered by their failure to define complex patterns of nonMendelian inheritance, such as seen in multi-factorial complex diseases (). This is in part because $8893% of all SNPs lie outside protein coding regions (), complicating our understanding of the regulatory mechanisms involved. Furthermore, $90% of all SNPs are rare (), i.e. occurring in a small percentage of individuals (typically 0.055%), and generally underemphasized in GWASs. Thus, only a fraction of valuable genetic information is studied.Recent research has provided evidence that rare SNPs and SNPs outside of protein-coding regions can contribute to disease manifestation () by collectively altering DNA methylation (), histone modifications (), enhancers (), chromatin states (), deoxyribonuclease I (DNAse I) accessibility () and transcription factor binding (), leading to gene expression changes () (reviewed in) and disruption of proteinprotein interactions (). Yet exploring SNPs-regulatory relationships in a hypothesis-driven manner is not just time-consuming, but also limited to the regulatory mechanisms an individual researcher can think of. Conversely, using systematically organized publicly available regulatory data offers a data-driven investigation of potential functional mechanisms altered by SNPs. To do this, software is needed to facilitate systematic analysis of such genome-wide data. Recent years have seen rapid growth of publicly available data on genome organization and functional/regulatory information (). The Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) project, the Roadmap Epigenomics program and others () have been actively cataloguing functional/regulatory genome annotation datasets, such as cell-and tissue specific histone modification profiles, DNAse I hypersensitive sites, chromatin states, and transcription factor-binding sites (TFBSs). Although many breakthroughs have been made by the analyses of these datasets, these resources remain underutilized by computational biologists for systematic analysis and interpretation of the functional mechanisms associated with, and potentially altered by, experimentally obtained 'omics' data. In this article, we describe the GenomeRunner web serveran automated framework for the statistical analysis and interpretation of the functional impact of SNP sets using regulatory datasets from the ENCODE, Roadmap Epigenomics and other projects. GenomeRunner prioritizes regulatory datasets most significantly enriched in SNP sets and visualizes the most significant enrichments (), thus suggesting regulatory mechanisms that may be altered by them. In addition to prioritizing SNP set-specific regulatory enrichments (functional impact), GenomeRunner implements three novel approaches: (i) regulatory similarity analysis, aimed at identifying groups of SNP sets having similar functional impact; (ii) differential regulatory analysis, developed to identify functional impact specific for a group of SNP sets; and (iii) cell type regulatory enrichment analysis, designed to identify cell type specificity of the functional impact. We have reviewed 20-related software tools to highlight the novel functionality of GenomeRunner (, Supplementary). The article is organized as follows. The Methods part provides a brief overview of GenomeRunner functionality and analytical approaches. The Results part illustrates the application of GenomeRunner to deepen our understanding of the potential functional impact of 39 disease/trait-associated SNP sets. GenomeRunner identified a group of nine immunologic diseases with distinct functional enrichment signature of the corresponding SNP sets, detected cell specificity of the regulatory enrichments relevant to disease pathology, and confirmed known enrichment of the immunologic disease-associated SNP sets in T helper cell-specific enhancers, H3K4me1 and H3K27ac activating histone marks. In summary, we show how GenomeRunner, an open-source web server freely accessible at http://www.integrativegenomics.org/, aids in biological interpretation of the significance of SNP sets in terms of putative functional impact.
Methods
Data source and preprocessingWe used organism-and cell type-specific regulatory datasets from the ENCODE () and Roadmap Epigenomics () projects. The hg19/mm9 human/mouse genome annotation data from the ENCODE project were downloaded from the UCSC genome database () (http:// hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg19/encodeDCC/and http://hg download.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/mm9/encodeDCC/, respectively). The Roadmap Epigenomics hg19 human genome annotation data was obtained from the http://egg2.wustl.edu/roadmap/web_portal/ index.html web portal (). The FANTOM consortium () human cell type-specific enhancer data was downloaded from http://enhancer.binf.ku.dk/pre sets/. The Cistrome () human/mouse regulatory data were downloaded from http://cistrome.dfci.harvard.edu/NR_ Cistrome/index.html. All data were accessed on July 22, 2015. To automate the use of the regulatory datasets, we convert the data to 0-based BED format (http://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/ FAQformat.html#format1.7). This conversion keeps genomic coordinates and, if available, strand and score information of regions annotated with regulatory or functional properties. We keep regulatory data across standard chromosome names, e.g. for human, 22 chromosomes, X and Y chromosomes and MT chromosome, if available. To speed up data access, the BED files are compressed and indexed by the bgzip/tabix tools (). As regulatory regions can be strand-specific and/or differ in the strength/significance of signal detection, we provide an option tofilter the regulatory datasets by strand and signal strength. To filter the regulatory datasets by signal strength, we estimate the 25, 50 and 75% percentiles of the full signal range. These percentiles are used as thresholds to filter out regulatory regions with signal strength below the selected percentile threshold. This filtering strategy allows focusing the analyses on regulatory regions with high signal strength. A total of 20 877 regulatory datasets (GRCh37/hg19 genome assembly) are organized in a hierarchical structure (, Supplementary). Each category of the regulatory datasets can be selected, as well as the individual datasets. The structured database organization simplifies interpretation of the results by focusing the analysis on a particular category of the regulatory datasets, and further narrowing it to a cell type-specific level.
Disease-and trait-associated SNP setsGenomic coordinates (hg19) of the 39 disease-and trait-associated SNP sets were extracted from the Supplementary Table S1 of the Farh et al. article 'Genetic and epigenetic fine mapping of causal autoimmune disease variants' ().
Regulatory enrichment analysisThe regulatory enrichment analysis evaluates whether SNPs in a set are statistically significantly co-localized with the regulatory regions in a datasets. The enrichment of such co-localization is assessed using the Chi-square (default) or Binomial tests, or Monte Carlo simulations (). We do not employ random sampling from the whole genome, as the distribution of SNPs at any given genomic region is not uniform (). Instead, by default, we provide a 'background' of all or common (with a minor allele frequency >1%) organism-specific SNPs from the latest dbSNP database. The user has an option to provide a custom background, e.g. a set of all SNPs evaluated in a study. The 'background' set of SNPs is used to evaluate co-localizations that occur by chance. Considering the fact that different types of regulatory regions are not independent (e.g. DNAse I hypersensitive sites may co-localize with H3K27ac activating histone modification mark), the regulatory enrichment P-values are corrected for multiple testing using the false discovery rate (FDR) procedure. We perform the correction on a per-cell-type basis, as each cell type has its own dependencies among different types of regulatory datasets. The enrichment analysis allows mechanistic insight into the functional impact of SNPs by prioritizing regulatory datasets most significantly enriched in userprovided SNP sets.
Regulatory similarity analysisIn the era of precision medicine, or the tailoring of treatments to patient-specific genetics, classification of patients by comparing patient-specific mutation profiles () is becoming an important clinical goal. GenomeRunner's regulatory similarity analysis allows classification of multiple SNP sets by estimating similarity of their functional impact by comparing their regulatory enrichment profiles. We define a SNP set-specific regulatory enrichment profile as a vector of enrichment Z scores obtained by testing a set of SNPs for enrichment in several regulatory datasets (Supplementary). If sets of SNPs are co-localized with similar regulatory datasets (i.e. have similar functional impact), their regulatory enrichment profiles will be similar. On the other hand, if sets of SNPs are enriched in different regulatory datasets, their regulatory enrichment profiles will be different. Note that SNPs in the sets do not have to have exact genomic location, but instead may be co-enriched in the same regulatory regions. As such, the regulatory similarity analysis evaluates relationships among SNP sets using regulatory context as a common reference. The results of the regulatory similarity analysis are visualized as an interactive heatmap of pairwise Spearman correlation coefficients among the SNP set-specific regulatory enrichment profiles. The heatmap is clustered to highlight groups of SNP sets with distinct regulatory signatures. The user can adjust clustering parameters, and define groups of SNP sets for the subsequent differential regulatory analysis.
Differential regulatory analysisThe differential regulatory analysis defines which regulatory signatures are associated with each group of SNP sets. For each pair of groups, the distributions of the enrichment Z-scores are compared for statistically significant differences using the Wilcoxon test. This comparison is performed for each regulatory dataset used for the enrichment analysis, and an FDR-corrected vector of P-values is collected. The differential regulatory analysis identifies regulatory datasets significantly enriched in one group but not in the other.
Cell type regulatory enrichment analysisThe cell type specific bias of the functional enrichments of a SNP set can be assessed with the cell type regulatory enrichment analysis. This analysis identifies the cell type specificity of the regulatory datasets most frequently and most significantly enriched in SNPs in this set. For each cell type, the distribution of cell type-specific regulatory enrichment Z-scores is compared with the overall distribution of the enrichment Z-scores using the Wilcoxon test. The cell type regulatory enrichment analysis, by nature, requires a SNP set to be tested in more than five cell type-specific regulatory datasets. This is best achieved by selecting several categories of cell type-specific regulatory datasets, e.g. DNAse-and histone modification regulatory datasets from the Roadmap Epigenomics project.
Literature similarity and disease ontology analysesTo establish similarity between two disease terms, the literaturebased approach uses information from public databases, such as disease-phenotype data from Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man, disease-associated genes (Entrez Gene), chemical compounds (CHEMID), pharmaceuticals (FDA drug list), and Gene Ontology (GO) terms. Let A and C represent the two diseases being compared and B n represents the set of n relationships they share. The first literature-based similarity metric is the number of shared relationships between A and C, normalized to the highest number of shared relationships A and C share with any other disease besides themselves (sharedRels). The second metric represents the number of AC shared relationships weighted by the number of expected relationships based on the connectivity of each entity (B n ) in the shared network (obsExp). Third is the minimum mutual information between AB n and B n C terms (minMim). Fourth metric is the strength of the literature connections between them (0.8 for every sentence comention, 0.5 for every abstract) (directStr). Fifth is the relative overlap between A and C in terms of the number of shared relationships (relOverlap). And finally, the minimum implicit strength normalized (misn), which ranks each AB n and B n C relationship as a function of the total area under the curve for all their relationships and calculates the minimum overlap they share. This misn method will weight highly correlated diseases whose overlapping relationships tend to be comparable in strength (e.g. if 'cell growth' is an important concept in both A and C literatures, then it will raise their misn. If it is very important to one but minimally important to the other, then it will not contribute much to the score). The disease ontology (DO)-based similarity method uses 'in the DOSim R package (, and references therein).
Performance optimization and assessmentGenomeRunner performs a large number of statistical calculations to obtain regulatory enrichments. We optimized statistical calculations by precalculating overlaps between each default 'background' SNP set and each regulatory dataset. These precalculated values represent overlaps that can occur by chance and are subsequently used in the Fisher's exact test calculations. To quantify the performance of GenomeRunner, we evaluated three parameters for their impact on run time: (i) the number of regulatory datasets; (ii) the number of SNP sets; (iii) the size of a SNP set. Each run time evaluation included comparing the optimized versus non-optimized statistical calculations. To evaluate the effect of the number of regulatory datasets on run time, a set of 1000 randomly selected SNPs was run for the enrichment analysis using from 100 to 1000 randomly selected regulatory datasets. To evaluate how the number of SNP sets affects run time, 10100 sets of random SNPs, each with 1000 SNPs, were analyzed for enrichment against 1000 randomly selected regulatory datasets (Supplementary).
Implementation and availabilityThe GenomeRunner web server is implemented in Python 2.7. It uses CherryPy for the web framework, Mako for web pages templating, and Celery for parallelizing analyses jobs. The enrichment analysis is built upon Kent utilities (), BedTools (), pybedtools (), bedops (), tabix () and R (). The frontpage interface is implemented using the Bootstrap framework and jQuery UI. The interface of the results page is implemented using the shiny R package. The heatmaps are created using D3, R/ Bioconductor functionality (), and the dendextend R package (). The GenomeRunner web server is available at http://www.integrativegenomics.org, and can be run as a command line version. It runs best in Google Chrome 29, Firefox 26, Safari 6. The source code and documentation for the GenomeRunner web server is available at https://github.com/mdoz morov/genomerunner_web. The quick start guide is available at https://github.com/mdozmorov/genomerunner_web/wiki. The R/ Bioconductor scripts used to perform the analysis of the 39 disease/ trait associated SNP sets are available at https://github.com/mdoz morov/gwas2bed/tree/master/autoimmune/R.GR.autoimmune.
Results
Defining regulatory mechanisms of complex diseasesTo illustrate how GenomeRunner can help to better understand regulatory mechanisms that may be altered in complex diseases, and their cell type specificity, we analyzed disease-and trait-associated SNP sets from 39 well-powered GWASs (). These include 21 immunologic diseases, four neurologic disorders, seven metabolic traits and seven other traits (Supplementary). Our analysis of the corresponding SNP sets was aimed to answer the following questions: (i) How well can relationships among the diseases be captured by the similarity of their functional impact? (ii) Are there groups of diseases with different functional impact, and what are these regulatory differences? (iii) What is the cell specificity of the functional impact of each disease?
Genomic similarity among disease-associated SNP sets correlates with knowledge-based disease similarityThe goal of the regulatory similarity analysis is to identify similarity among diseases based on patterns of the regulatory enrichments of their corresponding SNP sets (e.g. as determined by GWAS studies). Because the regulatory similarity analysis is a novel idea, we utilized several metrics to benchmark its performance in elucidating disease similarity. To establish a reference measure of similarity among the diseases, we used the shared genomic loci method introduced in the original publication by. This method measures similarity by calculating the number of overlapping disease-associated loci, defined as 500 bp regions surrounding disease-associated SNPs. Larger number of overlaps suggests higher similarity between a pair of diseases. We also employed literature-and DO-based approaches to measure disease similarity (). Both approaches offer several metrics to measure disease similarity (see 'Methods' section). Although each metric has been designed to measure different aspects of diseasedisease relationships, they utilize the same framework of knowledge databases and DO hierarchy. Therefore, we expected each metric to perform similarly in capturing disease similarities. The literature-and DO-based approaches can help to elucidate how well the shared genomic loci and the regulatory similarity measures reflect current knowledge about disease relationships. The literature-based and the shared genomic loci-based measures of disease similarity were highly correlated (median Spearman correlation coefficient  0.46, Supplementary), with the misn metric best correlating with the shared genomic loci measure (Spearman  0.49, P-value < 1.00E-16). The DO-based similarity measures were also positively correlated with the shared genomic loci-based measures, although to a lesser extent (median Spearman correlation 0.30). These results suggest that the shared genomic loci method can capture similarity among diseases analogous to known relationships and serve as a reference to evaluate the performance of the regulatory similarity analysis.
Imputed DNAse hypersensitive sites and histone marks best capture genomic disease similarityThe regulatory similarities may be obtained by selecting different categories of regulatory datasets, e.g. histone modification marks, DNAse hypersensitive sites etc. (Supplementary). As each category answers different biological questions about the regulatory mechanisms involved, we tested each category separately. We compared regulatory similarities obtained with each category vs. those obtained using the shared genomic loci method. This approach was aimed at identifying categories of regulatory datasets that provide regulatory similarities best correlated with the shared genomic loci similarity used as a reference. Among the ENCODE regulatory datasets, regulatory similarities based on the 161 regulatory datasets containing TFBSs were the most similar to the shared genomic loci similarities (Spearman's r  0.36, P-value  4.80E-12). Regulatory similarities based on histone modification marks and DNAse hypersensitive site datasets correlated less with the shared genomic loci similarities (Spearman's r  0.29 and 0.16, respectively). Surprisingly, regulatory similarities GenomeRunner web serverbased on chromatin states that encapsulate combinations of other regulatory marks () showed even less correlation with the shared genomic loci similarities (median Spearman's r  0.12). These results suggest selecting regulatory datasets is an essential step in measuring regulatory similarity among SNP sets, and highlights the importance of data-driven approach to analysis. The Roadmap Epigenomics project provides experimentally and computationally obtained regulatory datasets ('processed'/'imputed' datasets, respectively, Supplementary). Furthermore, the regulatory regions were obtained using either 'broad peak', or 'gapped peak', or 'narrow peak' peak calling algorithms (). We used each category of Roadmap Epigenomics datasets to identify regulatory datasets providing regulatory similarity best correlated with the shared genomic loci similarities. The imputed regulatory data captured the relationships among the diseases better than the processed data (median Spearman's r  0.61 versus 0.48, respectively, Supplementary). Furthermore, regulatory similarities obtained using histone marks and DNAse hypersensitive sites defined by the 'gapped peaks' algorithm showed the best correlation with the shared genomic loci similarities (median Spearman's r  0.66 and 0.54, respectively, Supplementary). Notably, gapped peaks, which are broad domains that include at least one narrow peak, have been recommended for use by the Roadmap Epigenomics consortium (), confirming our observations. Interestingly, using all regulatory data did not improve correlations of regulatory similarities with the shared genomic loci similarities (Spearman's r  0.55). These results indicate that computationally imputed regulatory datasets, in particular those with regulatory regions defined using the 'gapped peak' algorithm, perform best to measure regulatory similarity among the disease/traitassociated SNP sets.
Autoimmune disease-associated SNPsets show distinct regulatory enrichments from other disease/traitassociated SNP setsTo compare regulatory similarities among the diseases represented by the corresponding SNP sets, we performed principal components analysis (PCA) of the disease-specific regulatory enrichment profiles. To obtain disease-specific regulatory enrichment profiles, we used imputed histone and DNAse 'gapped peak' regulatory data, although using combinations of other regulatory datasets yielded comparable results (data not shown). The PCA shows the immunologic diseases as the most regulatory distinct from the other diseases/traits (). Hierarchical clustering of the disease-specific regulatory enrichment profiles also grouped the immunologic disease-associated SNP sets as the most distinct from metabolic, neurologic and other diseases/traits (Supplementary). We also visualized pairs of diseases with maximum regulatory similarity, and observed a similar grouping of immunologic diseases (Supplementary Table S6 and Supplementary). This visualization highlighted known relationships among the diseases, e.g. ulcerative colitis and ankylosing spondylitis (), and strengthened disease similarities currently under question, e.g. multiple sclerosis and celiac disease (). These results demonstrate that SNP sets of the diseases with similar pathologies are enriched in similar regulatory datasets, potentially altering similar regulatory mechanisms.
Two regulatory distinct groups of immunologic disease-associated SNP setsWe noted two subgroups of immunologic diseases formed distinct regulatory clusters (, Supplementary). Evaluating clustering stability of the regulatory enrichment profiles of 21 immunologic diseases with the pvclust R package () identified two stable groups supported by the regulatory similarity data, each containing 12 and 9 diseases, respectively (a  0.90,). These clusters were stable irrespectively of combinations of the regulatory datasets used for regulatory enrichment analysis (data not shown). These results suggest that there are at least two groups of immunologic diseases with SNP sets enriched in distinct regulatory datasets.
Thelper cell regulatory features are strongly enriched in a group of nine immunologic diseaseassociated SNP sets Having defined the two groups of immunologic diseases, we focused on identifying regulatory differences between them. We comparedregulatory enrichments between the two groups for statistically significant differences, i.e. identifying regulatory datasets significantly enriched in one but not the other group. Focusing on the regulatory data from 14 types of T cells and 9 types of B cells, we analyzed categories of histone modification marks, DNAse I hypersensitive sites and chromatin states. When using Roadmap Epigenomics data, we also investigated whether regulatory datasets defined using 'broad-', 'narrow-'and 'gapped' peak calling algorithms will identify the same differential regulatory features. This analysis of individual categories of regulatory datasets simplifies interpretation of the observed regulatory differences. Similar to Farh et al., we observed nearly all immunologic diseases-associated SNP sets showing some degree of enrichment in the regulatory datasets obtained from T helper cell subpopulations. However, our differential regulatory analysis placed nine immunologic diseases, 'Multiple sclerosis', 'Celiac disease', 'Systemic lupus erythematosus', 'Systemic sclerosis', 'Crohns disease', 'Primary biliary cirrhosis', 'Ulcerative colitis', 'Ankylosing spondylitis', 'Primary sclerosing cholangitis' as being significantly stronger enriched in the T helper cell-specific regulatory datasets (Supplementary). These results demonstrate how the regulatory similarity and differential regulatory analyses can refine our understanding of the SNPregulatory associations. In summary, these observations position the aforementioned immunologic diseases, referred hereafter as 'group 2', as preferentially driven by the regulatory changes in T helper cell subpopulations, and suggest they may be best responsive to T helper cell targeting therapies.
H3K4me1, histone acetylation marks and DNAseI hypersensitive sites from T helper cells are enriched in nine immunologic disease-associated SNP sets Using regulatory datasets defined with 'broad-', 'narrow-' and 'gapped peak' algorithms, we noted that the analysis with 'broad peaks' datasets identified more significant enrichment differences (e.g. 74 differential enrichments using processed 'broad peak' Histone marks data versus 67 'gapped peak versus 39 'narrow peak' data). We also observed that the computationally imputed data provides more differential enrichments than the processed data (e.g. 428 imputed 'gapped peak' Histone marks versus 67 processed data). These observations corroborate our previous note that the computationally imputed regulatory marks are better suited for the regulatory enrichment analysis, and further suggest the use of imputed data defined using the 'gapped peak' algorithm. We describe enrichment results using the imputed 'gapped peak' regulatory data throughout the rest of the manuscript unless noted otherwise, and providing the results obtained with the other data types in the Supplementary Table S5. In addition to the enhancer H3K4me1 mark, we observed the enrichment of several histone acetylation marks in the T helper cell subpopulations. H3K27ac, a mark associated with transcription initiation and open chromatin structure, was the most frequently enriched, followed by H4K12ac, H2BK120ac, H4K91ac (marks of transcription start sites), H3K14ac (critical for the recruitment of TFIID at the IFN-gamma locus) and other marks (Supplementary). Consistently, the 'group 2'-associated SNP sets are enriched in DNAse hypersensitive sites in the primary T helper PMA-I stimulated cells (P-value  1.62E-6 versus 9.32E-2 in the 'group 1' diseases) and other subpopulations of T helper cells. Taken together, these observations suggest that the 'group 2' diseases are associated with SNPs that may alter enhancers in the promoters of actively transcribed T helper cell-specific genes.
Enhancers in T helper cells subpopulations are enriched in the nine immunologic disease-associated SNP setsTo summarize combinatorial interactions of the regulatory marks into well-defined chromatin states, we used chromatin state data obtained using the ChromHMM learning system (). Using data containing 15 chromatin states, we identified enhancers ('7Enh') as the most significantly enriched in the 'group 2'associated SNP sets. Enhancers from the primary T helper cells from peripheral blood were the most significantly enriched in the 'group 2' SNP sets (P-value  2.72E-5 versus 1.35E-1 in the 'group 1' diseases, difference P-value  5.20E-2). The 'group 2' SNP sets were also significantly enriched in enhancers of other T helper cell subpopulations, and depleted in quiescent regions ('15Quies', Supplementary). Analysis of 18 and 25 chromatin states identified similar enrichment differences and suggested involvement of enhancers in the Primary T CD8 navenave and memory cells from peripheral blood (Supplementary). These results position the nine immunologic diseases from 'group 2' as likely to be driven by the regulatory changes in enhancers of T helper cells.
Cell type regulatory enrichment analysis identifies known cell specificity of the diseasesNumerous groups have reproducibly demonstrated that diseaseassociated variants are enriched within regulatory regions in phenotypically relevant cell types (). Having established T helper cell subpopulations as potentially being affected in the nine immunologic diseases, we aimed to identify cell type specificity of all 39 disease/ trait-associated SNP sets. The goal of the cell type regulatory enrichment analysis is to identify cell specificity of the regulatory datasets most frequently and most significantly associated with a SNP set. Under the hypothesis that disease-associated SNPs are disproportionally enriched in regulatory features in the cell types most relevant to the disease, GenomeRunner's cell type regulatory enrichment analysis aims to identify these cell types. As there's no de facto standard definition of cell types specific for any of the diseases and traits analyzed in our study, we used common knowledge about disease pathology and compared our results with observations made by. Similar to their observations, SNP sets associated with neurologic diseases were highly enriched in brain-specific regulatory datasets (Supplementary). Similarly, SNP sets associated with metabolic traits, such as 'Fasting blood glucose', 'HDL/LDL cholesterol', were the most frequently enriched in regulatory datasets from pancreatic islets, adipose tissue, liver. Notably, we observed 'Fasting blood glucose' and 'Type 2 diabetes' as being enriched in 'Fetal heart'-specific regulatory datasets (P-values 3.24E-22 and 4.65E-28, respectively), confirming well-known link between diabetes and cardiovascular diseases (reviewed in. Other trait-associated SNP sets also showed relevant cell type specificity of the regulatory enrichments, such as 'creatine levels' association with lung fibroblast primary cells (P-value 1.57E-21) and muscle cells, 'bone mineral density' association with chondrodyte cells (P-value 1.95E22) and other similar observations (Supplementary). These results strengthen our observation that the disease-specific genomic changes are enriched in the regulatory datasets from relevant cell and tissue types.
GenomeRunner web serverAlthough we did not restrict cell type regulatory enrichment analysis to any particular cell type, we observed predominant association of T helper cell subpopulations and other immune cell types with the immunologic SNP sets. Similar to, we observed association of a few diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, Kawasaki disease and primary biliary cirrhosis with B cell-specific regulatory datasets (Supplementary). We also observed significant enrichment of the 'ulcerative colitis' SNP set in the regulatory datasets from rectal mucosa, colon and intestine tissues (P-value  5.23E-14), consistent with its bowel pathology. Other notable observations include 'type 1 diabetes' association with cells from placenta, adrenal gland, and pancreas (P-value  5. 28E-19). Concurrent withwe ascertain that the cell type regulatory enrichment analysis allows a more focused insight into the cell type-specific effect of genetic variants upon regulatory context. Consequently, the interpretation-oriented analyses of GenomeRunner may be the final step in bioinformatics pipelines that preprocess the data, impute poorly genotyped regions and account for linkage disequilibrium (LD) depending on study prerequisites. If considering LD is crucial, we refer the user to the GoShifter enrichment tool () that uses LD information from the Phase I 1000 genomes data release and estimates enrichments by local permutations. However, regulatory similarities among the 39 disease/trait-associated SNP sets obtained with GoShifter correlated less well with the shared genomic loci similarities (Supplementary). With the release of Phase III 1000 Genomes data (), we plan to include optional LD filtering for different populations. The current version of GenomeRunner does not integrate other types of 'omics' information, such as mRNA and microRNA expression, and DNA methylation, shown to be well suited for the patient classification (). Our future application of GenomeRunner to the analysis of patient-specific mutation profiles includes integrating these layers of information and connecting the results with phenotype information. This integration will allow better understanding of the regulatory changes leading to disease manifestation. In summary, we describe the GenomeRunner web server for identifying regulatory mechanisms potentially affected by the functional impact of SNP sets. Furthermore, we provide a means to compare different SNP sets by similarity of their regulatory enrichments. Used in connection with other tools, we hope the GenomeRunner web server will aid in understanding the epigenomic alterations associated with pathogenic genomic changes in complex genomicsdriven diseases.
Funding
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
M.G.Dozmorov et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Discussion The GenomeRunner web server is a significant improvement of our work on automating and simplifying the search for biologically interpretable relationships among high-throughput data (Dozmorov, 2015; Dozmorov et al., 2012, 2013, 2014; Sawalha and Dozmorov, 2015). Designed to be intuitive and fast, its downstream analyses enable interpretation of a wide range of biological problems, such as defining subgroups of patients by the regulatory similarity of the patient-specific SNP sets. We illustrate novel insights that can be obtained with GenomeRunner by analyzing 39 disease/trait associated SNP sets. Using regulatory datasets as a common reference, GenomeRunner was able not only detect known relationships among the diseases, but also identify a subgroup of immunologic diseases with SNPs strongly enriched in enhancers of T helper cell subpopulations. We further identified cell types relevant to disease pathology, with regulatory mechanisms likely to be altered by the corresponding SNPs. To our knowledge, only three studies have investigated the use of similarity of patient-specific genomic information for classification purposes (Bakir-Gungor and Sezerman, 2011; Hofree et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2014). However, these studies use gene-centric reference to map SNPs to pathways and gene interaction networks, the idea we have also independently explored (https://github.com/ mdozmorov/PathwayRunner). The regulatory similarity approach implemented in GenomeRunner is gene agnostic in that it uses regulatory datasets across the whole genome as a reference. This approach is expected to be especially useful in interpreting the functional impact of rare and non-coding genomic variants identified from whole genome sequencing. Despite being a powerful tool for genomic data interpretation, GenomeRunner has some limitations. For example, its statistical model currently accommodates analysis of SNPs (point mutations) only. Although SNPs comprise $95% of genomic variants (Genomes Project et al., 2012), contribution of InDels (Ribeiro-DosSantos et al., 2015), Copy Number Variants (CNVs) (Curtis et al., 2012), structural variants (Kasowski et al., 2010) should also be considered as they are responsible for a much greater percentage of altered base pairs (Genomes Project, et al., 2012). Our future work includes accommodating genomic variants other than point mutations into the statistical framework of GenomeRunner. The other feature of GenomeRunner is that SNPs are considered as independent. Our goal here was to keep the structure of GenomeRunner maximally simple, speed up statistical calculations, and put minimal requirements on the user-provided input files.
