GEPdb integrates both genome-wide association studies and expression quantitative trait loci information, the two primary sources of genome-wide mapping for genotype–phenotype and geno-type–expression associations together with phenotype-associated gene lists. The GEPdb provides simultaneous interpretation of both genetic risks and potential gene regulatory pathways toward phenotypic outcome by establishing the ternary relationship of geno-type–expression–phenotype (GEP). The analytic scope is further extended by linkage disequilibrium from five different populations of the international HapMap Project. Availability and implementation: http://ercsbweb.
INTRODUCTIONGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) and expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) are the principal methods for genomescale mapping of genotypephenotype and genotypeexpression relationships, respectively. In most cases, GWAS provides little information on the underlying mechanism at the molecular and cellular levels. A recent survey showed that 516% of the GWAS hits fall into coding regions () allowing direct interpretation of protein structural and functional impacts. The majority of hit single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) may have some regulatory function through transcriptional regulation, miRNA targeting or epigenetic changes. Therefore, if there are common SNPs shared by both GWAS and eQTL, the eQTL genes are good candidates for the underlying pathological process and its phenotypic outcome (). Many dedicated databases have been developed for either GWAS () or eQTL (). There are few integrated databases for both GWAS and eQTL data that (i) support a mechanistic interpretation of GWAS results, and (ii) infer causal genetic variations responsible for differential expression of disease signature genes via eQTL mapping. We developed GEPdb that seamlessly integrates a comprehensive collection of GWAS, eQTL and phenotype-associated gene lists. Such integration provides a novel opportunity to analyze the ternary relationship of genotypeexpressionphenotype (GEP) in a genome scale. The hit SNPs (tagging SNPs) may belong to a haplotype block, whereas their neighboring SNPs may be actually functional in both GWAS and eQTL mapping by linkage disequilibrium (LD). GEPdb supports expansion of SNPs using LD information.
DATA COLLECTION AND PROCESSINGWe compiled and processed datasets for (i) 447 million SNPs, (ii) 41300 GWAS, (iii) 0.8 million eQTLs and (iv) 417 million eQTL SNP-gene pairs, as well as 12 000 phenotypeassociated gene signatures categorized by traits, disease subtypes and tissue/cell types. The summary of the datasets is shown in, and the detailed statistics are shown online at the GEPdb Web site. The SNPs are categorized as gene, 5 0 UTR, exon, intron, 3 0 UTR and intergenic. Notably, all GWAS datasets and the phenotype-associated gene lists are classified by Trait, MeSH, Study, FirstAuthor, Disease Class and/or tissue by a substantial manual annotation and are organized into a hierarchical tree-like structure.
SYSTEM OVERVIEWGEPdb integrates a comprehensive collection of GWAS (genotypephenotype), eQTL (genotypeexpression) and phenotypeassociated gene signatures. The schematic overview is shown in. Using the GEPdb, a list of SNPs or genes can be interpreted by associating the ternary relationships of GEP. The input SNPs or genes are selected among the precompiled datasets of GEPdb or can be directly entered by the user. The analytical procedure is designed to be simple, linear and bidirectional, i.e. G:E, G4E4P or P4E4G mode (). In the G:E mode, a list of SNPs and a gene set are entered as input, and then the SNPs and genes are linked to each other via the eQTL relationship. Alternatively, the user can select gene signature(s) for a particular trait (or disease), and check whether they are linked to the GWAS hit SNPs for the same or related phenotype via eQTL mapping. Any SNP set can be expanded using the LD information among the five different populations of the International Hapmap Project phases IIII. In the G4E4P mode, a list of *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors. input SNPs are entered and linked to the downstream regulated genes via eQTL (G4E). Then, these genes are compared against the precompiled gene sets related to various diseases and other phenotypes (E4P). The summary result is displayed as table, in which the statistical significance of the overlap between gene or SNP sets (P-value and Q-value) is calculated by the hypergeometric distribution and the Bonferroni correction method. The direction of analysis is reversed in the P4E4G mode. Starting from a list of genes [e.g. typically, differentially expressed genes (DEGs) for a disease: P4E] as input, their associated eQTL SNPs are retrieved as potentially regulatory loci.
DISCUSSIONA critical question regarding the GEP ternary relationship is to what extent the expression signatures (DEGs) can be interpreted by GWAS hit SNPs, via (i) eQTL and further by (ii) LD information. Among the datasets compiled in the GEPdb, we analyzed paired sets of the GWAS hit SNPs and the gene signatures from GAD and geneSigDB annotated by the same disease using MeSH terms and manual inspection. The coverage of the signature genes by GWAS hit SNPs via eQTL (+LD) varied highly depending(A) GeneSigDB and (B) GAD by the GWAS hit SNPs via eQTL mapping (blue) and LD + eQTL mapping (green). The GWAS hit SNPs are merged together for each disease if there are multiple GWAS for a single diseaseon the disease category and individual study. The median coverage was 0100 and 2.3100% by eQTL and LD + eQTL, respectively, and some signature genes resulted in no outcome (). The overall low coverage may, at least partially, result from inaccurate mapping between GWAS and the corresponding expression signatures because of disease subtypes or heterogeneity. Nevertheless, a significant fraction of known gene signatures were traced back to their potential genetic risks using GEPdb (G:E mode). Similarly, any set of gene signatures or candidate SNPs can also be analyzed using the G4E4P or P4E4G modes to generate testable hypotheses.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
GEPdb at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
D.Ryu et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
