Motivation: Gaining insight into chemogenomic drug–target interactions, such as those involving the substructures of synthetic drugs and protein domains, is important in fragment-based drug discovery and drug repositioning. Previous studies evaluated the interactions locally, thereby ignoring the competitive effects of different substructures or domains, but this could lead to high false-positive estimation, calling for a computational method that presents more predictive power. Results: A statistical model, termed Global optimization-based InFerence of chemogenomic features from drug–Target interactions, or GIFT, is proposed herein to evaluate substructure-domain interactions globally such that all substructure-domain contributions to drug–target interaction are analyzed simultaneously. Combinations of different chemical substructures were included since they may function as one unit. When compared to previous methods, GIFT showed better interpret-ive performance, and performance for the recovery of drug–target interactions was good. Among 53 known drug–domain interactions, 81% were accurately predicted by GIFT. Eighteen of the top 100 predicted combined substructure-domain interactions had corresponding drug–target structures in the Protein Data Bank database, and 15 out of the 18 had been proved. GIFT was then implemented to predict substructure-domain interactions based on drug repositioning. For example, the anticancer activities of tazarotene, adapalene, acitretin and raloxifene were identified. In summary , GIFT is a global chemogenomic inference approach and offers fresh insight into drug–target interactions. Availability and implementation: The source codes can be found at http://bioinfo.au.tsinghua.edu. cn/software/GIFT. Contact:
IntroductionProtein domains are independent folding structures and form different proteins as the functional units (). Compared with sequence similarity, domain structures are much more conserved among proteins (). Compound chemical substructures, or functional scaffolds, are the basic structural and functional building blocks of small molecules (). According to, chemogenomics, or chemical genomics, involves the systematic screening of targeted chemical libraries of small molecules against individual drug target familieswith the goal of identifying new drugs and drug targets. Thus, gathering chemogenomic data about protein domains and the chemical substructures of drugs underlying drugtarget interactions could foster the development of fragment-based drug discovery, drug repositioning and the understanding of drug-induced side effects (), thereby supplementing the network pharmacology methods of target prediction (). Among 1584 FDA-approved drugs and 89 nutraceuticals from the DrugBank database (), only 30% of them are contained in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) database (). The large gap between the number of known binding positions and the total number of drugtarget pairs calls for computational models to bridge them. Such computational models can be classified as structure-based methods and nonstructure-based methods. Structure-based methods, such as docking, have been developed over the course of many years, but they are constrained by the dependence on three dimensional structures of proteins (). In recent years, several non-structure-based methods, which are not limited by the structure information have been developed, along the accumulation of large-scale database in both chemistry and biology.developed a sparse canonical correspondence analysis method to extract the associated sets of chemical substructures and protein domains from drugtarget interactions, but the amount of detectable protein domains was relatively small.applied graph mining and sequence mining to automate the search for significant substructure patterns, leading to the interpretation of polypharmacology in drugtarget network. The substructures in drugs or proteins did not need to be defined from the literatures. However, protein substructures, which are generally composed of two or three residues, were difficult to correlate with biological interpretations.treated this question as a classification problem in machine learning. They used the logistic regression and support vector machine (SVM) algorithm to seek the drug chemical substructures and protein domains pairs that could be used to determine whether drugs and proteins interact or not. This method showed good results in predicting drugtarget interactions. However, none the methods noted above was able to evaluate uncertainty or variance of results, and they also ignored the possible combinations of drug chemical substructures that bind to protein domains as a whole. More importantly, the competitive effects of different substructuredomain interactions have never been considered since prediction has, thus far, been performed locally. Therefore, in this article, a Global optimization-based InFerence of chemogenomic features from drugtarget interactions, termed GIFT, was proposed (). Since different drug chemical substructures and protein domains may competitively contribute to drugtarget interactions, GIFT takes into consideration all the substructuredomain interactions and treats them as latent variables leading to drugtarget interactions. A substructuredomain interaction is defined as a direct physical interaction between a chemical substructure and a protein domain, for example, a hydrogen bond between an atom in a chemical substructure and an atom in an amino acids (). It should be noted that because some drugtarget interactions have not been recorded in DrugBank, we incorporated two parameters, namely fp (false-positive rate) and fn (false-negative rate), to describe data inaccuracy and incompleteness. Then the substructuredomain contributions to different drugtarget pairs were globally analyzed by the expectationmaximum (EM) algorithm framework, a statistical method to find the maximum likelihood estimates when the latent variables exist (). Variances in results were calculated by the observed Fisher Information (). GIFT was further extended to include the combinations of different drug chemical substructures based on the likelihood that some may function together. More than 700 substructure-domain interactions were found by GIFT. Some were validated by the PDB database. Our approach is a promising method for investigating drugtarget binding positions and contributes to our understanding in this field.
Results
Robust analysis of fn and fp on recovering drugtarget interactionsAs noted above, two parameters, fp and fp should be given in GIFT. Based on the assumptions in GIFT (see Section 4), we roughly estimated that the value of fn was no less than 0.4 and the value of fp was no more than 0.001 (see Section 4). To analyze the robustness of GIFT with different parameters, we used 5-fold cross validation to detect the recoveries of drugtarget interactions on different combinations of fn and fp. Here the negative samples were randomly selected from the drugprotein pairs without interacting records. The results showed that the performance for recovering drugtarget interactions remained stable for different combinations of fn and fp (See). In GIFT, fn was set as 0.85 and fp was set as 0.0001. Following the same cross validation procedure above, we compared GIFT with previous methods, namely, L1-log, L1-SVM (), SCCA () and the association method (see Section 4), based on their performance for recovery of drugtarget interactions. The association method was a naive approach to inference of substructuredomain interactions. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) of the association method is 0.72 (data not shown). Based on the AUC (see), GIFT performed better than the association method, L1-Log method, as well as SCCA, and it was comparable to L1-SVM for predicting drugprotein interactions. Although a large number of substructuredomain interactions were extracted by the previous methods, for example, more than 350 000 interactions by SCCA (), and around 5000 interactions by L1-SVM (), it was difficult to assess the accuracy of these interactions. In the following sections, we demonstrate that GIFT not only perform better for drugtarget predictions, but also provided better interpretation of the extracted substructuredomain interactions.
Performance of prediction on drugdomain interactionsGIFT was then evaluated for its performance in predicting drugdomain interactions. A total of 108 interactions between 53 proteins and 106 drugs were extracted from the crystallographic structures of known drugprotein interactions in the PDB database (). Domains coexisting in the same proteins were merged, so that only multidomain proteins were considered after data preprocessing. Finally 53 pairs of drugprotein interactions including 53 pairs of drugdomain interactions were left. Then the k value was used to describe the number of binding (amino acid) residues of a given drug were located in a given protein domain. Here k value was defined as the proportion of the number of the binding residuals lying within the protein domain over the total number of binding residuals, given a drugtarget pair. When k value was larger than 0.5, the drug was considered to interact with the domain (). The prediction of drugdomain interactions were followed Equation 2 in Section 4, and each domain was treated as one protein. A drug and a protein domain were predicted to interact if the score given by GIFT was larger than zero. Eighty-one percent of the drugdomain interactions could be predicted by GIFT. The representative results were shown in, and the complete results can be found in Supplementary Material.
Validation of substructuredomain interactionsA total of 726 substructuredomain interactions, whose scores, given by GIFT, were larger than their standard deviations, were extracted, including 255 interactions between substructure combinations and domains. Since some chemical substructures may function as one unit, more than 1800 combinations were recorded using the SMARTS format and added in our model (See Supplementary Material). Interactions between combinations of chemical substructures and domains were validated by the known crystal complex containing the relevant drugs and proteins from the PDB database. Eighteen of the top 100 predicted interactions between combinations of chemical substructures and domains have the corresponding drugtarget structures in the PDB database, and 15 of the 18 ones were successfully predicted (see).Both methotrexate and pemetrexed are antitumor drugs (), and can target against the dihydrofolate reductase and thymidylate synthase. One combination of the substructures interact with dihydrofolate reductase domain were predicted by GIFT, in good agreement with the real data (and B). DHF, the methotrexate analog, can also interact with thymidylate synthase and showed the same results (). It was shown that methotrexate targeted two different domains with the same substructures. Trimetrexate is one agent against amoebiasis and other protozoal disease. Although it lacked one predicted substructure, when compared with methotrexate and pemetrexed, trimetrexate could still target against dihydrofolate reductase domain by the other predicted substructure (). Since it shares the same functional substructure with methotrexate and pemetrexed, trimetrexate may have similar biological activity. Indeed, it has been tested as an antitumor drugs ().
Interpretation of the drugprotein interactions by GIFTWe further explored the drugprotein interactions by GIFT, using four different proteins from Homo sapiens: RARA, RXRA, RXRG and ESR1 as examples. All have the ligand-binding domain of. Schematic diagram of GIFT. A. The goal of GIFT is to infer the underlying drug substructure-protein domain interactions, given a set of drugprotein interactions. B. The local view of previous approaches that test one pair of substructure-domain at a time while ignoring other substructures or protein domains. C. The global view of GIFT that considers contributions of all substructure-domain pairs to the given set of drugtarget interactionsThe values are the mean areas under the ROC curves with the standard variances.The values are the mean areas under the ROC curves with the standard variances. Ratio is the proportion of negative samples over the total number of training samples.) lying within the protein domain over the total number of the binding residues. When k value is larger than 0.5, the drug is considered to interact with the domain. TRUE means the prediction that the drug interacts with the domain by GIFT fits the real data well.Bold black: the drugs. Thin black: the amino acids. All the figures are generated by LigPlot (nuclear hormone receptor. ESR1 also contains the oestrogen receptor domain. Using GIFT, several chemical substructures were predicted to interact with the above domains. Drugs having these chemical substructures that can target at least one of the four proteins were shown in. In the original drug-target interactions, tretinon, adapalene and acitretin targeted against RARA, RXRA and RXRG. Fulvestrant, raloxifene and letrozole interacted with ESR1. Tazarotene only targeted RARA. RARA shares the same protein domain as tretinon, adapalene and acitretin target RXRA and RXRG. Based on the results of GIFT, the four drugs have the same chemical substructures predicted to target the ligand-binding domain of nuclear hormone receptor (labeled in black in) and they may, therefore, share the same therapeutic functions. Since tretinoin has anticancer bioactivity, it suggests that acitretin, adapalene, tazarotene and raloxifene may have similar anticancer activity similar to that of tretinoin. Meanwhile, fluvestrant has the same predicted chemical substructures with tretinoin, adapalene, and tazarotene. It suggests that fluvestrant may interact with ESR1 by targeting the ligand-binding domain instead of oestrogen receptor domain. Recent researches partly confirm the GIFT prediction above. It is found that adapalene could block cell proliferation and induce apoptosis on hepatoma cells (). It was reported that tazarotene profoundly inhibits murine Basal cell carcinoma by inducing PI3K-AKT signaling (). Acitretin and several analogs exhibited antiproliferative activities against human breast MCF-7 epithelial cells (). Raloxifene, one of the selective estrogen-receptor modulators, was effective as a preventive choice in reducing the risk of breast cancer for postmenopausal woman ().
Global optimization-based inference of chemogenomic features
DiscussionIn this article, a statistical model, termed GIFT, was constructed to infer the interactions between drug chemical substructures and protein domains based on drugprotein interactions data. For the first time, a global optimization perspective has been introduced into this computation, meaning that all the substructure-domain contributions on drugtarget interactions are simultaneously analyzed. GIFT has several advantages compared with previous methods. First, it offers a more detailed description on the drugprotein interactions. Instead of adhering to the constraint which holds that 'similar drugs target similar proteins', we attempt to reveal the possible mechanisms underlying drugprotein interactions. Second, more than 350 000 interactions were predicted by SCCA (), and around 5000 interactions were predicted by L1SVM (). However, these figures represent local estimates, in addition to the lack statistical significance evaluations, thus potentially overestimating substructuredomain interactions. GIFT, on the other hand, can reduce such overestimation by incorporating a global perspective that accommodates variance estimation. It should be noted that GIFT is limited in that it only focuses on two-dimensional chemical space, as presented by the 881 PubChem substructures. Therefore, in the future, three-dimensional structure information should be incorporated into the calculations (See Section 4). As reflected by data already accumulated in the PDB database, more than 20,000 compound-protein interactions can be found, including more than 9000 distinct compounds (). Extraction of these binding information might result in more precise estimations of the substructure-domain interactions in the future. In summary, we propose a novel chemogenomic approach to infer substructure-domain interactions. It provides a chemogenomic view of the mechanisms of drugprotein interactions, and can be used as a new method that contributes to target prediction, drug repositioning and drug combination studies.
Methods
Data sources of GIFTThe information of drugprotein interactions, drug substructures, and protein domains is obtained from. A total of 1862 drugs are represented by 881-dimensional chemical substructure binary vectors from PubChem database, and 1554 proteins are represented by 876-dimensional protein domain binary vectors from the Pfam database (). Here the substructure is defined as a specific kind of two-dimensional chemical fingerprint by CACTVS. 4809 interactions exist between the drugs and the proteins. We deleted the drug chemical substructures or protein domains that never appeared in the drugs or proteins, and we merged those substructures or domains that appeared in the same drugs or proteins. The drugdomain interactions were extracted from PDB database by the script from Kruger et al., 2012. We only chose proteins that had multiple domains for our data. Finally, 53 pairs of drugprotein interactions with the records of drugdomain interaction were used.
The EM framework of GIFTLet Y 1. .. Y T denote the T drugs, and P 1. .. P S denote the S proteins. Let Z 1. .. Z M denote the M drug chemical substructures and let D 1. .. D N denote the N protein domains. Let ZD ij denote the set of the pairs of chemical substructures and domains from drug Y i and protein P j correspondingly. Let ZD mn denote the interaction result between the chemical substructure D m and the domain D n .ZD ij mn  1 if they interact and ZD ij mn  0 otherwise. Let YP ij denotes the interaction result between the drug Y i and the protein P j. YP ij  1 if they interact and YP ij  0 otherwise. Inspired by the work (), we herein propose a statistical method to evaluate the possible interactions between drug chemical substructures and protein domains. For our calculations, it was assumed that (i) the interactions of the drug chemical substructures and the protein domains are independent, given a pair of a drug and a protein pair; (ii) interactions between a given drug chemical substructure and protein domain would remain unchanged between different pairs of the drugs and proteins containing them, as shown byin which h mn  PrD mn  1; (iii) drug and the protein will interact if, and only if, one pair of chemical substructures and domains from them interact. Based on these assumptions, we can getWe include two types of errors in the data of the drug protein interactions: fp (false positive rate), in which the drug and the protein do not interact, but are recorded to be interacting, and fn, in which the drug and the protein interact, but are not recorded. Let O ij be the result of observed interaction between drug Y i and protein P j :O ij  1 if the interaction is observed and O ij  0 otherwise.It was estimated that on average the number of target proteins per drug was about 6.3 (). The value of fn then would be no less than 0.41. We estimate fp in a similar way and it would be no more than 0.001. And the probability for the observed interaction between drug Y i and the protein P j isThe log likelihood function is followed lh  logPrOjhIt is a function of h  fh mn g. h is estimated by the maximum likelihood estimation approach. The EM algorithm () is then used here. The observed data are the interactions from DrugBank Database, O  fO ij  o ij g. The complete data include all the drug chemical substructures and protein domain interactions and the observed data. Let A m be the set of drugs containing the chemical substructure Z m and let A n be the set of proteins containing the domain D n. Let N mn be the total number of pairs between A m and A n. The EM algorithm as follows:E Step:M Step:The variance of the parameters can be estimated by the observed Fisher information, which is followed:Here I ^ h is the observed Fisher information. In GIFT, the observed Fisher information is followed:In which,Since some drug chemical substructures may work as one unit, 1870 pairs of drug chemical substructures that frequently co-occuramong the drugs are selected as the extra drug chemical substructures. All the details of GIFT can be found in Supplementary Material.
The association methodThe association method is a navenave way to estimate the interactions between chemical substructures and protein domain, which is the fraction of interacting drugprotein pairs among all of the drugprotein pairs containing the pair of chemical substructure Z m and protein domain D n .in which I mn is the number of interacting pairs of drugprotein pairs containing the pair of chemical substructure Z m and protein domain D n and N mn is the number of total drugprotein pairs containing the pair of chemical substructure Z m and protein domain D n .
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
S.Zu et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
