Motivation: Glycosylation is a ubiquitous type of protein post-translational modification (PTM) in eukaryotic cells, which plays vital roles in various biological processes (BPs) such as cellular communication, ligand recognition and subcellular recognition. It is estimated that >50% of the entire human proteome is glycosylated. However, it is still a significant challenge to identify glyco-sylation sites, which requires expensive/laborious experimental research. Thus, bioinformatics approaches that can predict the glycan occupancy at specific sequons in protein sequences would be useful for understanding and utilizing this important PTM. Results: In this study, we present a novel bioinformatics tool called GlycoMine, which is a comprehensive tool for the systematic in silico identification of Clinked , N-linked, and O-linked glycosyla-tion sites in the human proteome. GlycoMine was developed using the random forest algorithm and evaluated based on a well-prepared up-to-date benchmark dataset that encompasses all three types of glycosylation sites, which was curated from multiple public resources. Heterogeneous sequences and functional features were derived from various sources, and subjected to further two-step feature selection to characterize a condensed subset of optimal features that contributed most to the type-specific prediction of glycosylation sites. Five-fold cross-validation and independent tests show that this approach significantly improved the prediction performance compared with four existing prediction tools: NetNGlyc, NetOGlyc, EnsembleGly and GPP. We demonstrated that this tool could identify candidate glycosylation sites in case study proteins and applied it to identify many high-confidence glycosylation target proteins by screening the entire human proteome. Availability and implementation: The webserver, Java Applet, user instructions, datasets, and predicted glycosylation sites in the human proteome are freely available at http://www.structbioinfor. org/Lab/GlycoMine/.
IntroductionGlycosylation is a dynamic enzymatic process where glycans (or carbohydrates) are attached selectively to proteins or lipoproteins. Glycosylation is an important and ubiquitous post-translational modification (PTM) () and numerous studies have shown that glycosylation plays a crucial role in various BPs, ranging from protein folding, subcellular localization, and degradation () to extracellular recognition and cellcell interactions (). It is commonly understood that glycosylation occurs in all cellular compartments and that >50% of all polypeptides are covalently modified (). Serine (S), threonine (T), asparagine (N) and tryptophan (W) are the usual targets of protein glycosylation (). Glycosylation can modulate the physicochemical and biological properties of proteins (). For example, glycan occupancy in a protein can influence the ligand-binding mode and affect its biological activity. It can also influence protein stability and solubility, as well as modifying the susceptibility to proteolysis (). Glycosylation can be divided into four main categories according to the chemical linkage between the specific acceptor amino acid and the glycan, i.e. N-glycosylation, O-glycosylation, Cglycosylation (or C-mannosylation), and glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol anchor attachment (). Each of these types has characteristic sequons or sequence motifs (). The three most abundant types of glycosylation, i.e. N-, O-and C-glycosylation, are of particular interest. During N-glycosylation, the glycan is linked to the amide nitrogen in N residues. The sequon for N-glycosylation is N-X-T/S, or N-X-C in some rare cases, where X can be any residue except proline (). During O-glycosylation, the glycan is attached to the hydroxy groups of S and T side-chains. No specific sequence motifs are defined for O-glycosylation, although experimental studies indicate that most O-linked glycosylation sites occur on S or T residues with a beta conformation that are in close proximity to proline residues (). In addition, O-glycosylation is frequent in secretory and membrane-binding proteins in a number of mammalian species. C-glycosylation involves the attachment of the glycan to the carbon of the first W residue in the following sequence motifs: W-X-X-W, W-X-X-C or W-X-X-F (). The key to understanding the mechanisms and other functional roles of glycosylation is identifying its substrates and the corresponding glycosylation sites. However, the experimental detection of glycosylation sites is still a challenging task, which often requires extensive laboratory work and considerable expense. Thus, computational approaches that accurately predict the glycan occupancy at specific sequons based on protein sequence information would be highly valuable and they may provide important insights into the functional roles of glycosylation. This is very important, because sequence-based analyses are currently the simplest and most readily deployed approach for predicting glycosylation targets and their respective glycosylation sites. A number of computational approaches based on sequences or sequence-derived information have been developed to address this task. Gupta and Brunak developed NetNGlyc, which is a web tool based on neural networks that predicts N-glycosylation sites from protein sequences ().developed NetOGlyc based on sequence context and surface accessibility. Cornelia et al. used ensembles of support vector machine (SVM) classifiers to predict amino acid residues that were likely to be glycosylated and implemented the EnsembleGly web server (). The SVM classifiers were trained using a dataset of experimentally determined N-, O-and C-linked glycosylation sites in 242 proteins extracted from the O-GlycBase database (version 6.0) (). Hamby and Hirst (2008) identified the pairwise patterns around glycosylation sites and combined these with the predicted secondary structure, predicted surface accessibility and hydrophobicity of the amino acids to train random forest (RF)-based predictors in an effort to improve the prediction accuracy. The developed GPP tool had an accuracy of 90.8% for S, 92.0% for T and 92.8% for N sites, respectively, based on an evaluation using a dataset of 242 proteins and 2415 glycosylation sites.developed an SVM-based approach called CKSAAP_OGlySite, which employed a sequence-encoding scheme based on the composition of k-spaced amino acid pairs (CKSAAP) to predict O-linked glycosylation.trained SVM models using the local sequence features around glycosylation sites, and the characteristic subcellular localization of glycoproteins and achieved $90% accuracy for both N-linked and O-linked glycosylation sites. Incorporation of structural features around the glycosylated sites, including the local contact order, surface accessibility, and secondary structure, have proved useful for improving the prediction accuracy of N-glycosylation (). More recently,developed an SVM-based tool, GlycoEP, based on the datasets with eukaryotic proteins of C-, Nand O-linked glycosylation sites. GlycoEP yielded accuracy of 84.3, 86.9 and 91.4% for prediction of N-, O-and C-linked glycosylation sites, respectively. There has been considerable success in the development of useful approaches for glycosylation site prediction, but several problems still exist in most of the currently available methods that need to be addressed to develop better methods, as follows.(i) The datasets used for model training are relatively small, which limits the predictive power of the method. In particular, many of the experimentally verified novel glycosylation sites that were discovered recently using high-throughput proteomic techniques were not included in the curated datasets. (ii) The majority of the available methods only predict specific types of glycosylation sites, such as N-or O-glycosylation. Few methods exist that predict all three of the major types of glycosylation sites, with the exceptions of NetNGlyc (), NetOGlyc () and SVMGlyc (), although they are outdated. (iii) The feature space used by existing methods to construct models is incomplete and not comprehensive. Other potentially useful features also remain that need to be characterized. (iv) Biological features are intrinsically heterogeneous, noisy, and multidimensional, but most existing methods do not employ feature selection techniques to quantify the importance and the contributions of the features used for the model performance, thereby leading to only a partial understanding of the sequence-glycosylation relationships. Given these deficiencies, it would be very useful to develop more accurate tools that facilitate the systematic prediction of all the major types of glycosylation. In this study, we propose a novel bioinformatics approach called GlycoMine that addresses these problems and significantly improves the prediction performance for C-, N-and O-linked glycosylation by integrating various informative features derived from protein sequences. GlycoMine uses the RF algorithm coupled with a novel feature selection strategy to boost the performance. Specifically, an effective two-step feature selection method based on information gain (IG) () and minimum redundancy maximum relevance (mRMR) () is used to determine the features that are important for glycosylation site specificity, as well as identifying condensed subsets of optimal features that contribute most to the prediction. A 5-fold cross-validation and independent tests using curated datasets demonstrated that GlycoMine outperformed other tools, including NetNGlyc (), NetOGlyc () EnsembleGly () and GPP (). Two case studies demonstrated that GlycoMine can be applied rapidly to accurately identify potential novel glycosylation sites in a protein of interest.
Materials and methods
Overall frameworkThe overall framework of GlycoMine is illustrated in, which shows that are four stages in the development of this tool, i.e. data collection and preprocessing, feature extraction, feature selection and model training and evaluation. The first stage involved data collection and preprocessing. In the second stage, a variety of features were extracted, including local sequence features, predicted structural features, protein functional features, and functional annotations. In the third stage, extensive feature selection was performed using a two-step procedure based on mRMR or IG in a crossvalidation manner, where the optimal feature subsets were selected for each glycosylation type. In the final stage, three RF-based classifiers were respectively trained for C-, N-and O-linked glycosylation sites. The performance comparison with other existing methods was made via 5-fold cross-validation and independent tests.
Collection of datasets and preprocessingThe experimentally determined C-, N-and O-linked glycosylation sites were extracted from four public databases (Supplemental Methods). All of the experimentally verified glycosylation sites in human proteins were extracted from these databases. Sequence redundancy in the curated datasets was removed using the CD-HIT program () to ensure that the sequence identity between any two proteins was no greater than 30%. This step was essential for eliminating sequence redundancy and avoiding overestimates of the performance of machine learning-based classifiers. As a result, we obtained 15, 168 and 208 glycosylated proteins with 68 C-, 416 N-and 649 O-linked glycosylation sites, respectively. The experimentally determined glycosylation sites were used as positive samples. However, it would be difficult to prove that a protein is not glycosylated in any specific conditions. Thus, it was difficult to collect proteins that could be considered as nonglycosylated. A background dataset that contained all human proteins was retrieved from UniProt. Negatives (no glycosylation sites) were selected from this background protein set, which excluded all experimentally verified glycosylated proteins. Amino acid residues (N, S, T and W) that were not experimentally verified as glycosylation sites were regarded as negatives. In addition, to obtain reliable positive and negative data, samples labeled as 'Probable', 'Potential' or 'By similarity' in UniProt were discarded. The final datasets were divided into two random subsets, which are referred to as the benchmark dataset and the independent dataset ($20% of the size of the benchmark dataset). The performance of our method and other existing methods were compared using 5-fold cross-validation tests with the benchmark dataset and further validated with the independent dataset. In addition, feature selection and model training were performed with the benchmark dataset. To extract the local sequence or structural features around potential glycosylation sites, we used a local sliding window () that comprised 15 residues, where the potential glycosylation site was located at the center with seven neighboring residues upstream and downstream of the central site.
Feature extractionPrevious research into functional site prediction have demonstrated the value of features that capture sequence, structural and functional properties as well as information encoded in functional annotations (). To this end, we extracted major features of each of these types (see Supplementaryfor a complete list of the extracted features).
Sequence-based features(i) AAindex (), which is a database that contains 544 (release 9.1) amino acid properties collected from the literature; (ii) Physicochemical properties of proteins, which were generated by BioJava (); (iii) Position-specific scoring matrices (PSSMs), which were generated by performing PSI-BLAST searches () against the NCBI nonredundant database; (iv) Residue conversation score derived from the PSSM generated by PSI-BLAST defined as:where p i,j is the frequency of amino acid j at position i; (v) CKSAAP (). This feature type was shown to be particularly useful for several PTM site predictions.
Predicted structural featuresThese include disordered regions predicted by DISOPRED2 (); secondary structures predicted by SABLE() and backbone dihedral angles predicted by SpineX ().(vii) Proteinprotein interaction annotations from STRING ().
Functional features
Functional annotationsThe functional annotations were derived from UniProt:(i) Functional domain; (ii) nucleotide-binding site; (iii) disulfide bond; (iv) posttranslationally modified residues (glycosylation sites annotated by UniPort were removed); (v) active site; (vi) natural variants; (vii) metal ion-binding site and (viii) other binding sites for any chemical groups (such as co-enzymes and prosthetic groups). A detailed description of all the extracted features is provided in the Supplemental Methods.
Feature selectionIt is likely that the initial feature sets contained certain redundant and noisy features, which were unwanted and which might have resulted in negative impacts on model training. Thus, it is imperative and often a common practice to employ feature selection techniques to reduce the dimensionality of the feature vectors in the initial sets () by eliminating features that do not contribute to the prediction. Thus, we developed a novel two-step feature selection strategy based on mRMR and IG, both of which are well-established feature selection methods, and they were applied initially to rank the importance and contributions of each feature type to glycosylation prediction.
Minimum redundancy maximum relevancemRMR is a feature selection algorithm based on mutual information (MI). It has been used widely in the field of bioinformatics and computational biology (). It can rank features based on their relevance to the target and the redundancy among the features. A ranked feature with a smaller index indicates that the feature has a better trade-off between the maximum relevance and the minimum redundancy. The mRMR-based feature selection strategy has been successfully applied in our previous studies of caspase-specific cleavage sites and has been shown to identify subsets of more important features relevant for the prediction ().
Information gainIG is a feature selection method based on the information theoretic concept of entropy and it is a measure of the uncertainty of a random variable (). IG evaluates each feature by measuring the IG with respect to the target class. IG has been used widely in bioinformatics as a fast and efficient feature selection method for high-dimensional data (). See Supplemental Materials for more details. IG regards the features with the highest IG as important, whereas mRMR ranks features according to their relevance to the target class and the redundancy between the features.
Two-step featureselection based on mRMR or IG Algorithm 1 describes the detailed procedure of our two-step feature selection method based on IG, mRMR and RF. In the first step, IG and mRMR were used to obtain the top 500 features as the optimal feature candidates (OFCs). In the second step, the most informative and contributory features were determined by the incremental feature selection (IFS). In step 1, the importance of each feature was evaluated by IG or mRMR. In the second step, the top 500 features were selected as OFCs (n  500). getTopfeatures (F X , i) is a function that can obtain the top i features from feature set F X. To determine the optimal features in the OFC, an IFS strategy based on a RF classifier and a 5-fold cross-validation were applied to the benchmark dataset to assess all of the features included in the OFCs. Steps 315 in Algorithm 1 describe the IFS strategy. In step 8, the variable 'sum' represents the sum of 20 calculation results. In step 10, 'average (sum)' is a function that calculates the average value of sum, which is defined as: n/20. In step 16, the variable 'num' represents the position of the best AUC score in the array AUC. IFS can be described briefly as follows. It constructs n feature subsets by adding one feature at a time from OFC to the candidate feature subset F 0 X. The i-th feature subset is defined as:where f i is the i-th feature from OFC. Each feature set F 0 X was tested using the RF classifier and evaluated based on five-fold crossvalidation tests to avoid overfitting. This process was repeated for 20 rounds. As a result, the feature set with the highest AUC value among the 500 AUC values was selected as the optimal feature set.Algorithm 1 Framework of the two-step feature selection procedure. Input: Initial feature set, F; Benchmark dataset, S; Number of features in the OFC set, n; Feature selection method, X Output: Optimal feature set, F'.; 7: temp  0; 8: for each k 2do 9: for each t 2do 10:
Model training and evaluation2.5.1 RF classifier RF () is a popular machine learning algorithm, which has been used widely in bioinformatics and computational biology. RF is an ensemble of decision trees that are built by random bootstrapping with a training dataset and a feature space. RF grows many classification trees and selects the classification that receives the most votes from all the trees. RF has various advantages that make it suitable for our prediction task, including: (i) RF performs better with high-dimensional inputs; (ii) RF is a highly efficient machine learning model because the RF training process is usually faster than that of many other algorithms. Given its reliable performance and efficiency, the RF algorithm implemented using the R package was used to train the models in the present study.
Performance evaluationWe used five measures, i.e. sensitivity, specificity, precision, accuracy and Mathew's correlation coefficient (MCC) to evaluate the prediction performance in the present study. We also use AUC, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC), which plots TPR against the false positive rate. We use the ROCR package () to draw the ROC curves and to calculate the AUC values. To evaluate the performance and to facilitate comparisons with other methods, we performed a 5-fold cross-validation (based on the benchmark datasets) and independent tests (based on the independent test datasets). A detailed description of these measures can be found in the Supplemental Methods.
Results and discussion
Amino acid site specificity of glycosylationBased on the curated datasets, we analyzed the site specificity of the three types of glycosylation sites. We calculated the frequencies of the amino acids at each position using a local window size of 14 residues (i.e. seven residues upstream and seven residues downstream) around the central glycosylated residue. The sequence logos shown in Supplementaryallowed us to visualize and analyze the sequence-level site specificity of the three types of glycosylation sites, where each stack represents the corresponding amino acid position in the sequence. The degree of sequence conservation at the corresponding position is measured based on the total height of each stack, which indicates the relative occurrence of the amino acid at that position. The distinct differences in the site motifs of the three types of glycosylation are reflected by the different requirements for amino acid types in the central position. For example, a hallmark of the C-glycosylation motif is the requirement for a W residue at the central position. A lesser requirement for W and cysteine (C) residues is also shown in the downstream (3 position) region and W in the upstream (3 position) region, thereby constituting the canonical C-linked glycosylation site motifs, including W-X-X-W and W-X-XC (X can be any residue except proline) (). For N-linked glycosylation, N residues are preferred in the central position, as well as a strong requirement for S or T at the 2 position, thereby forming the N-linked glycosylation sequence motifs N-X-T and N-X-S (). For O-glycosylation, it can be seen that S and T residues are preferred in the central position. No specific sequence motifs can be clearly defined for this type of glycosylation. Thus, the sequence-derived features that describe the local site specificity might be useful for predicting the different types of glycosylation.
Enhancing the prediction performance using a two-step feature selection strategyTo the best of our knowledge, this study represents the first systematic effort to use intensive feature selection to select and characterize more relevant features for protein glycosylation prediction, which contrasts with most previous studies where few used feature selection methods to address this problem. In the first step of feature selection, we used IG or mRMR algorithms to rank all of the initial features and to generate the top 500 OFCs, which were ranked by the corresponding IG or mRMR scores. In the second step of feature selection, we performed IFS to characterize the final optimal features for each type of glycosylation. The performance changes in the RF-based classifiers during the course of this latter feature selection procedure were reflected by the respective FFS curves, as shown in Supplementary Figures S3 and S4. There was a general trend where the height (the AUC score) of the feature selection curve continued to increase until it reached its highest peak. As a result, we selected condensed subsets of the most relevant and informative features that contributed to the prediction of glycosylation sites. To better understand the relative importance and contribution of each group of the final optimal features to the performance of the GlycoMine models, we evaluated the performance decrease (based on the AUC score) by iteratively removing feature groups from the model one a time. The changes in the performance results are shown in Supplementary Table S8. Compared with the other groups of features, it is clear that functional features were the most important feature type for all three types of glycosylation because removing this group from the model caused the largest performance decrease (resulted in the lowest AUC scores in Supplementary). For example, for O-linked glycosylation prediction, removal of functional features resulted in 12.8 and 26.5% decreases in the AUC values for the IGIFS and mRMRIFS models, respectively. Moreover, we found that the mRMRIFS model performed slightly better than the IGIFS model in terms of the AUC for C-and Nlinked glycosylation (Supplementary). For O-linked glycosylation, the IGIFS model had a higher AUC. In addition, the number of final optimal features varied significantly, depending on the type of glycosylation (Supplementary Tables S9 and S10). Models with less final features did not necessarily deliver worse performance, but the opposite was also true, i.e. a model may requires more final features to achieve a better performance. In the latter case, many of the features complemented each other and contributed collectively to the performance. Supplementary Tables S9 and S10 show statistics for the final selected optimal features for each type of glycosylation based on the IGIFS and mRMRIFS models, respectively.
Comparison with other methods using a 5-fold cross-validation and independent testsIn this section, we compare the results of the prediction performance using GlycoMine and those with four other existing tools, i.e. NetNGlyc (), NetOGlyc (), GPP () and EnsembleGly (), which are currently publicly available. Note that NetNGlyc and EnsembleGLy were trained using human glycosylation data, thus it is reasonable to compare the performance of these two tools with GlycoMine based on our datasets. These different methods used different training datasets to train their prediction models, thus to objectively evaluate the performance of these methods, we performed both 5-fold cross-validation and independent tests using the same benchmark and independent datasets. In the 5-fold cross-validation tests, it should be noted that we only performed feature selection using the four subsets and we excluded the test subset, thereby facilitating objective evaluations of the performance of our method. The number of three kinds of glycosylation sites in both benchmark and independent test are shown in. The sequences of these datasets were submitted to the servers of NetNGlyc, NetOGlyc, GPP and EnsembleGly to evaluate the prediction performance of these servers, where we used the default or recommended settings suggested by the authors. However, it is worth noting that GlycoMine was capable of predicting all three types of glycosylation, whereas the other tools could only be used to predict one or two types. The prediction performance comparison results for the three types of glycosylation sites are shown in Supplementary Table S12. We also used the ROC curves and AUC measures to evaluate the performance of the different methods. The ROC curves for the benchmark and independent datasets are shown in Supplementaryand, respectively. The results on both 5-fold cross-validation (Supplementary) and independent tests () indicate that for O-linked glycosylation sites, the IGIFS models achieved slightly higher AUC scores, while the mRMRIFS models achieved higher AUC scores for C-and N-linked glycosylation. Both types of GlycoMine models (trained using the optimal feature subsets selected by IGIFS and mRMRIFS) clearly outperformed the other four existing tools for all the three types of glycosylation sites. GlycoMine achieved significantly higher AUC scores than the other tools when tested using both the benchmark and independent datasets. For example, with the independent datasets, the GlycoMine models trained using the optimal feature sets (obtained by IG and IFS) obtained AUC values of 0.983 and 0.982 for N-and O-linked glycosylation, respectively, whereas the corresponding GlycoMine model trained using the optimal features selected by mRMR and IFS obtained AUC scores of 0.986 and 0.961, respectively. In contrast, the second best tool, EnsembleGly, obtained AUC scores of 0.939, 0.819 and 0.919, for the three types of glycosylation prediction. NetOGlyc obtained an AUC score of 0.850 for the O-linked glycosylation prediction. The other two tools, GPP and NetNGlyc, obtained much lower AUC values. For C-linked glycosylation, the GlycoMine models (IGIFS and mRMRIFS models) obtained an AUC score of 1.0. This was probably due to the limited size of the independent test dataset, where only 13 C-linked glycosylation sites were available. Considering that certain negative samples (i.e. non-glycosylated sites) can potentially be mislabeled, we further investigated the performance of GlycoMine by randomly sampling negative samples. We randomly selected the same number of negative samples as positive samples from the benchmark datasets for C-, N-and O-linked glycosylation with different OFCs using mRMRIFS and IGIFS methods. This randomization process was repeated 10 times. For each randomization, we conducted five-fold cross-validation tests. We calculated the average performance for 10 times of 5-fold cross-validation tests and reported the results in Supplementary Table S11. It is clear that even with different selected negative samples, there is a slight performance difference across the 10 randomization trials. This indicates that the performance of GlycoMine is robust and insensitive to the potential impact posed by the randomly selected negative samples. In addition to the AUC scores, we calculated the MCC, ACC, sensitivity, specificity and precision to compare the performance of the tools (Supplementary). These results demonstrated that GlycoMine obtained better performance than the other four tools, NetNGlyc, NetOGlyc, GPP and EnsembleGly, for the prediction of N-, C-and O-linked glycosylation sites, with the sole exception of the sensitivity score for N-linked glycosylation where GlycoMine obtained a slighter lower sensitivity than GPP (Supplementary). The improved prediction performance of our method compared with GPP and EnsembleGly might be attributable to three important factors: (i) the extraction of more useful and complementary features from multiple sources yielded better descriptions of protein glycosylation sites; (ii) the use of RF as the algorithm to learn the underlying rules of glycosylation and to train the models; and (iii) the use of an efficient two-step featureselection strategy to remove noisy and irrelevant features, and to select most informative features that contributed to the predictions.
Web server and local Java tool implementationWe developed a web server and a local Java Applet for GlycoMine to allow users to perform high-throughput bioinformatics analyses of novel glycosylation sites, which are freely available at http:// www.structbioinfor.org/Lab/GlycoMine. The GlycoMine server was implemented using Java Server Pages running Tomcat7 and configured in the Linux environment on a 16-core server machine with 50 GB memory and a 4 TB hard disk. The server uses the bestperforming models trained using the final optimal features selected by the two-step feature selection procedure. For O-linked glycosylation, the optimal features were selected by IGIFS, while for C-and N-linked glycosylation, the optimal features were determined by mRMRIFS. The server requires protein amino acid sequences in the FASTA format as the input. In cases where the user has multiple sequences to predict, they are encouraged to download the Java Applet of GlycoMine and submit a multiple FASTA formatted input to this Java program to predict the potential glycosylation sites of multiple proteins. Supplementaryshows an example of the interfaces of web server and the Java program together with its prediction output. The computational time required for a prediction task depends on the length of the submitted sequence. For a protein sequence with 500 amino acid residues, the prediction task requires 3 min and 50 s to generate and return the prediction results.
Proteome-wide prediction of glycosylation sitesThe development of GlycoMine allows users to perform the proteome-wide prediction of glycosylation sites in an automated manner. Thus, we used GlycoMine to screen potential glycosylated proteins and their respective glycosylation sites in the complete human proteome (a total of 84 843 proteins). The prediction models were trained using the final optimal features based on the complete training datasets. We adjusted the prediction thresholds to set the specificity level at 99.0% to generate high-confidence prediction results. The statistics for the predicted N-, C-and O-linked glycosylated proteins and glycosylation sites are shown in Supplementary Table S13. In total, 5846 and 6358 proteins were predicted to be N-and O-glycosylated, which contained 24 174 and 97 042 predicted Nand O-glycosylation sites, respectively. In contrast, the number of predicted C-linked glycosylation sites was lowest (only 18 926 sites), possibly due to the limited availability of experimentally verified glycosylation data for model training. A complete list of the predicted glycosylated proteins and their glycosylation sites is available from the GlycoMine website.
Case studyTo further illustrate the capacity of GlycoMine, we performed a case study of two proteins with respect to N-and O-linked glycosylation. The first protein was perforin-1 (PRF1; UniProt ID: P14222), a cytotoxic pore-forming glycoprotein that plays an important role in killing virus-infected and transformed cells by cytotoxic T lymphocytes and natural killer cells (). One N-linked glycosylation site has been experimentally confirmed by a previous study (). Previous study also indicates that transport from the Golgi to secretory granules requires N-linked glycosylation of perforin-1 (). The second protein was glycophorin-A (GYPA, UniProt ID: P02724), a major intrinsic membrane protein with a high proportion of O-glycosylated residues in erythrocytes (). The O-linked glycosylation sites (labeled in blue) inwere experimentally verified (). Glycophorin-A is expressed exclusively in erythroid cells and their precursors and is a marker for identifying erythroid differentiation in hematopoietic malignancies. The sequence scanning results and the predicted glycosylation sites for the domains of each protein are shown in. By assigning a higher prediction cutoff threshold of 0.5, GlycoMine predicted six and 34 high-confidence N-and O-linked glycosylation sites, respectively, in these two proteins. One of theseThe predicted glycosylation site probability using GlycoMine for two case study proteins (experimentally verified glycosylation sites are denoted as blue, whereas predicted glycosylation sites are shown in red). (A) The sequence scanning results and predicted N-glycosylation site locations with respect to the protein domains of perforin-1 (UniProt ID: P14222). (B) The sequence scanning results and predicted O-glycosylation site locations with respect to the protein domains of glycophorin-A (UniProt ID: P02724). The Pfam domains of these two proteins were drawn using DOG 2.0 () (Color version of this figure is available at Bioinformatics online.) sites in perforin-1 and 16 sites in glycophorin-A have been confirmed experimentally as glycosylation sites. These results suggest that GlycoMine can be a useful tool for in silico glycosylation site prediction.
ConclusionIn this study, we developed a novel machine-learning approach called GlycoMine for predicting C-, N-and O-linked glycosylation sites in the human proteome. GlycoMine combines various informative features from multiple sources. A two-step feature selection method based on mRMR or IG with IFS is used by GlycoMine to select the most contributory and useful features. Extensive crossvalidation and independent tests using benchmark and independent datasets suggested that GlycoMine outperformed existing tools: GPP, EnsembleGly and NetNGlyc. This study represents the first systematic effort to select and characterize the most important features that are relevant for predicting the three major types of glycosylation using intensive feature selection techniques. A user-friendly web interface and a Java Applet are available as an implementation of this approach. Compared with experimental approaches, bioinformatics tools such as GlycoMine can provide a powerful and cost-effective approach that allows the proteome-wide prediction of potential glycosylation sites. These predictions are likely to have a number of important applications, such as identifying novel glycosylated substrate proteins, examining the effect of point mutations on the gain or loss of glycosylation sites, and the rational design of glycoproteins by inserting neo-glycosylation sites. We consider that the web server and Java program will be useful tools for large-scale glycosylation site prediction and they may facilitate hypothesisdriven experimental design.
FundingThis work was supported by grants from a Major Inter-disciplinary Project Grant Awarded by Monash University, National Natural Science Foundation of China, Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC)and
F.Li et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
