GMD (generalized minimum distance of distributions) is an R package to assess the similarity between spatial distributions of read-based sequencing data such as ChIP-seq and RNA-seq. GMD calculates the optimal distance between pairs of normalized signal distributions, optionally sliding one distribution over the other to 'align' the distributions. GMD also provides graphical and downstream clustering tools. Availability: The R package GMD source code is available at http:// cran.r-project.org/web/packages/GMD/ under GPL license Contact:
INTRODUCTIONHigh-throughput DNA sequencers are now a cornerstone in genomics and can be used for inferring expression, splicing and non-coding isoforms (RNA-seq), transcription start sites (TSSs) (CAGE), transcription factor binding sites, chromatin status (ChIPseq) and more. Aside from typical tasks of read mapping/aligning to a reference or de novo assembling, differential expression, counting and peak calling, variant and mutation calling, comparing the distributions of DNA reads between different genomic loci or between different biological features (e.g. histone modifications) is also often meaningful. This is because the spatial distributions of such reads often indicate biological features; for example, ChIPseq experiments targeting H3K4me3 histone modifications often aggregate in characteristic double peaks around TSSs, while the H3K36me3 mark increase from TSS to termination site (). Similar examples exist for TSS () and small RNA data (). To do this systematically, a measure of similarity between distributions is necessary. Such measures should ideally be true metrics, have as few parameters as possible, be computationally efficient and also make biological sense to end-users. Here, we present such a measure, generalized minimum distance of distributions (GMD), based on MDPA (minimum difference of pair assignment,). It can compare two empirical distributions of categorical data, which we refer as histograms (Supplementary Material). Considering two normalized histograms * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Aand B, GMD measures their similarity by counting the necessary 'shifts' of elements between the bins that have to be performed to transform distribution A into distribution B. Both GMD and MDPA have been implemented in C to interface with R for computational efficiency.
ALGORITHMThe heart of GMD is the comparison of two histograms, typically originating from counting DNA reads from biological experiments (e.g. ChIP) mapped to two limited genomic regions, which have been normalized so that they sum to 1. The measuring of GMD of two normalized ordinal type histograms A and B is formulated into a process we call gmd, with an option sliding, indicating whether the optimal alignment should be searched for partial alignment.(b). The process gmd and its building block mdpa. The gmd process complements the mdpa by sliding and padding relevant distributions with zero counts and finding the optimal alignment, where Z(n) denotes a zero vector of length n. (a) the process mdpa for MDPA, where O and T denote two ordinal type histograms, with equal size of bins and equal overall mass. (b) the process gmd (with the option sliding on) for GMD, where A and B denote two normalized ordinal type histograms, with bin size b 1 and b 2 , respectively, (b 1  b 2 ). This algorithm runs in O(b) or O(b 2 ) with sliding off or on respectively, where b is the size of the distributions. (see Supplementary Material for details)
RESULTSHere, we show two examples of comparing distributions of CAGE and ChIP-seq data around TSSs, and an example of multiple pairwise comparison and the cluster utilities in GMD.
Distance measure and cluster analysis(a). All of these plots are taken directly from the GMD output.
Case study I: Transcription initiation distributions (CAGE):CAGE captures and maps mRNA 5' ends to the genome and can be used to infer TSS usage (). Inb, we measure the similarity between two TSS distributions, corresponding to two core promoters, taken from (). Case study II: Histone modification distributions (ChIP-seq):Histograms that are the result of averaging over a whole dataset can also be compared. In, we have compared the mean footprint over all TSSs of histone modifications H3K4me3 and H3K9ac from ChIP data ().f extends this to pairwise comparisons between 40 ChIP sets, along with summary statistics of the resulting clusters or the overall clustering quality.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
