Motivation: Methods for automatic nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) structure determination need to face a high level of ambiguity encountered in NMR spectra recorded by solid-state NMR and by solution NMR of partially unfolded proteins, leading to time-consuming calculations. The software package Ambiguous Restraints for Iterative Assignment (ARIA) allows for straightforward parallelization of the calculation, as the conformers can be generated in parallel on many nodes. Results: Due to its architecture, the adaptation of ARIA to grid computing can be easily achieved by using the middleware glite and JDL (Job Description Language) scripts. This adaptation makes it possible to address highly ambiguous datasets, because of the much larger conformational sampling that can be generated by use of the grid computational power. Availability: The version 2.3.
F.Mareuil et al.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. (ssNMR), and the study of partially unfolded proteins with solution NMR. The analysis of these structural landscapes is essential to understand important biological phenomena (Bckmann and Meier, 2010; Korzhnev et al., 2010; Leroy et al., 2010; Montserret et al., 2010). The iterative ARIA cycle is based on three major steps: (i) input preparation for the generation of conformations; (ii) generation of conformations by a simulated annealing procedure using the software CNS (Brunger et al., 1998); and (iii) analysis of the obtained conformations to generate a new set of NOE assignments and restraints. ARIA is straightforwardly parallelized by distributing the step (ii) over a few or many CPU units. A significant increase in the number of calculated protein conformations improves the statistics on the NMR conformations and can help to overcome the ambiguity bottleneck. Grid computing is an attractive option for the parallel computing of conformations, because of the large number of computing elements, and since it brings parallel computing even to laboratories that lack the in-house infrastructure. We have adapted ARIA to grid computing in the frame of GRISBI (Grid Support to Bioinformatics: www.grisbio.fr) (Blanchet et al., 2006a, b), which is a transverse project of the French Bioinformatics network RENABI (REseau NAtional des plateformes BIoinformatiques: http://www.renabi.fr/). In order to use the grid, the user needs to obtain a digital certificate from a trusted Certification Authority, to register on a virtual organization (VO) and to have an account on a user interface (UI) computer. A proxy certificate, valid by default for 24 h, has to be created to authenticate the user in subsequent secure interactions. The UI performs the steps (i) and (iii) of the ARIA iteration, and dispatches tasks related to step (ii) on a Workload Management System (WMS) that submit each task to an appropriate computing element (CE). The job submission and management on the grid computing elements is performed through the middleware glite, developed by the EGEE project (www.eu-egee.org). The glite commands, glite-wms-job-submit, glite-wms-job-status, glite-wms-job-output and glite-wms-job-cancel, are used in the ARIA grid implementation. The job submission is done through a Job Description Language (JDL) file generated by ARIA. The command glite-wms-job-submit submits a job to the WMS, by uploading the CNS input files to transfer them to the most appropriate computing element (Fig. 1). After a successful submission, ARIA uses the glite-wms-jobstatus command to query the WMS about the state of each job  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [13:45 14/5/2011 Bioinformatics-btr255.tex]
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
