Motivation: The sequences among subgenomes in a polyploid species have high similarity, making it difficult to design genome-specific primers for sequence analysis. Results: We present GSP, a web-based platform to design genome-specific primers that distinguish subgenome sequences in a polyploid genome. GSP uses BLAST to extract homeologous sequences of the subgenomes in existing databases, performs a multiple sequence alignment, and design primers based on sequence variants in the alignment. An interactive primers diagram, a sequence alignment viewer and a virtual electrophoresis are displayed as parts of the primer design result. GSP also designs specific primers from multiple sequences uploaded by users. Availability and implementation: GSP is a user-friendly and efficient web platform freely accessible at
IntroductionDeveloping genome-specific primers for polyploids not only will facilitate the study of sequence diversity and the association mapping of genes, but also the development of gene-based functional markers (). However, the polyploid genome contains two or more homeologous subgenomes with high sequence similarities, especially in the coding regions, which presents a particular problem with respect to the design genomespecific primers that amplify individual genes. To our knowledge, only one pipeline named PolyMarker can generate genome-specific primers (). However, PlolyMarker was specifically developed for SNP assay with the KASP TM (Kompetitive Allele Specific PCR) system, a very unique system using a three primers system in PCR reactions. PolyMarker requires users to prepare sequence files with SNP information and the target chromosome input. Therefore, the software has limited utility in a variety of other PCR-based applications. Ma et al. described a method for detecting locus-specific polymorphism in hexaploid wheat (). In this method, users are required to do step-wise processes using provided multiple perl scripts for blast search, extracting homeologous sequences, local alignment among the retrieved sequences to identify polymorphism sites. However, users still need to manually design primers based on the alignment. Currently, no good web-based tool is available that allows the user to design genome-specific primers by only inputting a query sequence. Here, we present a web-based, userfriendly primer design tool named GSP, which employs a BLAST search and multiple sequence alignment (MSA) to identifysequence variant sites among the homeologous sequences retrieved and then designs specific primers.
MethodsOur genome-specific primer design server consists of steps (Supplemental) including:
Blast based searches against a polyploid genomeThe increasing availability of genome sequence data from polyploid species now makes it possible to conduct homeologous sequence comparative analyses between subgenomes in polyploids. Bread wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) is a well-known, hexaploid, polyploid species, with genome size estimated at 17 Gbp and composed of three closely related and independently maintained genomes (International Wheat Genome Sequencing, 2014). In the current version of GSP, users can select genome sequence databases from three polyploid species (bread wheat, upland cotton and switchgrass) to design genome-specific primers. Because genome sequences for polyploid species are expected to be increased and improved, we will update the GSP dataset semiannually. In GSP, homeologous sequences in the subgenomes are extracted by BLAST using query sequences. The coordinates of homeologous sequence in the genome was retrieved by BLAST hits using the method described by Ma et al.
Aligning and identifying variant sites between homeologous sequencesGSP uses the MUSCLE () program to align homeologous sequences extracted from polyploid genomes. Sequence variations, such as nucleotide polymophisms, insertions and deletions, are identified in the MSA. The position of sequence variations among sequences are defined as variant sites. All variant sites in the alignment can be accounted for in designing specific primers. Users can set the number of variant sites in the primer or only extract primers that contain the variant site in the 3' end.
Analyzing primersThe primers in each sequence are generated by the Primer3 core program (). GSP uses primers and variant sites information to design specific primers and sort the primers based on two criteria: the number of variant sites and their location in the primer sequence. In general, the higher number of variant sites and their location in the 3 0 region will give a high weight in ordering primers. Users can view the ordered primers, indexed in numerical order on the primer results page.
Designing specific primers based on multiple sequence alignmentGSP not only allows users to BLAST the existing polyploid genome sequences to design genome-specific primers, but also allows the input of multiple sequences to generate MSA and design specific primers that can distinguish individual sequences. This function provides a user-friendly way to design specific primers from various taxa, gene families and other closely related sequences.
ResultsThe GSP web platform provides a user-friendly graphical view that displays primer design output. The main results of the GSP analysis are: MSA of the homeologous sequences (Supplemental), a distribution of primers and products (Supplemental), a detail of the primers information (Supplemental) and a primer-pair pool panel that contains the selected primer pairs (Supplemental). GSP provides an interactive view for selecting and analyzing primers. Users can easily find their primers of interest, obtain the sequence products and generate a virtual electrophoresis gel. GSP also allows users to manually select a specific region of a sequence in the alignment to verify its use as a good primer. In addition, GSP can check the specificity of primers input by users. We designed 53 primer pairs for group 2 homoeologous chromosomes for hexaploid wheat and tested their genome specificity using PCR assays. A total of 85% primers showed genome specificity and identified A, B and D-genome homoeologs (Supplementaland Supplemental).
ConclusionWith the rapid increase of polyploid genome sequence data from highthroughput sequencing technologies, effective primer design tools for homeologous sequences from the subgenomes of polyploids has become an important component of gene and genome analysis. GSP is a time-saving, user-friendly and easy-to-use web tool for designing genome-specific primers to distinguish sequences among the subgenomes of polyploid species. This web application tool can be easily extended to other polyploids when their genome sequences become available.
FundingThis
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
