Determining genetic factors underlying various phenotypes is hindered by the involvement of multiple genes acting cooperatively. Over the past years, disease–gene prioritization has been central to identify genes implicated in human disorders. Special attention has been paid on using physical interactions between the proteins encoded by the genes to link them with diseases. Such methods exploit the guilt-by-association principle in the protein interaction network to uncover novel disease–gene associations. These methods rely on the proximity of a gene in the network to the genes associated with a phenotype and require a set of initial associations. Here, we present GUILDify, an easy-to-use web server for the phenotypic characterization of genes. GUILDify offers a prioritization approach based on the protein–protein interaction network where the initial phenotype–gene associations are retrieved via free text search on biological databases. GUILDify web server does not restrict the prioritization to any predefined phenotype, supports multiple species and accepts user-specified genes. It also prioritizes drugs based on the ranking of their targets, unleashing opportunities for repurposing drugs for novel therapies. Availability and implementation: Available online at
INTRODUCTIONDuring the past decade, diseasegene prioritization has been central to research efforts in the field of human genetics. The promise of suggesting novel associations for genetic disorders with implications to therapeutical improvements has yielded a broad spectrum of computational tools (). Special attention has been paid on using physical interactions between the products of these genes to associate them with diseases (). Methods using proteinprotein interactions (PPIs) exploit the 'guilt-by-association' principle over the network topology to uncover new diseasegene associations. The guilt-by-association principle suggests that the genes whose products (proteins) interact with the products of known disease genes are more likely to be disease genes (). Recently, we proposed three novel algorithms for genome-wide prioritization of disease genes using PPI networks and showed that a consensus method combining these algorithms improved the prioritization () when using the diseasegene associations in Online Mendalian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database (). Combined with genomics and proteomics data, the method has been successfully used to identify a gene driving metastasis to bone in breast cancer (). Available network-based prioritization tools use either disease gene annotations from OMIM database () or a set of genes provided by the user () as initial associations (seed genes). These tools typically output the prioritization for a set of candidate genes; genes lying under a given genomic interval, a set of user-provided genes or top ranking genes (several hundred at most). Furthermore, some of these tools are accessible only through Cytoscape () as a plugin (). Publicly available biological data repositories can also be used for mining initial phenotypegene associations required by network-based prioritization methods without restricting to any predefined phenotype or candidates. Considering the limited availability of convenient interfaces that bridge network-based prioritization algorithms, we present GUILDify, an interactomebased prioritization server for phenotype-based characterization. GUILDify retrieves initial phenotypegene associations (seeds) via free text search on biological databases and ranks the proteins in the interaction network for their relevance to the phenotype. When the queried species is Homo sapiens, GUILDify provides a ranking of the drugs related to the phenotype based on the ranking of their targets.
NETWORK-BASED PRIORITIZATION USING INTEGRATED DATA SOURCESThe query made through GUILDify web interface is tokenized into keywords, and products of genes matching these keywords are searched in *To whom correspondence should be addressed.UniProt, OMIM and GO databases (see Supplementary Material on the data sources used). Matching proteins are displayed to the user. The proteins selected in this page are used as the initial phenotypeprotein associations (seeds). The user also selects the prioritization method(s) to be used in the prioritization step. GUILDify maps the seeds (selected proteins) onto a genome-wide PPI network and runs the global topology-based prioritization algorithm selected by the user. The species-specific PPI network is generated using the interaction databases integrated in BIANA (). GUILDify uses three algorithms (NetScore, NetZcore and NetShort) available to prioritize genes potentially involved in diseases using a priori diseasegene associations and PPIs. The user can modify the default parameters of the prioritization algorithms. Default values were tested on a large dataset of disease phenotypes using GUILD framework (). If more than one algorithm is selected, GUILDify uses a consensus that combines the scores of the selected algorithms (see Supplementary Material for details). GUILDify outputs a likelihood score (GUILD score) associating the gene product with the phenotype provided by the user for each gene product in the PPI network. It outputs the rank and descriptive information of the gene products. The files containing this information and the seed proteins used in the prioritization can be downloaded from the web page displaying the results (results page). The results page includes an interactive visualization panel where topranking proteins (at top 1 or 5%) and their interactions are displayed (). Nodes of the subnetwork in this panel can be selected, providing information on their description in BIANA integrated database. If the species is H. sapiens, GUILDify fetches the drugs (if any) targeting these top-ranking proteins from DrugBank () and displays them in the visualization panel. The score for each drug targeting a protein in the high-scoring subnetwork is calculated as the geometric distance to the protein(s) t targeted by the drug in the highest scoring subnetwork, using their individual scores as length. Further details on the materials and methods can be found in the Supplementary Material.
CONCLUSIONPhenotypic characterization of genes plays a crucial role in explaining the mechanisms behind biological processes. We have developed GUILDify, a free and easy-to-use web server for prioritization of genes using PPI networks. For a given phenotype, GUILDify uses descriptive fields in several proteomics and genomics databases in combination with network-based prioritization methods and provides an interactome-wide ranking. The ranking represents the relevance to the phenotype of interest and can be used to short-list the set of candidate genes that need to be further validated or to repurpose drugs (e.g. through common high-ranking targets).
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
E.Guney et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
