Copy number variants (CNVs) are a major source of genetic variation. Comparing CNVs between samples is important in elucidating their potential effects in a wide variety of biological contexts. HD-CNV (hotspot detector for copy number variants) is a tool for downstream analysis of previously identified CNV regions from multiple samples, and it detects recurrent regions by finding cliques in an interval graph generated from the input. It creates a unique graphical representation of the data, as well as summary spreadsheets and UCSC (University of California, Santa Cruz) Genome Browser track files. The interval graph, when viewed with other software or by automated graph analysis, is useful in identifying genomic regions of interest for further study. Availability and implementation: HD-CNV is an open source Java code and is freely available, with tutorials and sample data from http://
INTRODUCTIONA copy number variant (CNV) refers to a large (1 kb) segment of the genome that is either duplicated or deleted. CNVs are found between individuals and between tissues of the same organism because of germline mutation and/or somatic mosaicism, and can significantly impact genetic variability, gene expression, phenotypic variability, disease, cancer, evolution and adaptation (). They may also be referred to as copy number abberations, changes, differences or polymorphisms depending on the discipline, context and the level of specificity. At the genome scale, CNVs can be detected using a variety of methods, including microarray and next-generation sequencing analysis. After detection, finding CNVs present in many samples (recurrent CNV regions) can indicate commonly inherited CNVs or mutation hotspots generating CNVs. Finding unique CNV events can indicate potential candidate mutations relevant to disease or other phenotypic variants. We introduce HD-CNV, which takes any collection of CNV calls as input, detects recurrent regions based on percentage overlap and creates a unique graphical visualization of clusters of overlapping CNV regions across samples. Other software exists to analyse overlapping CNV calls and find recurrent copy number variable regions among samples (). HD-CNV is unique, in that it analyses CNV events using interval graphs () and gives a visual karyotype for quick identification of recurrent and unique CNVs across the genome.
METHODSHD-CNV imports pre-formatted CSV files containing previously detected CNV events. CNV events are treated as nodes in an interval graph. Interval graphs, in general, are used to represent regions (intervals) on a real line, and edges are added where intervals overlap (). Here, edges are added between nodes that share the user-specified base pair overlap required to consider two CNV events part of a 'merged region' (default 40%) (). Users also indicate the overlap required for a 'family' (region with highly similar CNV events, default 99%). Once the graphs have been built, the Bron Kerbosch Clique Finder algorithm () returns all cliques (groups of nodes completely interconnected), which are reported as merged regions. Merged regions, therefore, contain a collection of CNV events, which each overlap all others in the merged region by the minimum overlap specified and indicate the genomic location in which that group of overlapping CNVs is found. They can be of any size from two to the number of detected CNVs depending on the input, and they will be detected by HD-CNV with 100% accuracy. Human sample data were collected from Complete Genomics () publicly available diversity dataset, which includes CNV calls from their assembly software platform (version 2.0.0.26) for 46 individuals from diverse genetic backgrounds (including individuals from China, Japan, Kenya, Italy, USA and Nigeria). HD-CNV was applied to the data, and the graph files generated were visualized using Gephi (). Within each circular graph (one per chromosome), clusters (merged regions) are visible as circular substructures, whose size is proportional to the number of CNV events in the merged region. With 12 100 unique CNV events, HD-CNV runs in 62 s on an 2.8 GHz Intel Core i7 with 16 GB of random access memory. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
APPLICATIONHD-CNV identifies recurrent CNV regions and allows for high-level visualization of the relative number of CNV events on each chromosome, clusters of overlapping CNV events and isolated CNV events. It can be used for qualitative exploratory analysis on data from any organism, and it does not require additional reference data or annotation. Statistical analysis can be done up-or downstream as appropriate for the dataset. It can be used to compare CNV calls from multiple programs for concordance or discordance as in, for example, tumour/normal sample comparisons. It has been tested on data from different species (human and mouse) and data from different CNV calling platforms. HD-CNV generates various output files, including: 'Graph files' can be used for large scale visualization, allowing quick identification of areas for further study. CNV events, or merged regions from the graph, can be found in the track files. 'UCSC Genome Browser track files' contain the merged regions and the original CNV events, including base pair locations, which allows cross referencing with other genomic data and features.
RESULTSWe have used our program to analyse CNVs detected in humans from a diverse genetic background (). The darker clusters indicate a CNV event that is recurrent in all samples, which may indicate CNVs common among many human populations. Individual nodes, and smaller clusters, show rare CNV events that may be limited to certain individuals and sub-populations.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
