Motivation: Discovery of novel protective antigens is fundamental to the development of vaccines for existing and emerging pathogens. Most computational methods for predicting protein antigenicity rely directly on homology with previously characterized protective antigens; however, homology-based methods will fail to discover truly novel protective antigens. Thus, there is a significant need for homology-free methods capable of screening entire proteomes for the antigens most likely to generate a protective humoral immune response.
INTRODUCTIONIdentification of antigen proteins capable of triggering a significant humoral immune system response is important for addressing fundamental questions in immunology, virology and bacteriology. It is also important for practical purposes ranging from diagnostic applications to vaccine design. The goal of this article is to develop and test a predictor of protein antigenicity that can be used on a high-throughput scale on existing or new proteomes to identify key antigenic proteins that may have protective qualities and may be used in vaccine design applications. The predictor is developed * To whom correspondence should be addressed. by applying machine-learning methods to training data resulting from a unique high-throughput proteomic chip technology originally developed in the Felgner Laboratory (), as well as data extracted from the literature and public databases. From the outset, it must be recognized that the notion of protein antigen is similar to many other notions in biology (e.g. gene, consciousness) that are very useful but not tightly defined. Given the complexity, variability and flexibility of the immune system, at one extreme, one could take the position that every protein has the potential of being antigenic and of triggering a humoral immune response. On the other hand, it is well known that immune systems respond differentially to the various proteins of a pathogen and that there are commonalities among the humoral immune responses of different individuals exposed to the same pathogen. Within the proteins of a pathogen considered to be antigenic, one can further distinguish several overlapping subclasses with fuzzy boundaries such as protective antigens, serodiagnostic antigens and crossreactive antigens. To a first degree of approximation: protective antigens are important for conferring protection, serodiagnostic antigens are associated with a differential humoral antibody response between naive and exposed individuals and are important for diagnostics purposes and cross-reactive antigens are associated with a strong humoral antibody response in both naive and exposed individuals. The primary focus of this work is on protective antigen prediction. Protecting populations against infectious pathogens is an important priority and vaccination is widely recognized as one of the most reliable preventive approaches. By simulating the presence of a given pathogen, a vaccine elicits a specific protective immune response. Although most proteins produced by a given pathogen can be considered to be antigens, only some, denoted protective antigens, induce an effective immune response against the whole pathogen (). These protective antigens are usually surfaceexposed or exported proteins accessible to the immune system (). For safety purposes, the historical trend has been toward creating subunit vaccines or epitope vaccines () containing only full or partial protective antigens, as opposed to early vaccines based on attenuated whole pathogens. Identification of protective antigenic proteins or determinants is therefore a top priority in current vaccine development projects (). Thanks to advances in genomic technologies, pathogen genomes can now be rapidly obtained (), opening the door for in silico screening of a pathogen's entire proteome
Prediction of protein antigenicityfor the antigens most likely to elicit a protective immune response. Prediction of subunit antigenic determinants, B-cell epitopes, by computational methods has been an active area of research for a long time () and is still an accepted approach for modern vaccinology (;; Sweredoski and). However, because of the non-linear nature of epitopes in active folded proteins and the immune system's ability for adaptive response to antigens, the relevance of such predictors remains unclear and is debated often (). Prediction of protective antigens is usually referred to as reverse vaccinology (). This approach has obtained several notable successes () since the seminal work of. In previous work, the best vaccine candidates have been selected using both similarity to known protective antigens and predicted characteristics, such as the protein localization. For instance,used BLAST (), GCG (Accelrys Software), FASTA () and PSORT () to predict features typical of surface-associated proteins. These methods rely on sequence similarity with known protective antigens to predict relevant vaccine candidates in the proteome of a new pathogen. While homology to known protective antigens is a reasonable criteria for identifying some new protective antigens, it is by no means exhaustive and, by definition, will miss novel non-homologous protective antigens. Doytchinova and Flower (2007a, b) have proposed a sequencebased method that does not rely on homology as the methods described above do. Three distinct datasets were prepared to predict protective bacterial antigens, protective viral antigens and tumor antigens, respectively. Each dataset consists of 100 antigens collected from the literature as positive examples and 100 proteins randomly selected from the same set of species as negative examples. The corresponding predictive models were derived by applying a two-class discriminant analysis using partial least squares applied to a uniform representation of the protein sequences, obtained by the auto cross-covariance method described in. The estimated prediction accuracy of the resulting predictor, Vaxijen, ranges from 70% to 89% depending on the evaluation method and training set. The same method has been applied to 33 protective fungal antigens and 117 protective parasite antigens in, the corresponding models are also included in Vaxijen. To the best of our knowledge, the Vaxijen predictor is the first and only alignmentfree bioinformatics tool available for protective antigen prediction. Considering the small size of the datasets used for training and evaluation and the protocol for selecting negative examples, it is reasonable to suspect that the published accuracy estimates for Vaxijen are somewhat biased and that improvements ought to be possible with larger annotated datasets. However, collecting data on protective and non-protective antigens remains a particularly difficult task in spite of the numerous B-cell epitope databases available like AntiJen (), IEDB (), Bcipep () or AntigenDB (), since information about the neutralization of the parent protein or pathogen is rarely available. Reviewing the vaccinology literature to find relevant proteins to build a large training set is laborious and yields relatively small datasets. Thus, new high-throughput approaches must be developed to obtain larger data sets. Here, we take advantage of a new high-throughput technology () to study the humoral immune response to pathogen infection using protein microarrays. The technology uses a proprietary in vitro expression system to express the proteins encoded in the genome of a pathogen and print them on nitrocellulose arrays where they can be probed with sera from different individuals (e.g. naive versus exposed versus vaccinated). Secondary antibody coupled with fluorescent methods are used to visualize the entire response profile as with DNA microarrays. The proteomes of several pathogens such as Francisella tularensis (), Burkholderia pseudomallei () and Plasmodium falciparum () have been partially or entirely printed and probed against the sera of individuals with either positive or negative clinical tests for the corresponding pathogen. The resulting reactivity data provide a reliable estimate of the humoral immune response to each pathogen protein for each sera sample. Thus, these protein microarray data can be used to curate relevant datasets to train sequence-based machine-learning methods for predicting the degree of humoral immune response to novel proteins. Although the protein microarray data does not directly provide information about whether or not a particular antigen is protective, our working hypothesis is that the actual protective antigens are significantly overrepresented among the set of antigens for which the protected individuals elicit a significant antibody response, and the unprotected individuals do not. Here we begin by curating a large and non-redundant set of antigens with known immunogenicity using this high-throughput technology and combine it with data extracted from the literature and the existing databases. Only pathogen proteins are analyzed in this work, thus, self-antigens from tumors and non-peptide antigens are not utilized. From this protein set, we extract several sequence-based features and develop a two-stage machine-learning architecture to predict protective antigenicity from the protein primary sequence. The predictive abilities of the resulting system are assessed in four different ways: (i) by direct comparison with the method proposed in Doytchinova and Flower (2007b); (ii) by standard 10-fold crossvalidation; (iii) by repeated cross-validations using each pathogen protein subset as a fold; and (iv) by external validation on a pathogen proteome for which protein microarray data were obtained after the initial development of ANTIGENpro.
DATASETS AND METHODSIn this section, we describe the methodological steps of our study:(i) preparation of a rigorous set of antigenic and non-antigenic proteins; (ii) extraction of several sequence-based feature sets for each protein; and (iii) derivation of ANTIGENpro to predict protein antigenicity. For convenience, protein sets appear in bold and feature sets appear in square brackets.
Protein datasets for protective antigen predictionWe curate seven independent sets of proteins for the purpose of studying the prediction of protein antigenicity from primary sequence. Five of the datasets are curated using protein microarray data analysis for each of the following pathogens:Details and protocols followed to prepare these sets are given in Section 2.1.1. In addition, a dataset containing known protective antigens found in the literature and public databases, PAntigens, was curated and the details are given in Section 2.1.2. After the development of ANTIGENpro, an additional protein microarray dataset were obtained for the pathogen Bartonella henselae, and this dataset is used for external validation of the method. The details of this external dataset are provided in Section 2.1.3.
Protein microarray data analysis Technology developedin the Felgner Laboratory, described in detail in, was used to obtain reactivity data for most of the proteins of the five pathogens listed in. In short, for a given pathogen, the process begins by PCR amplification of primers for all deduced open reading frames (ORFs) in the sequenced genome. The amplified DNA is cloned with an in vivo recombination method into a plasmid expression vector. Then the vector is run through an in vitro transcription/translation process to produce polypeptides. These peptides are then printed on a enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) () array for screens against patient sera. ELISA uses fluorescence of a tagged dye probe to indirectly measure binding between antibodies in sera and the proteins printed on the array. A single microarray experiment consists of probing an array with patient sera, known as the primary, then probing with a secondary that binds with antibodies present in the primary, and finally a tagged dye conjugated with a molecule known to bind to the secondary is applied as a tertiary probe. The arrays are then scanned via laser, and fluorescence intensities are measured. The printing, probing and scanning aspects of these experiments are similar to the processes used with cDNA microarrays. Normalization and differential analysis protocols developed for DNA microarrays have been extended to these new protein arrays (). Each dataset is prepared for analysis in the following manner: the VSN transform () is applied to the dataset agnostic of class, typically using a plasmid expression vector with no inserted cloned DNA as a control. Differential analysis is done using the CyberT software described in Baldi and Long (2001) and available online at http://cybert.ics.uci.edu. Cyber-T calculates a Bayesian regularized estimate of the variance of the signal intensity levels. Then theses variance estimates are used to compare the groups with a t-test. The BenjaminiHochberg multiple test correction is used to scale the P-values, which are used as a measure of differential reactivity between naive and exposed groups. For each pathogen used in this study the pathogen name, specific strain, number of proteins with microarray data, number of exposed sera samples, and number of naive sera samples are displayed in. The ORFs and primers used for each dataset are available at http://portal.proteomics.ics.uci.edu/virus/portal.php. Each pathogen has at least 40 associated sera samples. The sera samples are divided into naive and exposed groups as described below. @BULLET The C.albicans dataset (Candida) exposed group sera comes from patients being treated for candidiasis (recovery of Candida from blood cultures) at Shands Teaching Hospital at the University of Florida (STH-UF). For the candidiasis patients, most sera were collected withinPage: 2939 29362943difficult. To the best of our knowledge, there are no public databases dedicated specifically to this purpose. B-cell epitope databases such as IEDB (), AntiJen (), Bcipep () or AntigenDB () represent a poor source of data for this type of study. Most of the reported B-cell epitopes are either part of the same set of extensively studied and epitope-mapped antigens or are peptides for which the neutralization of the parent protein, let alone the pathogen, is unknown and cannot be assumed from the neutralization of the epitope (). The immunology literature remains the principal source of relevant data for this prediction problem. Doytchinova and Flower (2007b) collected 100 bacterial and 100 viral protective antigens by reviewing the literature. We merged these two protein sets together with antigens reported in Kolaskar andand 12 immunogenic antigens found in the Bcipep database resulting in a set of 246 known protective antigens. Sequence redundancy was then reduced with a 30% similarity cutoff using BLASTCLUST (). The final PAntigens set contains 213 non-redundant protective antigens. UniProt () identifiers of the 213 protective antigens are reported in Supplementary Table 1. Note that there are several important differences between PAntigens and the Vaxijen () datasets. First, only pathogen proteins are considered in this study, therefore tumor antigens are not included. In addition, different groups of pathogens (e.g. bacteria, viruses or yeasts) are not separated to train distinct prediction models. Finally, the proteins classified as non-antigenic in this study are curated by selecting proteins with low seroreactivity according to the protein mircoarray experiments, whereas in other studies proteins classified as non-antigenic were selected randomly.
Prediction of protein antigenicity
External proteome: BartonellaThe pathogen Bartonella henselae was recently analyzed by the Felgner Laboratory using the methods described in Section 2.1.1. The corresponding dataset, Bartonella, is used in this work for external validation of ANTIGENpro (Section 2.3). As highlighted in, such validation provides a bias-reduced evaluation of a predictor. The dataset B.henselae consists of 1463 proteins. The procedure to select the most antigenic proteins based on the microarray data, described in Section 2.1.1, was applied to B.henselae resulting in a set of 73 antigenic proteins. The remaining 1390 were then classified as nonantigenic for the purpose of evaluating the ability of ANTIGENpro to recover the most antigenic proteins from an entire proteome. Some basic information on the source of the sera samples for B.henselae is provided below.Amino acids groups are separated by commas. a Natural alphabet. b Grouped by hydrophobicity (Idicula). c Grouped from eight numeric scales using EM algorithm ().
Sequence-based featuresFrom the immunology literature detailed in Section 1, only a small set of primary sequence characteristics are usually considered indicative of protein antigenicity. Here to train ANTIGENpro we take a broader approach by using a large number of features and feature sets. We follow a protocol similar to the one proposed to predict protein solubility on overexpression in. Among the 23 distinct feature sets proposed in this previous study, only eight feature sets showed any correlation with protein antigenicity in preliminary experiments. The details of these sets are provided below. For consistency and convenience, the names assigned to each feature set inare also used here. Six of the eight feature sets are frequencies of amino acid monomers and dimers using three different amino acid alphabets described in. The six sets are denoted bywhere Name-S is the name given to the alphabet in, S is the size of the corresponding alphabet and X takes the value M or D associated with the frequencies of monomers and dimers over the corresponding alphabet (e.g.). The two remaining feature sets,and, are described below. Note that the set of predicted featureswas modified to include TMHMM () predictions. Feature set sizes are reported in. Each feature is normalized toin the following experiments (Section 2.3). @BULLETFeatures directly computed from the sequence.(1) Sequence length n.(2) Turn-forming residues fraction:(4) Molecular weight.(5) GRAVY Index defined as the averaged hydropathy value () of the amino acids in the primary sequence.(6) Aliphatic index: (A+2.9V +3.9I +3.9L)/n (). @BULLETFeatures predicted from the sequence.(1) Beta residues fraction, as predicted by SSpro ().
C.N.Magnan et al.
Antigenicity predictionThe eight feature sets described above and five machine-learning algorithms are used to design a two-stage architecture for predicting protein antigenicity from the primary sequence using ensemble methods (Dietterich, 2000).
ANTIGENpro: a two-stage architectureFor a given protein set, denoted train afterwards, the prediction model is computed following the steps described in this section. First, the eight feature sets described in Section 2.2 are computed for each sequence in train. The dimensionality of each feature set is then reduced using the wrapper method described in. We defined the Naive Bayes algorithm as the induction algorithm, a depth-first search as the selection algorithm and the accuracy estimated by 10-fold cross-validation as the evaluation function to be optimized. The selection process is stopped when the SD of the accuracies computed during the last five steps does not exceed 0.01. Forty distinct primary classifiers are then trained using one of the eight feature sets describing the sequences in train and one algorithm among Naive Bayes, C4.5, k-nearest neighbors, neural networks and SVMs. We used LIBSVM () for SVM, which implements the sequential minimal optimization (SMO) algorithm proposed in) and Weka () for the other algorithms. Finally, the 40 probability estimates produced by the primary predictors are used as input to a second stage SVM classifier. For a new protein sequence, the probability estimate computed by the second stage SVM predictor is the final ANTIGENpro prediction.
Evaluation and comparison with previous methodsRepeated crossvalidations are usually recommended to obtain reliable accuracy estimates (). To form the cross-validation folds, we followed two distinct protocols described below. In the first cross-validation experiment, the six protein datasets are merged together and the resulting set is then balanced by randomly removing nonantigenic proteins until the subsets are equal in size (576 examples of each class). Then, a standard 10-fold cross-validation is launched with a randomized balanced split of the dataset. This process is repeated five times with a different selection of negative examples for each experiment. The following standard evaluation criteria are computed: accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, Matthews correlation coefficient and area under the ROC curve. For each evaluation metric, the mean and SD of the five runs are reported in. The method proposed in Doytchinova and Flower (2007b), Vaxijen,is evaluated using the same criteria on the bacterial and viral proteins of the same datasets (around 75% of the proteins). Results are also reported in. ROC curves for both predictors are given in. In the second cross-validation experiment, the folds correspond to the source datasets. Five of the six datasets are used for training and the sixth dataset, associated primarily with a different pathogen, is used for testing purposes. This process is repeated for all six datasets. For each experiment, the five training sets and the test set are separately balanced using the same strategy described above for 10-fold cross-validation. An exception is made when handling PAntigens because the set contains only antigenic proteins, thus no balancing is performed. Note that this protocol is not a standard crossvalidation protocol since the folds change during the process. Also, due to the large difference in size of the six protein sets, this protocol is unfavorable for a reliable evaluation of the predictor. In fact, in most cases the training set is either large but evaluated on a small test set or the training set is small but evaluated on a large test set. Nevertheless, this approach allows evaluation of different aspects of the predictor not highlighted by the 10fold cross-validation. Five repetitions of the whole process are performed with a random selection of the non-antigenic proteins for each experiment. Description of the datasets and results for each fold are reported in
Prediction of protein antigenicityand sensitivity of the predictor for each threshold are reported in the same table and discussed in Section 3.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONHere we present a three-pronged approach to assess the ANTIGENpro methodology. First, an internal validation is performed to determine if ANTIGENpro can discriminate the most antigenic from the least antigenic proteins in our curated data. For this purpose, ANTIGENpro is evaluated on the six protein sets described in Section 2.1 by repeated cross-validations using standard 10-fold cross-validation and dataset-fold cross-validation following the protocol described in Section 2.3.2. Results of the standard 10fold cross-validation runs are reported in the last column ofand in. Results for the dataset-fold cross-validation runs are reported in. These results clearly show that ANTIGENpro performs well at the internal discrimination task. Next, a validation experiment is performed using the set PAntigens to assess ANTIGENpro's ability to recognize confirmed protective antigens. For this experiment, ANTIGENpro is trained using only the microarray data and the accuracy on PAntigens is calculated. The results of this experiment indicate that a predictor trained solely on protein microarray data can predict truly protective antigens with accuracy that is significantly better than random. Finally, armed with a classifier that we know can discriminate the most antigenic from the least antigenic proteins and can recognize confirmed protective antigens, we perform an external validation on an entire proteome to assess ANTIGENpro's ability to recover likely protective antigens in a real-world setting. The Bartonella dataset, described in Section 2.1.3, is used for this purpose and the results of the experiment are reported in Tables 7 and 8. These results indicate that ANTIGENpro can be used effectively to identify likely protective antigens from an entire proteome.
Internal validationThe overall accuracy of ANTIGENpro, evaluated by repeated 10fold cross-validations, is 75.51% with a prediction threshold of 0.5. The predictor correctly classifies 75.88% of the antigenic proteins and 75.14% of the non-antigenic proteins. The Matthews correlation coefficient (noted MCC in) is 0.51 and the area under the ROC curve (ROC) is 0.81. These results indicate that the prediction model has learned relevant characteristics of the most antigenic versus least antigenic proteins. Finally, the small SDs over the five runs attest to the stability of the method. The evaluation of the Vaxijen predictor () on the datasets used for the 10-fold cross-validation experiments discussed above (results in) shows that this predictor is outperformed by ANTIGENpro. In fact, Vaxijen correctly classified 59.48% of the bacterial and viral proteins in these datasets. The other antigens (around 25% of the antigens in our datasets) cannot be tested since no prediction model is available for these pathogens. This is a clear shortcoming of Vaxijen. In addition, the Vaxijen sensitivity (89.69%) and specificity (25.85%) show an important bias toward positive predictions. Using higher prediction thresholds for this predictor drops the sensitivity and does not improve the overall accuracy. The other evaluation criteria and the ROC curve () also tend to indicate that ANTIGENpro is more suitable than Vaxijen for both two-class prediction and ranking.Sensitivity, specificity and accuracy are computed for the thresholds reported in the first lineThe dataset-fold cross-validation runs performed using each protein set as a fold show that the accuracy of ANTIGENpro on the five microarray datasets () is consistent (6670%) with the notable exception of the Malaria dataset (59.96%). As explained in Section 2.3.2, the protocol followed during this second set of experiments creates an unfavorable evaluation situation. For instance, the very small sizes of the datasets Burkholderia (10 proteins) and Candida (6 proteins) prevent a reliable interpretation of the results on these sets. The significant differences in size of the datasets may partially explain the overall 6% drop in accuracy of ANTIGENpro during the second set of experiments. Residual redundancy within each subset may also contribute to these observations.
Known protective antigens: PAntigensDuring the standard 10-fold cross-validation experiments, we observe that nearly all of the protective antigens in PAntigens are correctly classified (around 90%). In addition, when ANTIGENpro is trained using the five microarray datasets only, the predictor correctly classifies 81.6% of the protective antigens in PAntigens using an unbiased decision threshold of 0.5 (first line of). The high accuracy of ANTIGENpro on PAntigens supports the working hypothesis that protein microarray data can be used to predict the likelihood that a protein is a protective antigen. This result is significant because new alignment-independent methods are required for the discovery of truly novel antigens, and our data preparation protocol ensures that none of the sequences in the microarray datasets is homologous with any sequence in PAntigens.
External proteome: BartonellaHere we assess ANTIGENpro's ability to recover the most antigenic proteins from an entire proteome using the external dataset Bartonella. For this test every protein in the dataset must be classified as either antigenic or non-antigenic, resulting in an Page: 2942 29362943
C.N.Magnan et al.unbalanced set consisting of only 5% positive examples. This situation approximates how the method can be applied, and how it may perform on a new proteome in a real-world situation. Specifically, the scores produced by computational methods can be used to screen proteomes for subsets of proteins for further testing. For this type of application, the enrichment among the top ranked proteins is a useful metric. The enrichment is calculated as: (% of positives among top ranked subset)/(% of positives among the entire proteome), thus the expected enrichment of a random ranking would be 1.0. For instance, among the proteins ranked in the top 10% by ANTIGENpro on Bartonella, 17.0% of the antigenic proteins are recovered while only 5% of the entire proteome is classified as antigenic, this corresponds to a 3.4-fold enrichment. The probability estimates produced by ANTIGENpro are used to rank all the proteins in the proteome. Similarly, the ranking process is repeated using the scores produced by Vaxijen and SignalP. SignalP predicts the likelihood a protein contains a signal sequence, which is one criteria that is frequently used to screen for potential antigens. The enrichment results for ANTIGENpro, Vaxijen and SignalP are presented inusing the top 2, 5, 10 and 25% ranked proteins. Using the 2, 5 and 10% thresholds, the ANTIGENpro enrichment values are higher than for both SignalP and Vaxijen. At the 25% threshold, the SignalP result of 2.2 is slightly higher than the ANTIGENpro result of 2.1. Overall, the enrichment results indicate that ANTIGENpro can be used effectively to screen for likely protective antigens for further analysis or experiments. The two-class prediction accuracies on the external dataset are reported in. These results show that using a threshold of 0.5 to decide antigenicity yields a low accuracy of 55.64%. However, using higher prediction thresholds results in a significant increase in the accuracy of the predictor while the decrease in sensitivity is less significant. This is clearly a desirable characteristic of the predictor. In fact, when the threshold is set to 0.65, the accuracy is 70.54% (+14.90) with a sensitivity of 53.42% (8.22%). This external evaluation of ANTIGENpro shows that using higher prediction thresholds to decide protein antigenicity allows a significantly better recognition of antigenic and non-antigenic proteins.
CONCLUSIONPrediction of the most antigenic proteins produced by a pathogen is an important and difficult problem. Such predictors could be used to identify the best vaccine candidates for a pathogen or for diagnostic tests. One key issue associated with the prediction task is the difficulty of classifying antigenic and non-antigenic proteins on a large scale and the lack of public databases dedicated to this purpose. In this work, we have used reactivity data obtained by protein microarray data analysis to prepare relatively large sets of examples. From these protein sets and 213 known protective antigens, we have designed a two-stage architecture to predict protein antigenicity from the primary sequence. The resulting predictor, ANTIGENpro, is the first sequence-based predictor trained using a large non-redundant dataset mainly obtained by protein microarray data analysis. In addition, ANTIGENpro is the only alignment-free predictor not designed for a specific pathogen category. The results obtained during the evaluation experiments provide several interesting conclusions. First, despite the inherent noise in protein microarray data, it can be used to effectively categorize both antigen and non-antigenic proteins for training purposes. The results demonstrate that this source of data can be used effectively for this problem: 81.6% of the known protective antigens are correctly classified when the model is trained only on balanced protein microarray datasets and an unbiased decision threshold of 0.5 is used. In addition, the cross-validation results indicate that ANTIGENpro can predict protein antigenicity from sequence alone with accuracy that is significantly better than random (75.51%). These cross-validation results also show that it significantly outperforms Vaxijen, the only previously reported method that does not directly rely on homology to known protective antigens. The results on the external validation dataset demonstrate that ANTIGENpro performs well when ranking entire proteomes according to likely antigenicity, when compared with Vaxijen and SignalP. In addition, the method presented here can rapidly take advantage of the massive amount of data that will be available thanks to the high-throughput protein microarray technology developed for studying the humoral immune response to pathogen infections. ANTIGENpro is available online at http://scratch.proteomics.ics.uci.edu.
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
days from the first date that blood cultures were positive. The naive control group sera comes from hospitalized patients with negative tests at the Infectious Diseases Consultation Service of STH-UF and from volunteers at the University of California, Irvine (Mochon et al., 2010).  The P.falciparum dataset (Malaria) consists of patients from a 2006 longitudinal study conducted in malaria endemic rural Mali. Sera samples were taken in May, shortly before the beginning of malaria season. To avoid age-related factors, only subjects aged 810 years were analyzed. The subjects were monitored throughout the following malaria season. At the end of the season if a patient had at least one malaria episode, their May sera sample was categorized as naive, and if they had no episodes their May sera was categorized as exposed. The dataset is described in detail in Crompton et al. (2008).  The B.melitensis dataset (Brucella) exposed group sera comes from patients in Lima, Peru confirmed to have acute brucellosis by both Rose Bengal screening test and positive blood culture. All exposed patients had their first known episode of brucellosis, and sera was drawn within 13 weeks of onset of symptoms. The naive group sera come from ambulatory healthy control individuals from Lima, Peru. The dataset is described in detail in Liang et al. (2010).  The B.pseudomallei dataset (Burkholderia) exposed group sera comes from culture positive samples from patients in Thailand and the naive sample sera comes from patients in Singapore. The dataset is described in detail in Felgner et al. (2009).  The M.tuberculosis dataset (Tuberculosis) consists of sera samples collected from Colombia where the exposed group tests positive using both sputum smear and bacterial culture tests for M.tuberculosis and the naive control group is negative for both tests. Additionally, all sera are HIV negative in order to minimize the confounding relationship between HIV positive sera and the antibody response to the M.tuberculosis antigens. As discussed in the introduction, the notions of 'antigen' and 'protective antigen' are fuzzy. Here we describe the general approach and specific steps taken to curate sets of positive and negative examples, based on protein microarray analysis, that are relevant for the task of predicting the likelihood that a particular protein is a protective antigen. Since no direct information about protection is available, we identify the sets of antigens which elicit: (i) the strongest response among protected individuals; and (ii) the most significant differential response between protected and unprotected individuals. The working hypothesis is that these antigens are significantly more likely to contribute to a protective immune response than the other proteins in the proteome. This key assumption will be tested using a set of known protective antigens from the literature, PAntigens, described in Section 2.1.2. Specifically, the following protocol is applied to each pathogen dataset to classify proteins as antigenic or non-antigenic. First, the proteins are ranked according to the mean antibody reactivity calculated from the exposed sera group. The most reactive 10% are reordered by the P-value calculated by the t-test between the exposed and naive sera groups and the 50% most differentially reactive of this subset (5% of total), with the lowest P-values, are labeled as antigenic. The non-antigenic proteins are selected in the opposite fashion. Starting from the complete list of proteins ranked by the mean reactivity, the least reactive 20% are reordered by the P-value and the 50% least differentially reactive of this subset (10% of total), with the highest P-values, are labeled as non-antigenic. Finally, the antigen and non-antigen sets from the five pathogens are merged and redundancy reduced using BLASTCLUST (Altschul et al., 1997) with a 30% similarity threshold, as for PAntigens (Section 2.1.2). In addition, proteins in the merged pathogen set with more than 30% similarity with any protein in PAntigens are also removed. The size and composition of the six final datasets are reported in Table 2. 2.1.2 Known protective antigens: PAntigens As discussed in the introduction, collecting relevant data for predicting protective antigens is
