HippDB catalogs every protein–protein interaction whose structure is available in the Protein Data Bank and which exhibits one or more helices at the interface. The Web site accepts queries on variables such as helix length and sequence, and it provides computational alanine scanning and change in solvent-accessible surface area values for every interfacial residue. HippDB is intended to serve as a starting point for structure-based small molecule and peptidomi-metic drug development. Availability and implementation: HippDB is freely available on the web at http://www.nyu.edu/projects/arora/hippdb. The Web site is implemented in PHP, MySQL and Apache. Source code freely available for download at
INTRODUCTIONProteinprotein interactions (PPIs) mediate fundamental signaling pathways and cellular processes. Although PPIs are highly promising pharmaceutical targets, they are not preferred targets in conventional drug development because of their extended flat interfaces. In particular, compound libraries for high-throughput screening that offer attractive lead compounds for enzymatic targets lack the topological and functional complexity necessary for PPI inhibition (). One successful method to inhibit PPIs is the mimicry of secondary structure motifs that contribute to complex formation (). Often a subset of the residues at a proteinprotein interface can contribute significantly to the binding interaction (). Because solubility and specificity are eternal problems in drug design, it is advantageous to identify and prioritize most important residues, leaving less important positions free for fine-tuning (). Conventional computational methods to predict important residues include alanine scanning () and solvent-accessible surface area (SASA) analysis (). Alanine scanning provides the change in G resulting from a contact residue being mutated to alanine, while a SASA value describes how much of the residue is buried from solvent on binding. We have previously developed a scoring strategy to rank protein interfaces by their promise for synthetic inhibition () and designed inhibitors of formerly 'undruggable' PPIs (). To follow-up this work, we sought to derive a readily accessible resource for the chemical biology community. Research groups with potent small-molecule scaffolds might be interested in small interfaces with hotspot residues in two consecutive positions or in the i and i4 positions, whereas those developing peptoid or beta-peptide foldamers might be more interested in long interfaces with high total G. HippDBa database of helical interfaces in PPIslists all the helical PPIs in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) and catalogs computational alanine scanning results (G in Rosetta energy units) and SASA for each interfacial residue. We expect this dataset will be a useful resource for PPI inhibition.depicts a typical workflow in HippDB. The user might first search for interface helices found in humans by constraining the organism name. Next, the user might trim the results for complexes with exactly three hotspot residues, then for helices 510 residues long, then for a G average 42. By clicking on the PDB codes that result, the user can view any of the five complexes fitting these criteria in JMol, with their hotspot residues displayed in wireframe.
METHODSStructures of multi-entity protein complexes' asymmetric units were obtained from the PDB (). We identified all interacting interface chains within each PDB file and created a new PDB file for each chain and each pair of interacting chains. If the original PDB file contained more than one model, only the lowest-scoring model was used (according to Rosetta's 'Relax' protocol). Each qualifying pair of chains was analyzed using the RosettaScripts AlaScan filter, averaging 100 runs (). Following alanine scanning, we isolated all interface helices containing two or more hotspot residues (G 41.0 Rosetta energy units, which approximately scale as 1 kcal/mol) and computed SASA using NACCESS (). Interface helices were required to possess at least four consecutive residues, each assigned as helical by Dictionary of Secondary Structure Prediction acquired from the Center for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics Web site (). For each interface helix, parameters including average and total G and SASA, the percentage of the complex's G and SASA contributed by the helix, the helix length, hotspot *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. distance and sequence and the organism of origin are recorded in the database. The Web site interface uses original JavaScript for constructing queries, a standard AJAX protocol to execute the queries and a JQuery extension (DataTables) to format the query results ().
RESULTSFrom 11 818 multiprotein entries in the PDB, 379 877 files of two protein chains were produced and subjected to alanine scanning. Of these interfaces, we found 7308 helices of four residues or longer with the two hotspots necessary to qualify for the database. A qualifying alpha helix is, on average, 13.2 residues long and contains 2.7 hotspots. The end-to-end distance separating these hotspots is 7.3 residues. On average, the three best hotspot residues sum to a G of 3.9 in Rosetta energy units, and the helix overall contributes 48% of the chain's total G and 37% of its SASA. The rational design of PPI inhibitors involves a systematic analysis of native interactions. By cataloging the results of this analysis for every known structure, and by describing secondorder metrics to help prioritize design efforts, this database will eliminate often-reduplicated effort and greatly accelerate the design process. In this way, HippDB complements existing resources such as PocketQuery and HotSprint, the former of which catalogues regions of high solvent burial and the latter of which highlights evolutionary conservation to evaluate the role, functional or structural, of individual hotspots ().. A typical HippDB query. The five resulting complexes are depicted with the qualifying chain in green and the partner chain in orange. 1YCR is the native p53/mdm2 complex; 3FDO and 3JZO are complexes of p53-like synthetic peptides with mdm4 and 3G03 and 3JZR are complexes of synthetic peptides with mdm2
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
HippDB at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
