We provide a Bioconductor package with quality assessment, processing and visualization tools for high-throughput sequencing data, with emphasis in ChIP-seq and RNA-seq studies. It includes detection of outliers and biases, inefficient immuno-precipitation and overamplification artifacts, de novo identification of read-rich genomic regions and visualization of the location and coverage of genomic region lists.
QUALITY CONTROL@BULLET Visualize sample correlations: principal component analysis (PCA) is useful to assess quality and identify problematic samples. Unfortunately, it is not directly applicable to sequencing data. Instead, we measure the distance in read coverage between samples * To whom correspondence should be addressed.@BULLET Assess enrichment efficiency: in sequencing experiments such as ChIP-seq, MeDIP or DNase-seq, certain samples accumulate more reads in specific regions than their controls. A lack of such coverage variability can indicate sample preparation problems (e.g. inefficient IP) or a lack of pronounced peaks. We measure coverage inequality with the standard deviation (SD) and Gini's coefficient G (), a classical econometrics measure of wealth inequality. The expected value of the coverage SD is proportional to  n (see Supplementary Material), where n is the number of reads. The expected E(G|n) also depends on n, but no closed-form expression is available. We estimate E(G|n) by generating n reads uniformly distributed along the genome. In order to make samples with different n comparable, we report SD n = SD/  n and G n = GE(G|n).shows higher SD n and G n in the IP samples than in their respective controls, suggesting no sample preparation problems. Samples sequenced with GAII present clearer peaks than GAI samples, thus indicating an improvement in the technology.@BULLET Correct strand bias: ChIP-seq fragment sizes cause reads on the  strands to be shifted with respect to each other. With single-end reads this poses a challenge, as the fragment size distribution is unknown. Akin to, we scan for reads in high coverage regions and estimate the shiftsshift shifts as the mean distance between reads in the + and  strands. We add/subtract 0.5s5s to the location of reads on the  strand, respectively.
i and j as d ij
ANALYSIS@BULLET Find read-rich regions: in many sequencing experiments, the goal is to identify de novo genomic regions of interest, e.g. binding sites, previously unannotated short RNAs or copy number variations. Although many analysis strategies are available, the computational burden of applying them to the whole genome is often excessive. It is therefore convenient to prescreen and focus the analysis. We implement a screening tool to detect all genomic regions with@BULLET Visualize hits: we facilitate the visualization of a list of genomic regions by plotting the distribution of their distances to the closest gene/feature (in base pair or relative to the feature length) and average coverage profiles. Often it is useful to scan the genome for regions accumulating a large number of hits, e.g. peaks in ChIPseq or differential expression in RNA-seq may reveal common regulatory mechanisms. We provide functions to detect and plot such areas.
shows an MDS plot for the ChIP-seq experiment GSE25836. The distance between FOXA2 IP samples and their inputs is larger than the distance between replicates, indicating a satisfactory quality.  Remove overamplification artifacts: PCR overamplification causes some reads to repeat an abnormally large number of times, which can induce biases in downstream analyses. Simultaneously, naturally occurring read repeats are expected. For instance, short genomes or IP samples typically show more read repeats than longer genomes or control samples, as they focus on smaller genomic regions. We model the number of repeats as a mixture of truncated negative binomial distributions [number of components set to minimize the BIC, Schwarz (1978)], and use an empirical Bayes approach akin to Efron et al. (2001) to estimate the False Discovery Rate (FDR). We fit the model after truncating 0.001 of the reads (by default) with highest number of repeats, as these are more likely to be artifacts. Figure 2 shows more read repeats in the S.cerevisiae than in the human data (solid lines). Reads with more than six repeats were flagged as overamplification artifacts in the human data at a 0.01 FDR, while for S.cerevisiae the cutoff was 138 repeats. The procedure adapts the cutoff to the nature of the data.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
