Motivation: A large fraction of eukaryotic proteins contain unstructured tails or linkers. The presence of flexible regions allows these systems to experience a high level of mobility facilitating their biological function. The complex nature of protein rotation in such flexible modular systems precludes a straightforward application of hydrodynamic methods to calculate their rotational mo-tional properties. We describe the workflow of HYdrodynamic CoUpling of Domains (HYCUD), a program for prediction of effective rotational correlation times in multidomain proteins. The usage of HYCUD is demonstrated by its application to the ribosomal protein L7/L12. Rotational correlation times predicted by HYCUD might be used to detect molecular switch events mediated by disorder–-order transitions in interdomain linkers. Availability and implementation: The source code and documentation are available at www. mpibpc.mpg.de/106144/software.
IntroductionThe function of biological macromolecules depends on their internal mobility supported by the presence of intrinsically disordered regions (). Reorientational motion of biomolecules can be followed through a variety of experimental techniques (). However, for slowly tumbling systems, the use of these experimental techniques is limited. On the other hand, theoretical prediction of rotational motional behavior through standard hydrodynamic methods () is complicated in these systems by the presence of several potentially coupled motions (). To overcome these problems, modification of rigid-body hydrodynamics () as well as Brownian dynamics of coarse-grained models with the inclusion of hydrodynamic interactions () have been employed. Here, we describe the workflow of a recently developed alternative approach () called HYdrodynamic CoUpling of Domains (HYCUD) to predict the rotational correlation time (s c ) of protein domains within flexible modular systems. The details of the HYCUD method, together with its application to the flexible two-domain ribosomal protein L7/L12 and protein X of Sendai virus, are reported.
MethodsThe only input required for HYCUD calculations is a structural ensemble of the protein of interest. If high-resolution structures of the V C The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com protein domains are known, ensembles of the whole protein structures can be generated using freely available programs. One such program is ensemble optimization method (EOM) (). The core of HYCUD is formed by a Python script that takes the aforementioned ensemble as a single PDT file (ensemble.pdt), and proceeds as follows to calculate the ensemble-average s c (<s c >) of each protein module (, further details in Supplementary Information): 1. The ensemble.pdt input file is parsed, and a temporary directory structure is generated containing one protein databank (PDB) file for each model in the PDT file. If required, a third-party program is called to reconstruct backbone and side-chain coordinates on the basis of Calpha atom traces (). 2. According to a user-defined scheme, which determines the boundary of fragments in the aminoacid sequence of the whole protein, each PDB model will be split into some fragments and placed in a temporary subdirectory. Definition of the boundaries of the folded domains is guided by the available experimental knowledge. With regard to the unfolded regions where little experimental evidence exists, fragment lengths are set to 1214 residuesthat is twice the typical persistence length of unfolded polypeptide chains (). 3. For each fragment, the third-party program HYDROPRO (v. 10) () is called to calculate the hydrodynamic properties, i.e. rotational correlation time s c,0 and intrinsic viscosity. A parameter file hydropro.dat will guide this step of calculation. To prevent repetition of HYDROPRO calculations for the folded fragments which have the same size/shape across the structural ensemble, their s c,0 andare calculated separately and subsequently fixed. 4. After extracting s c,0 andof each fragment from HYDROPRO output result files, the script uses the pairwise distance between centers of mass of protein fragments to derive a scaling factor representing the 'effective viscosity' experienced by each fragment within the context of the whole molecule. The s c,0 of each isolated fragment will then be multiplied by this scaling factor, yielding a new s c value, which is then corrected for the local viscosity effects. 5. In the last step, the corrected s c of each fragment calculated for any member of the protein ensemble will be averaged over the whole ensemble after elimination of outliers.With respect to runtime, Steps 1 and 2 scale linearly with the number of PDB models in the ensemble and the total number of fragments per model. Moreover, these two steps are very fast such that they do not pose a significant limit to the speed of HYCUD calculations. The most time-consuming step involves the HYDROPRO calculations. As stated earlier, HYDROPRO calculations can be skipped for globular domains by fixing their s c,0 and. In this way, the computational cost of Step 3 will be mainly determined (linearly scaled) by the number of PDB models in the ensemble, the number of fragments in disordered regions per model and the parameter NSIG in HYDROPRO calculations. The computational costs of Steps 4 and 5 also scale linearly with the number of PDB models in the ensemble and quadratically (linearly for Step 5) with the total number of fragments per model, although they are typically negligible compared to Step 3. With a dedicated 8-or 12-core Linux machine, the HYCUD calculations for an ensemble of 500 models, each containing three globular regions and four disordered fragments (such as the dimeric L7/L12 protein) typically takes 12 h.
ResultsThe 120-residue L7/L12 ribosomal protein contains two globular domains, an N-terminal domain (NTD) responsible for protein dimerization and a C-terminal domain (CTD) (). The NTD and CTD are connected via a long flexible linker (). Here, we first generated an ensemble of 5000 random structures for the dimeric L7/L12 protein using the EOM program () (Supplementary). Subsequently, HYCUD calculations were performed to predict the effective s c of the dimerized NTD and each CTD within the full-length protein dimers. Supplementaryshows that the HYCUD prediction for both NTD and CTD converged within an ensemble size of 5001000. The s c distribution within the ensemble of dimeric L7/ L12 is shown in. S2B. Supplementarypresents the results of HYCUD calculations. Close agreement with the experimental results () was obtained considering the uncertainty range of experimental data and 5% inaccuracy in hydrodynamic calculations (). Further support for the validity of HYCUD is provided by the excellent agreement between predicted and experimental s c of the 53-residue domain of protein X from Sendai virus () (Supplementaryand Supplementary) as well as several other examples reported in Rezaei(Supplementary). In conclusion, we described a computational tool to predict the effective rotational correlation time of domains in flexible multidomain proteins. The presented tool is easy to use and provides users insight into the rotational motion of protein modules within dynamic modular biomolecules.
FundingThis work was supported through the German Science Foundation Collaborative Research Center 860, Project B2 (M.Z.) and the German Science Foundation research unit FOR934 (M.Z.).Recent advances in macromolecular hydrodynamic modeling, Methods, 54, 101114.
Bioinformatics, 31(8), 2015, 13191321 doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu824 Advance Access Publication Date: 12 December 2014 Applications Note at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
N.Rezaei-Ghaleh et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
