Motivation: Identifying functional relation of copy number variation regions (CNVRs) and gene is an essential process in understanding the impact of genotypic variations on phenotype. There have been many related works, but only a few attempts were made to normal populations. Results: To analyze the functions of genome-wide CNVRs, we applied a novel correlation measure called Correlation based on Sample Set (CSS) to paired Whole Genome TilePath array and messenger RNA (mRNA) microarray data from 210 HapMap individuals with normal phenotypes and calculated the confident CNVR–gene relationships. Two CNVR nodes form an edge if they regulate a common set of genes, allowing the construction of a global CNVR network. We performed functional enrichment on the common genes that were trans-regulated from CNVRs clustered together in our CNVR network. As a result, we observed that most of CNVR clusters in our CNVR network were reported to be involved in some biological processes or cellular functions, while most CNVR clusters from randomly constructed CNVR networks showed no evidence of functional enrichment. Those results imply that CSS is capable of finding related CNVR–gene pairs and CNVR networks that have functional significance.
INTRODUCTIONCopy number variation (CNV) is one type of human genomic structural variation and is recognized as a major source of human genetic variability, occupying a larger proportion of the genome than single nucleotide polymorphisms (). Specially, there have been several studies to find the impact of CNV on gene expression phenotypes. Much of the variation in messenger RNA (mRNA) transcript levels may be compensated for by regulatory networks, but understanding how genetic variants affect gene expression has provided an essential framework and model for elucidating the causes of various types of phenotypic variation including diseases. Research investigations on the impact of CNV on phenotypes are generally association studies using various types of gene expression and genotyped data from specific disease samples versus samples with normal phenotypes.proposed an approach to detect variation patterns by integrating gene expression and copy number data from breast cancer samples.found that copy number of CNVR that harbors salivary amylase gene (AMY1) is correlated positively with salivary amylase protein level.found CNVgene relationships through analysis on CNV and a set of genes which have similar patterns in breast cancer samples.analyzed the role of CNV in the development of breast cancer in conjunction with genes in the whole genomic area.profiled gastric cancer cell lines and found that 256 differentially expressed genes are located in the recurrent region of gains and losses. These results imply that those genes are important gastric cancer genes. Generally, these studies focus on the abnormal copy number variation regions (CNVRs) in specific disease samples. Also, many of these focus on CNVs that harbor genes (). The global impact of DNA copy numbers on the transcriptome has not been studied, especially for people with normal phenotypes (). A representative investigation of the impact of CNVs on the phenotypes of normal people in terms of gene expression was made by, who inferred relationships between DNA copy numbers and gene expression levels of normal phenotyped 210 HapMap samples, using a linear regression model. However, they focused on the genes that lie in or close to CNVRs (distance to a CNVR < 2 Mbp). Considering that there are many more CNVRs that do not harbor genes,detected only a small portion of the relationships between genotype and phenotype. Recent work byaimed to identify the collaborating CNVs that are responsible for hematopoietic tumorigenesis. They first found gains and losses that are commonly detected in the majority of hematopoietic tumor samples. Then, they constructed gain or loss networks by functional analysis of the genes that were harbored in gain or loss pairs. CNVRs in the central part of the gain or loss networks harbored the well-studied cancerrelated genes. Likeand many other studies, they also focused on CNVRs that harbor genes or gene regulatory regions. However, it is notable that they observed several CNVRs that contributed to the same phenotypic traits by using the concept of a CNVR network.
C.Park et al.When a CNVR regulates a gene that is on the CNVR itself or that is located near it, we call this type of CNVRgene regulation cis-regulation. In contrast, when a regulated gene location is independent of the CNVR's location, this type of CNVRgene regulation is called trans-regulation. In research elucidating the impact of CNVR on gene expression phenotypes, restricting CNVR gene relationships into cis-regulations is problematic because there are many CNVRs that have neither genes nor known regulation regions. When these CNVRs are strongly suspected to have some functional role, trans-regulation as well as cis-regulation between CNVRs and genes should be investigated. A nave approach to detecting both cis-and trans-regulations is to measure the correlation between the estimated copy number values of a CNVR and the expression values of a gene using Pearson's correlation coefficient (PCC) or its variants. However, just measuring correlation might lead to many potentially false positives, because this approach has two problems. First, both Whole Genome TilePath (WGTP) array and gene expression data are very noisy. Second, regulation between a CNV and a gene may be observed only under specific conditions or in samples in which some molecular functions or biological processes are taking place. To reduce the false rates of detection of cis-and trans-regulation, we developed a novel correlation measure named CSS, which effectively relieves the noise of WGTP and gene expression data by applying k-means clustering and also addresses the second problem by using a set of conditions which have similar intensities or expression patterns. In brief, CSS makes use of two vectors: one from the copy numbers of the CNVR A and the other from the expression values of gene B. CSS uses one additional vector from gene C that is connected to gene B through proteinprotein interaction (PPI). The rationale of exploiting PPI is that two interacting proteins have a high possibility of being involved in the same biological function in the PPI network. If the expression values of genes that are densely connected to the inspected gene are also correlated to the copy number values of CNVR, the relationship between the inspected gene and a CNVR is more convincing. Using the WGTP array data and paired mRNA expression data profiled from 210 HapMap samples from individuals with normal phenotypes (), we applied CSS to identify significant CNVRgene relationships. Rather than considering a single CNVR and a single gene, we considered the possibility that many CNVRs are affecting a set of genes that are involved in the same functions. We found that several CNVRs were related to the common set of genes. Using this common gene information, we constructed the functional CNVR network. Our CNVR network is not cancer specific, as inrather, it contains information about more fundamental biological processes and cellular functions that take place in people with normal phenotypes. To validate our CNVR network, we performed functional enrichment on the common genes that were cis-and trans-regulated with CNVRs clustered together in the network. As a result, we confirmed that most CNVR clusters were reported to be involved in some biological processes or cellular functions in the Gene Ontology (GO) database. In contrast, the functional enrichment tests of most CNVR clusters from the network that were constructed using PCC, as well as those from three types of randomly constructed CNVR networks, failed. These results imply that CSS is capable of finding related CNVRgene pairs, and that our CNVR network has functional significance.
METHODSTo construct a genome-wide functional CNVR network, we first find correlated CNVR and gene pairs from preprocessed WGTP array and mRNA microarray data. Two CNVR nodes that are correlated to a common set of genes comprise an edge of the CNVR network.PPIs for humans, as well as those of five other organisms. The proteins in these PPIs were mapped into gene symbols using UniPROT. After removing duplicated PPIs and PPIs that contain proteins that are not mapped to a gene symbol, we obtained 108 544 PPIs.
Data description
Finding correlated CNVRgene pairsEach individual of the 210 HapMap samples has both WGTP intensities for all probes and gene expression values in log2 ratio, which means that each CNVR and each gene has a vector with 210 values. To deal with the noise of the WGTP and gene expression data, we preprocess the data using k-means clustering algorithm with k = 3. First, we average the log2 ratio values of probes that are covered by each CNVR detected byfor each individual. We define c ij as the average copy number value of the ith CNVR of the jth individual. Likewise, g ij is defined as the expression value of the ith gene of the jth individual. Vector c j and g j are defined as the c ij s and g ij s of all CNVRs and all genes, respectively. Applying k-means to each c j and g j , the high values are marked with 1, low values are marked with 1 and intermediate values are marked with 0. Examples of flagging datasets are illustrated in. Given CNVR c, gene g and genes {ng i } that are connected to g through PPIs (), PS1, NS1, PS2 and NS2 are defined as follows: PS1 = {samples that are marked with 1 or 1 in both c and g}. NS1 = {samples that are marked with 1 in c and 1 in g or that are marked with 1 in c and 1 in g}.PS2 = {samples that are marked with 1 or 1 in both c and ng i }. NS2 = {samples that are marked with 1 in c and 1 in ng i , or that are marked with 1 in c and 1 in ng i }.
Identification of functional CNV region networksAnd PP, PN, NP and NN are defined as follows:PP means the number of samples that show positive correlation on c and g, and also positive correlation on c and g i. Likewise, PN stands for the number of samples that show positive correlation on c and g but negative correlation on c and ng i. Example for calculating PS1, NS1, PS2, NS2, PP, PN, NP and NN is shown in. PP, PN, NP and NN do not behave in a similar fashion. In some CNV gene links, PP can be a major measure for calculating avgCSS, and in other links, PN can be major. However, all these measures are equally meaningful, and it is not proper to give weight to some measures. The avgCSS between c and g is defined by the following formula: CSS (c, g, ng i ) = max(PP,PN,NP,NN) numberofsample , avgCSS (c,g) = average (CSS (c, g, ng i )). Example for calculating CSS and avgCSS is illustrated in.The CSS value increases as the number of individuals with similar expression patterns in both a CNVR and a gene increases. Therefore, CSS can be used in situations where regulation between a CNVR and a gene may be observed under specific conditions. Moreover, CSS increases the confidence of correlation by considering the set of genes in the second level that are directly interacted with the specific gene, g, by PPI. As shown in, the frequencies of the avgCSS values of all possible CNVRgene associations form a normal distribution (tested with ShapiroWilk test (), P-value > 0.05) with a mean of 9.59 and standard deviation of 3.36. A CNVRgene association is significant if its avgCSS is greater than the significant avgCSS threshold of 16.11, which is the value for the upper 5% of avgCSSs.
Construction of CNVR networksTwo CNVRs that share a similar set of genes can be said to be functionally related. The degree of functional relationship should be proportional to the weight of an edge of the CNVR network. Given two CNVRs c 1 and c 2 , the weight of edge (c 1 , c 2 ) is calculated using the following formula:where A = avgCSS (c 1 , g i ), B = avgCSS (c 2 , g i ) and intersections indicate genes that are commonly related to both CNVRs and unions indicate genes that are related to more than one CNVR. We use harmonic mean instead of arithmetic mean because genes that are strongly related to only one CNVR are not good for intersections.
RESULTS
CNVR networks with different scalesCNVR networks were constructed using 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10 and 20% of edges (CNVR pairs) after the edges, we sorted in descending order according to weight. As previously mentioned in Section 2.3, we calculated the weights between all CNVR pairs to construct the complete graph. However, although we calculated the weights for all CNVR pairs, the edges having high weights are more important than the others and we focused only on selected edges. Of 867 CNVRs identified by, the number of CNVRs that are matched to the raw WGTP array is 833. Among 833 CNVRs, some CNVRs did not have any genes satisfying avgCSS threshold (see Section 2). Thus, we reduced the selection to 767 CNVRs. Details of each network are presented in), many CNVRs are unconnected. This implies that many CNVRs may function alone, unlike proteins or genes. The average degree and distribution of degree of CNVR networks when considering all CNVRs were similar to those in PPI or GI networks (. However, when unconnected CNVRs were excluded, the average degree was far greater than that of a PPI or GI network. The fact that CNVRs with more than one connection form very densely connected CNVR networks can be also observed in, which was visualized using Cytoscape ().In addition, we performed an experiment with more recent set of CNVRs from. We constructed CNVR networks with our method using 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1 and 2% of highly weighted edges. And then we clustered the nodes and performed functional analysis for the networks in the same way we had performed. The result of the functional enrichment is inin the Supplementary Material. We could not find clusters from 5, 10 and 20% scaled network because the clustering algorithm we used failed to find clusters from those large-sized networks within the practical time. We can confirm that all CNVR networks were successfully enriched, which shows our method performs well for other CNVR data.
Identification of functional CNV region networks
Functional analysis of CNVR networkFor a more detailed analysis of the CNVR networks, we clustered the CNVR nodes using the network clustering algorithm (), which hierarchically detects the clusters in the network while allowing overlapping nodes (CNVRs) between them. When the weight scale of the network was 20, the number of clusters decreased. The suspected reason is that false-positive CNVRCNVR edges make the whole CNVR network too dense. Each CNVR cluster has common associated genes. For each CNVR cluster, genes that were associated with more than (n/2) CNVRs in the cluster of n CNVRs were extracted. We enriched these gene sets with the GO database using the FuncAssociate (). The FuncAssociate is a web-based tool that reports all GO terms that are enriched with statistical significance ( = 0.0005) for a given gene set. If no GO term is reported, the gene set is said to fail to be enriched or validated. We confirmed that the gene sets from all scales were successfully enriched with more than one GO term, indicating that the CNVRs in each CNVR cluster cooperate with each other in some biological processes or cellular functions. One of the example CNVR clusters from the CNVR network ofis composed of 13 CNVRs, chr14_669, chr11_565, chr19_808, chr7_396, chr17_749, chr3_195, chr6_376, chr20_822, chr4_217, chr5_282, chr10_524, chr18_775 and chr4_250. These have 1228 common associated genes.shows the GO enrichment results of those 1228 genes. We can infer that these CNVRs seem to be involved in protein complex formation processes, which contribute to intracellular transport. We provide the list of CNVRs and CNVR pairs, the list of CNVR clusters for each scale and the list of the associated genes for each CNVR, at http://embio.yonsei.ac.kr/Ahn/cnv_net.php. Although detecting the collaboration of CNVRs is one purpose of constructing a CNVR network, its other purpose is the filteration of false-positive geneCNVR associations through common gene extraction during the network construction. In other words, genes that are associated by only one CNVR are less convincing than genes that are associated by two or more CNVRs, and these singly associated genes are eliminated.
Comparison between CNVR networks based on avgCSS and those based on PCCTo validate that our association measure, CSS, was superior in identifying the correlations between CNVR and gene expression, we constructed a CNVR network using PCC (PCC network) and compared the functional enrichment of that and our CNVR network. This was the core process to calculate the association between the CNVRs and genes because we constructed the CNVR network based on the correlations for each CNVRgene pair. All other experimental conditions were the same as in the previous situations. We applied the same significance level, upper 0.5%, for the threshold of PCC and calculated weights between all pairs of CNVRs. We also constructed eight networks with the same range of scales that we applied to our CNVR network. Unlike our CNVR network in, the numbers of clusters in the PCC network were larger and the densities of networks with connected nodes were two or four times lower. Also, most of the clusters of the PCC network were not functionally enriched.shows the summary and results of functional analysis of PCC network. Unconnected CNVRs were also not functionally enriched. This implies that a PCC network may not include the biological meaning, in contrast to the results of our CNVR network.
Validation of CSS by random testsPreviously, we successfully validated our CNVR network through a functional enrichment test. If a randomly constructed CNVR network failed to be validated, we claim that our methods produce a CNVR network that has significant biological meaning. Second, we generated 833 false CNVRs by simulating the distribution of hybridization intensities, N(2.) and calculated CNVRgene associations for all possible pairs of false CNVR. As the log2 ratio of false CNVRs followed the distribution of real data, most of them were neutral. The remaining steps were the same as those of our method.shows the results of functional analysis. The numbers of connected nodes and edges were very similar to those in our CNVR network for each scale because we used the same measure, CSS, to identify associations and the remaining steps were the same. However, the number of clusters and the ratio of enriched clusters definitely differed on all scales from those of our network. This experimental result indicated that the network constructed using neutral regions instead of copy numbered areas did not reflect biological function. From Tables 4 and 5, we can say that CNVR networks constructed using random CNVRgene selection or false CNVRs failed to be validated while CNVR networks constructed by our approach were validated. This implies that CSS is able to detect significant CNVR gene associations, and our weight scheme is capable of constructing the correct CNVR network. To further show the significance of CSS, we performed the permutation test. First, we divided CNVRgene pairs into two groups, A and B, based on avgCSS threshold. Pairs above threshold are labeled as group A and pairs below threshold are labeled asgroup B. Second, we reconstructed groups A and B using randomly chosen pairs from A and B, and calculate a difference between the mean of avgCSS values in A and one in B. The second procedure was iterated 999 999 times, and we display the distribution of the statistics in Supplementary. H 0 is that our CNVRgene pairs are not significant. P-value for difference between means of A and B (statics for observed data) is 100E-06. Therefore, H 0 was rejected.
C.Park et al.We also tested the robustness of our method by comparing number of enriched clusters and enriched non-connected nodes generated with half of the transcript data, and less. Supplementaryshows the proportions of enriched non-connected nodes with same scales. Approximately 64.18% of the enriched clusters were detected even when only 10% of the samples were used with scale of 0.1%. It performed comparably well with 25% of samples. Supplementaryshows the proportions of enriched non-connected nodes
Identification of functional CNV region networkswith same scales. Fifty percent of samples approximately give comparable success ratio to whole samples in finding functionally enriched clusters and nodes. These two tests indicate that our method is robust to the number of samples used.
DISCUSSIONSWe showed that the ratio of functionally enriched CNVR clusters of the CNVR network constructed using CSS was far greater than that of PCC, in Section 3. Two major different characteristics of CSS and PCC appear to make the difference of performance. First, correlation is calculated using some group of samples that have similar patterns in CSS, while PCC is calculated using all the samples of the dataset. As there is no guarantee that functional relationship is active in all conditions or samples, our approach seems to have definite strength. Second, CSS measures the correlation between a CNVR and a gene by integrating the PPIs, while PCC needs no PPI. Given CNVR c and gene g, correlation between c and g is not reliable because both arrayCGH log ratio values and gene expression values are noisy, and not all samples show the significant correlation between c and g, as we have explained above. To correct the correlation value, we introduce other genes that are believed to be functionally linked, in other words, linked through PPI to g. Correlations between c and each of other genes can correct the significance level of the correlation between c and g. Of course, integrating the PPIs has obvious weakness. If the PPIs that are relevant to some biological functions in the protein network are sparse, CNVRgene relations that are related to those functions would be incorrect. Moreover, PPI datasets have been known to suffer from many false positives. However, PPIs datasets are becoming more complete and accurate, and we can expect that the weakness of CSS can be overcome to some degree. In addition, we analyzed more detailed functionality of some CNVR clusters we found, referring to the literature. The analysis can be found in Supplementary File.
CONCLUSIONSThe main contribution of our study is that we constructed functional CNVR networks for people with normal phenotypes using a novel correlation measure called CSS and the weighting scheme. Notably, our CNVR networks also contain CNVRs that are close to or that harbor some genes. The trans-regulations between those CNVRs and the genes allow our CNVR network to function on a genomewide basis. We showed that our CNVR networks have biological meaning, which means that we were able to identify several CNVRs that commonly contribute to some biological functions that are not dependent on specific conditions or diseases. We expect our methods can also be successfully applied to the construction of the disease-specific CNVR networks and that our methods will contribute to various studies regarding trans-regulation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
