Motivation: One of the major findings in systems biomedicine is that both pathogenesis of diseases and drug mode of action have a module basis. However, the transcription factors (TFs) regulating the modules remain largely unknown. Results: In this study, by using biclustering approach FABIA (factor analysis for bicluster acquisition), we generate 49 modules for gene expression profiles on 1309 agent treatments. These modules are of biological relevance in terms of functional enrichment, drug–drug interactions and 3D proximity in chromatins. By using the information of drug targets (some of which are TFs) and biological regulation, the links between 28 modules and 12 specific TFs, such as estrogen receptors (ERs), nuclear factor-like 2 and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, can be established. Some of the links are supported by 3D transcriptional regulation data [derived from ChIA-PET (chromatin interaction analysis using paired-end tags) experiments] and drug mode of action as well. The relationships between modules and TFs provide new clues to interpreting biological regulation mechanisms, in particular, the lipid metabolism regulation by ER. In addition, the links between natural products (e.g. polyphe-nols) and their associated modules and TFs are helpful to elucidate their polypharmacological effects in terms of activating specific TFs, such as ERs, nuclear factor-like 2 and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONRoughly speaking, the basis of drug actions is to rectify the gene expression disorders in diseases through modulating transcription factors (TFs). Therefore, the gene expression-based analysis has played a critical role in drug repurposing, lead discovery and elucidating drug mode of action (MoA) (). The pathogenesis of diseases has been revealed to be tightly connected to gene modules, which are sets of functionally related genes (). Intriguingly, by using biclustering approach iterative signature algorithm, Iskar et al. revealed that drug MoA also has a module basis, which provided new insights into drug actions and perturbed cellular systems as well (). However, the TFs regulating the drugassociated transcriptional modules remain unknown, which prevents us to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the drug-induced transcriptional variations. Considering the fact that some drug targets are TFs, such as estrogen receptors (ERs), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) and glucocorticoid receptor (GR), we attempt to use the target information of the module-coupled drugs to identify the TFs. Because biclustering approach FABIA (factor analysis for bicluster acquisition) has shown good performance in recognizing biclusters and has been successfully used in identifying gene expression modules and associated TFs (), we used FABIA to generate drug-induced transcriptional modules. In this study, a module is not only a set of genes but also connected with a set of agents. So, a module is exactly a bicluster. Then, we demonstrate that the modules are of biological relevance in terms of functional enrichment, drug drug interactions (DDIs) and 3D proximity in chromatins. Finally, we identify the TFs for some modules, by which we reveal some new mechanisms for metabolic regulation, and elucidate the polypharmacological mechanisms for some natural products.
METHODS
Data preprocessingThe raw data were downloaded from connectivity map (cMap) (), which consist of 7056 gene chips corresponding to five cultured human cell lines treated with 1309 agents. Each chemical treatment chip had a vehicle control pair. The data were first normalized by Robust Multi-array Average expression measure. Amplitude (a), a parameter merging the treatment and control data, was used to measure the extent of the differential expression of a given probe set (). The definition of a is as follows:where t is the expression value for the treatment and c is the expression value for the control. If a40, the expression is increased on treatment; if a50, the expression is decreased on treatment. However, if a  0, no change in the expression is observed. For each agent, the median of expression values determined under different conditions was applied to represent the expression profile. This merged the 7056 expression profiles into 1309 agent-specific transcriptional response profiles, constituting a matrix of 22 215 rows (probes) *To whom correspondence should be addressed. and 1309 columns (agents). Each column was normalized using the following equation:where x ij is the expression value in row i and column j, x j is the mean value of column j and s j is the standard deviation of column j.
Biclustering analysisThe FABIA method was used to perform biclustering analysis (). The outer product lz T of two sparse vectors with p bicluster results in a matrix X. The model for the matrix X is as follows:where the real numbers l i , z i T and correspond to a prototype column vector for genes, sample participating in the i bicluster and the additive noise, respectively. FABIA 2.2.2 software was used to search K biclusters of 22 215  1309 matrix. K (number of biclusters) was set to 50. The sparseness factor was set to 0.1 and the number of iterations was set to 10 000. When K ! 49, the biclusters covered all the information contents of the matrix. To simplify the presentation of bicluster results, we used 1 or 0 to represent the coupling or not of a bicluster to a specific agent, where 1 implies the z values40.
Gene function enrichmentDatabase for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery () was used to indicate Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) information associated with genes in modules, respectively.
Drug target enrichment for modulesThe drug target enrichment for each module was evaluated by a cumulative hypergeometric test (). The P-value was calculated using the following equation:Further evidence to demonstrate the biological relevance of gene modules comes from DDIs. The occurrence of DDIs means that the pharmacologic effect of a given drug is influenced by the action of another. Drug pairs that form DDIs usually have a high probability to share common targets (). Through searching DrugBank (), we obtained 7516 pairs of DDIs. It is interesting to note that DDIs are significantly enriched for drugs covered by the same module (Supplementary, cumulative hypergeometric test), indicating the strong pharmacologic associations among the drugs. To investigate whether the modules are associated with transcriptional regulation, we used the data of interaction regions for RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) determined by chromatin interaction analysis using paired-end tags (ChIA-PET) (), which defined close and distant regulatory elements directly interacting with gene promoters. The raw data were downloaded from Encyclopedia of DNA Elements ChIA-PET datasets (), which consist of data for five different human cell lines and were merged for use in this study. The genes of each module were mapped into the anchor regions of RNAPII (i.e. 2.5 kb upstream and downstream of interaction regions for RNAPII), according to the procedure reported previously (). Promoterpromoter interactions were significantly enriched for the genes within the same module (Supplementary, cumulative hypergeometric test), implying that these genes tend to be proximate in 3D structure of chromatins and thus to be transcribed cooperatively (). The target information of module-coupled drugs was used to identify the TFs linked to the modules. We retrieved 573 approved drugs (hitting 536 targets) from 1309 agents by searching DrugBank () and Therapeutic Target Database () and found that 209 targets were shared by at least two drugs. These targets and corresponding 477 drugs can be used for target enrichment to validate the coupling between targets and gene modules (). The results show that 168 targets can be enriched for 49 modules (P50.01, q50.01) (Supplementary Table S4, cumulative hypergeometric test), in which 11 are TFs, corresponding to 28 modules (). In particular, the links between ER and its associated modules can be further validated by the interactions between ER and its target promoters.It has been broadly accepted that although genomic information is recorded in a linear series of bases, gene regulation occurs in 3D structure of chromatins (). Because ChIA-PET can efficiently determine the spatial enhancer promoter interactions, the ChIA-PET-derived long-range chromatin interactions between the ER-bound regions and their target promoters are appropriate to verify the ER module relationships (). We mapped the genes in 49 modules into the anchor regions bound by ER [i.e. 20 kb within transcription start site to interaction regions, defined by] and found that module 42 is richest in potential target genes regulated by ER, with 66.4% (99/149) probes being potential ER targets (Supplementary). Modules 22 and 47 are also rich in ER-regulated genes (P50.00001, cumulative hypergeometric test) (Supplementary). These three modules are assigned to ER by drug target enrichment. It is interesting to note that 7 ER agonist drugs contained in 1309 agents are all coupled with module 42 (Supplementary), which provides further evidence to support the link between module 42 and ER regulation. Thus, it is reasonable to infer that other agents covered by module 42 are highly possible to stimulate ER. Through searching the adverse drug events database MetaADED (http://www.lmmd.org/online_services/ metaadedb/), it was found that 22 of 93 approved drugs covered by module 42 have side effect of gynecomastia (Supplementary), supporting their ER stimulation potential. Besides, the agents enriched by module 42 include 9 plant polyphenols (i.e. butein, ()catechin, genistein, hesperetin, kaempferol, luteolin, naringenin, nordihydroguaiaretic acid and resveratrol) (Supplementary), in good agreement with their widely recognized biological effects as phytoestrogens (). As illustrated in, some modules are coupled with multiple TFs. For instance, module 4 is regulated by ER, ER and GR. GR is well known for its regulation role in lipid metabolism (). Module 4 is tightly linked to lipid metabolism, with 37 of 65 genes involved in this process, according to KEGG and GO annotations (P50.0001) (Supplementary). Thus, it is reasonable to infer that ER also plays a role in lipid metabolism regulation. In all, 5 of the 37 genes (i.e. ACLY, FASN, ELOVL6, MVD and DHCR7) have been reported to participate in lipid metabolism and be regulated by ER (). The remaining 32 genes are thus tentatively inferred to be regulated by ER in a direct or indirect manner. The ChIA-PET data for ER indicate that 3 of 32 genes, i.e. AACS, NPC1 and FDFT1, are directly regulated by ER. Furthermore, we established the proteinprotein interaction relationships of 37 genes by extracting the proteinprotein interaction information (including known and predicted) from the STRING network with intermediate to high confidence (the default STRING evidence scores40.4) (). As shown in, there exist strong connections between the five recognized genes and other genes involved in lipid metabolism, supportive of the ER regulation of these genes. Thus, the TF-based analysis of gene responses to drugs is helpful to reveal new mechanisms for metabolic regulation and produce testable hypotheses. For TFs that have not been used as drug targets, we can establish their links with modules by retrieving information of biological regulation. According to KEGG annotations, module 36 is tightly associated with glutathione metabolism (P50.0001) (Supplementary), which is regulated by nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2). This module contains the genes for glutathione peroxidase 2 (GPX2) and ferritin heavy polypeptide 1 (FTH1), as well as all of the antioxidant genes controlled by Nrf2, including GCLM, GCLC, NQO1, HMOX1, GSR and PRDX1 (). Thus, there exists a close link between module 36 and Nrf2, which means that the 189 agents coupled with this module are potential redox regulators (Supplementary). Some well-known antioxidants, such as ascorbic acid and ebselen, are included in this list. Moreover, the 189 agents involve 4 para-quinones (i.e. tanespimycin, 1,4-chrysenequinone, menadione and tetroquinone), which abstract electrons and protons from the thiols of Keap1, an important negative regulator of Nrf2, resulting in the activation of Nrf2 (). Six polyphenols, i.e. quercetin, butein, nordihydroguaiaretic acid, myricetin, kaempferol and genistein, are included in this list, suggesting that these polyphenols can serve as redox regulators through activating Nrf2 in relatively low concentrations (low micromolar, recorded in cMap). Although natural polyphenols have long been touted as direct radical scavengers, accumulating evidence indicates that their health benefits are not likely to come from radical-neutralizing activity because their poor. Transcription factors (TFs, in green) linked to drug-induced transcriptional modules (in orange). By using the target information of module-coupled drugs and by retrieving information of biological regulation, 12 TFs were identified for 28 modules. The size of the arrow represents the negative logarithm of P-value in cumulative hypergeometric test. AHR: aryl hydrocarbon receptor; AR: androgen receptor; DAX1: dosage-sensitive sex reversal-adrenal hypoplasia congenita (AHC) critical region on the X chromosome gene 1; ER/: estrogen receptor alpha/beta; GR: glucocorticoid receptor; MR: mineralocorticoid receptor; Nrf2, nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2; PGR: progesterone receptor; PPAR//: peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha/gamma/delta bioavailability prevents them to reach high concentrations (high micromolar) to compete with in vivo antioxidants such as vitamins C and E (). Therefore, the present finding provides solid evidence to support the opinion that natural polyphenols are more likely indirect antioxidants than direct radical modulators (). Interestingly, genistein, nordihydroguaiaretic acid, butein and kaempferol are also enriched by module 42, which means that these polyphenols have both antioxidant and estrogen effects. Previous studies have revealed that the side effects of ER agonists are associated with the stimulated production of reactive oxygen species (). Thus, antioxidant and estrogen-like activities of natural polyphenols may be responsible for their safety in long-term consumption. Besides modules 42 and 36, these polyphenols are linked to many other modules (Supplementary), in which modules 11, 48, 10, 25, 3 and 37 are most common and are linked to ERs, DAX1, PPAR and other TFs (). Although it remains unknown whether polyphenols activate DAX1, genestein and kaempferol have been recognized as PPAR agonists (O'), and thus are cell cycle and apoptosis modulators with chemoprevention potential (). Therefore, the well-known health benefits of polyphenols including estrogen-like, antihyperlipidemia and anticancer effects () can be explained, at least in part, in terms of their potentials in activating specific TFs, such as ERs, Nrf2 and PPAR. In summary, by using drug target information and accumulated biological regulation information, we can establish the links between drug-associated gene modules and some TFs. Some of the links are supported by 3D transcriptional regulation data (derived from ChIA-PET experiments) and drug MoA as well. Based on the complex relationships between modules and TFs, we can get new insights into biological regulation, in particular, the lipid metabolism regulation by ER. Because natural agents usually stimulate multiple TFs, the polypharmacological mechanisms for these agents (e.g. polyphenols) can be partially elucidated in terms of activation of specific TFs. However, it should bear in mind that the present analysis was performed by merging expression profiles of different cell lines, which means that the present results revealed the fundamental links between drugs, TFs and regulated genes, rather than the cell line-dependent features of drug MoA. A more detailed exploration on this topic will be accomplished with the accumulation of biological regulation information, which will offer deeper insights into drug MoA.). Others (in orange) are also likely to be regulated by ER in a direct or indirect manner
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
M  K N  i  M N 4 where N is the total number of drugs used in the target enrichment significance evaluation (i.e. 477), M is the number of drugs in the module, i is the number of drugs sharing the same target in N and K is the number of drugs sharing the same target in M. Thus, we can calculate the probability by chance, at least x occurrences of a target among those associated with the module. 3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS We used the cMap as the starting database, which contains 7056 genome-wide expression profiles of five different human cell lines treated with 1309 chemical agents at different dosages (Lamb et al., 2006). Because most of the drug-induced transcriptional modules are conserved across cell lines (Iskar et al., 2013), the 7056 expression profiles were merged into 1309 agent-specific profiles. Then, the FABIA software (Hochreiter et al., 2010) was used to search K biclusters that correspond to the functional modules. When K was !49, superfluous biclusters were pushed toward zero, which means that the modules contained all the information from the 1309 samples (Supplementary Fig. S1). Thus, the present analysis was based on 49 modules, which consisted of 5921 probes and were ordered according to their information contents. That is, module 1 contains the richest information and module 49 contains the poorest. On average, each module covers 324 AE 10.6 agents, each agent is associated with 12.1 AE 5.3 modules (Supplementary Tables S1 and S2). Because different modules have different biological functions (see later in the text for details), the module profiles of the agents allow us to dissect their polypharmacological mechanisms. The biological functions of each module were defined by enriched genes recorded in GO and KEGG pathways. The 49 modules have significant GO enrichments, with 46 having significant KEGG enrichments (Supplementary Table S1). Most modules concentrate on a few functions, and both GO terms and KEGG pathway annotations match well with each other, indicating the functional convergence of the modules.
M.Xiong et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Identification of transcription factors at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
