The application of emerging metabolomics technologies to the comprehensive investigation of cellular biochemistry has been limited by bottlenecks in data processing, particularly noise filtering and metabolite identification. IDEOM provides a user-friendly data processing application that automates filtering and identification of metabolite peaks, paying particular attention to common sources of noise and false identifications generated by liquid chromatography– mass spectrometry (LC–MS) platforms. Building on advanced processing tools such as mzMatch and XCMS, it allows users to run a comprehensive pipeline for data analysis and visualization from a graphical user interface within Microsoft Excel, a familiar program for most biological scientists. Availability and implementation: IDEOM is provided free of charge at http://mzmatch.sourceforge.net/ideom.html, as a macro-enabled spreadsheet
INTRODUCTIONMetabolomics aims to measure all small molecules (metabolites) in a biological system. However, challenges associated with data analysis, in particular the accurate identification of metabolites () have restricted progress. Recent advances in high resolution mass spectrometry (MS) provide accurate mass detection that significantly improves metabolite identification from liquid chromatographyMS (LCMS) () although limitations still abound (), and noise or artifact peaks are often incorrectly identified as metabolites ().
IDEOMto average peak height and internal standards (optional), is automatically checked and normalization can be applied. Noise filtering within IDEOM removes common sources of noise in high resolution LCMS data: chromatographic peak shoulders, irreproducible peaks, background or contaminant signals, and fourier transform (FT) and electrospray ionisation (ESI) artifacts including isotopes, adducts and fragments (based on), as described in the documentation (Supplementary Material). Metabolite identification is achieved by matching the accurate mass and retention time of observed peaks to metabolites in the included database, which incorporates all likely metabolites from a wide range of biological databases, and can be updated by users for specific applications. Retention times for authentic standards, and a retention time prediction model, are included for ZIC-HILIC chromatography data (); however, as retention times are instrument specific, users are encouraged to upload standard retention times from their own platform with the macro provided. Subsequent to initial metabolite identification, a data-dependent polynomial mass recalibration step can be applied to correct for massdependent calibration errors. The final lists of identified, and rejected, peaks are annotated with confidence scores regarding the identification of each metabolite, based on retention times, organism-specific (or user-defined) databases and annotation as possible 'related peaks' (). Univariate statistics (mean, relative intensity, SD, t-test and Fisher ratio) are calculated in Excel. Multivariate statistics are obtained by calls to the R environment.
RESULTSThe automated pre-processing steps in IDEOM drastically reduce the need for manual curation of LCMS data by applying filters to remove hundreds of false-identifications (). The example tutorial dataset (Supplementary Material) demonstrates putative identification of 1314 metabolites and rejection of 1942 false-identifications from serum samples. The putatively identified metabolites are displayed in an interactive table that includes metabolite information, sample intensities, comparative statistics, LCMS data, and links to websites and graphs (). Putative identifications can be rapidly scrutinized by double-click access to LCMS metadata, or adjusted by selecting alternative isomers from dropdown lists. Data visualization is enhanced by Excel's conditional formatting, filtering and sorting, allowing users to view
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Applications are freely available for detection, quantification and alignment of signals in LCMS data (Blekherman et al., 2011), and numerous multivariate statistical methods have been proposed to extract significant features from these high-dimensional datasets (Madsen et al., 2010). However, many of the most powerful tools are implemented in statistical software, and while the graphical user interface (GUI) in MZmine (Pluskal et al., 2010) simplifies data pre-processing, recent advances in noise filtering and identification algorithms (Brown et al., 2011; Scheltema et al., 2011) are difficult to use without special training. IDEOM is a Microsoft Excel template with a collection of VBA macros that enable automated data processing of high resolution LC MS data from untargeted metabolomics studies, with a particular focus on removal of noise [which accounts for 80% of peaks in typical LCMS metabolomics datasets (Jankevics et al., 2012)], metabolite identification and data visualization. Its GUI allows users to exploit the power of data-processing methods such as mzMatch (Scheltema et al., 2011) and XCMS (Smith et al., 2006) from within Excel, and enables rapid and simple conversion of raw or pre-processed LCMS data into a filtered, interpretable list of putative metabolites, with associated confidence levels and sample intensities. 2 METHODS Opening the IDEOM template in Excel provides a spreadsheet on which to specify the parameters for data processing (default values are provided). All IDEOM macros for data processing are then activated by buttons or in-cell hyperlinks, and pop-up dialog boxes are used to specify important parameters for individual processing steps. Raw LCMS data files (.mzXML) are processed by IDEOM using the freely available XCMS (Smith et al., 2006) and mzmatch.R tools (http://mzmatch.sourceforge.net/index.php) (Scheltema et al., 2011), by automatic generation and execution of scripts in the R environment (www.r-project.org) (R, 2008) using readily adjustable parameters. Raw peaks are extracted by XCMS, and mzMatch applies peak matching, noise filtering, gap-filling and annotation of related peaks. Pre-processed peak lists from mzMatch or MZmine can be directly imported into IDEOM as text or csv files. During data import, any number of samples can be assigned to (up to 30) study groups (e.g. blanks, controls and QCs) to improve data filtering, analysis and visualization. Sample consistency, according
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
results according to sample intensities, significance, pathways or other properties. Additional IDEOM tools include: merging dual-polarity data, chemical formula determination for unidentified masses, stable isotope tracking and targeted analysis. Full documentation, tutorials, source code and the IDEOM template are freely available at http://mzmatch.sourceforge.net/ideom.html. IDEOM provides a user-friendly interface for analysis of complex metabolomics datasets without the need for specialist bioinformatics skills, allowing for the rapid production of meaningful, interactive results for biological interpretation of untargeted metabolomics data sets.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
