A key to understanding RNA function is to uncover its complex 3D structure. Experimental methods used for determining RNA 3D structures are technologically challenging and laborious, which makes the development of computational prediction methods of substantial interest. Previously, we developed the iFoldRNA server that allows accurate prediction of short (<50 nt) tertiary RNA structures starting from primary sequences. Here, we present a new version of the iFoldRNA server that permits the prediction of tertiary structure of RNAs as long as a few hundred nucleotides. This substantial increase in the server capacity is achieved by utilization of experimental information such as base-pairing and hydroxyl-radical probing. We demonstrate a significant benefit provided by integration of experimental data and computational methods. Availability and implementation: http://ifoldrna.dokhlab.org Contact: dokh@unc.eu
IntroductionThe iFoldRNA is a physical simulation-based automated RNA structure prediction webserver designed to predict 3D RNA structure based on available sequence data. The previous version of iFoldRNA allowed prediction of the structure of short RNA molecules (<50 nt) within 4 A  Root-Mean-Square deviation (RMSD) from corresponding experimental structures (). The limitation on RNA size is due to inaccuracies in the force-field and insufficient sampling. Increasing sequence size quickly becomes computationally prohibitive, since the RNA conformational space grows exponentially. We have previously shown that sampling conformational space can be drastically reduced by use of experimental constraints allowing us to correctly predict the tertiary structure of RNA up to a few hundred nucleotides long (). Here, we present a second version of iFoldRNA, which allows automated inclusion of two categories of constraints: base-pairing and nucleotide solvent accessibility. The source of base-pairing information can be generated either by sequence covariation analysis () or by using a number of chemical probing techniques. The SHAPE technique, in particular, has proven to be a quick and effective method for determining RNA secondary structure (). To infer solvent accessibility iFoldRNA v2 uses data from hydroxyl radical probing (HRP) experiments. In HRP, RNA in solution is treated with reagents that generate hydroxyl radicals, which cleave RNA strands. By identifying cleavage frequency for specific nucleotide bonds, solvent exposure can be determined. Incorporating these data as a burial force in simulations imposes long-range constraints on folded structures ().
MethodsThe prediction of RNA structure in iFoldRNA v2 is accomplished using a coarse-grained 3-bead RNA model (). Each bead in this model represents a phosphate, sugar or nucleobase. Simulations are performed using the Discrete Molecular Dynamics (DMD) simulation engine (). Base-pairing information is implemented as an additional potential promoting tertiary contacts between corresponding nucleotides. An ensemble of RNA molecules at different temperatures that undergo replica exchange is used to enhance conformation sampling (). Following DMD simulation, one hundred of the lowest energy structures are selected and clustered according to RMSD between pairs of selected structures. The centroids of the resulting clusters are retained for all-atom reconstruction.
HRP constraintsIf HRP data are available, an additional force field, effectively biasing RNA towards the correct structure, is applied. The structures selected for clustering are also required to have high structurereactivity correlations ().
All-atom reconstructionConversion to an all-atom representation is performed by replacing each 3-bead nucleotide by randomly selected rotamers of corresponding nucleotides in an all-atom representation. The initial allatom structure is run through a short DMD simulation to connect bonds and remove clashes. This simulation is performed with a high heat exchange coefficient, which allows for rapid dissipation of excess heat generated. A user is allowed to change the values of temperatures used to run replica exchange simulations and the number of DMD time steps. Simulations are performed on the Kure computational cluster at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, which consist of 122 blade servers, each with 8-cores 2.80 GHz processors running RHEL 5.6 operating system. The users are able to check the status of submissions through the server interface and are notified by email of job completion.
ResultsThe iFoldRNA v2 webserver generates accurate predictions of RNA tertiary structure using DMD. Predicted structures are typically within 1020 A  RMSD from crystal structures for 200 nt RNA. The average processing time for an RNA of this size is $1 day. We demonstrate how the inclusion of constraints increases the performance of the server on the example of M-box riboswitch (161 nt). The structure of RNA of this size is challenging to predict de novo. Without constraints the quality of the predicted structure is poor. RMSD between the predicted and the crystal structures calculated through phosphate atoms is 32 A . The interaction network fidelity (INF) is 0.363 (). The inclusion of the basepairing constraints improves the prediction (RMSD  25 A  , INF  0.692). The resulting structure has correct base pairing while most of the higher order tertiary contacts are missing. The addition of HRP data significantly increases the quality of the prediction (RMSD  7.7 A  , INF  0.725) (). We observe formation of the correct secondary and tertiary structures. Closer examination of the predicted structure using MC Annotate () reveals that it has 39 out of 46 canonical base pairs (AU or CG; Aadenine, U-uracil, C-cytosine, G-guanine) and 5 out of 6 noncanonical UG base pairs as compared with the crystal structure. As a benchmark we used two other servers RNAComposer () and 3dRNA (). The structure predicted by RNAComposer (RMSD  25.8 A  , INF  0.792) has correct base pairing; however, most of the higher order tertiary contacts are missing. The structure predicted by 3dRNA (RMSD  22.4 A  , INF  0.621) only partially reproduces correct base pairing and does not recapitulate most of the higher order tertiary contacts.
ConclusionsThe iFoldRNA v2 webserver offers a platform that combines experimental data and molecular dynamics simulations to predict tertiary structures of RNA as long as a few hundred nucleotides with atomic level detail. The comparison with other servers demonstrates the superior performance of iFoldRNA v2 for predicting the structure of long RNA molecules, provided HRP data is available. Currently, the server operates on two types of experimental constraints that include base-pairing information and reactivities derived from HRP experiments. However, there is growing number of approaches used to translate data from chemical probing experiments to constraints on RNA structure. For example, the recently proposed RING-MaP technique () uses chemical probing, massive parallel sequencing and correlation analysis to find nucleotides located close in space. To keep pace with experimental innovations we plan to introduce a new interface that allows users to set up constraints between any two nucleotides of their choice. The iFoldRNA v2 webserver is freely accessible at http://iFoldRNA.dokhlab.org for academic and non-profit users.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
A.Krokhotin et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
