Motivation: Side-chain modeling has seen wide applications in computational structure biology. Most of the popular side-chain modeling programs explore the conformation space using discrete rigid rotamers for speed and efficiency. However, in the tightly packed environments of protein interiors, these methods will inherently lead to atomic clashes and hinder the prediction accuracy. Results: We present a side-chain modeling method (CIS-RR), which couples a novel clash-detection guided iterative search (CIS) algorithm with continuous torsion space optimization of rotamers (RR). Benchmark testing shows that compared with the existing popular side-chain modeling methods, CIS-RR removes atomic clashes much more effectively and achieves comparable or even better prediction accuracy while having comparable computational cost. We believe that CIS-RR could be a useful method for accurate side-chain modeling. Availability: CIS-RR is available to non-commercial users at our website
INTRODUCTIONSide-chain modeling is the prediction of a protein's side-chain conformation for a given backbone structure. Due to its importance in protein design (), point mutation analysis (), proteinprotein docking (), homology modeling () and other aspects of structural modeling, side-chain modeling has been intensively studied for many years. A thorough search through the continuous side-chain conformations is inefficient and not feasible given the existing search algorithms and current computational power. Luckily, side-chain dihedral angles are not evenly distributed, which occur in tight clusters around certain values (). Based on these clusters, the side-chain conformational space can be discretized into rotamers which represent the conformations of these clusters, and an ensemble of rotamers for all side-chain types is thus called a rotamer library (). Based on rotamer definition, side-chain modeling can be efficiently transformed into a combinatorial search problem which is to find the best rotamer combination from all possible combinations of side-chain rotamers. For this methodology, many efforts have attempted including development of powerful scoring functions (), well-sampled rotamer libraries () and effective search strategies (). So far, rotamer-based side-chain modeling methods have become the most popular ones. However, because the side-chain conformations are approximated by discrete rotamers, these methods could inherently cause atomic clashes in the modeled structures, preventing them from accurate modeling of protein side chains. Furthermore, atomic clashes can lead to high energy and instability of structures, and thus the elimination of atomic clashes is beneficial for the subsequent analysis such as proteinprotein docking (). Atomic clashes can be alleviated to some extent by utilizing a very large rotamer library () or expanding a rotamer into finely sampled subrotamers (). Other more sophisticated approaches could include an additional step of rotamer refinement by off-rotamer space sampling (). In our study, to achieve a more effective side-chain modeling, we attempt to integrate the advances from side-chain modeling in both rotamer-based search and rotamer optimization. Our method, called CIS-RR, performs clash-detection guided iterative search (CIS) of side-chain rotamers while continuously optimizes side-chain conformations using a conjugate gradients method. Careful implementation of CIS-RR shows obvious improvements of prediction accuracy and elimination of atomic clashes, in contrast with the traditional iterative search method. Further benchmark testing shows, compared with the existing popular side-chain modeling programs, CIS-RR removes atomic clashes much more effectively and achieves comparable or even better predictionPage: 786 785790
Y.Cao et al.accuracy while having comparable computational cost. The methods and results will be elaborated in the following sections.
METHODS
Rotamer libraryIn this work, we use Dunbrack backbone-dependent rotamer library (version of) (). We also obtained the protein's standard bond lengths and angles from CHARMM (). Rotamers with a probability <1% are ignored.
Scoring functionThe scoring function was adapted from that of SCWRL3 (), which consists of two terms:E vdW is an empirical van der Waals potential. SCWRL3 only includes a piecewise linear repulsive term. In this work, a quadratic attractive term is also included. For a pair of atoms,where r ij is the interatomic distance between atoms i and j and R ij is the sum of their effective van der Waals radii, which are obtained from Chothia's work () with a 5% reduction. The hydrogen atoms are ignored. E rot is the rotamer term, which measures the preferences of the side-chain conformers. For a rotamer r m of residue m,where p(r m |,) is the rotamer library probability for the given backbone dihedral angle  and . It is normalized to the maximum probability p(max|,) of residue m in the same backbone dihedral angles (). We also considered a second term to penalize the drifting of side-chain dihedral angles away from the nearest rotamer library values. The side-chain dihedral angle  n (r m ) is the n-th  dihedral angle of r m  lib_n and  lib_n are the corresponding rotamer library dihedral angle and its standard deviation. Since aromatic side-chains are subject to have clashes, their E rot could be underestimated compared with their E vdW. Thus the scaling factor  is introduced and set as follows:{His, Phe, Tyr, Trp} 0, if r m  {Gly, Ala} 1, otherwiseThe parameters (k rot = 0.35, k rep = 5.882, k att = 0.08 and k tor = 0.4) of the scoring function were obtained by training on 55 high-resolution crystal structures that were randomly selected from the Protein Data Bank (PDB;). We followed the training procedure used by former works (). In brief, parameters were systematically optimized by searching the best conformation of one residue each time while keeping the others fixed in their native conformations.
Disulfide bondsBefore performing the scoring function calculation, CIS-RR uses the formula E ss = 0.1S 4.0 to evaluate the cysteine pair, which forms a disulfide bond. S is the disulfide bond score as used in SCWRL3 (). If the side chains of the cysteine pairs form disulfide bonds (E ss < 0), E ss will be added to the scoring function., where n is the number of residues; p is the number of rotamers per residue.
Rotamer relaxationIn this work, rotamer relaxation (RR) is implemented by using a conjugate gradients method to optimize the side-chain dihedral angles near the rotamer value. The conjugate gradients method follows FletcherReeves algorithm (). To produce a set of directions to rotate a side-chain, the directions are calculated from the derivatives of the scoring function with respect to side-chain dihedral angles:The derivative of the van der Waals potential for each of the dihedral anglewhere x i ,y i ,z i is the Cartesian coordinates of atom i constrained by  n. s axis is the unit vector of the torsion axis of  n. s i is the perpendicular vector from atom i to the torsion axis s axis (Supplementaryand). The detailed derivation of the above equation is provided in Supplementary Material. The derivative of the rotamer term for each of the dihedral angle  n is
CIS-RRThe CIS-RR operates as follows: First, the starting side-chain conformation of each residue is constructed by the rotamers with the highest probability at each position. Then, for each residue i, every one of its rotamers will be optimized as described in the Section 2.4 and tested for clashes with other residues that are kept fixed. If a rotamer r has clashes with other residues (i.e. the score of the van der Waals term >1.0), rotamer r is fixed temporarily and the clashing residues will change to each of the other rotamers, proceeding with RR. After all rotamers of the residue i are explored, the side-chain conformations of residue i or residue i and its clashing residues will be updated with side-chain dihedral angles that generate the lowest score during the search. The more detailed process is described as pseudocodes (). The above process keeps iterating from the most exposed residue to the least until the score converges to a stable value.
Improve side-chain modeling by CIS-RRClash-detection step plays an important role in CIS-RR. According to our analysis, 46% tested rotamers have clashes with other residues. Detailed information is provided in Supplementary Table S2. For CIS without RR, the RR process is bypassed in the above procedure.
Traditional iterative search coupled with RRTraditional iterative search coupled with RR (TIS-RR) tests every rotamer for a given residue while keeping other residues fixed. All the rotamers are subjected to RR and the one resulting in the lowest score will replace the original one. It updates one residue at a time and keeps looping until the side chains stop changing conformations. For TIS without RR, the RR process is bypassed in the above procedure.
Evaluation methodsThe modeling accuracy is defined as the percentage of correctly predicted side-chain  1 and  1+2 dihedral angles within a threshold of 40 @BULLET compared with the crystal structures (). In our work, the modeling accuracy is also indicated by root mean square deviation (RMSD) of side-chain heavy atoms. It calculates the square root of the mean of the square distances over all atoms from the predicted structures to the crystal ones. Before evaluating accuracy, the crystallographically symmetric terminal groups of Asp, Glu, Phe, Arg and Tyr are flipped to yield optimal atom matching. For Asn, Gln and His, due to the difficulty to distinguish different terminal atoms, their terminal groups are also flipped (). The atomic clash is also used to evaluate the modeling structures. If two atoms over two bonds away have the distance <60% of the sum of their respective van der Waals radii, they are regarded as an atomic clash.
Benchmark testingTwo different test sets have been used in our study. The first test set consists of 180 crystal structures, which were obtained from the test set of SCWRL3 (). It was used to examine the contributions of the two components of CIS-RR, namely CIS and RR, to the side-chain modeling. For a fair comparison, CIS-RR, CIS, TIS-RR and TIS all start from the same initial side-chain conformations in the testing. The second test set was used to compare CIS-RR with several popular side-chain modeling programs. It consists of 65 high-resolution crystal structures that were used in previous side-chain modeling studies (). All the tests were run on an Intel Q9550 processor.
Software availabilityCIS-RR is implemented in C++ and has been complied on Linux system. The executable version of our method is now available to non-commercial users at http://jianglab.ibp.ac.cn/lims/cisrr/cisrr.html.
RESULTSIn this section, we will first give an overview of our method CISRR. Then we will analyze the contributions of CIS and RR to the improvement of side-chain modeling and further investigate how CIS-RR effectively eliminates clashes. Finally, to gain an overall performance of CIS-RR, we compare it to several existing popular side-chain modeling programs.
Overview of CIS-RRCIS-RR is a side-chain modeling program that performs CIS and RR simultaneously (Section 2 and). Previously, TIS based on single residues has been attempted in side-chain modeling, which each time simply searches all rotamers of a given residue for the best one while keeping other residues fixed (). This method is relatively fast and able to couple with RR easily. However, it is sensitive to the former states and tends to get trapped in local minima, which hinders the modeling accuracy. To efficiently improve this method, we employ a clash-detection step to help side chains jump out of the local minima that is blocked by the mispacked surrounding residues. The implementation of CIS can not only effectively improve accuracy and resolve clashes but also achieve a desirable speed in side-chain modeling, for which we will show the results later. RR samples off-rotamer side-chain conformations quite effectively, but it usually cannot produce large enough changes of the dihedral angles to correct the mispacked rotamers. In the pioneer work from Baker lab, Wang et al. implemented a method, called RTMIN, which couples TIS with RR (i.e. side-chain minimization) to optimize side chains (). Inspired by their work, we couple the improved search algorithm CIS with RR and find that CIS-RR is superior to TIS-RR for its effectively removing clashes and significantly improving the accuracy of side-chain modeling.
The CIS and RR both contribute to the improvement of side-chain modeling over TISFirst, we compare CIS with TIS in side-chain modeling. For ease of comparison, both methods searched through the same rotamer library without RR. As shown in, compared with TIS, CIS dramatically reduces the number of atomic clashes from 224 to 125 out of 180 proteins while incurring a moderate increase in time consumption. Moreover, the accuracy of side-chain modeling has also been improved by CIS: the  1 and  1+2 of the whole proteins have been improved 1.3% (84.7% by CIS versus 83.4% by TIS) and 1.7% (73.8% by CIS versus 72.1% by TIS), respectively, and the RMSD has decreased 0.1  (from 1.78  to 1.68 ). Then we investigate to what extent RR contributes to side-chain modeling by comparing TIS-RR to TIS.shows that RR effectively reduces the number of clashed residues from 224 to 63 out of 180 proteins. Moreover, the  1 and  1+2 have also been improved 0.5% (83.9% TIS-RR versus 83.4% TIS) and 1.5% (73.6% TIS-RR versus 72.1% TIS), respectively, for all residues; and the RMSD has decreased 0.08  (from 1.78  to 1.70 ). However, RR is a time-consuming step, which incurs a significant increase of computation time (35 times of that without RR). The above analyses clearly show that both CIS and RR can improve side-chain modeling not only in the elimination of atomic clashes but also in the accuracy of side-chain modeling in terms of number of correct  dihedral angles and RMSD. Remarkably, when both CIS and RR are integrated into the framework of CIS-RR, the side-chain modeling can be further improved. For the elimination of residue clashes, CIS-RR leaves only 15 clashed residues unresolved in the 180 proteins tested, which is much better than the use of RR or CIS alone ().Residues are considered to be buried when there is a <20% solvent-accessibility ratio.is 89.3% and 78.6% by using CIS-RR, which have been significantly improved, compared with 84.8%, 70.6% by TIS-RR and 87.6%, 75.4% by CIS. This suggests that CIS and RR, when integrated into CIS-RR, collectively improve the performance of side-chain modeling.
Y.Cao et al.
Analysis of the performance of CIS-RR on individual residuesNext, we sought to find out how CIS-RR works on different types of amino acids.shows that CIS-RR improves the percent correct of both  1 and  1+2 dihedral angles of all amino acids. The improvements are more significant for the amino acids with aromatic side-chains (Phe His, Trp and Tyr). For example, the  1+2 improvement of Trp is up to almost 20% (and Supplementary). Our further analysis showed that for side-chain modeling by TIS, the four residues constitute about half of the clashes due to their large-size terminal groups (Supplementary). In CIS-RR the clashes of these four residues can be significantly reduced to seven clashes (Supplementary). Therefore, by focusing on elimination of clashes, our method CIS-RR efficiently corrects the mispacked conformations and thus improves the sidechain modeling, particularly for those of large size that is easy to cause clashes in the well-packed proteins.
Comparison of CIS-RR with the existing popular side-chain modeling programsTo gain an overall performance of CIS-RR, we further tested it on another popular test dataset consisting of 65 high-resolution crystal structures by making comparisons with several popular sidechain modeling programs, SCWRL4 (), IRECS (), Sccomp () and SCAP (). SCWRL is probably the most widely used program in the field. The latest version is SCWRL4, which is improved from SCWRL3 () by using the new rotamer library, more efficient search algorithms and a soft van der Waals potential plus hydrogen bonding based scoring function. IRECS does an efficient ensemble selection of most probable sidechain conformations using a knowledge-based statistical potential. Sccomp takes into account solvent accessibility and contact surfaces in the scoring function for accurate modeling. SCAP employs the iterative procedure and CHARMM force field to search through a very large rotamer library. All those methods are based on discrete rotamers.shows the test results of the five programs, in which CISRR achieved prediction accuracies of 86.4% and 76.7% for  1 and  1+2 , respectively (see Supplementaryfor the predicted accuracy of each protein). These results illustrate that, in terms of percent correct for dihedral angles, CIS-RR is comparable with SCWRL4, and better than IRECS, Sccomp and SCAP, especially for  1+2 (5% higher accuracy). Notably, in terms of number of clashes, CIS-RR eliminates almost all the clashes (2 clashes in 65 proteins) and outperforms the other four programs. However, due to the time consuming RR process, the run time of CIS-RR (15 min for 65 proteins) is longer than SCWRL4, IRECS and Sccomp. We further compared the performance of CIS-RR and SCWRL4 over individual amino acids. As shown inand Supplementary Table S5, among 18 types of amino acids (excluding Ala and Gly), CIS-RR showed better performance for 13 amino acids, especially for Cys, Trp and Met. This can be attributed to the efficient sampling of rotamer and off-rotamer conformations by CIS-RR. However, for the short polar amino acids (Asp, Asn and Ser), CIS-RR shows lower performance, which could be due Page: 789 785790All the programs are used under their default settings. Residues are considered to be buried when there is a <20% solvent-accessibility ratio.to their difference in scoring functions. Compared with SCWRL4, CIS-RR does not include the hydrogen bonding effects in the scoring function. Supplementaryalso illustrates that CIS-RR eliminates their clashes more effectively, particular for these residues with large-size side chains as described above. Taken together, we argue that CIS-RR and SCWRL4 are complementary approaches by nature in side-chain modeling, which suggests the significance of our work by focusing on effective clash elimination.
Improve side-chain modeling by CIS-RR
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CONCLUSION In order to improve the discrete rigid rotamer model, we developed a side-chain modeling program that integrates clash-detection guided iterative search with RR in the framework CIS-RR. Our analysis shows that the good performance of CIS-RR in side-chain modeling is mainly due to its effectiveness in clash elimination, which is achieved by extensive sampling of side-chain conformation space through the coupling of CIS and RR. Since CIS-RR is able to effectively relieve atomic clashes in the modeled structures with a desirable speed, it would be a very useful method for accurate sidechain modeling that can complement the current existing methods for subsequent analysis and refinement of protein structures.
