Motivation: Hydrophobic effect plays a pivotal role in most protein– ligand binding. State-of-the-art protein–ligand scoring methods usually treat hydrophobic free energy as surface tension, which is proportional to interfacial surface area for simplicity and efficiency. However, this treatment ignores the role of molecular shape, which has been found very important by either experimental or theoretical studies. Results: We propose a new empirical scoring function, named Cyscore. Cyscore improves the prediction accuracy by using a novel curvature-dependent surface-area model, which is able to distinguish convex, planar and concave surface in hydrophobic free energy calculation. Benchmark tests show that this model significantly improves the protein–ligand scoring and Cyscore outperforms a variety of well established scoring functions using PDBbind benchmark sets for binding affinity correlation and ranking tests. We expect the curvature-dependent surface-area model and Cyscore would contribute to the study of protein–ligand interactions. Availability: Cyscore is available to non-commercial users at
INTRODUCTIONScoring functions are approximate computational methods for predicting the binding affinity of two docked molecules, especially, a protein and a ligand. They are widely used in structure-based drug discovery and other molecular modeling applications, including virtual screening, de novo drug design and lead optimization (). In the past several decades, a variety of scoring functions have been developed. In general, they can be classified into three types, force-field-based (), knowledge-based () and empirical scoring functions (). Force-field-based scoring functions are derived from first principle, which employs classical force fields to compute the direct interaction energies, e.g. van der Waals and electrostatic energies, between the ligand and its target protein. Sometimes these methods are combined with GB/SA or PB/SA methods to address the solvation effect (). Knowledge-based scoring functions are derived from statistical potentials, which predict the binding free energy using the probabilities of finding atom pairs at a given distance between proteins and ligands. They have obtained a high level of prediction accuracy according to some recent studies (). However, knowledge-based scoring functions usually require large numbers of terms which are prone to over fitting by training, and can hardly provide immediate physical interpretation of results. Those weak points limit their applications. Empirical scoring functions incorporate the advantages of both force-field-based and knowledge-based scoring functions. They calculate the overall binding free energy as a sum of several physically meaningful terms, while their coefficients are derived from the regression analysis on experimental data. As they can achieve comparably accurate prediction and provide physical insights of proteinligand binding as well, empirical scoring functions are widely used in structure-based drug-design applications. In this article, we propose a new empirical scoring function, named Cyscore. It is composed of hydrophobic free energy, van der Waals interaction energy, hydrogen bond interaction energy and ligand's conformational entropy. We mainly focus on improving the prediction of hydrophobic free energy, because it is regarded to be dominant in most proteinligand binding (). Hydrophobic effect is the observed tendency of nonpolar surfaces to association in an aqueous solution. Many theoretical approaches have been proposed to study its mechanism, such as 'iceberg' model (), scaled-particle theory based 'void volume' models (). Both experimental and theoretical studies have pointed out that hydrophobic effect depends not only on surface area, but also on shape (). In the conventional proteinligand scoring methods, hydrophobic free energy is usually treated as surface tension, which is proportional to interfacial surface area for simplicity and efficiency. Obviously, this treatment ignores the role of molecular shape and hinders the more accurate prediction *To whom correspondence should be addressed. of hydrophobic free energy. Inspired by the thermodynamic research of Tolman (1949) and the pioneer work of), we took curvature as the descriptor of shape and proposed a novel curvature-dependent surfacearea model. Our analyses demonstrate that this model is superior to the conventional surface-area model significantly in protein ligand scoring. Compared to a variety of well-established scoring functions, it achieves the top performance using the well known PDBbind benchmark sets (). The methods and results will be elaborated in the following sections.
METHODS
Scoring functionsWe assume that the overall proteinligand binding free energy can be decomposed into four terms:G hydrophobic is the change of hydrophobic free energy from the freestate to the bound-state of the protein and ligand:where G complex , G protein and G ligand are the hydrophobic free energies of proteinligand complex, individual protein and ligand in the solvent, respectively. Hydrophobic free energy is computed as the integrationThis is our curvature-dependent surface-area model. The curvature factor V sphere V out 2 is defined by using a sphere centering at each sampling point on the solvent accessible surface (S) and calculating the square ratio of sphere volume (V sphere ) to volume out of the solvent accessible surface (V out ) (). Thus the convex, planar and concave surfaces are different in hydrophobic free energy prediction. The radius of the sphere is set to be 1.2 according to the derivation of our model (Supplementary Material). The atom radii are from Chothia's (1976) work. To obtain the square ratio numerically, we first generate a set of points to represent the solvent accessible surface using the method developed by Shrake and Rupley (1973). Each of these points represents an integral element of surface area. Then we place all the points into a grid of 0.1 spacing and compute the sphere volumes at each point by accumulating the grid volume. Finally we summarize all the products of square ratio and the surface element area. As the curvature factor requires a time consuming computation, we implemented the k-discrete oriented polytopes (k-DOPs) method to detect the overlap of spheres in this program for fast computation (). G vdw accounts for the van der Waals interaction and is calculated as the summation of LennardJones 10-6 potentials between the protein and the ligand.r ij is the distance between protein atom i and ligand atom j. And ij is the sum of van der Waals radii of protein atom i and ligand atom j, " ij is the depth of the potential well, and is calculated as " ij  ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi " i " j p : The van der Waals radii and " i , " j of each type of atoms are obtained from CHARMM22 parameters (). Hydrogen atoms are ignored in the calculation because their position is dependent on the methods of adding hydrogen and may result in atom clashes. G hbond accounts for the hydrogen-bond interaction between the protein and ligand. It was adapted from that of Grid ():where r ij is the distance between heavy atoms of protein atom i and ligand atom j, is the angle formed by the donor atom, hydrogen and acceptor atom (Supplementary). If 5 90 , the hydrogen bond energy for the pair of atoms is set to be 0. C and D are the parameters obtained from Goodford' (1985) work. G entropy accounts for the entropic loss effect of ligands upon binding process. We employed the classic method of counting the number of rotatable bonds (rotors). It is based on the assumption that each rotor in the unbound state associates with a discrete number of low-energy conformations but 'freezes' into a single conformation upon binding. Thus the number of rotatable bonds is proportional to a certain amount of conformational entropy ().In the following tests, we quantified the prediction accuracy through Pearson's correlation coefficient (R) and standard deviation (SD), which are the commonly used criterion for binding affinity prediction ().
DatasetsWe divided the datasets into a training set and two benchmark sets. They were selected from the database of PDBbind (), which collects the experimentally measured binding affinity data for all the biomolecular complexes deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). The training set is used to obtain the coefficients before each term by linear regression. It was selected from the latest version (v2012) of PDBbind using the following criteria: (i) structure resolution 5 1.8 , (ii) binding affinity covers the range from 1 to 11 kcal/mol. Each complex. A cross section for visualizing the curvature-dependent surfacearea model at concave and convex surface. The white region surrounded by the solvent accessible surface represents a molecule, which is the protein or ligand. Dark grey region represents the volume of the sphere out of the solvent accessible surface (V out ). Light grey region represents the volume of the sphere buried in the solvent accessible surface (V sphere  V out ). V out can be a descriptor for the concave and convex surface was double checked to ensure that its binding data was convincing and (iii) proteinligand data should be different from the benchmark data. We checked the protein sequence similarity and ligand chemical composition of the complexes (protein sequence similarity should be 590% or ligands should be different in chemical formula). Thus there is no complex in the training set whose protein and ligand are the same as that in the benchmark data. Finally we obtained 247 proteinligand data which can be found in Supplementary Table S1. The benchmark sets are two 'core set' of PDBbind: the latest version (v2012) and a most widely used version (v2007). The 'core set' was selected by the author of PDBbind, which was aim to provide a set of high quality, non-redundant data with special focus on the diversity of structures and binding data. The two sets contains 201 (v2012) and 195 (v2007) proteinligand data, respectively. Moreover, they can be clustered into 67 and 65 groups, each of which contains a high-affinity ligand, a medium-affinity ligand, and a low-affinity ligand bound to a common protein (). The clustering of proteinligand data can be used to test the ability to rank different ligands bound to the same protein when the correct binding poses of these ligands are known. The overlaps of the two benchmark sets are $30%.
Software availabilityCyscore is implemented in C and has been complied on Linux system. It is now freely available to non-commercial users at http://clab.labshare. cn/software/cyscore.html. Valid input file formats are PDB for proteins and Tripos Mol2 for ligands. Typically this software is able to process around 4000 ligand molecules for a given protein target per hour on an Intel Core TM processor (3.0 GHz) using one CPU core.
RESULTSIn this section, we first give an overview of Cyscore. Then we investigate how the curvature-dependent surface-area model is superior to the conventional models in scoring proteinligand interactions. Finally, to gain an overall performance of Cyscore, we compare it to a variety of well-established scoring functions using PDBbind benchmarks.
Overview of CyscoreCyscore is an empirical proteinligand scoring function, composed of hydrophobic free energy, van der Waals interaction energy, hydrogen-bond interaction energy and the ligand's conformational entropy. Those terms follow the classic approaches except the hydrophobic free energy. Conventionally, hydrophobic free energy is treated as a form of surface tension by many researches (). Thus hydrophobic free energy is measured by the surface area of a molecule, including solvent accessible surface area, molecular surface area or some approximate methods such as atom contact numbers (). However, a thermodynamic research ofshows that microscopic surface tension not only associates with surface area but also with curvature, that is:where (R) is the surface tension of spherical particle of radius R,is the macroscopic surface tension and is a constant. This equation in principle provides a means of obtaining the curvature-dependent hydrophobic free energy, but it is only applicable to spherical interfacial geometries. In order to derive a well-defined model, Nicholls et al. (1991) developed a curvaturecorrected surface-area model, which calculates the curvature factor at the points distributed over the accessible surface of a molecule. The hydrophobic free energy is:where S i is the area of the surface element, and c i is the curvature factor associated with S i. To determine c i , they place a sphere, centering at each sample point of the solvent accessible surface, and calculate the fraction of sphere surface lies in the molecular solvent accessible surface, which is c i  2S inner S sphere . S inner is the surface area of the sphere buried in the molecular solvent accessible surface, and S sphere is the total surface area. In the planar surface, c i  1.0, which means that Equation (7) is equal to the conventional surface-area model. In the concave region, c i 4 1.0, which indicates a higher hydrophobic free energy, while in the convex region, vice versa. Originally, this model was used in analyzing hydrophobic effects in protein folding and association, etc. We tried to apply it to proteinligand binding affinity scoring. However, it fails to show any improvements in our benchmark tests (Section 3.2). After a careful analysis, we found a possible reason is that c i is too sensitive to the judgment on whether a surface element of the sphere lies in or out of the molecular solvent accessible surface. In other words, if a protein structure is not so precisely determined, the minor difference in structure may lead to incorrect value of S inner. As illustrated in, the real protein surface and the experimentally determined or predicted protein surface are almost the same but the values of buried surface area of the sphere centering at point O have great difference (dark grey region). In the case of proteinligand scoring, this weak point is amplified because many of the atom distances in the binding pockets are around the size of a sphere, and thus errors will be accumulated, leading to bad scoring. Inspired by the work of, we developed a new curvature-dependent surface-area model using the sphere volume, instead of area, to evaluate the surface curvature. Our curvature factor is defined as the square ratio of sphere volume to the volume out of the molecular solvent accessible surface [. An example for the distance sensitivity of Nicholls' model. Supposing for a protein, the experimentally determined or predicted structure (solid line in A but dash line in B) is slightly different from the real structure (solid line in B). To determine the curvature of the surface, a sphere is centered at the point O. Although the two structures are almost the same, the exposed surfaces (dark gray in A and B) of the sphere are quite different, resulting in the inaccurate value of curvatureThe use of volume can avoid the sensitivity in determining the buried or exposed surface area simply by the sphere radius. Moreover, derived from our geometry analysis, this factor is an approximate form of Tolman's Equation (6), which indicates the physical meaning of our model (Supplementary Material). We expected this new approach could provide robust estimation of surface curvature and contribute to proteinligand binding affinity scoring.
Curvature-dependent surface-area model contributes to proteinligand binding affinity predictionTo investigate the effectiveness of the new curvature-dependent surface-area model, we combined it with the van der Waals interaction energy, hydrogen-bond interaction energy and ligand's entropic term, which are defined in Section 2.1. This new scoring function is called Cyscore. For comparison, we replaced the curvature-dependent surface-area model of Cyscore by Nicholls' model] and conventional surface-area model (hydrophobic free energy is proportional to the solvent accessible surface area), respectively. These two new scoring functions were named N-and S-score for short. Coefficients before each term of the three scoring functions are obtained from the training set using linear regression method individually. Then the three scoring functions were tested on the benchmark sets of PDBbind version 2007 and 2012 (Section 2.2). Results show that Cyscore achieves the highest Pearson's correlation coefficient in both sets, which is $711% higher than the N-or S-score (and B and Supplementary Tables S2 and S3). The correlation figures illustrate that our curvature-dependent surface-area model obviously improves prediction in low and medium affinity ligands (). A detailed analysis on individual testing data shows that Cyscore performs better in case of ligands binding in narrow pockets. Taking hydroxylated polychlorinated Biphenyl-4,4 0-dihydroxy3,3 0 ,5,5 0-tetrachlorobiphenyl binding with human transthyretin as an example (PDB code 2G5U, Supplementary), the binding pocket is deep but the interfacial surface is relatively small. Both N-and S-score underestimate their affinity except Cyscore which predicts much lower hydrophobic free energy. It is because the average curvature factor in this pocket weights 1.6 times higher than that at planar surface. In the above test, Cyscore exhibits advantages in protein ligand scoring. To more precisely identify the performance of the curvature-dependent surface-area model, we excluded the van der Waals interaction energy and hydrogen bond interaction terms from the scoring functions, as these contact-dependent terms may have overlaps with the hydrophobic term. Thus the three scoring functions are composed of only hydrophobic free energy and ligand's entropic terms (Their suffixes were set to be 2, as Cyscore2, N-score2 and S-score2 for short). We obtained the results by performing the same training and testing process as before. As illustrated inand D, Supplementary Tables S4 and S5, although those two-term scoring functions shows 7$15% decrease of the Pearson's correlation coefficients, Cyscore2 still performs the best in both sets, while N-score2 shows $7% decrease compared to S-score2. This result implies that our curvature-dependent surface-area model contributes to proteinligand scoring indeed.
Comparison of Cyscore with the well-established proteinligand scoring functionsTo gain an overall performance of Cyscore, we further compared it with a wide collection of scoring functions. Thank Cheng et al.,who carefully selected a high-quality-benchmark set (PDBbind core set v2007) and assessed 16 well-known scoring functions, including five scoring functions [LigScore (), PLP (), PMF (), Jain (), LUDI ()] in the Discovery Studio software version 2.0, five scoring functions (D-Score, PMF-Score, G-Score, ChemScore, F-Score) in the SYBYL software version 7.2, one scoring function)] in the SchrodingerSchrodinger software version 8.0, three scoring functions [GoldScore, ChemScore (), ASP ()] in the GOLD software version 3.2, two stand-alone scoring functions [DrugScore () and X-Score (released by academic groups. We can use Cyscore against the same benchmark set for a fair comparison. The test results for the 17 scoring functions are shown in. In terms of the Pearson's correlation coefficients (R) and the standard deviation (SD), Cyscore outperforms all of the tested scoring functions on this benchmark test. Moreover, we followed their newly defined 'ranking power' test, which benchmarks the ability to correctly rank the known ligands bound to a common target protein when native binding modes are known (). Cheng et al. divide the above data set into 65 groups of proteinligand complexes, each of which contains a high-affinity ligand, a medium-affinity ligand and a low-affinity ligand bound to a common protein. Scoring functions are evaluated by the success rate which counts for the ratio of correctly ranked groups in all the test groups. This test examines the ability of a scoring function to discriminate the structure changes of ligands, which is relevant to lead optimization and virtual screening studies because their aim is to rank molecules in the order of their binding affinities to the target protein. As shown in. Cyscore achieves a 53.8% success rate, which ranks the second best among the scoring functions. Further more, we did another benchmark test using the most recent updated set of PDBbind (core set, version 2012). For comparison, two freely available stand-alone scoring functions are used, that are, X-Score (version 1.3) and DSX (DrugScore eXtended, a new improvement of DrugScore) (). Their performances are among the top-scoring functions according to the above tests. Our results show that, the correlation coefficient of Cyscore is 0.630, while the values of other two scoring functions are less than 0.600 (, correlation Supplementary), and the success rate of Cyscore achieves 56.7% in 'ranking power' test, better than the other two scoring functions (). These results indicate that Cyscore has considerable and consistent performance. The above benchmark tests illustrate the ability of scoring functions to evaluate binding affinities of diverse protein ligand complexes. Generally, the inaccurate prediction of solvation energies and configurational entropies are the major limitations of present scoring functions (). Compared to other empirical scoring functions, such as X-Score, ChemScore, PLP, LUDI, LigScore and Jain, Cyscore has the similar or even simpler terms in composition. The main difference is in the method of calculating hydrophobic free energy, which is one of the main components of solvation energy. For example, X-Score implemented three types of hydrophobic terms, which were the conventional surface model, atom contact number based term and atom type-dependent contact term (). All the three methods ignored the effects of surface curvature on hydrophobicity. It is also a drawback of the solvation energy terms in most force-field-basedscoring functions. As for the knowledge-based scoring functions, the curvature information may be obtained by the inverse Boltzmann relation, but the effectiveness is still practically unknown because it relates to the extension of pairwise potentials to many-body potentials (). Taken together, the encouraging performance of Cyscore suggests the significance of our work on designing the better algorithm for hydrophobic free energy.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONThe hydrophobic effect plays a central role in bio-molecular recognition. It is estimated to provide, perhaps, 75% of the free energy of most binding or association events (). Despite its importance, calculating hydrophobic energy is far from accuracy due to its complex origin in nature. In this article, we proposed a curvature-dependent surface-area model to estimate hydrophobic energy in proteinligand binding. Compared to the conventional surface-area model, the new model is not only theoretically more exact, but also particularly more effective in the benchmark tests. Based on this discovery, we developed a new empirical proteinligand scoring function, named Cyscore. In terms of binding affinity correlation, Cyscore outperforms a variety of well-established scoring functions in our tests. Of note, Cyscore performs better for ligands binding in narrow pockets, due to their larger contribution of the curvature factor to hydrophobic free energy. To our knowledge, the curvature-dependent surface tension has not been explicitly analyzed and taken into consideration in most of the state-of-the-art scoring functions. Thus, we believe our model will be useful to the study of proteinligand interactions. In practice, Cyscore can be used in the molecular modeling applications whose accurate binding positions are accessible, such as lead optimization, binding-mode prediction (see additional experiments in Supplementary Table S6) and drug-resistant mutation prediction. It should be mentioned that, Cyscore has not been optimized for virtual screening, which strongly depends on the particular docking method. In the present article, we mainly focus on identifying whether and how much the curvature-dependent surface-area model contributes to the proteinligand binding affinity scoring. And in order to reduce the risk of overtraining, the composition of Cyscore is relatively simple in contrast to some other scoring functions. This limits the accuracy and universal applicability of Cyscore. For example, Cyscore does not count the water mediated proteinligand interaction, the chargecharge interaction and the system interaction. Moreover, the calculation of entropy is a complex task. For simplicity and efficiency, Cyscore just counts the number of rotatable bonds of ligands to evaluate the entropy loss. In the future, we plan to adopt more detailed terms and larger training sets to achieve more accurate and general predictions of the proteinligand binding affinity.The results produced by the best option of X-score are listed.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Improved proteinligand binding affinity prediction with Cyscore at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Y.Cao and L.Li at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
