Motivation: The human uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransfer-ase enzyme family catalyzes the glucuronidation of the glycosyl group of a nucleotide sugar to an acceptor compound (substrate), which is the most common conjugation pathway that serves to protect the organism from the potential toxicity of xenobiotics. Moreover, it could affect the pharmacological profile of a drug. Therefore, it is important to identify the metabolically labile sites for glucuronidation. Results: In the present study, we developed four in silico models to predict sites of glucuronidation, for four major sites of metabolism functional groups, i.e. aliphatic hydroxyl, aromatic hydroxyl, carboxylic acid or amino nitrogen, respectively. According to the mechanism of glucuronidation, a series of 'local' and 'global' molecular descriptors characterizing the atomic reactivity, bonding strength and physical– chemical properties were calculated and selected with a genetic algorithm-based feature selection approach. The constructed support vector machine classification models show good prediction performance , with the balanced accuracy ranging from 0.88 to 0.96 on test set. For further validation, our models can successfully identify 84% of experimentally observed sites of metabolisms for an external test set containing 54 molecules. Availability and implementation: The software somugt based on our models is available at www.dddc.ac.cn/adme/jlpeng/somugt_
INTRODUCTIONHuman uridine diphosphate (UDP)-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are major phase II drug-metabolizing enzymes that catalyze transfer of glucuronic acid from UDP-glucuronic acid to various substrates containing nucleophilic functional group, e.g. alcohols, phenols, carboxylic acids, amines, thiols and so forth. Up until now, 22 human UGT proteins have been identified, and they can be classified in four families: UGT1, UGT2, UGT3 and UGT8 (). These isoforms are widely distributed and can be found in liver, intestine, kidney, lung and skin. Both endogenous (e.g. bilirubin) and xenobiotic (e.g. drug) chemicals can be metabolized by this family of enzymes, yielding water-soluble products that are easier to be excreted (). Most of those isoforms possess the overlapping substrate specificities as well as the capacity to metabolize a variety of structure unrelated substances. For example, UGT1A3 can catalyze glucuronidation of phenols, carboxylic acids and amines (). In addition to an essential detoxification mechanism for structurally diverse drugs, the glucuronidation can also lead to short duration of action and the loss of pharmacological activity of the drugs. In such cases, medicinal chemist needs to optimize the lead compound to improve its pharmacokinetic properties. For example, to reduce potential for glucuronidation,designed metabolically more stable compounds by incorporating substituents at the ortho position of the phenolic hydroxyl group or exchanging the phenyl group. In addition, strategy like bioisosteric modifications of phenol moiety was also reported to overcome the issue of rapid glucuronidation (). In contrast, the property that glucuronidation may lead to a minimized systemic exposure can be used to reduce adverse events. For example,designed inhaled p38 inhibitors by introducing functional groups prone to be metabolized via cytochromes P450 (CYPs) or UGTs, to achieve high intrinsic clearance. Therefore, glucuronidation provides access to modifying the pharmacokinetic profile during lead optimization. It is necessary to identify whether a compound can be glucuronidated, as well as which functional group of the compound is able to undergo the reaction. Normally the UGT-catalyzed biotransformation is determined experimentally by metabolite identification techniques. However, given that such experimental techniques are cost-intensive and time-consuming, there is growing interest to develop reliable in silico models to predict and deepen our understanding of the reaction. Till now, only the crystal structure of C-terminal domain of human UGT2B7 was determined (). Accordingly, current computational models for UGTmediated reaction were based on the reported substrate profile. Early studies () mainly focused on analyzing kinetic constants for the glucuronidation of homologous series of substrates, suggesting that glucuronidation rate was related to *To whom correspondence should be addressed. molecular lipophilic, electronic and/or steric properties. Miners, Smith and Sorich extensively studied substrates and nonsubstrates of UGT isoforms ('reaction phenotyping') (). By trying various machine learning methods, classification models for discriminating substrates of different UGT isoforms were developed. They also applied the strategy of pharmacophore fingerprint analysis to mine the structure signature related to glucuronidation, and found that local environment of nucleophilic site played an important role in identifying potential sites of metabolism (SOMs) (). Though many computational studies have been reported to simulate reaction rate and phenotyping, models predicting sites of glucuronidation were rare.reported navenave Bayes models trained for eight UGT isoforms using three quantum chemical (QC) and constitutional descriptors. Their results indicated that the local environment of nucleophilic site is an important feature to characterize the SOM of glucuronidation, and general chemical properties may be of secondary importance. However, this study was based on a small dataset containing only dozens of glucuronidated sites, which limited its application to structurally diverse compounds outside the range of training data. In the present study, we combined local QC descriptors and global physicalchemical properties to build four classification models to predict sites of glucuronidation using the learning method support vector machine (SVM) and a dataset covering a large chemical diversity space. First, human UGT-catalyzed reactions were retrieved from MDL Metabolite Database, and potential sites of glucuronidation were marked by matching predefined SMARTS strings. Then, both QC and geometrical descriptors were calculated to train SVM classifiers for each type of sites, i.e. aliphatic hydroxyl, aromatic hydroxyl, carboxylic and amino nitrogen. In the end, model performance was assessed by 10-fold cross-validation (10-fold CV) and test set. For further validation, another 54 molecules were collected and predicted using our constructed models.
METHODS
DatasetsAltogether 1377 in vitro human UGT-catalyzed reactions were retrieved from the MDL Metabolite Database. The following preparation procedures were automatically performed with an in-house C program using modules of OpenBabel 2.3.0 (O').(1) Extracting experimentally observed sites. The experimentally observed SOMs were identified by applying a subgraph isomorphism algorithm to each reactantproduct pair. Empirically, the substrate of a glucuronidation reaction is a subgraph of its product when ignoring hydrogen atoms.showed the glucuronidation of morphine as an example (). By examining the 2D structures of morphine and its corresponding glucuronic acid conjugate, the SOM can be automatically determined at the OH group.and c presented two less common glucuronidation examples that were not considered in the current study.(2) Assigning class labels for potential SOMs. The most common nucleophilic sites of glucuronidation include (): aliphatic or aromatic hydroxyl oxygen, singly bonded oxygen of carboxyl group, amino nitrogen, heterocyclic nitrogen, amide nitrogen and thiol sulfur.summarized the corresponding SMARTS strings that were used to match potential SOMs. After removing the sites that appear too few times, we finally kept the following four types of sites: (i) aliphatic hydroxylic oxygen (AlOH), (ii) aromatic hydroxylic oxygen (ArOH), (iii) single bonded oxygen of a carboxylic acid group (COOH) and (iv) aromatic/aliphatic amino nitrogen and heterocyclic nitrogen (Nitrogen). Their SMARTS patterns and the number of reactants containing the corresponding groups are listed in. Among all the matched sites, those experimentally observed glucuronidation sites identified in step (1) were labeled as 1 (positive), and the others were labeled as 1 (negative).(3) Generating 3D structures and optimization. The initial 3D structure of each reactant was constructed in Sybyl 6.8 () and further geometrically optimized using the semi-empirical AM1 method in the MOPAC 7.0 program ().To generate a representative test set for validation, the KennardStone algorithm () was used to split each dataset into a training and a test set in the ratio of 4:1. Moreover, to further evaluate the constructed models, an external test set containing 54 molecules was compiled from recently published studies using in vitro experiments to determine UGT-catalyzed SOMs. Each molecule contained at least one glucuronidation site. The same procedure described earlier in the text was applied to build and optimize 3D structures. The initial structures, their SOMs and original references are provided in Supplementary Material S1 and S2.
DescriptorsThe mechanism of glucuronidation involves nucleophilic attack of the substrate on the cofactor (S N 2 reaction, a diagram was shown in) (). The descriptors capturing(c) Phenylbutazone as an example of C-glucuronidation information about the nature of nucleophilic atom (i.e. O, N) are supposed to contribute to discriminating whether a potential site can be glucuronidated. Previous studies () have shown that QC descriptors can well represent the atomic and molecular reactivity. Here 25 types of local QC features and 7 types of global QC features characterizing bond strength or reactivity of an atom were calculated (definition are available in Supplementary Material S3). Those one-center terms reflect the electrostatic behavior or reactivity ability of an atom toward the cofactor, whereas two-center terms are related to the bond strength between the atom and its bonded neighbors. More detailed information about these descriptors can be found elsewhere (). To calculate these QC features, the following key words were included in the input file of MOPAC program: AM1, MMOK, VECTORS, BONDS, PI, PRECISE, ENPART, EF, MULLIK and CHARGE  n, where n is the charge of the molecule studied. Then an in-house python program was used to calculate both local and global QC features by parsing the MOPAC output file. Because those two-center terms involve two atoms, the following transformations were made to use them as atomic descriptors. For the potential sites of AlOH, ArOH and COOH, both features of the bond O-H and O-C were separately calculated and used as atomic descriptors; for the sites of Nitrogen, all features of the bond N-X (where X can be any neighbor atom) were computed, of which the sum, max, min and mean values were used as atomic descriptors. Besides, it has been shown that steric and lipophilic properties of the substrates were also responsible for the rate of glucuronidation (). In this study, 13 molecular descriptors addressing geometrical and lipophilic properties were introduced (definitions are available in Supplementary Material S3). Geometrical descriptors were calculated via CODESSA 2.7.2 (), and logP () is computed using OpenBabel. Overall, there are 56 descriptors calculated for the sites AlOH, ArOH and COOH, and 81 descriptors for the sites Nitrogen.
Support vector machineSVM algorithm aims to find a hyperplane such that the sum of distances from the hyperplane to the nearest positive or negative training samples was maximized (). The optimization problem can be described as follows:aFor a given oxygen atom, SMARTS strings were tested in an order of carboxyl and sulfonyl4aromatic hydroxyl4aliphatic hydroxyl; for a given nitrogen atom, the order is amide, sulfonamide4N-heterocyclic4aromatic amine4aliphatic amine.In the case of N-glucuronidation, one single model will be built on sites from heterocyclic nitrogen and aliphatic/aromatic amino nitrogen. And sites from amide were excluded in this study because the experimentally observed sites were rather rare.where i is the slack variable that allows training errors, whereas C 1 and C 1 are penalty of misclassifying positive and negative samples, respectively. Through those additional terms, SVM can handle non-linearly separable training data. Besides, kernel function is applied to avoid the dimensionality problems when constructing hyperplane in a high dimensional space. Details of the theory can be found elsewhere (). The SVM classifier for each reaction type was established using the LibSVM package (version 3.0) () with the radial basis function (RBF) kernel [exp(-ku-vk 2 ]. To avoid skewing to predicting majority class, a larger penalty is applied when misclassifying samples from minority class. In the package of LibSVM, the penalty of class i is calculated as C i  W i *C, where Wi is the weighting parameter. Here the weight of the majority class was set to be 1, and the weight of the minority class was determined according to the following relationship:where POS and NEG is the number of reactive and non-reactive sites, respectively. Finally, parameters C and were optimized simultaneously during genetic algorithm (GA)-based feature selection as described in the next section.
Feature selection and parameter optimizationOverfitting often occurs when a model uses more terms than necessary (). Because the degree of degeneracy of our defined descriptors can be high, models built using all of them could be easily overfitting. Therefore, it is important to select a subset of relevant and non-redundant features. Up until now, there are a couple of frequently used feature selection techniques (), such as forward and backward stepwise, GA, replacement method and so forth. In the present study, for each pair of highly correlated features (Pearson correlation coefficient r 2 ! 0.9), the one with smaller F-score was removed first. The F-score of j-th descriptor is defined as follows ():where, X 1 j , X 1 j , X j are the average values of j-th descriptor of positive, negative and the overall samples, respectively; n 1 , n 1 are the number of positive and negative samples; X 1 k, j , X 1 k, j are the k-th value of the j-th descriptor of positive and negative samples, respectively. Feature with a larger F-score was supposed to contribute more to the followed classification modeling. Then, the framework of GA-based feature selection strategy as described previously () was applied to select the descriptors and optimize the SVM parameters (i.e. C, ) simultaneously. The fitness function of GA was defined aswhere BACC cv is the balanced accuracy (defined in the next section) of 10-fold CV, N desp is the number of selected descriptors to build SVM model and weight controls the number of selected descriptors. Different weight values were tested, and it was set to 0.0015 due to the associated BACC cv being consistently higher during the GA evolution.
Model performanceGiven the quantities of true positive (TP), false negative (FN), true negative (TN) and false positive (FP), a classifier can usually be estimated by sensitivity. SE is the measure of the rate correctly identifying a site as reactive given it is truly glucuronidated; SP, in contrast, is the measure of the rate correctly identifying a site as non-reactive given it is non-glucuronidated. Accuracy is the widely used measure of overall classification performance, but it is not appropriate when the dataset is imbalanced. Considering that the ratios of reactive to non-reactive sites for different reaction types varies from 0.25 to 3.19, three alternative metrics, balanced accuracy [BACC  (SE  SP)/2] (), area under receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) () and Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) (), were used to evaluate the performance of obtained models.
RESULTS
Overview of glucuronidation sitesTo model the sites of glucuronidation, dataset containing four types of functional groups were collected and listed in. When looking at the fraction of SOMs of each functional group, we can see that the ability of glucuronidation varies over different atom species. In general, oxygen atoms have more tendency to be glucuronidated over nitrogen atoms, whereas the local structure of oxygen atoms can also affect the reaction. As shown in, both ArOH and COOH have much more reactive sites than non-reactive ones, whereas AlOH has nearly same number of reactive and non-reactive sites. As shown in previous study (), deprotonation of the substrate is one of the key steps during O-glucuronidation. Thus the observed different reactive SOM ratios could be partially explained by the deprotonation ability of different reaction types. If other substituent effects are neglected, the alkyl group of AlOH has electron donating effect, which increases the electron density of O-H bond. On the contrary, the electron density of O-H bond of ArOH and COOH is lower due to the withdrawing effect of the corresponding groups. Accordingly, the interaction between oxygen and hydrogen of AlOH could be in general stronger than that of ArOH and COOH, leading to less deprotonated oxygens and reactive sites. Therefore, the reactivity of a given atom could be altered by the local environment, and descriptors characterizing such influence were supposed to be a discriminating predictor. For example, of the calculated descriptors, Mulliken (1955) bond order, also known as Mulliken's overlap population, can characterize the accumulation of the electrons between two bonded atoms, and thus measures the strength of covalent bonding. Wilcoxon rank-sum test showed that B_OH (Mulliken bond order of O-H bond) of AlOH is on average greater than that of ArOH and COOH (both P-values are 50.001).
Validation of classifiersA combination of selected descriptors and SVM parameters with the highest GA fitness score were used to model the final classifiers for each kind of glucuronidation reaction type. As being part of the fitness function of GA, BACC of 10-fold CV of each model was optimized during feature selection. After thousands of generations, the final result of 10-fold CV was listed in, from which one can see that a well and balanced performance can be obtained after GA-based feature selection. The statistics of each model on test set was also listed in. The results indicate that our classifiers have generally high performance of predicting both glucuronidated and non-glucuronidated sites, with BACC being 0.89, 0.88, 0.90 and 0.96, respectively. Besides, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of each model on test set was shown in, where the ROC curve for a random guess results was a diagonal line from bottom left to top right. It can be found that all curves were located far above the diagonal line, suggesting strong predictive performance of the obtained glucuronidation models. To further evaluate our models, an external test set including 54 molecules was collected from reference. This set contains all four types of SOMs. By applying the built models to these molecules, 129 of 148 potential SOMs were correctly predicted with an overall accuracy of 0.87. Altogether 57 of 68 experimentally observed SOMs were successfully identified, yielding an SE value of 0.84. A summary of prediction results was listed in, from which we can see that the four models recognized most of experimentally observed SOMs. Some examples were shown in, where potential SOMs were marked with circles. For example, dihydropyrrolopyrimidine is a PI3K inhibitor designed bywith IC50 value of 0.0086 M. This compound was metabolically unstable because of rapid glucuronidation of the phenol moiety, as reflected by a UGTglucuronidation activity assay and metabolite identification technique using LC/MS/MS. Using our models, the phenolic site can be successfully identified as reactive, which will provide useful information for structural modification to change the pharmacokinetic profile of the compound. Another point of note is that there are 74 negative sites of Nitrogen type among those 54 molecules, and only 6 of them were misclassified as positive. It indicated that our weighted SVM classifiers can achieve excellent prediction performance for skewed data distribution. The detailed information about potential, experimentally observed and predicted SOMs of each molecule are provided in Supplementary Material S2.
Selected descriptorsTo characterize the sites of glucuronidation, the initial descriptor set was reduced and optimized with a GA-based selection procedure.summarized the selected descriptors for each model. Among all those selected two-center QC descriptors, energyrelated ones (e.g. J, B, C, EE2, NN2, C2) characterize the interaction energy between two bonded atoms (i.e. bonding strength), which is related to the deprotonation ability in the case of O-glucuronidation. The polar_AB describes how electronic charge of the studied reaction site is perturbed by its neighbor(). Of the selected one-center QC descriptors, NA (Fukui atomic nucleophilic reactivity index) and SEA (electrophilic superdelocalizability) describe the nucleophilicity of an atom toward glucuronic acid, and RA (Fukui atomic oneelectron reactivity index) is a general indicator of the atomic susceptibility to electrophilic or nucleophilic attack (). These three descriptors are representation of local reactivity of a molecule from different emphases. Accordingly, at least one of them was selected for each resulted models, which suggested that the GA-based approach is efficient in selecting relevant descriptors. Apart from those local descriptors, we also calculated a couple of physicalchemical descriptors to characterize the overall property that a molecule possesses. These global descriptors, such as logP and molecular volume (MV), are useful to understand the favorable properties that a molecule should possess to be glucuronidated. As shown in, for O-glucuronidation sites (i.e. AlOH, ArOH and COOH), the value of logP of the molecules containing reactive sites are more likely to be larger than those containing non-reactive sites. P-values of Wilcoxon ranksum test were 50.005. The value of MV for the sites of AlOH, COOH and Nitrogen, instead, shows a reversed tendency. From these results, we may infer that molecules with higher lipophilicity and relatively small molecular size are generally more liable to glucuronidation, which is consistent with the intuitive perception of UGT substrates.. Boxplots to show the distribution of descriptors logP and MV. The box edges are first and third quartiles, the band inside the box is the median. The values in parentheses are P-values of Wilcoxon rank-sum test. For logP, the alternative hypothesis is that values of molecules containing reactive sites are more likely larger than those of molecules containing non-reactive sites; for MV, the alternative hypothesis is that values of molecules containing reactive sites are more likely less than those of molecules containing non-reactive sites sites are not experimentally eminent. Because the current models cannot compare the priority of different sites within or across reactions, they do not match all of the experimentally observed SOMs. In addition, the current study only used the local reactivity descriptors and the overall physicalchemical properties, whereas there are other factors that should be modeled. For example, the local steric effect of ligand may hinder the nucleophilic attack of reaction site on the cofactor. Therefore, further improvement should focus on the reaction kinetic issue and try to take more factors related to the metabolism into consideration.
CONCLUSIONIn the present work, we developed four in silico models to predict human UGT-catalyzed SOMs for the following potential sites: aliphatic hydroxyl, aromatic hydroxyl, carboxyl group, aliphatic/ aromatic amino nitrogen and heterocyclic nitrogen. Extensive validations were carried out on the models, and the results demonstrated good predicting performances on both internal and external tests. Among the GA-selected descriptors, we found that local descriptors such as bond strength (between reactive site and its neighbor) and Fukui atomic reactivity indices are important to characterize the glucuronidation potential of a site. Moreover, the distribution analysis of global descriptors suggested that molecules with higher lipophilicity and relatively small molecular size are generally more liable to glucuronidation. Overall, the current study may provide insight for understanding human phase II metabolic profile of a chemical, and the resulted in silico models allow chemists to make rational decisions more quickly during pharmacokinetic lead optimization.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
J.Peng et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
In silico site of metabolism prediction at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
DISCUSSION Sorich et al. (2006) reported in silico models for the first time to predict sites of glucuronidation. By analyzing the frequency of each functional group being metabolized, they found that the susceptibility of different nucleophilic types varies toward UGT-mediated glucuronidation. For example, UGTs prefer the atom sites attaching aromatic rings over those with aliphatic substituents. These observations are consistent with the distribution analysis result of our dataset. One of the major differences between Sorich's and our work is that their models predict isozyme-specific regioselectivity, whereas our models are reactionspecific that consider the overall effect of all UGT isoforms. Given the genetic polymorphism of the enzyme, it is expected that the isozyme-specific models may help understanding and predicting individual differences in drug response. However, after analyzing the metabolism data collected here, it is clear that there is a significant overlap between the isoforms. Excluding all substrates with overlapping specificity would not yield statistically meaningful results because the datasets were too small. In this study, we choose to construct separate SOM models for different functional groups, as they may possess different properties. For each of them, a GA-based approach was used to select the appropriate descriptors to characterize their reactivity. From the cross-validation results (only the results of 10-fold CV were provided in Sorich's work), our models showed improved and more balanced performance. Moreover, our models were evaluated by both internal and external test sets, and all these evaluations suggest that our models have excellent performances on predicting potential glucuronidation sites. Actually, at early stages of drug discovery, the UGT isoform responsible for a specific pathway is seldom experimentally determined, and medicinal chemists care more about the accurate 'soft' sites for structural protection and modification. The reaction-specific methods, due to a better consideration of local reactivity, would be more suitable for improving the prediction of UGT-mediated SOMs. In general, the current models are capable of reproducing 84% of experimentally observed SOMs. Though reasonably successful, we noticed that they tend to give incorrect predictions sometimes, especially for some molecules containing a large number of potential sites. The reasons for this can be multifold, but primarily we think it is because the current models have not accounted for the kinetic issue. For a molecule containing many potential sites, those sites may compete for UGT with each other, and have different reaction rates. Consequently, there are only a few major routes, and some 'actually' active
