Motivation: A major goal in genomic research is to identify genes that may jointly influence a biological response. From many years of intensive biomedical research, a large body of biological knowledge, or pathway information, has accumulated in available databases. There is a strong interest in leveraging these pathways to improve the statistical power and interpretability in studying gene networks associated with complex phenotypes. This prior information is a valuable complement to large-scale genomic data such as gene expression data generated from microarrays. However, it is a non-trivial task to effectively integrate available biological knowledge into gene expression data when reconstructing gene networks. Results: In this article, we developed and applied a Lasso method from a Bayesian perspective, a method we call prior Lasso (pLasso), for the reconstruction of gene networks. In this method, we partition edges between genes into two subsets: one subset of edges is present in known pathways, whereas the other has no prior information associated. Our method assigns different prior distributions to each subset according to a modified Bayesian information criterion that incorporates prior knowledge on both the network structure and the pathway information. Simulation studies have indicated that the method is more effective in recovering the underlying network than a traditional Lasso method that does not use the prior information. We applied pLasso to microarray gene expression datasets, where we used information from the Pathway Commons (PC) and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) as prior information for the network reconstruction, and successfully identified network hub genes associated with clinical outcome in cancer patients. Availability: The source code is available at http://nba.uth.tmc.edu/ homepage/liu/pLasso.
INTRODUCTIONA central research focus in genomics is to identify genes and gene networks involved in variety of biological processes. Gaussian graphical models are popular tools for the estimation of gene association networks from microarray data (). These models assume that the available data are generated from a multivariate Gaussian distribution (). As a consequence, the main task for inferring networks is to derive conditional independencies in the joint probability distribution of expression data for multiple genes. In the framework of undirected Gaussian graphical models, conditional independence relationships can be inferred from partial correlations, which are the correlations between pairs of variables given the remaining observed ones. Contrary to the marginal correlation, the partial correlation measures the direct association between two genes in the gene association network. Once a direct gene association network is complete, the knowledge on indirect gene associations can be easily obtained. The standard estimation of partial correlations involves either the inversion of the sample covariance matrix or the estimation of least square regression problems. Unfortunately, microarray data are typically characterized by a large number of variables with a small number of samples, which makes these traditional approaches inappropriate. To ensure proper estimation capability, suitable alternatives based on regularized estimation of these parameters by sparsity restriction have been proposed. The underlying assumption is the sparsity of biological networks: only a few edges are supposed to be present in the gene regulatory network. A well-known example of these regularization-based techniques is the L1 penalized least square estimator, known as the Lasso technique. The method has been widely adapted to high-dimensional model selection in linear and Gaussian graphical models (). One limitation of these approaches is that they focus on computational or algorithmic aspects but neglect prior biological knowledge or information. Many years of intensive biomedical research has deposited a wealth of biological knowledge into databases, including genegene regulatory pathway information. One well-known example of these data resources is the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (). It is a collection of comprehensive pathway information derived from experimental results, literature and other databases. Another rich resource is the Pathway Commons (PC) that integrates biological pathway and molecular interaction data from publicly available databases including BioGRID, HPRD, Reactome and others (). These pathways are often interconnected and can be viewed as a graph of inter-gene regulatory relationships. However, pathway databases represent only the static regulatory relationships between genes or gene products. It is not clear yet to what extent a network in a particular phenotype or cell type aligns with interactions defined in these databases. A recent *To whom correspondence should be addressed. microarray data analysis of 20 genes involved with the human cell cycle showed that as much as 6070% of the identified gene regulatory relationships were in agreement with known regulations (). It is expected that integrating a priori pathway information in a gene expression analysis would increase the power of the method to recover biological networks. Recently, several methods have been developed to use pathways or network information, including network-constrained parameter estimation, in the framework of variable selection (; Tai and Pan, 2007a, b;). For example, the prior information was incorporated into a spatially correlated mixture model for selecting targets of one transcription factor (). In addition, an Ising model using network knowledge was used to identify differentially expressed genes (). In this study, we developed a prior information-dependent Lasso (pLasso) procedure for regularized estimation of largescale gene association networks. Specifically, we embedded prior network information into the regularized regression, such that it could specify preferences for particular sets of variables in the model. The rationale is derived from a Bayesian perspective of Lasso. A mixture of two Laplacian distributions was conceptually proposed to represent different prior knowledge of two sets of gene interactions: one set is present in known pathways, whereas the other has no known prior information. We first explored the effectiveness of the pLasso using simulation studies, and then applied the pLasso to a breast cancer dataset and an ovarian cancer dataset to evaluate the proposed method. We have demonstrated the effectiveness and power of our pLasso procedure through both simulation studies and real data analysis.
METHODS
Graphical Gaussian model of gene networkGraphical models are a class of statistical models that present direct covariate interactions. These models can be described by means of a graph G  (V, E), where V  {1,.. ..., p} is the vertex set representing variables, and E  (e ij ) is the edge set representing conditional independency relations between vertices. If e ij  0, there is no edge between two vertices i and j. The lack of an edge between two vertices corresponds to their conditional independence given all other vertices. Let X  (X 1 ,.. .., X p ) be a random vector of vertices states that are real valued and follow a multivariate Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and covariance matrix AE, so the inverse covariance matrix,{! ij } known as the precision matrix, describes the conditional independence structure of X. If e ij  0, then ! ij  0. Therefore, it can be easily linked to the partial correlation in the graphical model through Equation (1).ij is the partial correlation between gene i and gene j conditioned on the values of all the other genes. The pattern of zero entries in the inverse covariance matrix corresponds to conditional independence restrictions between variables.
Neighborhood selection with the LassoIn general, a typical genomic dataset has a much smaller number of observations (n arrays) than number of variables (p genes). Under these conditions, inverting the sample covariance matrix as described is inappropriate for estimating the partial correlations. A recent study showed that suitable surrogates based on regularized estimation of the covariance matrix or on regularized high-dimensional regression can lead to practical solutions (). In this study, we will use Meinshausen and Buhlmann's neighborhood selection method. Basically, Lasso regression is applied to each node in the network, reducing the original problem to multiple sparse linear regression problems. Formally, let X \i indicate the p1 vector of the values of all genes except i. Similarly, let i   i 1 , :::, i i1 , :::, i p  T represent the regression coefficients where gene i is the response variable and all the other genes are the covariates. The lasso-based estimate of regression coefficients is the solution of the optimization problem:Here 40 is the regularization parameter. This optimization problem can be easily solved by a coordinate descent algorithm (). Then, the neighborhood estimation of node j is defined by Equation (3). ^ ne j  fk 2 V; ^ j k 6  0g  3 Also, based on the relationship between partial correlation coefficients and regression coefficients, the following equation can be derived ().With the L1 penalty, many estimated regression coefficients will shrink to 0. It is not guaranteed that the ^ i j and ^ j i always have the same sign for finite sample sizes. In this situation, we applied the 'max' symmetrization approach (), which is defined by Equation (5).And now by replacing both the ^ i j and ^ j i in Equation (4) with ^ sym ij , we can define the estimate of the partial correlation coefficients as in Equation (6).
Prior dependent lasso estimation of neighborhoodThe lasso estimate for linear regression has a Bayesian interpretation.indicated that the lasso estimate can be viewed as the model of the posterior distribution of with a double exponential distributed prior (or Laplacian prior). Minimizing Equation (2) can be regarded as maximizing the log posterior distribution ofwhere C is a constant in Equation (7). Thus, the lasso penalty can be regarded as the logarithm of the prior distribution of the parameter  ( 1 ,.. ., p ) T , which is a Laplacian prior with mean equal to 0. Because prior distributions model our prior knowledge of the data, the known network structure can be introduced in a natural way in the form of prior probabilities. A mixture of two Laplacian prior distributions for the regression coefficients is proposed as in Equation (8) with different parameters l 1 and l 2 .Here l 1 and l 2 are regularization parameters. non-prior and prior represent the regression coefficients corresponding to the edges absent and present in the prior knowledge. The prior distribution of regression coefficients for the edges not present in known databases is concentrated. Because of the sparsity assumption, most of these regression coefficients shrink to 0. On the other hand, the prior distribution of regression coefficients corresponding to existing edges in the known databases is diffuse. Their regression coefficient profile is scattered away from zero, as it is preferable to include the regression coefficients representing the known gene interactions from reliable data source. In our proposed pLasso method, we selected different values of the regularized parameter l (l 1 and l 2 ) in two lasso penalty terms, thus allowing the lasso regression coefficients corresponding to the edges absent and present in the prior knowledge to have different prior distributions.
A new criterion for regularization parameter selectionAsymptotically, Lasso guarantees both model estimation consistency and selection consistency under certain conditions (). The regularization parameter controls the sparsity of the estimated network. Large values of lead to sparse networks, whereas small values of result in dense networks. Sparse networks have less number of degrees of freedom, but lower log-likelihood. Bayesian information criterion (BIC) is a well-known model selection criterion (). We apply BIC for choosing the regularization parameter that is a tradeoff between the data fitting and the model complexity. Taking into account the fact that the degree of freedom of the Lasso equals the number of non-zero entries in the coefficient matrix, we define an average of the BIC score for all genes for neighborhood estimation. BIC  2 log LXj  k log n  2 log PS  9 Here, the first term L(X j ) represents the likelihood of the data. In the second term, n is the sample size; k is the average node degree of the network, calculated by the number of non-zero entries in the estimated coefficient matrix. In the last term, logP(S) is the prior probability of the network model S. A smaller BIC score implies a better model. Usually, the prior probability logP(S) in the BIC score is chosen to be an uninformative uniform prior so that the same prior probability is assigned to all considered models. In this study, we use an informative prior incorporating both our knowledge on network sparsity and the prior information in known databases, defined as the Equations (10) and(11) below. As an asymptotic result, the original BIC score definition is derived for large samples. In a typical genomic dataset where n5 5p, we found the original BIC definition often resulted in data underfitting and an oversparse network. To address this issue, we first define the prior probability that favors the network with an optimal minimum number of edges. In this modified BIC (mBIC) score, q represents the minimum average node degree of the estimated network. When the estimated network has an average node degree of k bigger than q, it has no effect on the score. Otherwise, an extra penalty is imposed into the framework, defined as the following: mBIC  2 log LXj  k log n  maxq  k, 0 log n 10 where the third term depicts a form for the prior probability that favors the network S with an average node degree above q. We also define a second modified BIC (pBIC) score that takes into account the prior pathway information for selecting the optimal value of the regularization parameter l 2. The rationale underlying the pBIC score is, if the estimated edges are also present in the known databases, a favorable prior distribution will be assigned, leading to a lower BIC score. In the pBIC, is defined as the average number of estimated edges included in prior information for each node and calculated as  j ^ E \E prior j=p, where p is the number of genes, E is the set of edges in the inferred network and E prior is the set of edges in the prior. We let represent the precision of the prior knowledge, indicating the proportion of true edges in prior information. To further compensate the false-positive edges in E and E prior , we use the multiplicity term to denote the effective number of true prior edges recovered in the estimated network. Therefore, the complexity of the model in BIC is balanced with respect to the total number of possibly correct prior edges recovered in the estimated network. We have found that this simple prior representation could reflect the information within the prior knowledge, favoring the estimated network models with a large number of edges included in prior information. pBIC  2 log LXj  k log n  maxq  k, 0 log n  log n 11
Evaluate the inferred gene network hubsTo evaluate the performance of the pLasso method, we applied it to two public datasets for network inference. The first dataset was a microarray gene expression study of breast cancer (), the partial correlation analysis (GeneNet) (Opgen) and the original Lasso method. The genes were selected if they were among the top genes with most neighbors in the inferred network for patients showing distant metastasis but not in the network for the metastasis-free patients (based on pLasso, Lasso and GeneNet methods) or the most significantly differentiated expressed genes (SAM). We also compared the predictive power of the selected genes with the gene signatures identified previously, including the 76 genes for breast cancer () and the 193 genes for ovarian cancer (The Cancer Genome Atlas Research). To make a fair comparison, we selected the same number of genes under different methods (76 genes and 193 genes for breast cancer and ovarian cancer analysis, respectively). For breast cancer analysis, we used the 214 patients' samples from the Wang dataset for training and then applied an independent dataset, including 165 patients who did not receive hormone therapy or chemotherapy, for testing the predictive power of the selected gene signature for survival outcome (van de). For ovarian cancer analysis, we used a training set of 215 patients from TCGA batches 1115, and tested in an independent validation set consisting of 253 samples from TCGA batches 1724. We performed the univariate Cox's analysis on the selected genes in the training dataset, and used the Cox's regression coefficients for these genes to calculate the risk score for each sample in the testing dataset as in. Specifically, the genes with positive Cox's regression coefficients were considered to be 'poor prognosis' genes, whereas others were considered as the 'good prognosis' genes. The risk score for each patient in the testing datasets was defined as the t-statistics comparing the average of the poor prognosis genes with the average of the good prognosis genes. Patient samples with risk scores above 0 were predicted to be in the 'highrisk group', whereas others were classified in the 'low-risk group'. The sensitivity and specificity of prediction results based on selected genes from different methods were then compared.
SIMULATION RESULTSTo demonstrate the performance of the proposed pLasso method, we conducted simulation studies to empirically compare our method with the traditional Lasso method (). In the experiment, we designed two simulation scenarios on different network scales. The first simulated network is a small network with 40 nodes, an average node degree of 4, a maximum degree of 6. The 80 (40*4/2) edges were randomly assigned to the 780 (40*39/2) node pairs with the limit that the maximum node degree is not exceeded. According to this network structure, we simulate its associated gene-expression datasets similar to others (). Basically, we first constructed a positive definite partial correlation matrix P based on the simulated network. Then the microarray gene expression data were simulated from a standard multivariate normal distribution with correlation structure derived from P with each gene having 10, 100 and 200 replicates so that we could further investigate the effect of sample size on the performance of our method. Our second simulation scenario has a larger network with 300 nodes and 900 edges, an average degree of 6, a maximum degree of 12. Each gene was simulated with 10, 100 and 200 replicates. We first screened the optimal value of 1 using both BIC and mBIC criteria to compare their effectiveness on the original Lasso performance. To accommodate the model complexity at different network scales, we set the q value of mBIC score to 2 and 4 in the small and large network scenarios, respectively, and evaluated these estimation results using an F-score, where F  2*Precision*Recall/ (Precision  Recall). Here precision is the proportion of prediction results that are true positives, and recall is the proportion of true positives that are predicted, also known as the true positive rate. The F-score can be interpreted as a weighted average of the precision and recall, and reaches its best value at 1 and worst score at 0. We reported its average and standard error based on 100 simulated datasets for each scenario. As shown in, if the simulation scenario was in the n4p setting (e.g. p  40, n  100 and 200), it possessed the same optimal 1 values based on BIC and mBIC screening, and their performance evaluated by the F-score was identical. However, in the p4n setting, Lasso with BIC reached its optimal 1 value with severe network sparsity, whereas Lasso with mBIC led to a larger number of true edges in the identified network and a higher F-score. The results demonstrated the effectiveness of our mBIC in addressing the problem of data underfitting, especially in the scenarios of larger networks with smaller sample sizes. In real situations, the true underlying network is only partially known in our prior knowledge and is mixed with spurious edges. To investigate the performance of our pLasso method with imperfect prior information, we have simulated prior information with different precision levels varying from 0.1 to 1.0. The total number of edges in the prior data was set equal to the number of edges in the true underlying network. Therefore, a precision level of 0.1 indicates that 10% of the edges in prior are true edges, whereas the other 90% are spurious ones, and a precision level of 1.0 indicates a perfect prior with all true edges included. To incorporate the prior information, the network recovery method pLasso was implemented to search over a sequence of m from 0 to 1.2 with an increment of 0.1 to get the optimal 2 , where 2  * 1. The optimal 2 value was obtained when the minimum pBIC score was achieved. The parameter 1 used in pLasso was set the same as that in the original Lasso approach based on the mBIC criterion. Results indemonstrated that in all simulation scenarios, combining prior knowledge with higher precision in pLasso led to a higher F-score. Nevertheless, we found F-scores from pLasso were consistently higher than those from a traditional Lasso method. Even when the precision of the prior was as low as 0.1, pLasso achieved an F-score comparable with or slightly higher than the Lasso method for all the simulation scenarios. Obviously, the precision of prior knowledge is important in determining the optimal value of 2 , as defined in the Equation (11), and thus affects the performance of pLasso. As shown in the Supplementary Table S1, the lower precision of prior knowledge, the larger value of 2 will be obtained, indicating the penalty on the prior is large. Particularly, when only 10% of edges in the prior were true edges (precision level is 0.1), the optimal m based on pBIC was close to 1.0 for the simulated network, leading to a large 2. This suggested the edges in the prior information get a large penalty, thus reducing the likelihood of including low quality prior knowledge in the network inference process. On the other hand, if the precision of the prior information was high, the corresponding optimal l 2 (m) value would be low, indicating that the penalty on the prior knowledge was small. Therefore, even though we often cannot obtain perfect prior information, our approach helps to distinguish the true edges from the spurious ones, and outperforms a traditional Lasso method that neglects prior information.also demonstrated pLasso performance under different simulation scenarios, including different network sizes (p) and sample sizes (n). Performance is affected by both factors. In the simulation scenarios where n4p, the traditional Lasso itself was able to achieve an optimal performance with a high F-score (0.69 and 0.80 for p  40, n  100 and 200, respectively).With the pLasso method, a relatively large value of l 2 (m) was selected, which restricted the addition of edges present in the prior, and the overall performance did not significantly improve unless the precision of the prior was high (Supplementary). On the other hand, in the simulation scenarios where p4n, the original Lasso without incorporating prior information performed poorly because of the small sample size effect. In this setting, the advantage of our pLasso method is most obvious, as demonstrated by the performance improvement when the prior information was incorporated even if the prior precision level was low (). In our simulation studies, the precision () of prior used in pBIC score calculation was provided. However, this is often not the case in real data application. Therefore, we can only use an estimated value in the Equation (9) for choosing the optimal regularization parameter l 2 and inferring the network. To investigate the effects of on the performance of our method, we varied the estimated value of between 0 to 1 for each true value of (0.1, 0.3, 0.6 and 0.9). It was demonstrated that in the large network of 300 genes with each gene having 100 samples, the performance was affected in the extreme case, if we estimated the precision to be 1 while the true precision was only 0.1. However, if the estimated was within a reasonable small range of the true values, our method performance was relatively robust to the selection of estimated (). This conclusion was demonstrated to be valid in other simulation scenarios as well (Supplementary Tables S2 and S3).
APPLICATION TO ANALYSIS OF CANCER GENE EXPRESSION DATA
Breast cancer dataIn the analysis of breast cancer data, our interest is to investigate the gene regulatory networks of two types of breast cancer patients, the metastasis-free group and the group with metastases. Because the performance of Lasso and pLasso are sensitive to the sample size, we only used 107 of 179 metastasis-free patients so that the sample size of the metastasis-free group is the same as that of the patients with metastases. We used a prior gene network compiled from the KEGG database and the PC web resource, which yielded a network with 11 211 genes and 97 128 edges. To make the computation less intensive, we only applied our method to the set of genes included in our prior knowledge. In the experiment, mBIC with a q value of 5 was used to search over the optimal 1 value based on the observation that the node degree is on the order of 2 to 10 edges per node (). With traditional Lasso method, the inferred network from patients with metastases had 21 360 edges. For the pLasso setting, we set the precision of the prior knowledge to 0.6, as we expect that 6070% of the edges present in the prior knowledge would align with the interactions in the true network corresponding to breast cancer samples (). Both patient groups resulted in networks with similar number of edges. In the groups of patients with metastases, we inferred a network with 5187 genes and 29 821 edges, whereas the metastasis-free patient group yielded a network with 5106 genes and 29 364 edges.gives an example showing the difference between the inferred networks from the Lasso and pLasso approaches in patients with metastases. The metastatic progression of breast cancer is directly caused by the disregulation of numerous cellular signaling pathways. The mitotic checkpoint serine/threonine protein kinase BUB1 beta (BUB1B), has been known to be essential in the mitotic checkpoint during normal mitosis progression. Recently, an analysis on multiple public datasets of gene expression discovered that BUB1B is associated with early distant metastases in breast cancer (). Here we took BUB1B and its neighbors to exemplify the inferred network structure difference in breast cancer patients with metastases (). In this group of patients, BUB1B possessed a higher node degree in the pLasso-inferred network (34) than that in the Lasso-inferred network (19). We found 26 of 42 edges present in the prior knowledge were included in the pLasso-inferred network, whereas only 7 edges in the prior were recovered in the Lasso-inferred network. As expected, one effect of incorporating prior knowledge is the inclusion of more edges from the prior. In addition to this effect, because of the nature of Lasso's linear regression, addition of edges from the prior will yield information on the conditional independence between other edges. This could trigger the elimination of spurious edges in the estimated network, as seen in this application, where we found 4 edges inferred by the Lasso method were not present in the network inferred by the pLasso (). To evaluate the performance of our method, we examined the 100 hub genes having most neighbors in the inferred network of patients showing distant metastasis, but not in the other group of metastasis-free patients. Among the 214 lymphnode-negative breast cancer patients we used to construct the gene networks, 107 showed evidence of distant metastasis and were considered as failure in our distant-metastasis-free survival analysis. For each of the hub genes we investigated, we divided the patients into two equal groups based on their expression values of the hub genes: the high-expression group and the low-expression group. We expected that for some of these hubs, the two groups would exhibit significant differences in their distant metastasis-free survival outcome. To test this hypothesis, we used the 'Survival' package in R to calculate the KaplanMeier survival curves. For each hub, its statistical significance was determined by controlling the false discovery rate at 0.2 with theBenjamini and Hochberg multiple testing procedure for the Pvalues obtained from log-rank tests (). Based on this significance criterion, we found that the gene expression values of 18% of hubs were significantly associated with breast cancer patient outcomes. For the networks inferred from original Lasso method, the expression values of 13% of hubs showed significant association with breast cancer outcome. As the control, only 8 AE 2% of 100 randomly selected genes demonstrated the significant association between their expression values and the breast cancer patient outcome.
Ovarian cancer dataAs we did with the breast cancer data, we used a prior gene network compiled from the KEGG database and the PC as prior knowledge in our network inference. For the pLasso setting, we also set the precision of the prior knowledge to 0.6. We investigated the gene networks of patients with progressed disease and the disease/progression-free patients. In the group of patients with progressed disease, the inferred network had 4636 genes and 25 836 edges, whereas the disease-free patient group yielded a network with 4630 genes and 25 673 edges. Disease-free survival analysis on the hub genes from the inferred networks was performed. We found 22% of hubs were significantly associated with ovarian cancer disease-free survival outcome (FDR correct q50.2). As a comparison, only 18% the hubs obtained from the original Lasso method and 5 AE 2% random genes demonstrated significant association between their expression values and the ovarian cancer survival outcome.
Comparison with other methodsGiven the clear association between a subset of inferred network hubs with prognosis for both breast cancer patients and ovarian cancer patients, we further determined if a list of selected gene hubs can be used to predict survival outcome and compared their performance with those obtained from other methods that were based on genome-wide expression data alone. As described in Section 2.5, we calculated the risk score for each patient based on the selected genes. The patients were then divided into two groups based on their risk scores. KaplanMeier survival analyses on two patient groups were performed and showed the selected genes from the breast cancer and the ovarian cancer networks inferred by the pLasso method were significantly associatedwith survival outcome in their corresponding validation datasets (). The univariate Cox proportional analysis of the gene signatures identified from different methods for survival outcome and the predictive power of these genes in the validation dataset were compared and summarized in. It was demonstrated that the genes selected from our pLasso method yielded the highest sensitivity (0.81 and 0.69 for breast cancer and ovarian cancer analysis, respectively) among others at a comparable specificity level. We should also note that, whereas the pLasso method effectively identified individual genes with significant predictive power for survival outcome, it also provided information on gene network topology and the relationship among genes. Our pLasso method is effective in inferring clinically significant networks, as demonstrated by the predictive power of the network hubs and their significant association with patients' prognosis. We also investigated the overlap between the gene signatures from pLasso with those previously identified. We found only 4 and 5 genes overlapped with the 76-gene signature and the 193-gene signature corresponding to breast cancer and ovarian cancer, respectively. It indicated that the pLasso method was effective in identifying novel genes that can serve as potential markers for prognosis prediction.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONInferring gene networks in a high-dimensional data framework is never a trivial problem. Particularly, the noise inherent in the measurements always dampens the power of making inferences on a genome scale. Therefore, using only gene expression data will not likely be sufficient. Recent techniques attempt to integrate additional data sources or introduce constraints to help guide the inference procedure. Motivated by the application of incorporating prior pathway and network structure information into the analysis of genomic data, we have taken advantage of the Lasso method and its apparent Bayesian perspective in the Gaussian graphic framework. Taking into account that validated gene interactions in prior should occur at a much higher frequency compared with undocumented interactions in real networks, we partition edges in a graphical model into two subsetsa known gene interaction group and an unknown gene interaction group, and then assign the former group with a smaller regularization parameter in Lasso regression compared with the other group. Implemented in neighborhood selection with Lasso, the proposed method was shown to have better performance in recovering network structures compared with the traditional Lasso in our simulated studies and real data analysis. Lasso is a model selection method shown to be consistent in variable selection under certain conditions (). Its consistency is highly dependent on the right choice of the penalty parameter. In practical implementation, the penalty parameter is typically tuned to achieve optimal prediction accuracy based on cross-validation (CV). However, this procedure was shown not to be consistent in terms of variable selection, with a potential overfitting effect in the resulting model (). This problem will be vastly exaggerated when the sparsity of the network is assumed in the domain of biological network inference. On the other hand, BIC is a well-known model selection criterion, which tends to favor parsimonious models. The comparison of CV and BIC for optimal regularized parameter selection in network inference demonstrated that BIC preferentially resulted in sparse networks and had less overfitting effect than CV (Supplementary). The results are consistent with those in the previous study (). We also defined a BIC score that incorporated our prior knowledge on network sparsity to address the network over sparsity issue of the original BIC, especially in the setting of large networks with small sample sizes (n5p). mBIC was shown to have less overfitting effect than CV, while consistently outperforming CV in identifying true network edges (Supplementary). Compared with a CVbased method, the modified form of BIC presents advantages of considering the data fitting during model selection, being more straightforward to compute and more easily to incorporate prior knowledge, and providing better performance in network inference. Therefore, BIC and its modified forms were adopted in our study to select the optimal regularization parameter.Note: The patient samples in the validation datasets were classified into two groups based on the selected genes. P, P-value of Cox analysis. HR, Hazard Ratio.. KaplanMeier analysis for metastasis-free survival (breast cancer) and disease-free survival (ovarian cancer) on independent validation datasets. Patients were divided into two groups based on their risk scores: the high-risk group (black) and the low-risk group (red)Our proposed pLasso method is conceptually analogous to some other approaches that use a mixture of prior distributions to represent the gene interactions absent and present in the prior knowledge, respectively (). However, our approach is different in that we took advantage of the Bayesian perspective of the lasso procedure and modeled the Laplacian prior distributions for the regression coefficients between genes by specifying different values of the regularized parameter in lasso penalty terms. Although the importance of incorporating prior knowledge into analysis has been widely recognized, there seems to be few studies in using the lasso penalty terms to differentiate the gene interactions absent and present in the prior knowledge. Out study is also clearly different from other approaches in terms of its application domain. It is performed in the framework of Gaussian graphical model for inferring a genome-wide gene association network, whereas most other applications incorporating prior information focused on classification analysis (, b), detecting differential gene expression () or identifying transcription factor targets in a small scale (). In our real data analysis, we used the prior knowledge compiled from the KEGG database and the PC web resource. Both KEGG and PC represent an incomplete recapitulation of the true underlying network and may contain some irrelevant interactions. To improve the level of completeness of the prior knowledge, it is natural to combine the information from both resources for network inference. The quality of the prior is another contributing factor to the method performance. Taking into account the relative robustness of our method to the estimated precision level of the prior (), we used the same precision rates in the application of KEGG and PC prior information. It was demonstrated that using the combined prior information from PC and KEGG yielded a network with more genes and edges than using either the PC or KEGG alone, while achieving better performance in predicting clinical outcome in both the breast cancer and the ovarian cancer datasets (Supplementary). It was also observed when using KEGG alone as the prior, the performance of the pLasso was not as good as that using PC alone or using the combined prior. These results suggest the coverage of prior knowledge is a more significant contributing factor to the method performance than the quality in this real data application. Based on these results, it is expected the pLasso method lends itself a potential improvement of performance as our knowledge of pathways accumulates over time and an increasing amount of prior knowledge gets incorporated into the analysis.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Z.Wang et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Incorporating prior knowledge into Gene Network Study at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
