Motivation: Most existing methods for predicting causal disease genes rely on specific type of evidence, and are therefore limited in terms of applicability. More often than not, the type of evidence available for diseases varies—for example, we may know linked genes, keywords associated with the disease obtained by mining text, or co-occurrence of disease symptoms in patients. Similarly, the type of evidence available for genes varies—for example, specific micro-array probes convey information only for certain sets of genes. In this article, we apply a novel matrix-completion method called Inductive Matrix Completion to the problem of predicting gene-disease associations ; it combines multiple types of evidence (features) for diseases and genes to learn latent factors that explain the observed gene–dis-ease associations. We construct features from different biological sources such as microarray expression data and disease-related text-ual data. A crucial advantage of the method is that it is inductive; it can be applied to diseases not seen at training time, unlike traditional matrix-completion approaches and network-based inference methods that are transductive. Results: Comparison with state-of-the-art methods on diseases from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database shows that the proposed approach is substantially better—it has close to one-in-four chance of recovering a true association in the top 100 predictions , compared to the recently proposed CATAPULT method (second best) that has 515% chance. We demonstrate that the inductive method is particularly effective for a query disease with no previously known gene associations, and for predicting novel genes, i.e. genes that are previously not linked to diseases. Thus the method is capable of predicting novel genes even for well-characterized diseases. We also validate the novelty of predictions by evaluating the method on recently reported OMIM associations and on associations recently reported in the literature. Availability: Source code and datasets can be downloaded from
INTRODUCTIONIn silico prioritization of disease genes is an important step towards discovering causal genes and understanding genetic disorders. Many diseasegene prioritization tools have been developed in the last decade, some generic and some disease-class specific. Due to the inherent difficulty and latency in human genedisease studies, very few reliable associations are reported to public databases such as the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) and the Genetic Association Database (). Therefore, exploiting multiple auxiliary sources of data is essential for predicting genes related to polygenic traits, and many existing methods have been developed for this purpose. For example, a popular family of network-based methods include CIPHER (), GeneWalker (K  ohler et al., 2008), Prince (), RWRH () and CATAPULT (). These methods exploit biological networks such as the functional gene interactions network and disease similarity network; they infer genedisease connections by using random walk procedures on different biological networks or computing a similarity measure between nodes. The problem of predicting genedisease associations can be thought of as analogous to designing a recommender system where the goal is to predict the 'preference' that a user (gene) would give to an item (disease). An important formulation used in recommender systems such as the Netflix movie recommendations () is matrix completion, where the problem is to 'complete' the user-item preference matrix given a sample of observed preferences. The standard matrix completion techniques for recovering the user-item preference matrix assume that the true underlying matrix is low-rank. To the best of our knowledge, there is no existing successful application of the matrix completion approach to recovering the genedisease associations matrix. Two reasons are the extreme sparsity of the associations matrix and the lack of 'negative' associations. Also, all matrix completion approaches suffer from the cold-start problem, that of making predictions for a new user (see Section 2). Our approach in this article is based on matrix completion and is best motivated by the limitations of the existing methods discussed next. Most of the aforementioned methods typically rely on a seed or candidate set of genes already linked to the query disease and therefore fail to make predictions for a new disease of interest, for which there are no gene linkage studies yet; a few make reasonable predictions if we could compute some similarity measure with existing diseases on which the methods were trained. However, more often than not, the type of evidence available for diseases of interest variesfor example, we may know already linked genes, keywords associated with the disease obtained by mining text, or co-occurrence of disease symptoms in patients. Methods relying on a specific type of evidence (such as disease similarities) cannot be applied to a query disease with a different type of evidence (say keywords associated with the disease). The same is true for the type of evidence available for genes. Network-based methods cannot predict a gene that is not connected to any other node in the network. On the other hand, methods that exploit gene-expression profiles, functional annotations and signaling pathways exist but have primarily *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com been developed for specific disease-classes, and therefore fall short in generalizing to new diseases. It is imperative that complementary types of evidence be merged to provide better coverage and generalization than any single data source. The survey article by Piro and Di Cunto (2012) discusses the following different types of evidence used by prioritization tools: text-mining of biomedical literature, functional annotations, pathways and ontologies, phenotype relationships, intrinsic gene properties, sequence data, protein protein interactions, regulatory information, orthologous relationships and gene expression information. In this article, we propose a framework that can seamlessly integrate features from the aforementioned data sources. Our approach involves two steps. First, we derive features for diseases and genes from multiple sources. Next, we incorporate the features while trying to learn genedisease associations in a novel inductive matrix completion (IMC) approach [recently developed and theoretically analyzed by Jain and. The entries of the associations matrix are assumed to be generated by applying the corresponding gene and disease feature vectors on an unknown low-rank matrix Z. The parameter matrix Z is learnt using a training set of OMIM genedisease associations, and predictions for a disease are obtained as a function of the features of all genes and the feature vector for the disease. We evaluate our proposed approach through comprehensive experiments and demonstrate substantial increase in the quality of predictions compared to state-of-the-art methods. Our findings and contributions are summarized below.(1) Integrating diverse feature sets of genes and diseases obtained through a wealth of publicly available data overcomes extreme sparsity in the genedisease associations data.(2) Our approach is a novel application of the inductive matrix completion method; it can be applied to diseases not seen at training time, unlike traditional matrix completion approaches and other network-based inference methods that are transductive.The approach is particularly effective for a query disease with no previously known gene associations, and for predicting novel genes, i.e. genes that are previously not linked to diseases, thus capable of making novel predictions even for well-characterized diseases.(4) Comparison with state-of-the-art methods on OMIM diseases shows the superiority of the inductive method. We also validate the novelty of predictions by evaluating the method on recently discovered gene associations recorded in the OMIM database, as well as on associations recently reported in the literature curated by B  ornigen et al.We begin by discussing the limitations of traditional matrix completion techniques, motivating our approach and describing the inductive method in Section 2. In Section 3, we describe our experimental datasets and construction of gene and disease features. Extensive quantitative analysis of the new approach is presented in Section 4, and conclusions are presented in Section 5.
Related workIn the past two decades, a number of tools have been developed for prioritizing disease genes, leveraging the advances in statistical and machine learning techniques. We refer the reader to the excellent survey articles by Moreau and Tranchevent (2012) and by Piro and Di Cunto (2012) for a near-comprehensive treatment of different classes of methods, contexts in which they are bestsuited and what sources of data they integrate. Recently, predicting genedisease links based on network analysis has become popular (). These methods work by determining similarity between candidate gene and disease nodes in heterogeneous networks composed of different biological networks. In particular, the recently proposed CATAPULT framework and Katz on the heterogeneous network () integrate different biological networks and phenotypes from multiple other species such as mouse and fly. The main drawbacks of network-based methods are that they are limited to the genes that belong to the network and often are not capable of making predictions for new diseases. In contrast, our proposed approach is inductive, and can integrate multiple diverse sources of data in the form of features, including the different biological networks. Sequence-based features have been employed for prioritizing disease genes by L opez-Bigas and Ouzounis (2004) and by. However, these methods do not use any prior knowledge about the disease and prioritize genes a priori.show that high-throughput gene-expression data can predict gene function through the 'guilt by association' principle and exploit it to find new candidate genes for many OMIM diseases. On the other hand, methods like CATAPULT, TOPPGENE () and Xu and Li (2006) use topological network features. Our proposed approach seamlessly integrates different types of features and therefore provides better generalization to new diseases and new types of evidence.
INDUCTIVE METHODOur goal is to predict potential genes for a given disease of interest. We form the genedisease associations matrix P 2 R NgNd ; where each row corresponds to a gene (total number of genes is N g ), and each column corresponds to a disease (total number of training diseases is N d ), such that P ij = 1 if gene i is linked to disease j and 0 if the relationship is unobserved. Our approach is based on matrix completion, which is one of the most successful and well-studied techniques for recommender systems. Given a sample of observed entries W from a true underlying matrix M 2 R mn ; the goal is to estimate missing entries under additional assumptions on the structure of the matrix. The most common assumption is that the matrix is low-rank, i.e. M = WH T , where W 2 R Ngk and H 2 R Ndk are of rank k ( m, n. Applying the standard low-rank model on the genedisease associations matrix P % WH T , we could solve the following optimization problem:where is a regularization parameter, W i and H j denote the latent factor for the i-th gene and the j-th disease, respectively. We want to learn factors W 2 R Ngk and H 2 R Ndk such that the estimated values are i61
Inductive Matrix Completionclose to the observed entries, and the rank of WH T is small. The gene disease association matrix P is typically very sparse. For example, in our dataset consisting of diseases from the OMIM database, most columns (diseases) have just one known entry, and many rows (genes) have no known entries.illustrates why using traditional matrix completion Equation (1) on P is not a good ideait fails to predict on rows and columns with no known entries. Of course, to make meaningful predictions, we would need more information about genes and diseases that have no associations data. Different data sources provide evidence for genes and diseases: textmining of biomedical literature, functional annotations, phenotype relationships, proteinprotein interactions, regulatory information, orthologous phenotypes in other species and gene-expression information. The question we ask here is if we can directly use the rich set of features for genes and diseases, for the prioritization task. One na ve way is to solve a regression problem associated with each disease independently, where the gene features form the covariates and associations for the disease are the responses. This is called single-task learning. The fundamental problem here is that most diseases do not have enough training examples. In contrast, we need a multi-task learning approach, as we would expect closely related diseases to have similar predictions. The idea is to learn gene associations for multiple diseases jointly. We formulate a multi-label learning problem, where each gene is an example and each disease is a label or a task, and the goal is to jointly learn associations for all diseases. The recently developed framework () for multi-label learning formulates the problem as that of learning a lowrank linear model Z 2 R dL ; where each example (gene) is represented by d features and has up to L labels (diseases). If x 2 R d denotes the feature vector for a gene, then the corresponding prediction for disease j is given by x T Z j ; where Z j is the j-th column of Z. Two key observations given below are in order.(1) In typical multi-label problems arising in machine learning applications [considered, for example, by, the set of labels is usually fixed and when presented a new example we would want to predict which of the labels are most relevant. In the case of genedisease associations, as discussed earlier, it would be desirable to make predictions for a new diseasefor example, one that was not previously known to be a polygenic disorder. But this is not possible in the standard multi-label formulation because it is transductivethe labels are fixed during the training phase, and predictions on new labels are not possible.(2) On the other hand, it would be helpful to construct features from other auxiliary sources such as text articles on diseases, studies on patients, symptoms, etc. Relationships (such as co-occurrences) with other existing polygenic traits also make viable biological features. We would want to be able to exploit available information to make informed predictions on diseases.To this end, we adopt the recently developed IMC method () for the task of learning genedisease associations. The method can be interpreted as a generalization of the transductive multi-label learning formulation. IMC assumes that the associations matrix is generated by applying feature vectors associated with its row as well as column entities to a low-rank matrix Z. The goal is to recover Z using observations from P. The idea is illustrated in. Let x i 2 R fg denote the feature vector for gene i, and y j 2 R fd denote the feature vector for disease j. Let X 2 R Ngfg denote the training feature matrix of N g genes, where the i-th row is the gene feature vector x i , and let Y 2 R Ndfd denote the training feature matrix of N d diseases, where the ith row is the disease feature vector y i. The IMC problem is to recover a low-rank matrix Z 2 R fgfd using the observed entries from the gene disease association matrix P. Denote the set of observed entries (i.e. training genedisease associations) by W. The entry P ij of the matrix is modeled as P ij =x T i Zy j and the goal is to learn Z using the observed entries W. Z is of the form Z = WH T , where W 2 R fgk and H 2 R fdk ; and k is small. The low-rank constraint on Z is NP-hard to solve. The standard relaxation of the rank constraint is the trace norm, i.e. sum of singular values. Minimizing the trace-norm of Z = WH T is equivalent to minimizing 1 2 kWk 2 F +kHk 2 F : The factors W and H are obtained as solutions to the following optimization problem:The loss function ' penalizes the deviation of estimated entries from the observations. A common choice for loss function is the squared loss function given by ' sq a; b=a  b 2 : The regularization parameter trades off accrued losses on observed entries and the trace-norm constraint. Given a new disease j 0 that was not a part of the training data, the predictions P ij 0 can be computed for all genes i as long as we have feature vector y j 0 : Typically, when the number of features is very large, a small value of k implies that the number of parameters to be learnt is much smaller than f g  f d. Note that in the standard matrix completion, we would learn (N g + N d )  k parameters, but in IMC the number of parameters is independent of the number of genes or diseases, but depends only on the number of gene and disease features.
Principal components as featuresWe perform dimensionality reduction on different types of data sources to obtain robust gene and disease features. Most of our data sources are in the form of networks represented by adjacency matrices. One way to obtain real-valued features for nodes is to look at the principal components of the adjacency matrices. In particular, we use the leading eigenvectors of the adjacency matrix as latent features. For example, consider the gene-interactions network G of size N g  N g. Let U 2 R Ngm denote the matrix of eigenvectors corresponding to the top m eigenvalues of G. Now, the i-th row of U gives m latent features for gene i. We perform PCA (principal components analysis) on the microarray expression and word-count data to obtain low-dimensional informative features for genes and diseases, respectively. We discuss data sources and feature extraction in detail in Section 3.
OptimizationThe objective function in Equation (2) is non-convex. We adapt the LEML solver provided byfor solving Equation (2) since the traditional multi-label learning problem can be thought of a special case ofwhere the disease feature matrix Y is set to the identity matrix of size N d. The solver uses alternating minimization (fix W and solve for H and vice versa) to optimize Equation (2). If the loss function ' is convex, then the objective function becomes convex when W or H is fixed. The resulting convex problem in one variable (W or H) is solved using the Conjugate Gradient iterative procedure. Common choices of loss function include squared loss, logistic loss ' log a; b=log 1+e ab  and squared-hinge loss ' sqhinge a; b=max 0; 1  ab 2 : Notethat the set W contains only positive (known genedisease) associations. However, the number of positive associations typically is very small. In many machine-learning applications, we also have access to negative examples. Unfortunately, we do not have any negative examples (i.e. absence of a genedisease connection) for our task. Common strategies to cope with the situation are treating all unknowns as negative associations, randomly sampling negative associations from unknowns, or using label-dependent costs ().
Computational efficiencyComputational cost of solving the optimization problem potentially differs with the choice of the loss function. In our experiments, we use squared loss in the objective, and treat missing values as zeros. For squared loss with fully observed labels, we can essentially use the Algorithm 2 in, which yields a fast procedure for solving Equation (2). In particular, the time taken per alternating minimization step is OnnzP+N g f g +N d f d k 2 T; where nnz(P) denotes the number of non-zeros in P, and T is a small constant. In our experiments, f d , f g and k are very small (few hundreds), and the alternating minimization procedure converges in 510 iterations (takes under 2 min on average on a 2.8 GHz, 8-core machine).
DATASET AND FEATURES
OMIM associationsWe obtained human genedisease associations data from the OMIM project. OMIM phenotypes have become the standard data set for the evaluation of prediction of genedisease associations (;). For quantitative evaluation (using 3-fold cross-validation discussed in Section 4.1), we use the OMIM data used in. There are 3209 diseases with at least one known gene association and 3954 genedisease associations (i.e. the total number of non-zeros in the genedisease associations matrix). The matrix is extremely sparse, with 490% of the columns with exactly one non-zero entry and $75% of the rows with no non-zero entries. To compare different gene prioritization methods on the novelty of predictions (see Section 4.7), we use more recently reported associations in the OMIM database (reported between August 2011 and November 2013).
Gene featuresMicroarray measurements of gene-expression levels in different tissue samples, obtained from BioGPS (www.biogps.org) and Connectivity Map (www.broadinstitute.org/cmap), serve as the first source of the gene features. In particular, each feature corresponds to a gene-expression level in a sample of a given cell type. Typically, microarray measurements are given for 'probes' (that encode possibly multiple genes). If a probe involves more than a single gene, then the probe is discardedthus favoring gene-specific probes. If a gene is part of many such probes, then the measurements are averaged across probes. There are some genes for which we do not have any measurements, and hence no features are available for those genes. In total, there are 4536 features for each of the 8755 genes. We observe that the features are highly correlated. This is understandable as samples of same cell type from two different individuals (as in the case of BioGPS features) tend to have similar gene-expression profiles. In our experiments, we project the data to a lower dimensional space. In particular, we use PCA that performs a linear mapping of the data onto the lower dimensional space spanned by the leading 100 eigenvectors of the covariance matrix, maximizing the variance of the data in the new representation. The second source of gene features is the functional interaction data between genes. HumanNet () is a large-scale functional gene network which incorporates multiple datasets, including mRNA expression, proteinprotein interactions, protein complex data and comparative genomics (but not disease or phenotype data). HumanNet contains 21 different data sources, which are combined into one integrated network using a regularized regression scheme trained on GO pathways. HumanNet has been shown to be very useful for the gene-prioritization task (). We obtain latent graph features for genes from HumanNet given by the leading 100 eigenvectors of the network., we construct gene and disease features using different sources. Then, we perform IMC using row and column features. The shaded region in the P matrix corresponds to genes or diseases with at least one known association i63
Inductive Matrix CompletionThe third source of gene features arises from gene orthology genephenotype associations of other species that are relatively richer compared to genedisease studies in humans. We use phenotypes of eight different species (), namely, plant
Disease featuresAnalogous to the use of HumanNet for obtaining latent features for genes, we extract 100 latent disease features from the disease similarity network MimMiner (). The MimMiner network has been previously used for prioritizing disease genes (). Another source of disease features we incorporate comes from the web pages for the OMIM diseases. In particular, we look at the 'Clinical Features' and 'Clinical Management' sections of the web pages that document the symptoms, medication and responses by patients, and related studies of effects of different courses of therapies. We want a representation for diseases such that two diseases that are biologically close (such as variants of the same disease) are also close in the feature space. To this end, we form the so-called term-document matrix M, where M ij gives the frequency of the term i in the web page corresponding to disease j. The term-document matrix is commonly used in text mining such as topic extraction from a corpus of documents. Often it is better to use a re-weighting scheme called tfidf (term frequencyinverse document frequency): M ij is offset by the frequency of the word i in the entire collection of documents. This helps filtering out common words. After applying the tfidf scheme, we trim the feature space by purging the most common (like 'dose', 'day', 'regimen' that are not informative) and very rare words (specific to a disease such as 'vicriviroc' that appears only in the OMIM page for Susceptibility to Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type I phenotype). The resulting feature space for diseases is still high dimensional ($20 000 words). We reduce the dimensionality of the feature space using PCA as in the case of microarray gene features, retaining the top 100 principal components.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Evaluation methodsTo quantitatively evaluate our approach and to compare to the state-of-the-art diseasegene-prioritization methods, we measure the recovery of genes using a cross-validation strategy similar to the one used by Mordelet and Vert (2011) and byon OMIM data. We split the known genedisease pairs into three equally sized groups. We hide the associations in one group and run the methods on the remaining associations, repeating three times to ensure that each group is hidden exactly once. For each disease in our dataset, we order all the genes by how strongly the method predicts them to be associated with the disease. Finally, for every genedisease pair (g, d) in the hidden group we record the rank of the gene g in the list associated with disease d. We use the cumulative distribution of the ranks as a measure for comparing the performances of different methods, i.e. the probability that the rank (at which hidden genedisease pair is retrieved) is less than a threshold r. The motivation for using this performance measure is to distinguish methods based on the probability of recovering a true association in the top-r predictions for a given disease. A small value of r is desired by biologists; Here, we report results for r 100. Recent methods including ProDiGe () and CATAPULT () have adopted this performance measure for evaluation. We are also interested in studying the ability of our method to correctly identify associations between diseases and genes that are less well studied. Singhpropose validation on singleton genes, i.e. genes with only one known association in the dataset but none in the training, for highlighting methods that discover novel genes. We employ this validation strategy in Section 4.5. In Section 4.6, we study how different methods perform on the task of predicting genes for a new disease, i.e. diseases for which there are no known associations at the training time. Assessing the novelty of predictions is often challenging. It is common to hand-pick biologically relevant genes from the top few predictions and corroborate with findings in the existing literature, which is then sometimes followed by wet-lab experiments. Here, we choose to use the unbiased evaluation scheme adopted by B  ornigen et al.
Baselines and competitive methodsA natural baseline for our proposed approach is the standard matrix completion on the genedisease associations matrix P given in Equation (1), i.e. IMC with the gene feature matrix X and the disease feature matrix Y set to identity matrices of appropriate sizes. We compare to two recently proposed methods that rely on combining the different biological networks we use to derive latent features from: the gene-interactions network, the disease similarity network and the bipartite genephenotype associations networks of multiple species. We also consider a stronger baseline methodmatrix completion on a heterogeneous network that is composed of the aforementioned biological networks. Finally, we compare to the LEML method (), which is the transductive equivalent of IMC, when there are no disease features. Below, we describe the methods in more detail: 1. CATAPULT (): Train a bagging support vector machine classifier over genedisease pairs; i64 N.Natarajan and I.S.Dhillon each genedisease pair is represented by features corresponding to the number of paths of increasing lengths in the combined network given by:where P includes the genedisease associations matrix P and phenotypes of other species discussed in Section 3.2, and Q is set to the disease similarity matrix Q corresponding to human disease nodes and 0 elsewhere. This method was shown to outperform a number of graphbased inference methods such as PRINCE (), RWRH () and ProDiGe (). 2. Katz on the combined network (): The method computes similarities between a pair of nodes based on how many paths of different lengths connect the pair. The similarity between nodes i and j in the combined network Equation (3) is given by:where C l ij gives the number of paths of length l connecting nodes i and j in the network C. Typically, a small value of k is used (node similarity is better captured by shorter paths). Letting k = 3, we can write the matrix of scores between gene and disease nodes as:The parameter (typically set to a small value like 0.01) dampens the contribution from paths of higher lengths. This method is closely related to RWRH (). 3. Matrix completion on the combined network: We consider matrix completion on the combined network C instead of the bipartite network P; the low-rank model C % WH T suggests that the factors W and H should explain not only the genedisease associations, but also the observed gene interactions, other species phenotypes and disease similarities. Letting the size of the matrix C to be N  N, the optimization problem we solve is:A large value of biases the estimation of the unobserved entries in the different biological networks comprising C toward 0 (reflecting the assumption that the true underlying biological networks are sparse). Of course, setting = 0 corresponds to applying the standard matrix completion Equation (1) on C. In our experiments, we set = 0.2 (the best value chosen by cross-validation). in complementary information, helps improve the predictive performance.
Effect of rank kThe key parameter in IMC is k, the rank of the model matrix Z 2 R 300200 : The effect of rank k on the performance of the method is shown in. In general, we observe that performance increases with k. More importantly, a small rank k = 30 yields a competitive performancemuch better than CATAPULT as compared with. This indicates the success of multi-task learning approach that exploits correlations between multiple diseases and between multiple genes. At k = 100 IMC performs as good as the effective full rank k = 200. For comparison with competitive methods, we use k = 200 in our experiments.
Singleton genesOne problem that plagues the evaluation of prioritization methods are the 'popular' genes. Genes that are well-connected tend to be predicted more often and therefore tend to yield inflated recall rates. To this end, we adopt the following strategy used in: We look at singleton genes, i.e. genes that have only one association in the data, and evaluate the methods on how highly the corresponding gene associations are ranked. Note that the genes have no known associations at training time, and therefore the ability of a method to predict singleton gene associations also attests to the novelty of predictions. The results are shown in. We see that using additional sources like the biological networks directly are helpful in the case of Katz and matrix completion on C and to lesser extent in case of CATAPULT in the top 120. IMC attains a significant increase in the performance around top 50100 predictions because it uses additional microarray features.
Induction on new diseasesNext, we turn to an important aspect of evaluation of the proposed methodability to make predictions for a new disease. By new disease, we mean a disease for which there are no existing gene associations. However, the features for the new disease may be available. For evaluation purposes, we look at the CDF of ranks of genes associated to diseases for which no gene associations were available at the training time (corresponding to columns with no known entries).shows how different methods perform on the task. The significance of using disease features cannot be emphasized moreIMC is substantially better than all other methods. Note that the baseline matrix completion is missing from the plot, as it cannot make predictions for diseases with no known entries.(we use the expanded set of OMIM phenotypes in our experiments; six of the 42 associations correspond to collapsed phenotypes such as 'Complex heart defect' which can potentially be associated with many phenotypes in our dataset, and therefore we choose to exclude them from evaluation). Of the 36 associations, six associations correspond to six new diseases that are not a part of our training data. It has been a year since the paper was published, so we supplement the data by including 84 recent associations added to the OMIM database between. Evaluating novelty with singleton genes and induction on new diseases. The methods are evaluated in two extreme settings: rows with no known entries (top panel) and columns with no known entries (bottom panel). (A) While using additional sources like the biological networks directly are helpful in the case of Katz and Matrix completion on C, we see a significant increase in the performance around top 50100 predictions by also using microarray features (solid black). (B) The significance of using disease features is distinct. Note that the baseline matrix completion is missing from both the panels as it cannot make predictions for rows or columns with no known entries (see Section 2). Evaluating methods on 120 newly discovered associations. The plot shows empirical cumulative distribution function of the ranks of recently discovered associations for a few diseases (see Section 4.7). We see that IMC outperforms all the methods for most values of r, and CATAPULT is competitive. Note that the training data consists of many more associations than that of, and partly explains the noticeable increase in performance of all methods
i67
Inductive Matrix Completionobserve that our method recovers the hidden gene MUTYH in the top-100 predictions but no other method does. Notably, MUTYH is also associated with the OMIM phenotype Familial Adenomatous Polyposis 2. The tfidf features for the two diseases have a high similarity (normalized inner product) which helps our method recover MUTYH for gastric cancer.
CONCLUSIONSIn this article, we have proposed a novel approach based on inductive matrix completion for prioritizing disease genes. Our approach combines complementary types of evidence which is essential for generalizing to new diseases, as no single source of data can potentially capture all relevant relations. Comprehensive quantitative analysis of the proposed approach substantiates the claim, as we observe that approaches that rely on particular sources or features (such as biological networks in case of CATAPULT or only gene features as in the case of LEML) perform significantly worse in many cases. The inductive method is not restricted to the types of features used in our experimentsnew sources of information can be incorporated easily. Typically, prioritization strategies for finding a novel gene related to an already well-characterized disease would differ from those for which limited or no prior knowledge is available. In our experiments, we find that our approach consistently performs the best on almost all types of diseases and genes, wellcharacterized or new, which makes our approach a suitable prioritization tool to use for biologists.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
. LEML (Yu et al., 2014) Implemented identical to IMC, but does not use disease features. Note that the first three methods do not use gene-or diseasespecific features such as microarray or tfidf, respectively. For all the matrix-completion-based methods (including LEML and IMC), we rank the predictions using the estimated values of the matrix (higher the estimated value P ij , more relevant is the gene i for disease j). For the IMC method (i) we construct the gene and disease features (f g = 300, f d = 200) as described in Section 3, (ii) we use squared loss in the optimization problem Equation (2), which we find to be the best-performing loss function in our experiments, and missing entries are treated as zeros in the objective function, which together with squared loss results in a fast procedure for solving Equation (2) as discussed in Section 2.3. We set = 0.2 in the optimization problem Equation (2) for both IMC and LEML. We use the best value for parameters obtained by cross-validation for all the competitive methods. 4.3 Overall performance The 3-fold cross-validation results on 3209 OMIM diseases are presented in Figure 3a. The vertical axis in the plots gives the probability that a true gene association is recovered in the top-r predictions for various r values in the horizontal axis. We observe that the proposed method IMC significantly dominates every other competitive method consistently over all r values. Our method has close to 25% chance of retrieving a true gene in the top-100 predictions for a disease, whereas even the second best performing method CATAPULT has only $15%. The three competitive methods Katz, CATAPULT and matrix completion on the combined network which use the same information, albeit in different ways, perform very similarly within the top-100 predictions. As expected, matrix completion on C performs significantly better than the baseline matrix completion. The importance of using disease features cannot be emphasized moreLEML performs significantly worse. In Figure 3b, we present precisionrecall curves for different methods. Precision is the fraction of true positives (genes) recovered in the top-r predictions for a disease. Recall is the ratio of true positives recovered in the top-r predictions to the total number of true positives for the disease in the test set. We observe a consistent ordering of curves with respect to the standard precision and recall measures. Integration of multiple informative features is important for the success of the method. However, we do see that disease features play a dominant role in the predictive power, as most of the OMIM diseases have a single known gene. We find that (data not shown in plots) features obtained from gene-interactions network are important particularly for genes that are wellconnected. Gene-expression data is highly noisy and correlated, and therefore we rely on using a few PCA features. Not all genes and diseases have all sets of features; genes that are not connected in the gene network have some microarray expression based features, and similarly diseases not connected in the disease similarity network have tfidf features. We would like to emphasize that integrating features from different sources that bring i65 Inductive Matrix Completion at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
