Motivation: microRNAs (miRNAs) are known to play an essential role in the post-transcriptional gene regulation in plants and animals. Currently, several computational approaches have been developed with a shared aim to elucidate miRNA–mRNA regulatory relationships. Although these existing computational methods discover the statistical relationships, such as correlations and associations between miRNAs and mRNAs at data level, such statistical relationships are not necessarily the real causal regulatory relationships that would ultimately provide useful insights into the causes of gene regulations. The standard method for determining causal relationships is randomized controlled perturbation experiments. In practice, however, such experiments are expensive and time consuming. Our motivation for this study is to discover the miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships from observational data. Results: We present a causality discovery-based method to uncover the causal regulatory relationship between miRNAs and mRNAs, using expression profiles of miRNAs and mRNAs without taking into consideration the previous target information. We apply this method to the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) datasets and validate the computational discoveries by a controlled biological experiment for the miR-200 family. A significant portion of the regulatory relationships discovered in data is consistent with those identified by experiments. In addition, the top genes that are causally regulated by miRNAs are highly relevant to the biological conditions of the datasets. The results indicate that the causal discovery method effectively discovers miRNA regulatory relationships in data. Although computational predictions may not completely replace intervention experiments, the accurate and reliable discoveries in data are cost effective for the design of miRNA experiments and the understanding of miRNA–mRNA regulatory relationships. Availability: The R scripts are in the Supplementary material. Contact: thuc_duy.
INTRODUCTIONmicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short ($22 nt) endogenous non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression by promoting mRNA degradation and repressing translation. They recognize target mRNAs by base pairing to complementary sequences in the 3 0-untranslated region (3 0-UTR) of the target mRNA (). miRNAs have also been observed to target genes through sites in the 5 0-UTR and sometimes in the open reading frames (). It has been demonstrated in a body of literature that miRNAs regulate a wide range of biological processes in proliferation (), metabolism (), differentiation (Esquela), development (), apoptosis (), cellular signalling () and even cancer development and progression (). Since the advent of microarray data on gene expression programs, various statistical data mining methods have been devised in recent years in an attempt to discover the miRNAmRNA regulatory relationships. This research into the regulatory relationships between miRNAs and mRNAs can be recognized in two main streams. In the first stream, researchers developed various methods to identify a group of co-expressed miRNAs and mRNAs in data. For instance,applied Bayesian network parameter learning,proposed a population-based probabilistic learning model andused a rule-based method. In the second stream, attempts were made to predict the regulatory networks of miRNAs and mRNAs for specific biological processes. Some highlights in this direction includeapplying a probabilistic graphic model adopted from the authortopic model in information retrieval,using Bayesian network learning andproposing a graphical model inspired by the correspondence latent Dirichlet allocation. These methods, although varied, all identify only the statistical relationships in the data. These relationships are either correlations or associations between the two types of variables, miRNA and mRNA. However, correlations or associations are not causality. For instance, the expression values of an miRNA *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com and an mRNA may be strongly correlated across samples, but it is not sufficient to conclude that the miRNA regulates the mRNA. The strong correlation between the miRNA and the mRNA may be a result of the mRNA regulating the miRNA, or a third molecule regulating both the miRNA and the mRNA. In this article, our ultimate goal is to discover which miRNAs causally regulate which mRNAs. A regulatory relationship between an miRNA and an mRNA means that a change in the expression level of the miRNA will result in a change in the expression level of the mRNA. Associations or correlations are not the right tools to test the causal hypothesis. Therefore, we aim to discover the causal effects of an miRNA on an mRNAs. We refer to this causal effect as miRNA causal regulatory relationship to emphasize the difference between causal discovery and statistical discovery. The gold standard method for tackling this problem is randomized control experiments. For example, we can use gene knockdown experiments to knockdown miRNAs one by one while measuring changes (i.e. causal effects) in the expression level of mRNAs. However, such experiments are time consuming, expensive and not necessarily definitive. Fortunately, with the foundation created by, the recent advances in causal discovery research have opened the door to discovering causal relationships from observational data. Instead of conducting controlled experiments, we can use do-calculus () to estimate the causal effects of a variable on other variables based on observational data. The do-calculus requires a causal structure of the variables to be given as a DAG (directed acyclic graph); however, such a structure is often unknown in reality. To bridge the gap,) proposed a method to estimate causal effects from observational data alone. The method is called intervention calculus when the DAG is absent (IDA), and it includes two main phases: (i) to learn a causal structure from observational data and (ii) to apply do-calculus to infer causal effects. Our method is based on IDA. Given the observational data of variables, IDA can capture the causal effects of the variables on one single response variable. We extend the application of IDA and build our model for multiple response variables, and then apply the model to discover the miRNA causal regulatory relationships. In our problem, miRNAs and mRNAs are nodes or variables in the model, and observational data are the expression profiles of the miRNAs and mRNAs. We can view genes as subjects and miRNAs as analogous to 'treatments', which may have causal effects on the 'responses' (i.e. expression levels) of the genes. Our aim is to measure the causal effect of each miRNA on mRNAs. Applying this approach, we tackle two drawbacks of current miRNA regulatory relationships research. First, the method discovers causal relationships between miRNAs and mRNAs, not just the statistical relationships. Second, we assume that miRNAs and mRNAs interact with each other in a complex system, for instance, an miRNA can causally regulate mRNAs as well as other miRNAs. This assumption is more reasonable than the commonly used approach that considers only the bipartite of interactions between miRNAs and mRNAs. For example, (shows that let-7 can regulate other non-coding RNAs including miRNAs.In this work, we first derive the solution to discover the causal miRNA regulatory relationships based on the IDA approach. Then we apply the method to the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) datasets. We implement a controlled experiment for the miR-200 family to validate the results. The outcome shows that the causal miRNA regulatory relationships discovered using our method largely overlap the findings from the experiment, suggesting that the causal relationships between miRNAs and mRNAs can be identified from expression profiles.
METHODS
NotationsLet G  V, E be a graph consisting a set of vertices V and a set of edges E V  V. In our context, V  fX 1 ,. .. , X p g is a set of random variables representing the expression levels of miRNAs and mRNAs, and the edges represent relationships between these variables. In G, X j is a parent of X i if there is a directed edge X j ! X i. We use pa i G to represent the set of all parents of X i. X k is called a sibling of X i if there is an undirected edge X i  X k. We denote the set of all siblings of X i in G, sib i G. When the graph G is clear from the context, we use pa i and sib i instead of pa i G and sib i G. A v-structure is an ordered triple of vertices, X i , X j , X k , such that in G, there exist directed edges X i ! X j and X j X k , and X i and X k are not adjacent. X j is then known as a collider in this v-structure. Graph G is a DAG if G contains only directed edges and has no cycles. The skeleton of a DAG G is the undirected graph obtained from G by substituting undirected edges for directed edges. An equivalence class of DAGs is the set of DAGs that have the same skeleton and the same v-structures. An equivalence class of DAGs can be uniquely described by a completed partially directed acyclic graph (CPDAG). A partially directed acyclic graph (PDAG) is a graph where the edges are either directed or undirected and one cannot trace a cycle by following the directions of the directed edges and any directions of the undirected edges. A PDAG is completed if (i) every directed edge exists also in every DAG belonging to the equivalence class and (ii) for every undirected edge, X i  X k , there exists a DAG with X i X k and a DAG with X i ! X k in the equivalence class.illustrates the method used in our work. Details of the major steps, causal structure learning and causal inference are presented in Sections 2.3 and 2.4, respectively. Section 2.5 summarizes our method as an algorithm with the steps of implementing the method with expression data.
Method overview
Causal structure learningLearning causal structures from data plays a critical role in causality discovery. A popular method used to construct the structure from data is probabilistic graphical models. These graphical models are used to analyse and visualize conditional independence relationships between random variables (). The structure of conditional independence among the random variables is usually presented as a DAG of which vertices represent random variables and edges encode conditional dependence of the enclosing vertices. Learning a DAG from data is highly challenging and complex, as the number of possible DAGs is super-exponential in the number of nodes (). Nevertheless, a number of methods have been proposed to learn DAGs from data. One approach is to restrict the search space to trees, such as the maximum weight spanning trees (). Another approach, Greedy Equivalent Search (), works for a moderate number of nodes. Adding to these methods are the highly computation intensive Bayesian approaches for DAGs (). An interesting alternative to those greedy or structurally restricted approaches is the Inductive Causation (IC) algorithm proposed by. This algorithm is the base of causal structure learning research, and the algorithm is outlined in three phases as follows:Phase 1Find the undirected structure: For each pair of X i and X j , search for a set S XiXj such that X i ? ?X j jS XiXj . Add an undirected edge between X i and X j if no set S XiXj can be found.Phase 2Determine the v-structures: For each connected triple X i  X j  X k , direct the edges and add a v-structure.e. if and only if X i and X k are dependent given X j .Phase 3Direct the remaining edges: Follow different rules/ constraints to direct the remaining edges whenever possible, avoiding the creation of new v-structures and cycles. The IC algorithm, however, leaves the details of Phases 1 and 3 unspecified and opens the door to further research. Spirtes and Glymour proposed the PC algorithm (), named after its inventors Peter Spirtes and Clark Glymour, to implement in detail the IC algorithm. The PC algorithm starts from a complete undirected graph and deletes recursively edges based on conditional independence decisions. This yields an undirected graph that can then be partially directed and further extended to a CPDAG. With high-dimensional datasets, we need to select the most efficient tool to implement the conditional independence test in the PC algorithm.proved that when the distribution of variables is multivariate normal, the partial correlation test can be used as a conditional independence test as stated in the following theorem.Theorem 1: () Assume that the distribution P of the random vector X  fX 1 ,. .. , X p g is multivariate normal. For i 6  j, i, j 2 f1,. .. , pg, k f1,. .. , pg n fi, jg. i, jjk denotes the partial correlation between X i and X j , given fX r ; r 2 kg. Then, i, jjk  0 if and only if X i and X j are conditionally independent, given fX r ; r 2 kg.Recently, Kalisch andshowed that in the highdimensional context, that is, the number of nodes p may be much larger than the sample size n, the PC algorithm with partial correlation test is uniformly consistent. This sheds light on the discovery of causal structures for high-dimensional data, such as gene expression datasets. In this article, we adapt the PC algorithm as a step of our algorithm in discovering the CPDAG, which includes miRNAs and mRNAs as nodes (seeand Step 2 of Section 2.5).
Causal inferenceOur problem is to infer the causal effects (intervention or knockdown effects) of each single miRNA on the regulations of every mRNA under consideration, using only the observational data, the expression data of miRNAs and mRNAs. The causal effects can be computed using do-calculus (), given a set of conditional dependencies from the expression data and a corresponding DAG model. The intervention doX i  x 0 i  is an operation to force X i to receive the value x 0 i. The purpose is to observe how the system reacts with this intervention, or in other words, how the distribution of a variable may change after the intervention.formalized the definition of post-intervention distribution by the pre-intervention distribution as shown in the following definition.Definition 1: Let X  fX 1 , X 2 ,. .. , X p1 g be a set of variables. The distribution generated by an intervention doX i  x 0 i , i 2 f1,. .. , p  1g on the set of variables is given by the truncated factorization formula:where pa j is a set of parent nodes of X j , and Px j jpa j  are the preintervention conditional distributions.To deal with high-dimensional datasets, we made some assumptions in Theorem 1 and the PC algorithm in the causal structure learning phase. The assumptions are that the distribution of the variables X is multivariate normal, Markovian and faithful to the true (unknown) causal DAG. With the same assumptions, we can now calculate the intervention effects based on the discussions in, which are formalized in the following theorem.Theorem 2: Let X 1 ,. .. , X p , X p1  Y be jointly Gaussian. The causal effect of X i on Y for i  1,. .. , p can be calculated as:in which pa i is the set of parent nodes of X i , and Y $ X i  pa i is the shorthand for the linear regression of Y on X i and pa i ., :::, S n are input data samples of the p  1 variables, X 1 , :::, X p and the response variable Y. In a high-dimensional dataset, p ) n. In the first phase, the causal structure in the form of a CPDAG is learnt from data, by applying the PC algorithm. In the second phase, do-calculus is used to infer the causal effects between X i and Y, i  1, :::, p. Y is the only response variable.At this point, we have had the tools, the PC algorithm, to learn the CPDAG and Theorem 2 to estimate the causal effects for each DAG in the equivalence class CPDAG. For illustration, consider the CPDAG G in, where we are interested in efX 1 , Y. We can first list all the DAGs in the equivalence class, G 1 ,. .. , G 4. The causal effect efX 1 , Y can then be calculated in each DAG by applying Theorem 2. However, when the number of nodes in a CPDAG is large, the number of DAGs grows quickly. As the essence of the calculation of efX i , Y is the sets of parent nodes of X i ,suggest searching the CPDAG directly for all the valid parental sets of X i rather than identifying all the DAGs in the equivalence class for the parental sets. We restate this suggestion by the following theorem.Theorem 3: Let S sib i G. A set pa i G [ S is a parental set of X i if and only if directing all edges between X i and vertices in S toward X i , and all edges between X i and vertices in sib i G n S away from X i will not create any new v-structures., pa 1 G  , sib 1 G  fX 2 , X 4 g. Therefore, the candidate parental sets of X 1 are , fX 2 g, fX 4 g and fX 2 , X 4 g. However, the set fX 2 , X 4 g is not the parental set of X 1 , as directing edges between fX 2 , X 4 g and X 1 toward X 1 will create a new v-structure. Therefore, applying Theorem 2 to the three parental sets, we have the multiset that contains all the causal effects of X 1 on Y, E 1  f 1j , 1jX2 , 1jX4 g. A multiset is a set in which elements are allowed to appear more than once.
In
AlgorithmNow, we are able to present the algorithm for discovering miRNA causal regulatory relationships in four steps as follows:Step 1: Identify differentially expressed genes, i.e. those genes whose expression values vary significantly across the conditions (categories) of the samples. First, we divide the dataset as per the categories (e.g. normal and cancer) and identify the differentially expressed genes across different categories. We assume that those genes with little or zero change in expression between the categories play a minimum role in the biological processes and are thus omitted. Let X 1 ,. .. , X m and Y 1 ,. .. , Y n represent miRNAs and mRNAs, respectively, that are identified to be differentially expressed. Combining the expression profiles of the differentially expressed miRNAs and mRNAs, we have a dataset for the m  n variables.Step 4: Output the miRNA causal effects. For each miRNA, the outcome of Step 3 is an array of multisets, and each multiset contains all causal effects of the miRNA on an mRNA (note that the causal effects of an miRNA on a particular mRNA may have multiple values, as we estimated the effects from its different parental sets). With each of the multisets, in this step, we select the causal effect value with the smallest absolute value, and output it as the causal effect of the miRNA on the mRNA.
RESULTSIn this section, we present the results and analysis of applying our algorithm to the NCI-60 dataset for EMT.
ImplementationIn this section, we describe how the algorithm in Section 2.5 is applied to the NCI-60 dataset. We divide the samples in the dataset into two groups based on their conditions, epithelia and mesenchymal. The differentially expressed gene analysis is performed using the limma package of Bioconductor (), and 1635 mRNA probes and 43 miRNA probes are identified to be differentially expressed with p-value 50.05 (adjusted p-value). Detailed results are provided in the Supplementary Material. The PC algorithm is then used to estimate the CPDAG G. The input for the PC algorithm is a 47  1678 matrix of the 47 samples of miRNA and mRNA expression values for the 1678 probes. The PC algorithm uses partial correlation as the conditional independence test. The significance level of this test, , is the tuning parameter for the PC algorithm. In this implementation, we use the R-package called pcalg and set  0:01 (p-value50.01). Then the causal effect ef(miRNA, mRNA) is calculated using Theorem 3 for each pair of miRNA and mRNA. As stated in Step 4 of the algorithm, we use the causal effect value whose absolute value is the smallest of all in the obtained multiset as the result for ef(miRNA, mRNA). For example, if ef(miRNA, mRNA) f0:4,  0:5, 0:4, 0:3g, then we choose ef(miRNA, mRNA) 0:3 as the result. This choice assures a consistent result because if the reported result of ef(miRNA, mRNA) is high, all the estimations across different DAGs (parental sets) must be high. To overcome the problem of small number of samples in biological data, we bootstrap the data 100 times and take the median of the 100 estimates for each pair of (miRNA, mRNA) as the final results. The final result is displayed in a tabular form (as the final table in). The value in each cell of the table is the causal effect that an miRNA has on an mRNA. It is worth noting that the causal effect of each individual miRNA on each individual mRNA in the result is not necessarily a consequence of the direct interactionbetween an miRNA and an mRNA. In fact, it indicates the total regulatory effect that the miRNA has on the mRNA, and the regulation pattern can be direct, indirect or both. We can rank all the genes based on the absolute values of the causal effects that a particular miRNA has on them. In this article, we rank the genes regulated by miR-200a and miR-200b, respectively, and extract the top 20, 50 and 100 genes in each case based on the causal effects that the miRNA has on them for experimental validation, which will be discussed in the next section. The computational results that show the causal effects of miRNAs on mRNAs can be found in the Supplementary Material.
Validation by experimentsThe most effective way to validate the results is by biological experiments. In this article, we design the follow-up controlled experiment on the samples of MDA-MB-231. We measure the gene expression level in the MDA-MB-231 samples transfected with the miR-200 family and in the MDA-MB-231 samples without the miR-200 family (controls). Specifically, we have one sample transfected with miR-200a, two samples transfected with miR-200b and two control samples. The reason for choosing the miR-200 family for experimentation is that the miR-200 family has been confirmed as a biomarker for EMT (). The differentially expressed genes from the controlled and transfected samples are then used to validate the computational results. With the experiment, 345 and 533 genes are identified to be regulated by miR-200a and miR-200b, respectively, with adjusted p-value 50.05 [the p-values are obtained from limma () with Benjamini and. The detailed experimental results are in the Supplementary Material, and a summary of validation results is given later in the text in term of the number of genes confirmed by the experiments and the consistency in the signs of regulations:(1) A significant number of genes regulated by miR-200 family being confirmed. There is significant overlap between the top genes regulated by miR-200 that are discovered by our method and the differentially expressed genes identified from the experiment. For miR-200a and miR-200b, we extract respectively from the computational results the top 20, 50 and 100 genes based on the causal effects that the miRNA has on them, for validation. The numbers of genes that have been confirmed by the experiment are shown in. If we consider the results inwe select the top-k genes for validation, the recall rates will be improved with the increase of k. In practice, depending on the goal of an experiment, k can be adjusted to have a good balance between the recall rates and precisions.(2) Consistency in the signs of regulations. In the results discovered by our method, a positive/negative causal effect that an miRNA has on an mRNA means that increasing the miRNA expression level will result in an increasing/ decreasing expression level of the mRNA. Therefore, the signs of the causal effects, either positive or negative, indicate up-or downregulations in the context of miRNAmRNA interactions. In the experiments, to identify the up-/downregulations of miR-200a or miR-200b on an mRNA, we compare the expression level of the mRNA between the control samples and the samples transfected by miR-200a or miR-200b. The greater level of the mRNA expression level in the transfected samples implies the upregulation (positive causal effect) and vice versa. We compare the results of the experiments and our method regarding the signs of the regulations of miR-200a and miR-200b on the top 20, 50 and 100 genes, respectively. With miR-200a, for the top 20 and 50 genes, respectively, the signs discovered using our method are 100% consistent with (the same as) those identified by the experiments, and 95% of the regulations discovered by our method on the top 100 genes have the same signs as those discovered by the experiments. With miR-200b, for the top 20, 50 and 100 genes, the consistency of the signs are 100, 94 and 94%, respectively.The significant numbers of genes that have been confirmed by experiments together with the high level of consistency in the signs of causal effects suggest that our method can be used as a new tool to assist in the experimental design for discovering miRNA causal regulatory relationships.
Functional validation of mRNAs for EMTAs the results are obtained based on the EMT datasets, we extract the top 150 genes based on the total causal effects that all the miRNAs have on them, and we validate the genes against the literature knowledge of pathways and functional biomarkers of EMT. We use GeneGo Metacore from GeneGo Inc. to identify the pathways previously discovered in the literature that involve the genes in our top 150 list. The results inshow that the top genes that receive the highest causal effects are highly relevant to the regulation of EMT. For instance, pathways number 6, 7, 8 and 11 are direct pathways of the development of EMT, and others are important pathways involved in the process of EMT. An example of pathway number 1 can be found in the Supplementary Material. The pathway results suggest that the top genes causally regulated by miRNAs are highly relevant to the biological condition (EMT) of the datasets. Therefore, we can also use the method in this article for identifying functional miRNA regulatory modules for a specific biological condition. This can be doneby ranking all the miRNAs that regulate the group of genes, e.g. the top 150 genes, and then setting thresholds for the values of causal effects to extract the miRNAmRNA regulatory modules. We also conduct enrichment analysis for the top 150 genes to investigate the relevance between the gene functions and the biological condition of the dataset. We use Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Ingenuity Systems, www.ingenuity.com), a commercial application that calculates the association between a particular gene set and known functions and pathways, for this purpose. The top 150 genes are significantly enriched for several biological functions. The top five functions listed by IPA are known to be critical for EMT. They are cellular movement, cell-to-cell signalling and interaction, cellular assembly and organization, cellular growth and proliferation and cell morphology. Especially, there are several genes in the sub-categories of cellular movement, invasion and migration, which have been identified as the functional biomarkers of EMT ().shows the genes in the top 150 list that are in the classes of invasion and migration, which are functional biomarkers for EMT.
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONSmiRNAs have been regarded as one of the most important regulators. Identifying their functions and regulatory mechanism is critical in understanding biological processes of organisms. Both biology and computational biology have seen great efforts made to elucidate miRNA functions. However, the precise regulatory relationships between miRNAs and mRNAs remain elusive. The statistical relationships that most computational methods can discover only reveal associations or correlations but not causality. In this article, we present an alternative approach for revealing the causal relationships between miRNAs and mRNAs. This method is inspired by the recent advances in causality discovery research on large-scale datasets, especially the IDA method (). Based on this method, we derived the solution for miRNA causal regulatory relationship discovery. Our method makes use of the expression profiles of miRNAs and mRNAs and evaluates the causal effects of miRNAs on mRNAs. Our assumption is that miRNAs and mRNAs interact with each other in a complex system. This is a more realistic assumption than those that consider the interactions occur between miRNAs and mRNAs only. One promising aspect of our approach is that the causal effects we get are similar to those from a randomized controlled experiment. Results from the follow-up experiments have indicated that our method can be used to effectively identify a set of genes causally regulated by miRNAs. Although the discovery based on observational data alone may never replace the actual intervention experiments, these results can serve as a tool for the design of follow-up miRNA experiments. In this article, we have applied our method to the EMT datasets. The results show that our method has effectively identified the causal relationships between miRNAs and mRNAs. The follow-up experiments confirm the validity of the identified causal relationships for the miR-200 family. The results for other miRNAs remain open for further research and experiments. In addition, the enrichment analysis from the extracted results shows the consistency of the results of our method with the literature regarding biological functions of EMT. We expect that our method can be applied to different datasets to discover the miRNA causal regulatory relationships and to the complex regulatory networks, including miRNAs, transcription factors and mRNAs. For extension purposes, the results of this method can be further analysed and interpreted in various ways. For instance, we can focus on the miRNA regulatory networks, or discover the level of regulations that a group of, BMP4, CLDN7 CDH1, MCF2L, CCDC88A DDR1, CLDN4, SPACRC GRB7, KRT8, ZEB1, STAP2 MST1R, PIK3C2B, S100A14 ARHGAP8/PRR5-ARHGAP8 RHOD, ITFB4, KLK6, F11R PLXNB1, CXCL16, S100P Genes in invasion and migration, sub-categories of cellular movement, are functional markers of EMT. The results are generated from IPA. The last column is the range of p-values for all genes in the group.The pathways are highly relevant to the regulation of EMT. miRNAs has on a particular gene, or compare the similarity of two miRNAs based on the causal effects they have on a group of genes. Our approach complements existing prediction methods that are based on sequence complementarity. Current understanding of the nature of miRNAmRNA interactions is still somewhat limited. Predictions based on sequence complementarity and/or structural stability of the putative duplex have a very high rate of both false positives and false negatives. A major reason for this is the role played by RNA folding as well as accessibility because of protein binding. The more sophisticated prediction methods such as mirSVR () incorporate training of the models on experimental data derived from genome-wide mRNA expression changes after miRNA transfection. Our approach predicts miRNAmRNA interactions based on gene expression data. Some of the interactions have already been experimentally validated, with reporter assays and the like, supporting the validity of our approach. Some interactions from our study are novel and can be good candidates for future investigation. Some of the interactions and regulatory modules are likely to be applied to other biological scenarios in which the component miRNAs and mRNAs are expressed, whereas others, such as those involving miR-200, will be restricted to epithelial cells and the EMT process because the miRNA and/or mRNA targets have cell-specific expression. However, because our approach not only indicates bi-component miRNAmRNA interactions but also generates multicomponent regulatory modules, the approach has the power of suggesting important regulatory pathways that warrant future study. Some of these are likely to be restricted to the EMT process, but they are worthy of investigation because EMT has a major role in development and in cancer progression. Using our method (which is based on the IDA method), we can theoretically infer the causal relationships between every two variables in the dataset. However, to make it computationally efficient for a specific biological problem, in practice, we should restrict the number of 'cause' variables and/or the number of 'effect' variables. For instance, in our method, we only focus on the causal relationships between miRNAs (causes) and mRNAs (effects). Other relationships, such as miRNAmiRNA, mRNA mRNA or mRNAmiRNA, although in theory can be inferred, are beyond the scope of this article, and the complexity of the algorithm would increase significantly.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
T.D.Le et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Inferring microRNAmRNA causal regulatory relationships at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
