Motivation: Polypharmacology (the ability of a single drug to affect multiple targets) is a key feature that may explain part of the decreasing success of conventional drug discovery strategies driven by the quest for drugs to act selectively on a single target. Most drug targets are proteins that are composed of domains (their structural and functional building blocks). Results: In this work, we model drug–domain networks to explore the role of protein domains as drug targets and to explain drug polyphar-macology in terms of the interactions between drugs and protein domains. We find that drugs are organized around a privileged set of druggable domains. Conclusions: Protein domains are a good proxy for drug targets, and drug polypharmacology emerges as a consequence of the multi-domain composition of proteins.
INTRODUCTIONThe decrease in the translation of drug candidates into effective therapies during the past two decades has occurred concurrently with the goal of rational drug design of developing selective ligands that act on a single target (). This 'classical' perspective is an oversimplification challenged by a growing body of evidence showing that there are many drugs for each target and that a single drug can affect multiple targets (). The emergent concept of polypharmacology bears this out, both from a target and a drug perspective. On one hand, we can obtain the correct combination of targets from analyses of the biological networks associated with a given disease, and on the other hand, we can select or design 'magic shotguns', i.e. drugs that are able to bind multiple targets with low specificity (). The network perspective from the study byillustrates this situation well. They organized all approved drugs reported by DrugBank into a drug target network in which the drugs are depicted as nodes that are connected if the drugs share a protein target, and they also generated a targetprotein network in which the proteins are nodes that are connected if the proteins are targeted by the same drug. More than half of the drugs in the drugtarget network formed a giant interconnected cluster, and in both networks, the majority of the nodes were connected to at least one other drug/target, that is drugs share protein targets and proteins are targeted by more than one drug. Although Yildirim et al. bring up polypharmacology as a general attribute of drugs, their results also illustrate an important bias of drug design, which is that many approved drugs are based on the same therapeutic targets. Mestres et al. pursue this topic further and show that because of limited time and resources, small molecules are not screened systematically through a large and complete panel of proteins. Thus, drugtarget networks derived on the basis of public bibliographic sources may be more representative of the target space explored by the pharmaceutical industry rather than being a true reflection of drug polypharmacology (). When they take into account drug affinity data by including targets with no particular therapeutic interest, they find that drugs target even more proteins, illustrating that drug polypharmacology is the rule rather than the exception. Polypharmacology has recently been explained in terms of protein modularity within protein interaction networks. Within any protein interaction network, a module represents a densely connected group of nodes (and these may be either proteins or functional motifs/domains) that are weakly connected to the remaining network. A rich variety of global measures based on reverse engineering of network topologies have been suggested to uncover the organizing principles behind complex networks. Such reverse engineering of network topologies-based measures reveal that networked structures can emerge at different levels, from single-node characteristics and the tendency of pairs of nodes to connect to each other, to the patterns exhibited by associations of three or more nodes known as motifs (). Here, we aim to re-orientate the field to the fundamental principle of protein science, the premise that the functional units of proteins are domains, to explain polypharmacology. Protein domains are compact and functional structures that can be considered the building blocks of proteins. The definition of protein domains overlaps the structural and functional views of proteins (). Because domains are units of structure () and there is a limited repertoire of domain types (), protein domains are combined to form different proteins with different functions (). Furthermore, proteinprotein interactions are dominated by domaindomain interactions (). Therefore, we think that drugtarget interactions may be mediated by drugdomain interactions; hence, we argue that protein domains can be major contributors to polypharmacology. In other words, because proteins have a modular structure and the same domains can be repeatedly found in different proteins, the reason why a drug binds multiple protein targets *To whom correspondence should be addressed. may be related to the proteins sharing a common domain that the drug may be targeting. In this work, we attempt to unravel the association between drugs and protein domains to address the hypothesis that protein domains are the areas on which drugs act and are an important factor in the polypharmacological behaviour of most drugs.
METHODS
Data retrievalWe compiled a drugtarget interaction dataset for human proteins using interaction data from the databases DrugBank (), STITCH () and MATADOR (). We filtered the drugtarget interactions from DrugBank to exclude nutraceutical compounds and to include only approved and experimental drugs labelled with a PubChem Compound identifier. High-confidence drugtarget interactions from STITCH and MATADOR were added to our data to obtain a comprehensive non-redundant set of drugtarget interactions for human proteins. The CATH and PFAM domain compositions for each target protein were obtained from Gene3D (release 10.2) and BioMart (), respectively.
Scoring and evaluation of drugdomain associationsEach drug that interacts with a protein in our initial dataset is associated with all the domains that comprise the protein. We formulated a scoring scheme based on the information content of a drug associated with a domain, i.e. the self-information of each drugdomain pair from all the possible drugdomain pairs. The self-information for a drugdomain pair, taken from the mathematical theory of information, is defined as IdD   log 2 Pd, D; Pd, D  pd  pD  ndwhere P(d,D) is the probability of finding a drug (d) associated to a domain (D), and nd and nD are the number of times that drugs and domains, respectively, appear in the dataset. We calculate the score (s) for each drugdomain pair in our network as sdD  NdD  IdD where N(dD) is the number of times the pair dD is in the network. Random drugdomain networks were computed by shuffling the initial drugtarget interactions and keeping the same CATH and PFAM domain composition for each target. For each drugdomain pair in our network, we obtained a distribution of scores computed from the random networks in which the particular drugdomain pair was found. Thus, for each drugdomain pair, we have a score and a distribution of 25 random scores. We computed the probability that each score was included in the distribution of random scores using a statistical t-test. Using a P-value threshold of 0.001, we could assess whether a drugdomain association was likely to occur by chance.
Domain co-occurrence networkTwo domain co-occurrence networks were built using the CATH and PFAM domain composition for each protein in the drugprotein interaction dataset. Two domains in the network are linked if they appear in the same protein.
Evolutionary analysis of drug targetsProtein sequences of human GPCRs and kinases were obtained based on the presence of characteristic CATH domains in the human proteome and aligned with ClustalW (). We obtained the phylogenetic distance from each tree and built one network for each target class in the sequence similarity space. In these networks, nodes represent protein sequences, and two nodes are linked if the phylogenetic distance between the proteins is 50.75. Data retrieval, network building and analysis were performed using the Ruby and Python scripting languages and the Networkx Python module (http://networkx.lanl.gov/). Bipartite graph analyses were performed with Cytoscape and with the BipartiteNet plugin developed by our group.
RESULTS
Modelling the drugdomain networksOur initial dataset comprises 5531 drugs, 3580 proteins and 12 754 drugprotein interactions. We have considered two complementary perspectives on protein domains: the structural perspective provided by CATH () and the function-oriented perspective offered by PFAM (). With our scoring scheme based on the statistics of domain occurrence in the protein targets of each drug, we provide reliable drugdomain associations for 26.05% (CATH) and 27.78% (PFAM) of the drugs in the initial drugprotein interaction dataset. Our drugdomain network models include only the drugdomain associations that are more likely to appear than those expected at random (P-value  0.001), based on the statistical meaning of the occurrence of every possible drugdomain pair. To provide a meaningful comparison of the drugdomain associations with the drugprotein interactions, we built drugprotein subnetworks for the drugs that we can associate with the PFAM and CATH domains.shows the global properties of the resulting drugdomain and drugprotein bipartite networks.
Druggable domainsThe drug average degree indicates that drugdomain networks tend to be organized around particular druggable domains that draw together most of the drugs. We checked this finding by examining the network heterogeneity and the clustering coefficient of the drugdrug projections. Monopartite projections of the drugdomain and drugprotein networks (where drugs are nodes and two drugs are connected by an edge if they share at least one target in the corresponding bipartite network) contain information about how drugs are targeting the same proteins (or domains). Projections from drugdomain networks tend to have fewer hubs and more clusters than those from drugprotein networks, as shown in. When we compared the drugdomain bipartite networks with the drugprotein bipartite subnetworks, it was clear that drugs revolve around a privileged set of targets to a greater extent in the former. We aimed to identify these druggable domains as proxies for the druggable genome.used drug-binding domain annotations to identify the druggable protein families in the human genome. Our drugdomain associations revealed roughly the same description of the druggable genome.
Drug selectivity in drugdomain networksDrugdomain associations are more selective than drugprotein interactions. The degree distributions of the bipartite networks clearly indicate the higher selectivity of drugdomain associations (). The fraction of drugs targeting one domain is considerably higher than that targeting one protein in both the CATH and the PFAM drugdomain networks, whereas the fraction of drugs with more than one target is lower in both the CATH and the PFAM drugdomain networks except for drugs with two targets. In this particular case, there are more drugs targeting two domains than drugs targeting two proteins. When we inspected the co-occurrence of these domain pairs in the same proteins using domain co-occurrence networks, we found that 94.5% (CATH) and 87.5% (PFAM) of the pairs appear in the same protein.showed that proteins linked by drug associations tend to interact preferably with one another than with other proteins. To check whether the domains associated with promiscuous drugs are clustered in modules, we mapped drugs associated with two or more PFAM domains to a proteindomain interaction network obtained from the DOMINE database (). We identified 575 modules within this domain interaction network using ModuLand (). We found that 85% of these modules contained up to five domains, and that 46.94% of the promiscuous drugs are associated with the PFAM domains contained in these modules.
Phylogenetic relationships between druggable domainsTo get insight into the evolutionary relationships between domains associated with polypharmacological drugs, we selected two examples of drugs targeting the main classes of pharmacological targets (GPCRs and kinases): doxepin (PubChem ID 667 477), a modulator of a number of serotonin, adrenergic and histamine receptor subtypes, and staurosporine (PubChem ID 44 120 114), a protein kinase inhibitor. In Supplementary, we represent the phylogenetic trees for GPCRs and kinases as networks in the sequence similarity space, where proteins with high sequence similarity appear linked together in modules. Doxepin targets are closely related to each other, whereas staurosporine targets show a much lower sequence similarity.
DISCUSSIONOur work is not the first to attempt to associate drugs with protein domains.developed a statistical approach to predict potential targets for new drugs based on interactions between drugs and protein domains. Interestingly, they assumed that drugs act by binding to specific proteins, contrary to the idea proposed by drug polypharmacology. Moreover, they relied on the idea that drugs interacting with the same domain tend to share therapeutic effects; hence, they associate domains with therapeutic categories using the anatomical therapeutic chemical (ATC) codes, that is, a domain is associated with a group of drugs sharing the same ATC code. As far as we know, the work described in this report is the first attempt to identify direct drugdomain associations in a systematic and comprehensive manner. Other previous research has focused on drugdomain relationships as well.and Russ and Lampel (2005) relied on manual annotations of drug-binding domain to explore the druggable genome. We obtained roughly the same setof druggable domains with our automatic method. We found that drugs tend to revolve around a privileged set of domains, as can be observed in the drugdomain bipartite networks and can be deduced from the monopartite projections of the drug domain and drugprotein networks. Network heterogeneity reflects the tendency of a network to contain hub nodes; a drug drug projection of a bipartite network with a low heterogeneity reflects a trend in which drugs are organized around a privileged set of targets. This is the case for the drugdrug projections of both drugdomain networks when compared with their corresponding drugprotein subnetworks, as shown in. Drug degree distributions (particularly in drugdomain networks), after we corrected for the co-occurrence of domains in the same proteins, clearly show that drugs target domains in a more specific way than they target proteins. Different domain targets for a polypharmacological drug tend to cluster in the same modules, within domain interaction networks such as DOMINE. These domains, and in particular co-occurring domains, can be interpreted as a single module or as a single pharmacological target, in the same sense that protein complexes are considered as drug targets in the work of Nacher and Schwartz (2012). To get a hint of the evolutionary perspective of druggable domains, we selected polypharmacological drugs that target the two main families of druggable proteins, as described byin the druggable genome, i.e. GPCRs and kinases. Although both doxepin and staurosporine can be associated with protein domains that are archetypical for each protein class, the targets of doxepin are closely related in the GPCRs phylogenetic tree, whereas the targets of staurosporine are widespread in the human kinome. These two examples illustrate a difference in the subfamily targeting specificity of the selected drugs and suggest further studies, such as the implications in drug polypharmacology of the evolutionary conservation of structural domains (with particular focus on binding site conservation) and the structural similarity of domains for distinct targets. Our results support the idea that protein domains are a good proxy for drug targets when considering the structural and functional perspectives of their definition. Hence, drug polypharmacology, understood as the ability of a single drug to bind several proteins, emerges as a consequence of the multidomain composition of proteins.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Polypharmacology from protein domains at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
A.A.Moya-Garca and J.A.G.Ranea at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
