Motivation: Diagnosis and prognosis of cancer and understanding oncogenesis within the context of biological pathways is one of the most important research areas in bioinformatics. Recently, there have been several attempts to integrate interactome and transcriptome data to identify subnetworks that provide limited interpretations of known and candidate cancer genes, as well as increase classification accuracy. However, these studies provide little information about the detailed roles of identified cancer genes. Results: To provide more information to the network, we constructed the network by incorporating genetic interactions and manually curated gene regulations to the protein interaction network. To make our newly constructed network cancer specific, we identified edges where two genes show different expression patterns between cancer and normal phenotypes. We showed that the integration of various datasets increased classification accuracy, which suggests that our network is more complete than a network based solely on protein interactions. We also showed that our network contains significantly more known cancer-related genes than other feature selection algorithms. Through observations of some examples of cancer-specific subnetworks, we were able to predict more detailed and interpretable roles of oncogenes and other cancer candidate genes in the prostate cancer cells.
INTRODUCTIONDiagnosis and prognosis of cancer is one of the most important research areas in bioinformatics. Enormous efforts have been made to identify biomarkers of cancer, and have predominantly focused on the analysis of transcriptome data. Recently, diagnostic and prognostic predictive performances have been improved by incorporating interactome data (). Incorporating interactome data has the additional benefit that it can suggest detailed roles of potential cancer-related genes.showed that with metastasis of breast cancer, integration of interactome and transcriptome data can be useful to * To whom correspondence should be addressed. extract coexpressed functional subnetworks, as well as to obtain higher classification accuracy. These subnetworks contain many known breast cancer genes that could not be detected in previous studies which analyzed only transcriptome data.that the organization of interactome data is changed by altered gene expression in breast cancer, which affects disease outcome. To accommodate for this, they searched for changes in global modularity in protein interaction networks. They calculated the average Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) of a hub protein and its interacting partners, and revealed many interactions that displayed altered PCCs as a function of disease outcome. Their analysis is based on the concept of date and party hub (). A date (intermodular) hub shows low correlation of coexpression with its interacting partner and acts as a global connector in the protein interaction network, while a party (intramodular) hub shows high correlation of coexpression and acts as a local connector. They found that intermodular hub proteins tend to have more partners which form altered interactions than intramodular hub proteins. Analyses of coexpressed subnetworks or hub proteins have been helpful for the understanding of the metastasis of cancer at the molecular level. However, providing interpretability to a gene or protein network would also be valuable. For example, if the network could provide information on what makes networks change and what the effects of the changes are, then candidates to be validated or methods to validate would be more specific, and more effective targeting for therapies or drugs would be possible. To achieve this goal, we integrated genetic interactions and gene regulatory pathways, based on previous studies using proteinprotein interactions and gene expression profiles. Functional dependencies revealed by genetic interactions are known to provide abundant information regarding biological pathways (). Recently, Lin et al. constructed genome-wide maps of human genetic interactions using radiation hybrid genotyping data (). They suggested that their genetic interaction network approached saturation, suggesting the network did not show a scale-free distribution of connectivity, but was Gaussian-like. Thus, we can expect that the addition of genetic interactions would help make the network more global, provide functional dependencies between genes at a genome-wide level and give more accurate and abundant explanation to each individual pathway. The other dataset we used for our network is gene regulation information. Gene regulatory pathways give more detailed explanations of cancer genes and their oncogenesis. CombinatorialPage: 1847 18461853
Integrative prostate cancer gene network constructioninteractions among transcription factors are critical to directing tissue-specific gene expression (). As well as the transcription of the gene, we expect that the integration of gene regulations, physical interactions and genetic interactions can explain the combinatorial alterations of complexes which function as activators or inhibitors of translocation, and protein complex modification processes that are changed in the tumor cells. An integrated network using various kinds of data including gene expression profiles, protein interactions, genetic interactions and gene regulatory pathways could provide more accurate diagnosis than the networks constructed using a single dataset. This explains the advantage of integration of multiple types of interactions. We also confirmed that the classification accuracy outperformed previously studied feature selection and classification algorithms. We validated our network with Fisher's exact test using the cancerrelated gene list provided by the Cancer Genome Project, and confirmed that our network was enriched by cancer-related genes better than gene sets from other feature selection algorithms. We could see that many cancer-related genes are involved in the cancer-specific gene network, and that many of those were hubs of proteinprotein interactions or genetic interactions. Many cancer-related genes could be detected using only one type of interaction set, which also suggests that the network is more complete with the integration of multiple interaction types. We also found evidences that combinations of interactions including protein protein interactions (PPIs), genetic interactions (GIs) and inferred proteinprotein interactions (IPPIs) might influence the modification of a complex and the translocation of a protein, as well as the transcription of genes. It was observed that most cancer-related genes or cancer candidate genes play a role as a member of complex, which influences the transcription, modification or translocation processes, and also as an entity that is influenced by these processes.
METHODSWe integrated the PPI dataset, GI dataset and gene regulatory networks to construct the initial network. We then identified the subnetworks of which interactions showed different behavior between tumor and normal samples. We assumed that more accurate subnetworks result in better classification accuracy, when those subnetworks are used as a classifier. Therefore, we obtained the optimal parameter through several cross-validations, and used it for constructing the cancer-specific network.
Data descriptionTo identify cancer-specific interactions, we analyzed the DNA microarray measurements of the expression of human mRNAs. This microarray dataset is composed of 12 600 measurements of 52 prostate cancer samples and 50 normal samples (). We used two other microarray datasets for independent tests (), which includes known, experimental and predicted PPIs for human, as well as five other organisms. The proteins in those PPIs were mapped into gene symbols using UniPROT. After removing duplicated PPIsand PPIs that contain proteins that are not mapped into a gene symbol, we obtained 108 544 PPIs. Second, we downloaded 7 248 479 GIs inferred from radiation hybrid genotypes (). Among those, we used only 377 235 GIs of which gene symbols can be mapped into the gene symbol list in the Entrez Gene database. Third, we downloaded human pathways from the Pathway Interaction Database () on October 2010. These include 114 pathways curated by NCI-Nature, and 332 pathways imported from BioCarta and Reactome database. Each pathway is mainly composed of protein complex modification, transcriptions of genes or translocation of a protein or protein complex. Modification, transcription or translocation processes can be activated or inhibited by proteins or protein complexes. We refer these interactions as GRs (Gene Regulations). We assume that all the proteins in the protein complex take part in the activation or inhibition. For example, if a protein complex with four proteins activates transcription of a gene, then we obtain four binary activations of transcription. If the protein complex with three proteins inhibits the modification of the protein complex with four proteins, we can get 12 binary inhibitions of modification. Additionally, we inferred the interactions among proteins which constitute known protein complexes in the human pathways of Pathway Interaction Database. We refer these inferred interactions as IPPIs. We assumed that the protein complex would form a complete graph. For example, we obtain six IPPIs from the protein complex with four proteins..
Construction of cancer-specific gene networkPPIs, GIs, GRs and IPPs are commonly binary interactions of genes. Among these interactions, GRs are directional and others are non-directional.Page: 1848 18461853
J.Ahn et al.Identifying interactions that should be included in a cancer-specific network from each type of interaction dataset is the key obstacle in constructing the network. Therefore, we propose a novel scoring measure for this purpose. The optimal threshold for the measure maximizes the classification accuracy of the network. Accordingly, we also propose a new prediction method which makes use of the network as a classifier. A network with such interactions can form a wide map of gene interactions that comprises 7261 genes. To identify a cancer-specific gene network using this network, we took a similar approach as Taylor et al., which exploited the difference of strengths of the interactions. The strengths of some interactions can be different between normal and tumor cells. The changes of interaction levels from normal to tumor state can be causes or effects of tumorigenesis. Suppose that a protein complex is modified during tumorigenesis, and this protein complex is responsible for changing the strength of regulation of some proteins. Then we can say that changes in the interaction and regulation are the causes of tumorigenesis. The modified protein complex and altered regulations can affect various interactions and regulations, and these changes can be regarded as a result of tumorigenesis. The changes in interactions can be represented as changes in degree of dependencies between two interactors, in this case, genes. As the dependency of two genes increases, the correlation of their mRNA expressions would also increase. To measure the dependency between two genes, we calculate the PCC between them. A large difference of PCC values means that there were significant changes of correlation of two genes between two groups of samples. Based on the rationale mentioned previously, each interaction of the whole network is tested to determine if the PCC of mRNA expression values of two genes is different between normal samples and tumor samples. For a given interaction of which two interactors are a and b, we can say that they show significantly different correlations if the interaction satisfies the following equation:Score of an interaction = | PCC(v at , v bt )  PCC(v an , v bn )| > threshold, where v at and v an are vectors of mRNA expression values of gene a on tumor and normal samples, respectively, and v bt and v bn are vectors of mRNA expression values of gene b on tumor and normal samples, respectively. An interaction that satisfies the equation is included in the cancer-specific network. Parameter threshold can be interpreted as minimal significance of difference between two groups of samples. As the threshold increases, the significance level becomes more stringent. Therefore, a smaller number of more definite interactions and regulations are selected. In other words, false positive and false negative rates of the cancer-specific network would decrease and increase, respectively, as the threshold increases. We should find the optimal threshold that yields the best result in the trade-offs between false negative and false positive rates. To identify the optimal threshold value, we performed leave one out cross-validation (LOOCV) while lowering the threshold by 0.01. When performing LOOCV, the cancer-specific gene network functions as a classifier. Each edge of the cancer-specific network satisfies the score of an interaction equation. For a given sample s of which the class label is unknown, we can predict its class label using the edges of this network by the following procedure.(i) Assign two scores, score t and score n to unknown sample s and initialize to zero.(ii) For each edge e = (a, b) in the cancer-specific gene network:(b) Calculate n and t where,(c) If t  n, score t = score t + 1, else score n = score n + 1.(iii) If score t  score n , s is labeled as tumor and otherwise, s is labeled as normal.In the procedure above, t and n represent the changed values of PCC when the given sample s is added to the tumor and normal sample set, respectively. If s is normal sample, n is likely to be bigger than t. Therefore, score n would be also increased if proper interactions are selected as a classifier, and s is labeled as normal if score t < score n .
RESULTSFirst, we performed experiments to obtain the optimal threshold for each type of interactions. Then we constructed a tumor-specific gene network using optimal thresholds, and performed independent and comparison tests. Lastly, we analyzed our network with the known cancer-related gene list.
Obtaining optimal thresholdAs stated above, we assumed that the more accurate the cancerspecific network is, the higher classification accuracy it has. Thus, for a more accurate cancer-specific network, we needed to obtain an optimal threshold. We measured the accuracy, sensitivity and specificity by LOOCV varying a threshold for each set of PPI, GI, GR and IPPI networks (). In, we can see that sensitivity generally decreases while specificity generally increases as the threshold increases. In other words, a low threshold can result in high false positive rates, and a high threshold can result in high false negative rates. We selected the threshold value that results in the best accuracy. When numbers of test and control cases are different, accuracy is not a good measure for classification quality. However, in our experiment, the numbers of tumor (=52) and normal samples (=50) are nearly identical, thus there is no reason not to use accuracy measure. Once we obtained the optimal threshold for each type of interaction, we performed LOOCV again with integrated interactions which satisfy the threshold of each type. For example, PPIs of which score > threshold of PPI, or GIs of which score > threshold of GI can be used for the LOOCV test.summarizes the results of these tests. Note that the number of interactions is an averaged value because training sample sets are changed for each run in LOOCV. As we can see in, we obtained better LOOCV results when using integrated interactions than when using individual set of interactions. The only test that shows similar classification results is IPPIs, which are a minority among all interaction types. Comparison withis also exhibited in), Nave Bayesian (), k-NN (k-Nearest Neighbor,) and Random Forest () for a classification method. SMO is a sequential minimal optimization algorithm for training a Support Vector Machine (SVM).show a large variance depending on the classification algorithm. For a more thorough test, we performed independent tests using two datasets fromBecause these datasets were normalized by z-scoring transformation, they can be integrated into one dataset composed of 47 tumor samples and 12 normal samples. First, we performed four independent tests Page: 1849 18461853with each of the four sets of cancer-specific interactions. Then, we performed an independent test again using integrated cancer-specific interactions. The results, shown in, suggest that using integrated interactions improves the classification performance, which is the same result shown in. These observations are indirect evidence that each interaction type is complementary to each other and they altogether result in a richer cancer-specific gene network while minimizing the false positives. Comparison withfor independent test is also exhibited in. Our method outperforms these two methods. Next, we performed tests to compare the classification performance of our network with previously published classification algorithms. When we use the cancer-specific gene network as a classifier, it can be considered as preprocessed data by feature selection. Therefore, we applied feature selection algorithms including relief-F (), correlation-based filter (), information gain (), gain ratio () and chi-squared () to the training dataset and then performed an independent test using classification algorithms including Nave Bayesian, SMO, k-NN and Random Forest. Those feature selection and classification algorithms were implemented in Weka v3.5 (), a publicly available open-source software package. We selected the top ranked 2772 genes, or the same number of genes as in our classifier, Page: 1850 18461853after each gene is ranked by each feature selection algorithm. The results are shown in. Nave Bayesian and SMO show similar classification accuracy with our method. However, these two methods do not seem to gain from feature selection algorithms. Random Forest and k-NN definitely gain from feature selection algorithms, but they generally show a lower accuracy than our solution.shows the summary information for the cancer-specific gene network, which is used for analysis throughout the rest of the article. To determine if genes in the pathway were previously published in the cancer-related studies, we searched GeneRIF database by keyword. The keywords used were as following: tumo(u)r, cancer, onco(gene), carcino(genesis), neopla(sm), adenocarcino(ma), leukem(ogenesis), astrocytoma, glio(ma), meningioma, thymoma, lymphoma, myeloma, ameloblastoma and hamartoma, in a case-insensitive manner. We found 118 among 283 cancer-related genes in the protein interaction network, and found 156 among 286 cancer-related genes in the integrated network. This again shows that each type of interactions is complementary, as we have seen in Tables 2 and 3.Overexpressed genes Underexpressed genes FAM107A, NELL2, CALM1, ANXA2, DPYSL2, PTGDS, RCAN2, CDC42BPA, MAL, JAK1, KANK1, DIP2C, CETN2, CCND2 XBP1, RPS2, P4HB, RPLP0, CLDN3, TSPAN1, NME2, FASN, RPL13, EEF2, RPL13A, GUCY1A3, RPL12, RPS10, WWC1, EEF1G, RPL29, RPS18, RPSA, RPL14, TNFSF10, RPS8, RPS17, RPS28, RPL8, RPS4Y1 network only is more significant in describing the cancer-specific gene network, and we can expect that genes that were selected from other networks are also significant.also shows the P-values using other feature selection algorithms. For each selection algorithm, we selected 2772 top ranked genes and counted the known cancer-related genes among 2772 genes. We can confirm that the selective power of our interaction based method is definitely higher than other gene-based feature selection algorithms. Among 2772 genes (156 known cancer-related genes) in our cancer-specific network, we selected 517 genes of which degree is 5 as hub genes. Among 517 hub genes, there were 39 cancerrelated genes (7 prostate cancer-related genes), thus 25% (=39/156) of cancer-related genes were hub genes. There were 2616 genes which are not known as cancer-related genes based on Caner Genome Project, and 478 genes among them are hubs, thus 18.27% (=478/2616) of them were hub genes. Thus, cancer-related genes had higher rate to be a hub gene than non-cancer-related genes.lists 14 overexpressed genes and 26 underexpressed genes in tumor samples from two sample t-test. We used  = 0.01 as the genome-wide significance level, and applied the Bonferroni adjustment to deal with multiple comparisons. The detailed information for each informative gene is available in the Supplementary Table S4. We used MeV software () to detect over-and underexpressed genes.
Integrative prostate cancer gene network construction
J.Ahn et al.
Analysis of cancer-specific gene network
Integrative prostate cancer gene network construction
DISCUSSIONSTo analyze the cancer-specific gene network, we firstly clustered it into modules using network clustering algorithm (), which hierarchically detect the modules in the network while allowing overlapping nodes (genes) between modules. Then we enriched these modules with Gene Ontology (GO) database using FuncAssociate (). We have found 312 clusters which has more than 3 genes. Among 312 clusters, 86 clusters were enriched with P < 0.01. Major biological processes and molecular functions of those 86 clusters are summarized in.includes well-known processes which have been implicated in oncogenesis, and seems to cover global map of biological processes and cellular functions. Detailed enrichment results and genes of each cluster are provided in Supplementary Table S2. To see more details of some cancer-specific subnetworks, we visualized the cluster 76, 128, 167, 200 and 430 of Supplementary Table S2, in. Visualization was done using the Cytoscape ().We can confirm that activation or deactivation of interactions in tumor state explains well-known processes which are related to oncogenesis. Many edges of(negative regulation of apoptosis) are observed in tumor state only, which means apoptosis are negatively regulated in tumor state. On the contrary to this, almost all the edges of(positive regulation of apoptosis) are observed in normal state only. This means apoptosis process does not function normally in tumor state. Similarly, most edges of(immune system process) can be observed in normal state only. This explains there can be defects in immune system in tumor cells. Many edges of subnetworks for cell cycle (and d) are activated in tumor state only, which shows changes of cell cycle process in network level. Using these subnetworks, we can predict more detailed roles of each gene. For example, hub gene CD3D in, which is known to be involved in T-cell development, seems to form a Page: 1853 18461853
Integrative prostate cancer gene network constructioncomplex with many genes including cancer-related genes (IKZF1, TRA@) and activate modification of complexes in which cancerrelated genes (IL2, PTPN11 and CBL) are involved. E2F1 incan be an evidence to support the fact that combinatorial interactions among proteins direct the gene expression level (). E2F1 has many interactions including PPI, GI and IPPIs, and the combinations of those interactions may influence the transcription of POLD1, TK1, MCL1, etc. It is also interesting that many cancer-related genes are observed to be involved in multiple cancer-specific subnetworks, and many play important roles. For example, RB1 inis a hub of PPIs. We identified a large number of genes that are not mentioned in any cancer-related publications, but are shown to play a crucial role. Those include TLE1 in, PTGDR inand CD3D in. These could be strong candidate genes for further biological investigation. In addition to the genes listed above, there are many more such candidates in our cancer-specific network with their predicted roles. Throughout the cancer-specific subnetworks, GIs, PPIs, GRs and IPPIs are shown to be slightly overlapped. Moreover, we observed a large number of cancer-related genes which can be detected using only one type of those interactions, and those genes must be complementary to each other. Therefore, we conclude that a network with integrated interaction is better at finding cancer-related genes than a network with only one type of interaction. Beside the subnetworks discussed above, we provide subnetwork files in SIF format for visualization in Cytoscape at http://embio.yonsei.ac.kr/Ahn/tc.php.
CONCLUSIONSIn this study, we proposed a novel cancer-specific network construction method and showed that the cancer-specific gene network contains many cancer-related genes. The selective power of our method was better than previously studied feature selection algorithms. We also proposed that the classification method can make use of our network. When constructing the network, integration of PPI, GI, GR and IPPI increased the classification accuracy. This means more complete and complementary network can be achieved by various datasets, rather than using only PPIs. By analyzing the cancer-specific gene network, we confirmed that cancer-related genes played an important role in the network, and could suggest more detailed and interpretable roles of cancerrelated genes and cancer candidate genes in the prostate cancer cells. These roles include activator/inhibitor (or activated/inhibited genes) of transcription, translocation and protein complex modification processes, as well as the membership of protein complexes that are in charge of or result in cancer-specific transcriptional regulation. We expect that more significant and interesting observations are possible.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
