Motivation: Gene regulatory network (GRN) inference based on genomic data is one of the most actively pursued computational biological problems. Because different types of biological data usually provide complementary information regarding the underlying GRN, a model that integrates big data of diverse types is expected to increase both the power and accuracy of GRN inference. Towards this goal, we propose a novel algorithm named iRafNet: integrative random forest for gene regulatory network inference. Results: iRafNet is a flexible, unified integrative framework that allows information from heterogeneous data, such as protein–protein interactions, transcription factor (TF)-DNA-binding, gene knock-down, to be jointly considered for GRN inference. Using test data from the DREAM4 and DREAM5 challenges, we demonstrate that iRafNet outperforms the original random forest based network inference algorithm (GENIE3), and is highly comparable to the community learning approach. We apply iRafNet to construct GRN in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and demonstrate that it improves the performance in predicting TF-target gene regulations and provides additional functional insights to the predicted gene regulations. Availability and implementation: The R code of iRafNet implementation and a tutorial are available at
IntroductionUnderstanding the complex gene regulatory network (GRN) has an important role in current biomedical research. With the advent of high-throughput technologies such as transcriptomic and proteomic profiling, computational inference of GRN at genome scale are feasible and a large number of models have emerged (). Common challenges exist for inferring GRNs, including the non-linearity of regulatory relationships among genes, the incompleteness and noisiness characterizing genomic data, the presence of relatively fewer samples compared with the number of genes (the 'large p small n problem'). Therefore, successful GRN inference algorithms need to be sensitive to capture the non-linearity among genes, robust to avoid over-fitting and resilient to the limited number of samples. Among the various approaches developed so far, random forest has emerged as a strong player. As an ensemble learning algorithm, random forest performs extensive bootstrap sampling and random feature selection and relies on combining the outputs from a collection of non-linear learners to derive the final model. Such practice allows the delivery of excellent performance with moderate sample size requirement. Random forest has been used as an efficient and flexible tool to predict disease phenotypes () and its utility has been demonstrated in a variety of biological applications (introduced GENIE3, a random forest based algorithm for the construction of GRN. The performance of GENIE3 was evaluated on the DREAM 4 in-silico size 100 challenge, the DREAM 4 in-silico multifactorial challenge, and the DREAM 5 network inference challenge. In particular, GENIE3 was the best performer in both the DREAM 4 in-silico multifactorial challenge () and DREAM 5 network inference challenge (). In order to better capture the direction of regulatory relationships,proposed a random forest based algorithm which infers GRN from time-series data. In particular, they demonstrated the superior performance of their algorithm over other existing methods such as dynamic Bayesian network and ordinary differential equations models. Although being very successful, these random forest based models derive GRN from a single data type, namely, the gene expression data. There is no direct way to integrate multiple genomics data such as proteinprotein interactions and expression from perturbation experiments in current implementations.The importance of integrating multiple genomics information has been well recognized by the research community. One reason of doing so is that different data types usually provide non-redundant information about regulatory relationships; e.g. proteinprotein interactions are particularly informative for the topological structure of the network and the functions of neighboring genes (); while gene expressions from perturbation and time-series experiments often provide more insights on the directionality or the causality of regulatory relationships. Multiple integrative models have been developed so far, such as Bayesian networks models (), sparse structural equation models (), and consensus techniques (). The limitations of many existing methods are the linearity and normality assumptions often made on gene regulations. For example, due to the computational complexity of the models, gene dependence structure is often approximated via a linear regression, which may not perform well under the presence of higher-order interactions in the data. On the other hand, algorithms making no assumption on the linearity or normality can easily become computationally intractable when the number of genes significantly increases and, therefore, their applicability is limited to the construction of relatively small networks (). In this article, we propose iRafNeta new algorithm in which different data types are integrated under a unified random forest framework. The key idea of iRafNet is to introduce a weighted sampling scheme within random forest to incorporate information from other source of data. Specifically, the model considers the expression of each gene as a function of the expression of other genes. For each node in the tree ensemble, instead of randomly sampling N genes from the entire gene set as done by GENIE3 (), iRafNet samples genes (the potential regulators) according to the information provided by other data such as proteinprotein interactions or expression data from perturbation experiments, so that genes supported by other data as potential regulators will be favorably sampled. By doing so, information embedded in other datasets is integrated into the network construction, while the effective search space of potential regulators is significantly reduced. To demonstrate the advantage of integrating multiple data in the construction of GRN, we consider synthetic data from the DREAM 4 () and the DREAM 5 () challenges, which have been used as gold test data sets for objectively comparing the performance of various GRN inference models. We show that iRafNet performs better than previous models in most considerations. As a real data application, we apply iRafNet to the inference of yeast GRN by integrating multiple public data sets. We show that our new approach has an improved performance in predicting transcription factor (TF) regulations and it also provides additional functional insights to the predicted gene regulations.
Methods
Overview of random forest-based GRN inferenceRandom forest is an ensemble algorithm based on learning a collection of decision trees. Each decision tree is learned independently on a group of bootstrapped samples. Starting from the root node containing all observations, each tree recursively splits observations into more homogeneous subsets. This allocation process is obtained by determining and applying certain splitting rules depending on the predictor variables. Specifically, at each node in the tree ensemble, N candidate predictors (N < p, with p being the number of all genes) are randomly sampled and the final predictor to be used for the splitting rule is chosen to minimize a certain cost function (). Finally, outputs from individual trees are averaged to obtain the ultimate outcome. Recently, Huynh-Thu et al. (2009) introduced GENIE3, a random forest based model which infers GRN by solving p independent regression problems. Specifically, the expression of a particular gene g j is modeled as a function of the expression of other genes via random forest and genes that are strong predictors for the expression of g j are considered as g j 's regulators. Genes are ranked based on the measure of importance resulting from random forest. The importance score S k,j of gene g k for predicting gene g j is defined as the total decrease in node impurity due to splitting the samples based on gene g j (). Let s denote a node in the tree ensemble and let (s L , s R ) denote its left and right children nodes. Then, the decrease in node impurity I(s) from splitting s based on gene g k is defined aswhere v(s), v(s L ) and v(s R ) are the variances of observations allocated to s, s L and s R ; while c s , c sL and c sR are the number of samples allocated to s, s L and s R. Let V k be the set of nodes in the tree ensemble that use g k for the splitting rule. Then, the importance score S k,j of gene g k for predicting gene g j is calculated as the average of node impurities across all trees, i.e. S k;j  P s2V kIs=T where T is the number of trees.
iRafNet algorithm designIn this article, we introduce a weighted sampling scheme under the framework of random forest to allow the integration of heterogeneous data types. As shown in, first, iRafNet processes supporting data to derive the prior belief of regulatory relationships among genes, then, it integrates such prior information to the main dataset via random forest to construct the final GRN. We consider different genomic data including gene expression data from steadystate experiments, time-series experiments, knockout experiments and other biological data such as proteinprotein interactions. As shown in, one data source is considered as main input data for random forest inference while other D datasets (supporting data) are utilized to derive prior information. iRafNet can be summarized in the following major steps, and detailed information regarding each step is provided in later sections:Step A1. For the dth supporting data, with d 2 f1; :::; Dg, we derive scores fs d k!j g which measure the likelihood of regulatory events fg k ! g j g based on the dth genomic data. Then, scores fs d k!j g are transformed into sampling weights fw d k!j g, which are utilized in the next step for data integration; Step A2. For each target gene g j , with j  f1; :::; pg, we model the expression value of gene g j as a function of the expression value of potential regulators via random forest using the main input dataset. Particularly, at each node, we randomly choose an integer I 2 f1; :::; Dg with equal probability and sample N potential regulators according to weights fw I k!j g; Step A3. Potential regulators are ranked based on the importance score resulting from random forest (see Section 2.1). In Step A1, sampling weights are derived from fs d k!j g which can be any score measuring how likely regulatory relationships fg k ! g j g are based on the dth genomic data. In particular, when scores fs d k!j g i198 F.Petralia et al. consist of P-values, weights are calculated as w d k!j  1=s d k!j  1. The procedure utilized to sample potential regulators in Step A2 is an extension of the one introduced by. As we described in Section 2.1, the importance score for a given predictor is derived by averaging the decrease in node impurities across all trees. Under the standard random forest algorithm, at each node, N potential regulators are proposed as candidates for the splitting rule via random sampling. When the number of potential regulators is large, relevant variables will less likely be sampled as candidates for establishing splitting rules. Consequently, for each tree, the total decrease in node impurity of relevant variables will be reduced. iRafNet overcomes this problem by sampling potential regulators according to prior information so that variables supported as relevant by other data will be more frequently sampled as candidates for the splitting procedure. Generally, potential regulators of a target gene g j consist of any other gene g k with k 6  j; in some cases, the set of potential regulators may be set as a smaller subset based on certain prior knowledge. It is worth noting that Step A2 can be performed using either steadystate (Huynh) or time-series gene expression data (). Because steady-state gene expression data usually contains more samples than time-series data, we use the former as main dataset for random forest construction and the latter to derive prior weights in Step A1.
Construction of sampling weightsOne key step of iRafNet is to transform information embedded in supporting data into indicators of potential gene regulations. In this section, we focus on some commonly used data types which include steady-state gene expression, time-series gene expression, proteinprotein interactions and gene expression from knockout experiments. For each data type, we provide detailed information on how weights are derived.
Weights based on proteinprotein interactionsWe use diffusion kernel to capture and transform the proteinprotein interaction information (). We define the diffusion matrix as F  e H with H being a p  p symmetric matrix with: a. h j, k equals one if genes g j and g k interact, and zero otherwise for j6  k(off-diagonal element) b. h k,k  i k , where i k is the total number of interactions of gene g k (diagonal element).Given the diffusion matrix F, regulatory weights are constructed as w PPI k!j  F k;j , i.e. the element (k, j) of F. Because proteinprotein interactions are bi-directional, the following identity holds w PPI k!j  w PPI j!k  F k;j  F j;k .(1); Dg, we derive weights fw d k!j g measuring the prior belief of regulatory relationships fg k ! g j g. Using expression data, we run random forest to find genes regulating g j. At each node, instead of sampling a random subset of genes from the entire set of genes; we randomly choose an integer I 2 f1; :::; Dg and we sample genes according to weights fw I k!j g. The final network is derived by ranking potential regulators based on the random forest importance score iRafNet for GRN inference i199 According to Equation (1), missing weights fw KO s!j g are found via a weighted average of scores fw KO '!j g '2R with weights proportional to the corresponding similarity measures. The similarity measure derived in Step B3 is based on the assumption that when two genes are functionally related they are more likely to be affected by a similar set of genes ().
iRafNet implementation and availabilityiRafNet package is an extension of the original package Random Forest available in R Cran (). Specifically, the original random forest code was modified to allow weighted random sampling. The computational complexity of iRafNet is the same as GENIE3, i.e. OpTNnlog n, where n is the sample size, p is the number of genes, N is the number of variables sampled at each node and T is the number of trees. iRafNet can be easily parallelized as the network inference consists of p independent sub-problems. iRafNet requires users to specify T, the number of trees and N, the number of potential regulators to be sampled at each node. As the number of trees increases, the tree ensemble generally provides more accurate results. For this reason, the number of trees is usually chosen sufficiently large (T > 500). The choice of N is less straightforward, since large values of N usually result in predictions with high-bias; while low values result in predictions with high-variance (). However, it is a common practice to set N  r 1/2 with r being the number of potential regulators (either the number of genes 1, or a customized smaller number) ().
Results
Application of iRafNet to the DREAM 4 and DREAM 5 network inference challengesTo evaluate the performance of iRafNet, experiments from the DREAM 4 () in-silico size 100 and the DREAM 5 () challenge are considered. Both challenges provide gene expression and other biological data such as time-series and perturbation data. Each team participating in the challenge had access to all different data types, and the exact data to be used for GRN inference was a decision made by each team. For each synthetic data, iRafNet was compared with GENIE3. In particular, GENIE3 results were obtained directly from The Dream Project website (http://www.the-dream-project.org/). The DREAM 4 in-silico size 100 challenge consists of five networks involving p  100 genes. For all experiments, sampling weights were computed from P-values as described in Methods section. For each network, knockout data and time-series expression were provided. In particular, time-series data consisted of ten different experiments with 21 time points each; while knockout data included wild-type gene expression and gene expression after knocking out each one of the p genes. iRafNet infers the five networks from time-series data utilizing knockout data as prior information. Because knockout data are based on one experiment, P-values could not be computed via standard t-test. Alternatively, we derived P-values P KO k!j as P KO k!j  21  Ujx KO k!j  x wt j j=r j , where U is the distribution function of the standard normal distribution with mean of 0 and SD of 1; and r j is the SD of the expression of gene g j based on all samples in the knockout data. Following the original algorithm GENIE3, random forest parameters are set as T  1000 and N  r 1/2 , with r being the total number of genes minus one, i.e. r  99.compares GENIE3 and iRafNet in terms of the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) and the precision-recall curve (AUPR). Both GENIE3 and iRafNet provide a ranking of regulatory relationships based on importance scores resulting from random forest. For different thresholds on the importance scores, we computed receiver operating characteristic and precision-recall curves using the R package 'ROCR'. For each network, knockout data and time-series gene expression are provided. GENIE3 is implemented using only time-series gene expression; the best performer utilizes only knockout data; while iRafNet integrates both knockout data and time-series gene expression. For iRafNet, we provide 95% confidence intervals for both AUC and AUPR values. The confidence interval for AUC was derived using 'ci.auc()' function in R package 'pROC' (), which implements a method developed by. The confidence interval for AUPR was computed using a logit transformation approach (). As shown in, our algorithm achieves better predictive performance compared with GENIE3 in terms of both AUC and AUPR for all the five networks involved in the DREAM 4 challenge. Furthermore, as shown in, iRafNet performs similarly to the best performer in the DREAM4 in-silico size 100 challenge, which inferred GRN from knock-out data alone (). The DREAM 5 challenge consists of four networks with one being derived by insilico simulation and the other three being obtained experimentally from three species. We report results concerning Network 1 and Network 3, involving 1643 and 4511 genes, respectively. We decided to focus on these two networks mainly besection, since time-series data is usually characterized by small sample sizes,lenge, for each model, receiver operating characteristic and precisionrecall curves were computed considering the top 100 000 regulations.compares iRafNet, GENIE3 and COMMUNITY in terms of AUC and AUPR. COMMUNITY is a more generalized ensemble model, which derives a consensus network by combining the results of all 35 teams participating in the challenge (). The DREAM 5 challenge provides predicted networks for all teams participating in the challenge; based on this information, we compute confidence intervals of the area under the ROC and precision recall curve for all models and include the results in. Although COMMUNITY outperformed each single team participating in the challenge, iRafNet results in better AUPR than both GENIE 3 and COMMUNITY. Specifically, the AUPR of iRafNet is $9% larger than that of COMMUNITY and $21% larger than that of GENIE3 for Network 1. For Network 3, the AUPR of iRafNet is $11% larger than that of COMMUNITY and GENIE3. The three methods scored similar performance in terms of AUC; however, as shown in, iRafNet outperforms the other two methods in the most critical region of the ROC curve characterized by small values of false positive rates. It is worth noting that the DREAM4 challenge is based on in-silico data and provides complete knockout data. As illustrated in, for this challenge, the performance ofis comparable to iRafNet. However, with data input more similar to real-world applications (i.e. only a small set of genes are knocked out), the model that estimates GRN solely from knockout data may perform poorly. As an illustration, we reported inthe results from a team participating in the DREAM 5 challenge who considered only knockout data for GRN inference. This algorithm is referred to as Meta 1 byand resembles the best performing algorithms from the DREAM 4 challenge (). As shown in, iRafNet outperforms this algorithm in terms of both AUC and AUPR.
Application of iRafNet to GRN inference in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeTo further demonstrate the applicability of iRafNet to real biological data, we apply iRafNet to construct GRN in S. cerevisiae. In particular, we considered knockout data from, proteinprotein interactions from three databases), DIP () and MINT (, time-series data (), and steady-state expression for p  3665 genes from. iRafNet constructed GRN from steady-state gene expression data and used proteinprotein interactions, knockout gene expression and time-series gene expression as prior information. For testing purposes, iRafNet was compared to GENIE3 which estimates GRN from gene expression data alone.For the time-series data (), we selected timecourse gene expression data from cdc28 cell cycle arrest which consists of 17 time points. For the knockout data, we considered P-values provided by. The total number of knockout genes from this experiment was 169 and missing causal relationships were inferred as described in Methods section. Further details on how sampling weights were derived are provided in Methods section. The random forest parameters were set as T  1000 and N  r 1/2 , respectively, where r  3664. In order to evaluate the performance of both models, the following criteria were considered: GO terms enrichment and prediction of TF regulations.
iRafNet results in more enriched GO categoriesWe compared networks resulting from GENIE3 and iRafNet based on GO terms enrichment. We focused on 58 GO Slim terms obtained from the Saccharomyces Genome Database () containing from 20 to 200 genes. For each model, importance scores for all regulatory relationships were derived and we focused on the 200 000 highest scored regulatory relationships (in the DREAM5 challenge, only the first 100 000 predicted regulations were considered for the competition, we relax the cutoff so that true predictions are less likely to be excluded due to this parameter setting). For each GO term, the enrichment score was computed via a one-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (). Specifically, for each GO term, we considered every undirected edge between all pairs of genes contained in the GO category and calculated the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistics based on importance scores of undirected edges resulting from each method. The importance score of each undirected edge (g s  g k ) was defined as the mean between importance scores of the two directed edges g s ! g k  and g s g k . The Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistics reflects the degree to which a gene ontology (GO) category is overrepresented at the top of the ranked list of importance scores.shows the number of GO terms with significant enrichment. As shown, iRafNet results in more enriched GO categories than the original algorithm which relies on a single data type. Supplementaryin the supplementary material shows the list of GO categories and corresponding P-values under each method.
iRafNet better predicts TF regulationsIn this section, we evaluate the ability of our model to predict TF regulations. For this purpose, we consider results fromwhich used chromatin immuno-precipitation techniques to detect TF-gene interactions and provided P-values of regulations between 72 TFs and 3644 genes. Based on these P-values, we derive the 'true' network. Specifically, an edge between TF g k and gene g j g k ! g j  is considered true if the corresponding P-value is smaller than 0.01; while the edge of the opposite direction g j ! g k  is used as negative control.shows the AUC and AUPR for GENIE3 and iRafNet. Specifically, for iRafNet, we used different set of weights derived from either knockout, time-series or protein protein interactions data, as well as used all these weights simultaneously. Overall, iRafNet results in better predictive performance than GENIE3. The best predictive performance is achieved when sampling weights were obtained from knockout data alone. This result is not completely surprising since knockout data is considered one of the most informative data for inferring regulatory relationships (). The slightly less optimal performance resulting from integrating all data types may be due to the inconsistency among different datasets (e.g. some datasets could have less optimal quality). This result suggests that a careful selection of input data is very important regardless the underlying algorithms. We perform another comparison based on the ability to predict TF regulations. Let R t h be the top t h directed regulations with the largest importance scores. Then, we derive R e R t h , defined as the set of directed edges belonging to set R t h which were found to be significant (P < 0.01) byand R d R e , defined as the set of directed edges for which the opposite direction is not included in set R t h. A higher cardinality of R e indicates that the algorithm is more capable of revealing the regulatory relationships as detected by; while the higher cardinality of R d indicates the algorithm is more accurate in excluding the 'wrong' directed edges. As shown in, for different values of t h , iRafNet consistently identifies larger R e and R d than GENIE3. Supplementaryin the supplementary material provides a list of regulations identified by iRafNet but not recovered by GENIE3. Multiple regulations are supported by independent experiments, suggesting the validity of the predictions. For example,showed that Dig1 forms a complex with Ste12, Tec1 or Dig2. Dig1 knockout caused up-regulation of Fus1 gene expression, the effect was particularly significant when both Dig1 and Dig2 were knocked out (). As another example,showed that the transcription of ADH1 was sensitive to GCR1 disruption, which is consistent with our prediction.
DiscussionIn this article, we develop iRafNet, a unified framework based on random forest which constructs GRNs by integrating information from multiple data types. Specifically, information from different data sources is used to derive a series of weights, which, then, are utilized for sampling potential regulators during the tree construction. This weighting scheme provides multiple benefits compared with the sampling procedure adopted by the standard randomFor both GENIE3 and iRafNet, we consider the set of 200 000 highest scored directed edges, referred to as D. As shown, the number of unique undirected edges a  b was 156 359 and 163 886 for GENIE3 and iRafNet, respectively. For each method, we show the number of GO categories with significant enrichment for different P-value thresholds (0.05 and 0.01).For each model, the AUC and the AUPR and corresponding 95% confidence intervals are reported. i202 F.forest. In the original random forest algorithm, at each node, sampling is done by randomly selecting N potential regulators and, among them, the predictor maximizing the decrease in node impurity is chosen for the splitting rule. This strategy may be less effective when the number of informative predictors is small compared with the total number of genes; in such case, informative predictors have small chance of being chosen as candidates for the splitting rules. This will cause the importance scores of informative predictors to be lower compared to the cases when they have larger chance of being chosen as potential regulators. Simply increasing the number of trees may not resolve the aforementioned problem. In order to better illustrate this point, we applied GENIE3 to infer Network 1 from the DREAM 5 challenge using different tree numbers. As shown in, the predictive performance is relatively unchanged when we increase the tree number from 500 to 5000. This result is not surprising since a larger tree number is not going to significantly change the average score of a feature across all trees when T is already large. Our approach of weighted sampling allows potential regulators identified as informative by other genomic data to be more favorably selected. As a result, the corresponding importance score will be more favorably measured compared with other regulators with no prior support. The importance of appropriate prioritizing relevant features in highdimensional learning has been recognized by multiple works. For example, a recent work showed that using a bootstrap ranking to derive a robust prioritization of SNPs could significantly increase the performance of disease risk prediction (). Our work provides another demonstration on this concept and points out a direction to further improve the prediction performance under random forest framework. Besides reducing the curse of dimensionality, iRafNet is expected to increase accuracy and coverage of GRN inference through integrating diverse information using its weighting scheme. Of course, this may not always be the case, as we have seen that when datasets of different quality and different origin are combined, the overall performance may actually reduce. In this work, we only illustrate the integration of limited types of genomic data. However, iRafNet can be utilized to integrate almost any data type as long as its information can be transformed into prior knowledge regarding potential regulatory relationships. When compared with other integrative models like Bayesian network, the advantage of iRafNet relies on its computational efficiency and the robust predictive performance resulting from its nonparametric nature. In fact, a limitation of many existing methods such as Bayesian networks are the linearity and normality assumptions often made to reduce the computational complexity of the algorithm. Although non-parametric Bayesian networks have been proposed in literature (), they are computationally intensive and generally require very large sample size. The computational complexity of Bayesian networks is amplified by the difficulties encountered in parallelizing the algorithm. In contrast to Bayesian networks, iRafNet can flexibly model non-linearity and higher-order interactions while being efficient on large-scale applications as it can be easily executed with parallelization. Moreover, the performance of iRafNet is in general robust to the number of trees in the random forest model upon our investigation. One open question in the estimation of GRN is whether the best performance is achieved by single models or by COMMUNITY methods which derive a consensus network combining results from different models (). Recently,claimed that COMMUNITY methods perform better than single methods. Despite their predictive performance, COMMUNITY methods remain computationally demanding algorithms which require the estimation of many different models followed by the estimation of the consensus network. For the DREAM5 challenge, our algorithm was compared to COMMUNITY, which integrated the predictions of 35 teams participating in the challenge (). As we showed in the manuscript, iRafNet is comparable to if not better than the COMMUNITY and, therefore, represents an efficient alternative (for the datasets used in this work, iRafNet can finish in less than an hour on a cluster running in parallel). In our implementation of iRafNet, we treated time-series and steady-state gene expression data separately, one for deriving prior information regarding potential regulators, while the other as main input for random forest construction. Alternatively, they could be combined as a single dataset and be used as input for a single source-based random forest algorithm. Although combining the two datasets would increase the sample size and generally provide greater power in detecting regulations; problems may arise when the sample sizes of the two data sets are imbalanced. In such situation, the construction of tree ensemble may be largely driven by the dataset with more samples while the signals embedded in the smaller dataset may be concealed. This would be less an issue when the two datasets are used separately to train different models. For this reason, we decided to integrate time-series and steady-state gene expression in two stages. A rigorous test should be considered to evaluate and compare the performance of either combining datasets or treating them separately in a two-stage learning procedure. It is also worth noting that prior weights may be computed using alternative methods. For example, in Section 2.3.3, instead of using the Jaccard index, other methods may be utilized to measure the similarity between genes. Because the 'best' methods for prior weights calculation may depend on the data inputs, users are encouraged to explore different options when calculating the prior information. Additional work is needed to improve the way that different data types are integrated. In its current implementation, prior biological data, such as proteinprotein interactions and expression fromNetwork 1 from the DREAM 5 challenge is considered and performance measured in terms of AUC and the AUPR.Cardinality (n e , n d ) of sets (R e , R d ). Let R tk be the set of the first t h directed edges with highest scores, with t h  {60 000; 80 000; 100 000}. Then, R e R th is defined as the set of directed edges found to be significant (P < 0.01) by, while R d R e is defined as the set of directed edges in R e for which the opposite direction is not included in set R tk .
iRafNet for GRN inference i203perturbation experiments, are equally weighted. This characteristic is appealing when different source of data provide equally important information about regulatory relationships. However, in real world applications, some experiments may be less informative about the network structure and an equal weighting procedure may penalize the overall performance. To overcome this problem, as future work, we consider to design a new model where the contribution of each data source is estimated and appropriately weighted within the unified random forest framework.iRafNet for GRN inference i205
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
.3.2 Weights based on time-series gene expression In contrast to proteinprotein interactions, time series data can provide information on the directionality of regulatory relationships. According to the definition of Granger causality, a gene g k is causal for gene g j if past values of g k are predictive for future values of g j (Lozano et al., 2009). For a pair of genes (g j , g k ), the expression value of gene g j at future time (t  1) is modeled as a linear function of the expression value of gene g k at current time (t) and the significance of regulation g k ! g j is tested via a standard t-test. The resulting P-values fP TS k!j g are, then, utilized to derive sampling weights as follows w TS k!j  1=p TS k!j  1. 2.3.3 Weights based on knockout data We denote x wt j the expression of gene g j in wild-type condition, and x KO k!j the expression of gene g j after knocking out gene g k. Similarly to time-series data, weights w KO k!j are derived as w KO k!j  1=P KO k!j  1 with P KO k!j being the P-value testing the regulatory relationship g k ! g j based on knockout data. Specifically, P KO k!j is computed via a two-tailed t-test on the difference x wt j  w KO k!j . In real world applications, only a small subset of genes is generally knocked-out and only some regulatory relationships could be inferred by this approach. To overcome this problem, we propose a method that imputes causal relationships by borrowing information from other knocked-out genes. Let R be the set of knocked-out genes; then, missing causal relationships are inferred based on the following steps: Step B1. For any gene g k with g k 2 R, we derive P-values fP KO k!j g and we consider the regulatory event g k ! g j true if P KO k!j is smaller than 0.01; Step B2. For each pair of genes (g h , g k ), a measure of similarity is obtained as follows:  We derive the sets of genes which are functionally related to genes g h and g k based on knockout data. In particular, a. when both g h and g k belong to R, we compute (E h , E k ), the sets of genes affected by knocking-out genes (g h , g k ), and (C h , C k ), the sets of knocked-out genes which affect genes (g h, g k ); b. otherwise, we compute only (C h, C k ), the sets of knocked-out genes which affect genes (g h, g k );  Letting J(A, B) be the Jaccard index between sets A and B, the similarity measure G h,k between genes g h and g k is derived as a. G h;k  JE h ; E k   JC h ; C k =2; b. G h;k  JC h ; C k ; Step B3. For genes fg s ; s6 2 Rg, we impute missing weights as follows:
F.Petralia et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
