Motivation: Limited cohort of transcription factors is capable to structure various gene-expression patterns. Transcriptional cooperativity (TC) is deemed to be the main mechanism of complexity and precision in regulatory programs. Although many data types generated from numerous experimental technologies are utilized in an attempt to understand combinational transcriptional regulation, complementary computational approach that can integrate diverse data resources and assimilate them into biological model is still under development. Results: We developed a novel Bayesian approach for integrative analysis of proteomic, transcriptomic and genomic data to identify specific TC. The model evaluation demonstrated distinguishable power of features derived from distinct data sources and their essen-tiality to model performance. Our model outperformed other classifiers and alternative methods. The application that contextualized TC within hepatocarcinogenesis revealed carcinoma associated alterations. Derived TC networks were highly significant in capturing validated cooperativity as well as revealing novel ones. Our methodology is the first multiple data integration approach to predict dynamic nature of TC. It is promising in identifying tissue-or disease-specific TC and can further facilitate the interpretation of underlying mechanisms for various physiological conditions. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONIn the human genome, genes manifest dramatic diversity in terms of expression levels and tissue-or condition-specific expression patterns. Despite this tremendous diversity, all genes are controlled by numbered transcription factors (TFs). TFs can work as monomers, homodimers and heterodimers to facilitate (as an activator) or inhibit (as a repressor) the recruitment of RNA polymerase and display high specificity in ligand activation thereby precisely controlling the condition-dependent expression of target genes (TGs) (). TF activity and interaction is characterized of condition-dependence and transience. Such mutual regulation among TFs underlies major features of cellular identity and complex functions such as pluripotency (), development () and differentiation () even diseases (), which makes the study of transcriptional cooperativity (TC) of paramount importantance. The development of numerous experimental technologies including whole-genome sequencing, large-scale expression profiling, yeast two-hybrid experiments and emerging chromatin immunoprecipitation makes it possible to understand the combinational transcriptional regulation from various perspectives. Biologically relevant synergistic interactions between different TFs are discovered in yeast by insight into gene expression data (). Proteinprotein interaction (PPI) data is also used to infer synergistic binding of cooperative TFs (). Another study that can indicate the interactions between TFs is based on the genome sequence (. b). More recently, the ENCODE Consortium provides comprehensive Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing data for reliable view of TF-binding-site interaction (). Previous studies on the investigation of TC are reasonable in assumptions or biology. Many TFs bind DNA preferentially at characteristic sequence motifs, thereby providing the sequence specificity required to reflect the possible spatial relationships between TFs in terms of preferences in distance and orientation (). The interaction between two proteins indicates they contribute to the same or similar biological processes (). The gene profiles reveal the similarity between gene expressions, which could be used to infer synergistic relationships between TFs when their common TGs show highly correlated expression patterns (). Although previous studies have made encouraging progress, the investigation of TC encounters four major challenges: (i) the time consumption and high costs of valid experiments; (ii) the vast majority of TFs not being experimentally profiled genome wide; (iii) the difficulty of interrogating the activities of multiple TFs within the same cellular environment; (iv) mainly focusing on static or global interaction but ignoring the dynamic nature of TC. All of these have underscored the need to integrate various data and construct a complementary computational approach that can assimilate them into biological models. The TC defined in this article broadly means the functional interaction between different DNA-binding TFs in regulation of gene expression. It could be physical, genetic or regulatory interaction between TFs, competitive or synergetic co-regulation. Furthermore, TF homodimer interactions and interactions *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com between TFs and non-DNA-binding cofactors as well as cooperativity among multiple TFs are not within our research emphasis. In this article, we proposed a novel algorithm based on Bayesian theory for integrative analysis of diverse large-scale biological data to identify TC. Our strategy is based on hypothesis that cooperative TF pairs share shorter distance in PPI network, closer spatial relationship on promoter regions, stronger distance constraint among binding sites and higher correlation on gene expression pattern. We derived four features and tested their discrimination based on HepG2 golden standard dataset. Benchmark analyses were implemented for the assessment of model performance compared with individual feature and straight Logistic regression as well as one-feature-removed Bayesian model. Furthermore, we performed comparison with other existing methods. Bayesian approach was then applied to contextualize TC within hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Data sourcesOur study started with the collection of informative data resources, which include PPI data, position weighted matrices (PWMs), TFTG regulatory relationships and gene-expression data of specific tissuedisease. The PPI data used to calculate PPI score are publicly available from HPRD (). The PWMs were obtained from TRANSFAC (), JASPAR () and researches on ENCODE data (). Promoter sequence set was built by extracting sequences 1000 bases upstream of annotated transcription starts of RefSeq genes with annotated 5' UTRs from Human genome sequence (hg19). TFTG regulatory relationships were collected from three distinct databases: TRED (), InnateDB () and HTRIdb (). We used microarray data of human liver cell line (HepG2) induced by PCB153 (GSE6494) for feature and model evaluation, neuroblastomas SKNSH cells induced by retinoic acid (GSE9169) for method comparison and gene profiles during HCC progression (GSE25097) for application.
The PPI scoreFirst, we constructed a PPI network based on non-redundant PPI data from HPRD that consists of 39 240 PPIs involving 9673 proteins. Then, extended CzekanowskiDice distance was used to calculate the distances between proteins (). It can express diversity and specificity of distances between proteins adequately. For the proteins A and B with the range l, D(A, B, l) was defined as follows:DA, B, l Where Int k (A) is a list of proteins whose minimum number of edges needed to reach protein A is equal to k (to decrease the distance between proteins interacting with each other, Int k (A) includes the protein A itself). D(A, B, l) is equal to CzekanowskiDice distance. Finally, the PPI score as a measurement of cooperativity between proteins was defined as follows:PPI Score  min l DA, B, l, l in f1, 2g: 2
Genome-wide search for PWMSeven hundred and seventy-four unique PWMs united from TRANSFAC (), JASPAR () and researches on ENCODE data () were imposed with genome-wide search for their binding occurrence and sites (the schematic is shown in Supplementary). We performed PWM scan under the assistance of BSgenome package and only considered TF binding in promoter region that was defined as 1000 bases upstream from transcriptional start site (TSS). The minimum match score was set to 95%. Although some regulatory elements can act over large distances, up to several kilobases from TSS, we focused on sequences in the relative proximity of TSS as they are most likely to contain regulatory information for latent spatial relationships between TFs. Totally, there are $4.8 million hits in non-repetitive promoter regions, which correspond to $6200 hits for each PWM.
Co-occurrence scoreCo-occurrence score evaluates the over-representation of TF pair occurrence in the promoters of common TGs regulated by two TFs compared to its occurrence in all promoters in human genome. It was calculated according to:where n is the number of the promoters of common TGs regulated by two TFs; N is the total number of human promoters; g is the occurrence of TF pair in the promoters of common TGs regulated by two TFs; and G is the overall occurrence of TF pair in promoters of entire human genome. The equation was used to obtain the probability of observing the TF pair g or more times in the n promoters of common TGs regulated by two TFs, given that the TF pair occurs G times in total N promoters. It is notable that some TFs have multiple binding sites in one promoter. In such cases, when calculating g and G we counted all combinations between the TF binding sites. Other researchers reported that counting all possible pairs yielded better performance than regarding these cases as a single binding-site pair occurrence (, b). Note that one TF pair may correspond with several PWM pairs since one TF may have more than one PWM, so the co-occurrence score was taken as the minimum among them.
Distance constraint scoreThe distance constraint between binding sites of one TF pair in promoter regions was measured by comparing the observed distance distribution f obv (d) with a background distribution f (d) using the Kolmogorov Smirnov test. For each TF pair, distances between their binding sites were calculated. If one or both TFs own multiple binding sites in one promoter, we included the distances between all combinations as we did for co-occurrence score. The background distribution f (d) was obtained by considering binding sites of TF pair occur randomly on promoters and measuring the distances between them (in unit of bp). It can be normalized as:where L is the length of one promoter sequence; w a and w b are the widths of the binding sites of TF a and TF b ; d is the binding site distance; and L  w a  w b  d  1 means the number of all possible arrangements for the binding site pair. The background distribution f L (d) varies depending on different promoter sequence length L. In our approach, L was 1000 bp.
Co-expressionFor a given TF pair, assume there are m (m!2) common genes shared by both. Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) based on gene-expression profiles was calculated for each of the M  C 2 m pairs of genes. PCC was applied with Fisher transformation to obtain co-expression r for the following analysis: r  1 2 ln 1  PCC 1  PCC : 5
Bayesian modelFor each TF pair, we separated data resources into two parts: prior information and context-specific data. PPI, co-occurrence and distance constraint were considered as prior information that is independent of the cell type or physical condition and were integrated together through Logistic model as prior probability that reflects the general propensity of cooperativity.Due to the possibility of numerical underflow from very small probabilities, we made use of natural logarithm for co-occurrence score and distance constraint score. The overall model shown schematically inwas based on Bayesian theorywhere p represents the probability of combinational cooperativity given the prior information and specific gene profiling. Prior probability that a TF pair is cooperative was termed as  P(I  1). Here 1   P(I  0) was analogous to representing one TF pair is not cooperative. Co-expression r was assumed to be generated from one of two underlying distributions. One relates to the cooperative state of TF pair rjI  1, while the other distribution corresponds to the uncooperative state rjI  0. Co-expression r can be modelled with normal distribution as:Distributions for cooperative state and uncooperative state were designated with parameters 1 , 1 and 2 , 2 .
Parameter estimation and model computationThe parameters of the Bayesian model 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 1 , 1 , 2 , 2 were estimated by maximizing the likelihood function using expectation maximization (EM) algorithm. The EM algorithm used in our model is robust and fast on convergence as long as proper initial parameters are selected. We initialized the parameters with the utilization of PPI data. Although PPI is constituent of prior information, it still contributes to an informed starting point. Detailed implementation of EM algorithm is as follows.Step 1: Based on PPI information, extract TF pairs from the qualified TF pairs and label them with 'co-operative'. Randomly sampled equal-sized TF pairs from the rests and label them with 'nonco-operative'.Step 2: Utilize the dataset constructed in Step 1 to fit 0 s in Logistic model and 0 s, 0 s of normal distributions.Step 3: Calculate the expected p based on parameters estimated in Step 2.Step 4: Maximize the likelihood function to obtain all the parameters and update the initial values with the new estimations.Step 5: Repeat regular EM steps until convergence.The criteria for convergence are: (i) the likelihood of the model changes by 0.001 and (ii) all the parameters change by 0.001 with respect to the previous EM iteration.
Golden standard dataset ofTC in HepG2Utilizing domain-based interaction data () and TF-to-TF regulatory interactions specific in HepG2 (), we confirmed 68 TF pairs validated by experiments and hepatoblastoma-specific (HepG2) to form the golden positive dataset. Since the majority of TC remains undiscovered to date, it is difficult to derive a reasonable golden negative dataset. In this article, we used three rules to identify the negatives: (i) the TF pairs are not physical interacted; (ii) TFs are not specifically interacted in HepG2; and (iii) TF pairs cannot share identical gene ontology (GO) terms on cellular component considering TF pairs who function in different components would not be interacted. Based on these criteria, 428 TF pairs were left to form the golden negative dataset.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Feature construction and discriminationWe derived features from various data sources and based on reasonable biological assumptions. The PPI score based on extended CzekanowskiDice distance was used to measure the distance between proteins in the PPI network. The closeness between two TFs in PPI network suggests their contribution to the same or similar biological processes, from which, we can deduce that these two TFs possess a high probability to be cooperative. If two TFs are interacted, intuitively, one can expect their binding occurrence to be enriched in the promoters of their common TGs compared to the whole genome; furthermore, the distance between their binding sites should be significantly shorter than the random expectation. Co-occurrence score and distance constrain score were compiled from this property. Researches on various model systems have revealed that cooperative TFs have complicated patterns of significant coexpression (), besides, TGs' expression correlation reflects the transient and dynamic natures of TC, which is potent to explain the context-specific cooperative behaviour between TFs. From this, we deduced co-expression feature (see Materials and Methods section). To measure the extent to which these evidence resources could differentiate cooperative and non-cooperative TF pairs, we built) and golden negative dataset (GND) includes 428 TF pairs (Supplementary). We made comparative analysis for GSD VS GND. The density plots of four features show excellent discrimination for positives and negatives (). Compared with non-cooperative TF pairs, cooperative TF pairs display shorter distance in PPI network, closer spatial relationship in promoter regions, stronger distance constrains among binding sites and higher correlation on gene expression pattern, which validates our assumption. Wilcoxon Rank Sum test was employed to capture the significance of difference between two classes using the features we defined. The P-values (inside each density plot of) indicate significantly distinguishable power of each feature, which validates the effectiveness of those features to predict TC.
Model efficiency and performanceThe PPI, co-occurrence and distance constraint were considered as prior information that is independent of the cell type or physical condition and were integrated through Logistic model as prior probability to reflect the general propensity of cooperativity. Co-expression calculated from context-specific gene profiling reflects the dynamic and transient behaviour of TC. ThenBayesian model combines prior information and specific gene expression information to compute the posterior probability that a TF pair is conditionally cooperative (see Materials and Methods section). The EM algorithm was used to maximize the likelihood function for the estimation of parameters in Bayesian model. Faster convergence was achieved if we used informative initial values. Normally, GSD, if available, would be used to initialize parameters. However, in many cases, it is difficult to construct a legitimate GSD. We recommended that PPI data could be used to give an informed starting point. Using PPIvalidated TF pairs labelled as 'co-operative' and randomly sampled TF pairs labelled as 'non-co-operative', we can fit the parameters in Bayesian model as starting point. Then, regular EM algorithm was conducted until convergence. With this strategy, the iteration of HepG2 dataset is 154. As a comparison, we evaluated whether plain starting point would affect model convergence. We built an equal-sized dataset as GSD of HepG2 by random sampling without replacement for TF pairs. Then, each TF pair in the dataset was allocated with a binary variable indicating 'co-operative' or 'non-co-operative'. Next, Bayesian model was trained. This process was repeated for 100 trials. The EM iteration ranges from 400 to 604 with average of 502 and SD 38 (), which indicates uninformed starting point hampers the model efficiency. To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach, we first performed comparison with individual feature and straightLogistic regression that includes four features, using the HepG2 dataset we described before. For individual feature, we simply used the feature score to predict TF cooperativity. For Bayesian model and straight Logistic regression, we trained them with 5-fold cross-validation. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves of these classifiers () show that our proposed Bayesian model consistently outperformed the other tested classifiers. Not surprisingly, multi-feature models performed better than single feature. At sensitivity of 80%, the false positive rate of Bayesian model is $30%, 10%5Logistic regression. Moreover, Bayesian model has the biggest AUC (area under ROC curve) of 0.83 while Logistic's AUC is 0.78. We further investigated the importance of each feature for Bayesian model performance. Four features were removed from the model successively. Each time, only one feature was removed and Bayesian model was trained on HepG2 dataset. Note that when co-expression is excluded, the Bayesian model turns to typical Logistic regression with three features.displays their performance in terms of ROC. As expected, one-featureremoved model substantially transcends one-feature-only model but is inferior to full-feature model. It demonstrates the essentiality of each feature. Although no data type is fully informative when taken alone, by combination, Bayesian approach is capable to confidently infer quantitative TC.
Comparison with other methodsWe performed extensional comparison with other existing methods mentioned in the section 1 to see whether integrated Bayesian model can predict TC more accurately. Each method was replayed and its prediction performance was assessed based on two independent, high-quality benchmark datasets. The first one is HepG2 dataset described before and second one is SK-NSH (neuroblastoma specific) dataset which consists of 68 positive TF pairs (Supplementary) and 421 negative TF pairs (Supplementary) using the same criteria as HepG2 dataset.lists the AUCs (ROC curves in Supplementary), which show that our Bayesian model is better in predictions than existing algorithms. This favourable results are due to at least one of the following reasons: (i) the predictive capability of single data source is inadequate and unilateral while Bayesian model provide comprehensive prediction by information fusion; (ii) although genome-wide TC were predicted by some methods (, b), they neglected the transient and dynamic behaviour of TC; (iii) we integrated generic features (such as PPI score) and specific feature (co-expression) to capture the true cooperative nature of TFs. A previous study () exploited Bayesian network integration of genome-wide data to evaluate TC, which is conceptually similar to our model. However, there are several technical differences in methodology. First, among 15 features defined by, some features represent the same characteristic only based on different datasets (such as ChIP chip-based TG overlap, literature-based TG overlap and motif occurrence-based TG overlap), which inevitable brings redundant information and dependences among them. We compiled features from distinct sources, ensuring their approximate uncorrelation (Supplementary) as well as complementation to each other. Second, the Bayesian network structure is predetermined as approximate conditional independences and inter-dependencies and the parameters are learned from GSD. As a comparison, our model only needs informative initial values and accurate parameter estimation can be achieved by EM algorithm. This difference will be notable if GSD is scarce for some organisms. Third,labelled all features with conditional probability and predict the general TF cooperativity in yeast while we separated features into prior and context-specific, identifying the dynamic nature of TC in human. Actually, it is reported that TF activity and TF synergy are conditiondependent (), which means our model is more biologically meaningful. Furthermore, our reduced yet complementary features will make it more feasible to extend the model to other organisms.
Prediction of TC during hepatocarcinogenesisWe applied Bayesian model to study the transcriptional regulatory mechanism underlying HCC progression. Gene-profiling data of HCC progression were obtained from GEO database (GSE25097). Since we are highly interested in the cancerization from cirrhosis to HCC, six samples for healthy liver, 40 for cirrhosis, 129 for both HCC with cirrhosis background (short as cirr-HCC) and adjacent non-tumours were extracted for the). The variability map () presents the degree of variability among the partners of a given TF from cirrhosis to cirr-HCC. Cooperative partners almost retained the same for FOS, SP1 and TP53 over two contexts (for instance, JUN and ETS1 for FOS, E2F1 and POU2F1 for SP1, TFAP2A and GATA2 for TP53). However, dominate tendency was observed among DDIT3, E2F1, HIF1A and RXRA that some of their partners were only cooperative under cirrhosis.
Recasting TC network of hepatocarcinogenesisTo obtain a systematic-level perspective, we recast TC as a network. For comparison between cirrhosis and cirr-HCC, we framed same scale networks of TF pairs with top 100 highest posterior probability (all 40.9, except ETS1FOS in cirr-HCC with 0.89), wherein the nodes are TFs and the edges designate interactions (and Supplementary Tables S5 and S6). We then mapped the interactions in the derived networks to nonredundant protein complex dataset based on CORUM (). Seven and six TF pairs were found co-occur in at least one protein complex for cirrhosis and cirr-HCC, respectively. Besides, we also used TFTF interaction data extracted from TcoF database () to validate our predictions, which resulted in 30 and 26 TF pairs with interaction evidences. In total, 31 and 27 interactions were validated in cirrhosis and cirr-HCC networks separately. To evaluate the significance of predicted networks, we randomly sampled 100 TF pairs for 2000 trials and averagely 11 pairs were validated by protein complex and TFTF interaction information, demonstrating that our derived TC networks are highly significant (P-value55  10 4 for cirrhosis and 51  10 3 for cirr-HCC).Both our results recapitulated previously reported observations and revealed novel potential interactions, which could provide novel insight into the molecular mechanism controlling formative carcinogenesis. Each TC network consists of 100 interactions which involve 59 TFs and 41 TFs for cirrhosis () and cirr-HCC (), respectively. Comparisons between TC networks revealed that when the disease progression switches from cirrhosis to HCC, TC changes correspondingly. Nevertheless 68 relationships (grey lines) were observed consistently under different conditions, which can indicate the development and progression of carcinogenesis share highly common regulations. Moreover, ETS1, GATA2, SP1, EGR1 and MYC are consistently hub TFs over two contexts. The interactions among these five hub TFs are conserved during the progression. However, hub TFs have more specific interactions with other TFs under cirr-HCC. For instance, there are 13 specific interactions with ETS1 under cirr-HCC while only one under the context of cirrhosis. These five hub TFs could be regarded as pivotal factors to understand the molecular mechanism that underlies the development and progression of carcinogenesis.
Functional analysis of specific cooperativityWe took specific cooperativity of E2F1TFAP2C versus E2F1 TP53 and specific transcriptional complex FOSEP300JUNB versus FOSETS1NFKB1, all extracted from the TC networks, as the instances to investigate the potential molecular mechanism underlying the cancerization from cirrhosis to HCC. E2F1 possesses a specific cooperativity with pro-inflammatory factor TFAP2C under cirrhosis and tumour suppressor TP53 under cirr-HCC. We found that many differentially expressed TGs regulated by this TF pair are enriched in regulation of biosynthetic and metabolic process for cirrhosis while cell cycle, apoptotic and cell death for cirr-HCC. For instance, the cooperativity of E2F1 and TFAP2C regulates the folic acid-containing compound biosynthetic and metabolic process (Bonferroni-adjusted P-value51.4  10 5 ), which has been). As a comparison, E2F1 and TP53 cooperate to promote cell-cycle progression (Bonferroni-adjusted P-value52.4  10 4 ) by activating G1/S-related gene CCNE1 and PCNA, G2 phase-related gene TOP2A, G2/M-related gene TUBA4A and G2/M-, M/G1related gene CCND1 (). The uncontrolled cell cycle is one of the major aspects for cancers. Additionally, there exists evidence that the synergy of E2F1 and TP53 can induce apoptosis (), which may be achieved through co-regulating apoptosis factor TP53BP2 according to our analysis. Specific cooperativity FOSEP300JUNB is observed under cirrhosis. It was shown that EP300 can stimulate activity of the FOSJUN complex in vivo and part of this response was conveyed through direct interaction of EP300 with FOS (). There were reports that dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1) was transcriptionally regulated by TF FOS () and the cooperative interaction of JUNB with EP300 remarkably mediates the DMP1-promoter activity during mineralization, which was confirmed in vivo by immunoprecipitation and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis. Further, phosphorylation of JUNB was found to be essential for its interaction with EP300 (). Although DMP1 is an ArgGlyAsp-containing acidic phosphoprotein that was originally thought to be a mineralized extracellular matrices components (), DMP1 mRNA was later detected in non-mineralized mouse tissues including liver, muscle, brain, pancreas and kidney by RTPCR (). More recently, it was demonstrated that DMP1 can block proliferation, migration, tubulogenesis responses and tumour-associated angiogenesis by modulating vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which expands the role of DMP1 in angiogenic field for the first time (). Our predicted cooperativity may provide upstream transcriptional mechanism for the angiogensic function of DMP1, which is implicated in the regeneration of hepatocytes and contributes to the development of fibrous bands in hepatic cirrhosis (). Specific cooperativity ETS1FOS and ETS1NFKB1 forming complex FOSETS1NFKB1 are observed under cirr-HCC. Cis-acting elements with AP1, ETS-like and NFKappaB binding motifs have been identified in the promoter region of the granulocytemacrophage colony stimulating factor (CSF2) gene (), which encodes GMCSF cytokine involved in differentiation, proliferation and activation of the hematopoietic system. The results suggest constitutive ETS1 as well as inducible NFKB1 and FOS cooperate as a transcriptional complex in activated T cells. Additionally, pathway enrichment analysis for common TGs shared by FOSETS1NFKB1 showed that the most significant one is 'pathways in cancer' (Bonferroni-adjusted P-value51.8  10 4 ). Possibly, specific complex FOSETS1 NFKB1 can function in activated T cells by regulating CSF2 which cooperates with other genes involved in cancer pathways and result in promoting hepatocyte necrosis, inflammation and regeneration, ultimately carcinogenesis (). Bayesian approach can penetrate the limitations of qualitative inference from experiments and inadequate capability of individual data source. It provided rigorously quantitative measurement of TC. Furthermore, the prior information reflects the general propensity of TC, which sets the stage for tissue-or disease-specific analysis of regulatory programs. This approach is compatible for discretionary gene profiling, ensuring its adaptability. However, the Bayesian approach has its own limitations. Owing to the size of the TF repertoire and a small portion of reported PWMs so far, the overall landscape of TC is difficult to be identified. On the other hand, to assure the specificity of this model, 1000 bases upstream from TSS was considered in our study and a strict threshold was set for the pattern search of PWMs, which would miss a considerable portion of qualified TF pairs. Nevertheless, this model is able to capture the dynamic nature of TC by comprehensive analysis of data from multiple cascades. We believe that our proposed Bayesian approach is a promising application in identifying tissue-or disease-specific TC and will further facilitate the interpretation of underlying mechanisms for various physiological conditions.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
P.Hu et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Identification of specific transcriptional cooperativity at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
