Motivation: Phenomics is the study of the properties and behaviors of organisms (i.e. their phenotypes) on a high-throughput scale. New computational tools are needed to analyze complex phenomics data, which consists of multiple traits/behaviors that interact with each other and are dependent on external factors, such as genotype and environmental conditions, in a way that has not been well studied. Results: We deployed an efficient framework for partitioning complex and high dimensional phenotype data into distinct functional groups. To achieve this, we represented measured phenotype data from each genotype as a cloud-of-points, and developed a novel non-parametric clustering algorithm to cluster all the genotypes. When compared with conventional clustering approaches, the new method is advantageous in that it makes no assumption about the parametric form of the underlying data distribution and is thus particularly suitable for phenotype data analysis. We demonstrated the utility of the new clustering technique by distinguishing novel phenotypic patterns in both synthetic data and a high-throughput plant photosynthetic phenotype dataset. We biologically verified the clustering results using four Arabidopsis chloroplast mutant lines.
IntroductionThe plummeting cost of genome sequencing has ushered genomics into a new era. However, using genomics data alone is insufficient to answer most major questions in biology, because genomics data cannot explain how genes control complex behaviors (). The next wave in biology will be to phenotype organisms and then integrate genomes with phenomes to identify genes that may govern phenotype and responses to the varying environment (). Especially, progress in phenotyping technologies is required to accelerate genetic mapping and gene discovery in genome-wide association studies for dissecting the genetic architecture of important traits underlying phenotypes (). It thus is important to develop computational methods to examine potentially interacting phenotypes (i.e. measurable traits/behaviors) of a genetically diverse population for a given species in order to identify meaningful differences in biological function. The database PhenomicDB has been built to collect phenotypes of multiple species in free-text format with the goal to gain insights into the genetic origin of diseases (). Phenoclustering was then V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com proposed to perform meta-analysis on PhenomicDB using advanced natural language processing methods, resulting in clusters of genes by the similarity of their phenotypes that can be further explored for genotypephenotype interaction analysis (). However, since high-throughput phenotyping quantitatively assesses multiple phenotypes of many traits simultaneously, it often generates a large amount of data rather than qualitative descriptions. New approaches to analyze quantitative phenomics data are needed. One application is in bioenergy research, where computational techniques have been developed to detect, collect and study photosynthesis and related traits, such as growth, under non-laboratory conditions and in high throughput (). In general, photosynthesis phenotypes can be altered in two ways, either through the changes of peripheral processes of the photosynthesis regulatory network or the modification of central components of the network (). Changes in peripheral processes tend to preserve regulatory relationships within the network. In contrast, altering the central components of photosynthesis is likely to perturb the relationships between key regulatory processes, leading to a different correlation among photosynthesis phenotypes. In this study, we focus on data analysis for the second case, to which we refer as inter-functional analysis for photosynthesis phenotypes data. By taking advantage of the systematic knockout of genes encoding chloroplast-targeted proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana, a model plant, we have conducted a large-scale phenotype screen on the single knockouts and the references to understand the underlying molecular functions of the knockout genes in plant photosynthesis (). In our experiment, plants with single gene knockouts have been profiled by non-invasively measuring three key photosynthetic parameters, i.e. / II , q E and q I (that reflect photosynthesis efficiency in photosystem II, active energy dissipation, and photoinhibition, respectively), in response to fluctuating light conditions, resulting in a large volume of plant phenotyping data that allow us to determine the downstream effects of the knockout genes on photosynthesis in dynamic conditions (). More specifically, multiple fluorescence images () are taken for every plant as the light intensity is varied over time and the photosynthesis parameters () are derived from each image. As a result, each plant is characterized by a sequence of three-dimensional vectors with each dimension corresponding to a different photosynthesis parameter. The objective of this study is to automatically identify gene groups with their photosynthesis phenotypes significantly different from reference based on the collected data. A natural first step is to examine the extremes, i.e. mutant lines that exhibit significantly different photosynthesis characters from the wild type in all of the three photosynthesis parameters. Although this simple technique has been shown to be effective for identifying potential biomarkers and drug targets, it is not an effective approach for exploiting the full potential of experimental results (). In this work, we take a holistic approach for inter-functional photosynthesis data analysis. We develop an efficient workflow to effectively identify novel phenotypes based on mutant lines sharing similar measurements of photosynthesis parameters. The identified gene groups and their associated phenotypes are used to derive insight into the functions of and interactions between related genes. Based on existing annotations and literature for the well-studied genes, we can associate biological processes with each phenotype pattern, which in turn can be used to reveal the functions for the poorly characterized genes (). Although numerous clustering algorithms have been developed, most of them require vector representation of data and thus cannot be applied directly to our problem where each plant is represented by a sequence of vectors (). One simple way to handle the challenge is to run standard clustering algorithms (e.g. k-means and hierarchical clustering) against all the vectors measured for different plants, and determine the cluster member for each plant by taking the major vote among the measured vectors. Another approach is to concatenate the sequence of vectors measured for each plant into a single vector, and apply standard clustering algorithms to the derived vectors. The main problem with these two approaches is that they are unable to effectively explore the correlation among different photosynthesis parameters revealed by the set of vectors measured for each plant. This is particularly important for photosynthesis data analysis because it is the correlation between photosynthesis parameters that helps understand the regulatory role of the mutated genes on the photosynthesis processes. We propose to address the above challenges of phenotype data analysis by developing a novel clustering technique named Non-parametric modeling, or NPM for short. We introduce a. The process of extracting data from photosynthesis phenotype experiment. (a) a series of fluorescence images, (b) the derived photosynthesis parameters (/ II  light, q E , q I ) for two genotypes, i.e. mutant line AT3G17830 and the wild type (used as reference) under dynamic environmental conditions, (c) the photosynthesis parameters of the same plants in 3D space. / II  light refers to a more advanced photosynthesis parameter named Linear Electron Flux cloud-of-points representation for each mutant line, with each point corresponding to a vector in the sequential phenotype measurements taken for the mutant line, where the correlation among photosynthesis parameters is captured by the 'shapes' of clouds. Based on the theory of kernel density estimation (KDE), we then apply a nonparametric clustering technique to group plants into the same cluster if their clouds share similar shapes (). When compared with the existing clustering algorithms, the key advantage of NPM is that it does not make any assumption about the underlying data distribution and thus is particularly suitable for phenotype data analysis. Our empirical study shows promising results of the proposed clustering technique on both synthetic and real photosynthesis datasets. We have biologically verified the clustering results using four Arabidopsis mutant lines for nuclear encoded chloroplast proteins. The experimental results demonstrate that NPM is able to generate testable hypotheses, which lead to new biological discoveries. We emphasize that although our empirical study is limited to photosynthesis data, the non-parametric clustering algorithm developed in this work is general and can be applied to other domains (e.g. gene expression data analysis).
Related workClustering algorithms have been widely used in biological data analysis. One well known example is gene expression clustering (). Numerous clustering algorithms have been designed to exploit temporal correlations and trends in gene expression time series (). Clustering algorithms have also been successfully applied to biological network analysis, which aims to discover and identify gene functional groups (), and to sequence analysis [e.g. sequence alignment (), motif detection () and protein/DNA sequence clustering (. Most previous studies of clustering algorithms in biological data analysis are based on parametric models (). In contrast, the proposed method adopts nonparametric density estimation for data clustering that does not make parametric assumptions about the underlying distribution. A well-known non-parametric clustering method is mean-shift (Carreira-Perpi a  n,), which is widely used in computer vision and image processing. Other examples of nonparametric clustering are the scale-space method () and spectral clustering (). The scale-space clustering method was pioneered in, and further studied in Roberts (1997) using density estimation. Spectral clustering is mostly based on the theory of manifold learning (), and has been widely used for image segmentation. However, since most non-parametric clustering algorithms require vector representation of data, they cannot be applied directly to our problem. The theoretical foundation of the proposed work is based on KDE (). KDE was first introduced in the 1950s (). The consistency of KDE was shown initially in Parzen (1962) and its convergence rate for finite samples was later proved (). A more complete literature review for KDE can be found in Cybakov (2009).
Non-parametric clustering for phenotypic data analysisIn this work, we develop a novel clustering algorithm NPM for inter-functional phenotype data analysis. Below, we will present phenotype data representation and framework of non-parametric clustering, and then describe an efficient algorithm for solving the related optimization problem.
Data representationThe center of NPM is a cloud-of-points representation. Let M 1 ;. .. ; M m be a collection of m genotypes. Let p be the number of photosynthesis parameters. For each genotype M i , we denote by x i 1 ;. .. ; x i ni the sequence of multi-dimensional vectors measured for M i , where n i is the number of valid measurements for M i and each x i j 2 R p includes the measurements of p photosynthesis parameters derived from the jth measurement for M i. Because the focus of this study is to examine the dependence among different photosynthesis parameters, we will ignore the sequential order among vectors fx i j g ni j1 and simply characterize the photosynthesis property of genotype M i by the set of data points D i  fx i 1 ;. .. ; x i ni g, which we refer to as cloud-of-points representation.shows examples of the cloud-of-points representation for the sequence of / II , q E and q I measurements that are given in.
A framework for non-parametric clusteringFollowing the standard framework of mixture models (), we assume that there are K different underlying distributions, where each distribution is introduced to capture a different 'shape' of the cloud-of-points representation, and all the data points observed in the cloud-of-points representation are drawn independently from one of the K distributions. More specifically, let f 1 ;. .. ; f K  be the density functions for the K underlying distributions, and let P  P 1 ;. .. ; P K  be the prior probabilities for choosing each distribution. Then, for mutant line M i , the likelihood of observing the cloud-of-points representationis then given byFollowing the framework of maximum likelihood estimation (), we find the optimal density functions ff j g K j1 by solving the optimization problemwhere PrD i  is given in Equation (1). The main challenge arises from solving the optimization problem in, in which the variables to be optimized are functions (or vectors of infinite dimension). This is in contrast to most optimization problems where the variables are of finite dimension (). The type of optimization problem in Equation (2) is often referred to as variational optimization in the literature of operations research. One simple approach towards variational optimization is to make specific assumptions about the density functions ff j g K j1 , a common approach adopted in the study of mixture models (). In the simple approach, a parametric family of distributions, e.g. the well-known Gaussian mixture model, is specified assuming that each f j  is a Gaussian Inter-functional analysis of high-throughput phenotype datadistribution. However, this simple approach could be problematic in our study, since the complicated shaped cloud-of-points representation (see) may not fit well to any member in the specified distribution family. Therefore, we adopt the non-parametric density estimation approach, because the key advantage of non-parametric approach is that it avoids the parametric assumption of the underlying distribution ().
Efficient computational algorithmWe propose to solve the optimization problem in Equation (2) by exploring the theory of KDE. Our approach is based on the Nadaraya-Watson method for density estimation (). More specifically, let ^ x 1 ;. .. ; ^ x ' be the ' landmark points, where landmark points are randomly sampled from the collection of data points for all mutant lines. Using the landmark points, we approximate each density function f j as:where a j  a 1 j ;. .. ; a ' j  are parameters to be determined for f j , jx  ph 2  p=2 expjxj 2 =h 2  is a multi-variate Gaussian distribution and h is the kernel bandwidth. Since f j is a density function, we have a q j !0;, where 1 is a vector of all ones. Using the approximation in (3), the likelihood function PrD i  is rewritten as:We can approximate the variational optimization problem inEquation (2) into the following normal optimization problem:where a 1 ;. .. ; a K 2 fa j 2 R p  : a > 1  1g and PrD i  is given in (4). We developed an EM algorithm to efficiently optimize the objective function in Equation (5). For each mutant line M i , we introduce a hidden variable Z i 2 K to indicate which cluster (or density function) M i belongs to. In the E-step, we estimate the posterior probability PrZ i  jjD i  as:In the M-step, we update the prior probabilities P and parameters fa j g K j1 by:where ~ a 1 ;. .. ; ~ a K are parameters obtained in the previous iteration of EM algorithm. Algorithm 1 highlights the key steps of our EM algorithm. In line 25, data are first normalized to prevent large measurement dominating others. In line 7, the landmark points are sampled. Then, the EM iteration part is in line 917. E-and M-step are repeated until the log-likelihood converges. The output are K density functions f 1 ;. .. ; f K. Each mutant line is assigned to one density function that contributes the largest likelihood to its data points.shows how the log-likelihood function Lfa i g K i1 ; P is improved over iterations, when running our EM algorithm on photosynthesis data (see details in Section 4). Because it is wellknown that an EM algorithm could be trapped in a bad local optimum, we run Algorithm 1 multiple times and choose the solution with the largest log-likelihood.the kth photosynthesis parameter 4: Normalize the kth photosynthesis measures to 0; 1 by subtracting them by minimum value and dividing them by the difference between maximum and minimum value 5: end for 6: // Select landmark points 7: Randomly sample ' data points from the collection of data points for all mutant lines, denoted by ^ x 1 ;. .. ; ^ x ' 8: // EM algorithm 9: Initialize ~ a 1 ;. .. ; ~ a K with numbers randomly chosen from 0; 1 10: Initialize ~ L  1 and DL  1 11: while DL > e do 12: Update posterior probability PrZ j  kjD j  using (6) for every mutant line M j and every cluster k 13: Update the coefficients a 1 ;. .. ; a K using (8) and P using (7) 14: Set ~ a j  a j ; j  1;. .. ; K 15: Compute the log-likelihood, L  P m i1 logPrD i jF 16: Update DL  L  ~ L and ~ L  L 17: end while Return f 1 ;. .. ; f K with f j x  P ' q1 a q j jx  ^ x q =' One fundamental assumption of NPM is that density function f j  can be approximated by Equation (3). Theoretic study of KDE can easily show that any smooth bounded density function can be well approximated byprovided that the number of sampled landmark data points ' is sufficiently large. Please refer to Theorem S1 in Supplementary Material. We finally note that the density functions for most well-known distributions (e.g. Gaussianand Laplacian distributions) are smooth and bounded, and thus assuming density functions to be smooth and bounded is a very minor assumption in real-world applications.
ExperimentsFor performance evaluation, we compared NPM with a series of baselines that adopt two different data representation methods other than the cloud-of-point representation used in NPM. The first method is to use concatenated vectors, i.e. concatenating the set of data vectors measured for each genotype into a single vector, and then applying to the derived vectors three standard clustering algorithms: (i) k-means () (Kmeans), (ii) hierarchical clustering () (Hierarchy) and (iii) using principal component analysis () to reduce the dimensionality of the concatenated vectors and then applying k-means (PCA  Kmeans), where the reduced dimensionality was set to 3 in our experiments. The second data representation method is to simply use the original vectors: clustering all the vectors measured for different genotypes, and then determining the cluster membership for each genotype by taking the majority vote among the vectors measured for that genotype. Two baseline algorithms were developed based on this method: (i) applying k-means to all the measured vectors (Kmeans-split) and (ii) applying Gaussian mixture model to all the measured vectors (GMM-split). Except for the number of clusters K, there are three parameters to be specified in NPM: the stopping criterion for EM process, the kernel bandwidth h for KDE and the number of landmark points '. Within a cross-validation dataset (see Section 4.2 for details), a grid search was applied to find the best kernel bandwidth h that resulted in the maximal log-likelihood. A similar approach is applied to determine the number of landmark points '. For parameter , we simply set  1 in our experiment.
Plant photosynthesis phenotyping experimentPhotosynthesis involves the net movement of electrons generated from the oxidation of water through a series of electron carriers to a chemical reductant NADPH (LEF, linear electron flux). These reactions are driven by light energy that is funneled to two chlorophyll containing complexes, Photosystem II (PSII) which extracts electrons from water and Photosystem I (PSI) which donates electrons to the terminal acceptor Ferredoxin and ultimately NADPto form NADPH. Electron transfer between PSII and PSI is essentially connected by the cytochrome b6f complex (cyt b 6 f ) and mobile electron carriers, plastoquinone/plastoquinol (PQ/PQH 2 ) and plastocyanin. LEF is tightly coupled to the formation of an electrochemical proton gradient (pmf, proton motive force) between the lumen (inner thylakoid compartment) and the stroma. First, the oxidation of water by PSII releases protons into the lumen. Second, during the sequential reduction of PQ to PQH 2 in the stroma-localized quinone binding sites of PSII and b 6 f , protons are taken from the stroma and are released into the lumen upon oxidation of PQH 2 to PQ at the lumen-localized quinol binding site on cyt b 6 f. Pmf has an electric field component (Dw) and a chemical gradient component (DpH), which are thermodynamically equivalent but kinetically separable. Its dissipation through the chloroplast ATP synthase is coupled to the phosphorylation of ADP to form ATP. The amplitude of pmf depends on the rate of proton accumulation and on the resistance (inverse of the proton conductivity, gH  ) of the chloroplast ATP synthase to proton flux. Both NADPH (reducing power) and ATP (chemical bond energy) are used by downstream metabolism, primarily the fixation of carbon dioxide into sugars. The formation of high energy states and reactive intermediates during photosynthesis can lead to damage to the photosystems (photoinhibition) and/or formation of reactive oxygen species. Indeed, photoinhibited PSII centers accumulate in a light intensity dependent manner and have been linked to the long-lived component of nonphotochemical quenching (q I ). However, LEF is self-regulating; as excitation pressure increases, electron transfer slows (in effect photosynthetic efficiency, / II , decreases) and excess is energy actively dissipated (quenching increases) to minimize the accumulation of reduced intermediates. More specifically, the DpH component of pmf (acidification of the lumen) slows the oxidation of PQH2 at cyt b 6 f and at the same time induces two pH sensitive components of q E quenching. Under stress, inhibition of LEF may limit the formation of pmf. For example, under severe CO 2 limitation, as the acceptor pool (NADP) diminishes in the absence of carbon fixation, LEF will slow to a rate that cannot support a significant DpH. In such cases, a higher DpH can be sustained by:(i) alternative pathways that supplement proton uptake such as cyclic electron flux, (ii) increasing the fraction of pmf stored as DpH, and/or 3) decreasing proton conductivity through the ATP synthase, gH  [as reviewed in;. In our experiment, we screened a total of 338 chloroplast-targeted single mutant lines in A. thaliana. To ensure the reliability of the results, multiple biological replicates (four or more) were examined for each mutant line, so the total number of plants added up to 1, 499, which is also the number of instances used in follow-up analysis. A sample of the phenotype dataset is available at Supplementary. For each plant, three photosynthesis parameters (/ II , q E and q I ) were measured (P  3 for our algorithm). The photosynthetic parameter, U II (quantum yield of photochemistry), when multiplied by the ambient light intensity (light) yields a quantity proportional to the LEF rate. The quenching parameters, q E (rapidly relaxing in the dark, Dph dependent) and q I (slowing relaxing, related to photoinhibition), are two separate photoprotective mechanisms that dissipate excess light energy ().
Clustering results using NPMGiven the photosynthesis phenotype data, we adopted the crossvalidation method suggested in Smyth (2000) to decide the number of clusters K. We used 3-fold cross-validation, i.e. at each time, NPM was fit on two thirds of the data (as training set), and the likelihood of the fitted model on the remaining one third data (as test set) was computed. Higher log-likelihood means that the model is better fitted to data.shows that when K is larger or equal to 3, the cross-validation likelihood is near its maximum value. Therefore, we set K to be 3. Subsequently, three clusters of plants were identified by NPM. For the convenience of visualization, we plotted the clustering results in 2D spaces, with coordinates corresponding to twoInter-functional analysis of high-throughput phenotype dataparameters each time (see). To better understand the overall properties of each cluster, we focus on the q E versus (/ II  light) plot in. For all plants, changes in q E and (/ II  light) are positively correlated with the changes in light intensity. The clustering results of the sampled phenotype dataset are available at Supplementary Table S2. The first cluster (green) in this plot contains 87% of plants, including all the wild type plants. We refer to it as the cluster of wt-like. When compared with the other two clusters, the wt-like cluster exhibits a stronger correlation between q E and (/ II  light), which reflects the sigmoidal relationship between the DpH component of pmf generated by photosynthetic electron flux and lumen pH-dependent processes required for q E quenching, i.e. violaxanthin deepoxidase activation and PsbS protonation (). When compared with the first cluster, the mutant lines in the second cluster (red) tend to have significantly higher q E sensitivity to electron flux, suggesting that in these mutant lines pmf builds to a larger extent due to more restricted proton flux through the ATP synthase lower gH  ) or that the fraction of pmf stored as DpH is larger. We refer to it as the cluster of qE-sensitive. On the other hand, mutant lines in the third cluster (blue) show normal (/ II  light) values but significantly lower q E values than the wt-like cluster, indicating that these mutant lines may lack the capacity to accumulate a significant DpH or other biochemical components essential for q E. We refer to it as the cluster of low-q E. Similar phenotype partition can be found in the q I  (/ II  light) space () and q I  q E space ().
Performance evaluationBecause a significant portion of the chloroplast-targeted proteins have unknown functions, the optimal gene grouping is unknown, making it difficult to directly measure the clustering performance of NPM (). To perform objective evaluation of the clustering results, we computed the gene-to-gene similarities based on the clustering result, denoted as photosynthesis phenotype-based similarity (PPS). In parallel, we derived another kind of gene-to-gene similarity score based on the biological knowledge from metabolic pathways or existing gene expression data, denoted as extra information-based similarity (EIS). We then measured how well the two sets of similarities are aligned with each other. Our assumption is that a good clustering result of mutant lines should lead to a PPS that well aligns with the EIS. Below we describe the computation of PPS and EIS, respectively. For each mutant line, there are at least four biological replicates and each replicate may be grouped into a different cluster. By taking the average of the cluster membership vectors for the replicates, we derived a three dimensional vector representation z i for each mutant line M i. The PPS between any two mutant lines M i and M j was then computed as the similarity between their vector representations:The biological knowledge base AraCyc (), (a manually curated database providing the metabolic pathway information for 46 out of the 338 genes in our study) was used as the extra information. More precisely, two genes form a similar gene pair if they are in the same metabolic pathway and we get a total number of 91 similar gene pairs. Therefore two mutant lines have a high EIS value if they form a similar gene pair: EIS  ( 1; M i ; M j  2 similar gene pairs 0; otherwise :Next, we measure how well the PPS is aligned with the EIS derived from AraCyc. For each mutant line M i that appears in the similar gene pairs, we ranked all the other genes in descending order of their PPS with M i , and recorded the percentage of the AraCycbased similar gene pairs that were recovered by the top ranked genes with the cutoff rank varied from 10 to 100. Based on our assumption, the larger the percentage of recovered similar gene pairs, the better the clustering result will be.included inthe result of random selection for each mutant line as the baseline (highlighted by a dashed line). It shows that the performance of NPM is significantly better than the other clustering methods and the random ranking (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, see P-values in) (). Because the EIS computed using AraCyc only covers a portion of the genes in our study, we repeated the same evaluation steps with the gene co-expression scores in the ATTED-II database (). Although gene co-expression data is not as accurate as manually curated data, it includes most of the genes in our study, and has been well recognized as a reliable source for performance evaluation (Harr and Schl tterer, 2006). We used the mutual rank (MR) scores to compute EIS from ATTED-II. More specifically, we set the threshold of MR to be 20, and gene pairs with MR scores above this threshold are considered to be ATTED-based similar gene pairs. We get a total number of 465 similar gene pairs. The results inindicate that the clustering result generated by NPM has a better correlation with the biological similarities derived from transcriptional co-expressions than the other clustering methods. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test verifies that NPM is statistically significantly better than all baselines with a significance level of 0.01 on the ATTED-II database (see). In summary, the performance evaluations using both the metabolic pathways and the gene co-expression values show that the clustering result generated by NPM better correlates with external biological information than the other clustering methods.
Biological significanceWe examined the biological significance of selected clustering results, as shown in. Dozens of interesting mutant lines were discovered from the inter-functional clustering analysis. As a demonstration, we discuss two mutant lines in the following text. The first one is cfq (AT3G24530; coupling factor quick recovery). The cfq mutant line harbors a point mutation on the gamma subunit of the chloroplast ATP synthase, which alters its regulation. In our analysis, cfq belongs to the qE-sensitive cluster (red) which showed lower values of both / II and q E than wild type. This phenotype is consistent with excess enzymatic activity of the chloroplast ATP synthesis (high gH  ), which minimizes pmf formation and subsequently the capacity for photoprotection via the q E mechanism and the ability to slow electron transfer through the cyt b6f complex. Consequently, Photosystem I in these plants is more susceptible to photodamage particularly under fluctuating light, as confirmed by independent biochemical and spectroscopical methods (). The second example is the t-DNA insertion line AT1G44575 (npq4) of the pigment-binding protein PsbS. It is associated with photosystem II antenna complexes of higher plants and part of the qE mechanism. In our data, the mutant line had normal / II but very low q E. Its biased distribution was assigned by NPM to the low-qE cluster (blue). This is reasonable because it is an essential component of the qE mechanism, but does not affect the regulation of lightinduced electron transfer (). These two examples demonstrate that the clustering approach can distinguish mutant lines with overlapping effects on multiple phenotypes. In this case, both cfq and npq4 showed low q E but had distinct effects on electron transfer. We observe inthat the mutant lines in the qE-sensitive cluster have restricted proton flux through the ATP synthase, resulting in high q E sensitivity, and the mutant lines in the low-qE cluster (blue) have low quenching capacity, causing significantly low q E but normal / II values. Therefore, we hypothesize that skew from the wtlike cluster in the q E versus (/ II  light) plot may be used as an indicator for altered activity or regulation of the ATP-synthase. To verify the hypothesis, we chose four function unknown mutant lines from the cluster results with the most distinct phenotypes to further explore the relationships among multiple photosynthesis parameters. From the qE-sensitive cluster, we chose the lines SALK 106162 and SALK 072581, which are T-DNA insertion mutagen of AT2G29180 and AT4G33520, respectively. AT4G33520 encodes a putative metal-transporting P-type ATPase, and is involved in copper ion transmembrane transport. AT2G29180 is a function unknown chloroplast-targeted protein. From the low-qE cluster, we chose SALK 114469, a T-DNA insertion mutagen of AT1G79040, which encodes for the PsbR subunit of photosystem II. For comparison, we also chose SALK 044616 (AT1G65230) from the wild-type like cluster. We first repeated / II and q E measurements under several light intensities using an Integrated Diode Emitter Array (IDEA) spectrophotometer, which also allows high-resolution absorbance measurements of other photosynthetic parameters that are not yet possible to perform using high throughput methods ().shows the re-measured plants have the same relationships between q E and (/ II  light) as our high-throughput phenotype values, indicating the reproducibility of our data is high. We also measured proton-flux across the thylakoid membrane, thus the ATP-synthase activity using the same device (). As expected, wt-like candidate shows no difference in ATP synthase activity compared with wild type (Col-0). Both candidates from the qE-sensitive cluster have a decreased proton-flux, vH  , compared with wild type. The lower proton conductivity, gH  , compared with wild-type, observed in SALK 072581 is consistent with downregulation of ATP synthase activity to limit proton flux and favor pmf formation. Contrary to expectations, SALK 106162 shows marginally higher gH  despite lower vH  , consistent with lower steady state pmf in this mutant compared with wild-type. In this case, the sensitivity of the q E response may be due either an increase in the fraction of pmf stored as DpH or increased sensitivity of the quenching response to lumen pH. The candidate from the low-qE cluster showed similar proton flux rates and conductivities compared with wild type, indicating the loss of q E may be due to other factors, e.g. a decrease in DpH=pmf ratio or loss of a component that influences quenching efficiency. In summary, the behavior of the distinctInter-functional analysis of high-throughput phenotype dataclusters relative to the wt-like cluster may be indicative of the functions (or loss of function) responsible for the phenotype.
Experimental results for simulated dataIn the second experiment, we created a synthesized dataset with 120 instances. The cloud-of-points representation for each instance M i is generated as follows: we randomly chose two out of the three Gaussian distributions (), and sampled n data points from the two Gaussians, where n is varied from 20, 30 to 40. There are totally 3 classes, i.e. Gaussian 1&2, Gaussian 2&3 and Gaussian 1&3. For example, if the two chosen distributions are Gaussian 1 and Gaussian 2, we label this instance M i as Gaussian 1&2. The synthetic dataset is available at Supplementary Table S3. We measured the clustering performance by Normalized Mutual Information () defined as NMIX; C  2IX; C=HX  HC, where X is the ground truth class label partition, C is the data partition generated by a clustering algorithm, IX; C measures the mutual information between the two partitions, and HX and H(C) measure the entropy of the two partitions, respectively.summarizes the clustering performance for NPM and baseline algorithms. As expected, we observed that the clustering performance of all algorithms improves with increasing number of samples. We also observe that NPM significantly outperforms the baseline algorithms. The poor performance of Kmeans-split and GMM-split suggests that applying clustering algorithms directly to the measured vectors is not appropriate for the cloud-of-points representation. The fact that PCA  Kmeans does not significantly outperform Kmeans suggests that blind dimensionality reduction may not be sufficient for handling high dimensionality in data clustering.
ConclusionSophisticated phenomics measurements are becoming increasingly important for the discovery of important biological functions and genes (). Due to the complexity of phenomics datasets, the conventional clustering approaches often fail to identify genes of distinguished functions because they have to make parametric assumptions about the underlying data distribution. There is thus an urgent need for new tools to analyze large and complex phenomics datasets. The NPM method presented here represents an important advance over existing clustering algorithms because it avoids the parametric assumption of data distribution. A demonstration of our method on plant photosynthesis data shows that the proposed technique is effective in capturing mutant lines with similar photosynthesis profiles in comparison to the conventional clustering algorithms such as k-means and hierarchical clustering. In the future, we plan to further improve our analysis by (i) conducting biochemical experiments to validate novel genes with the new phenotypes, and. Experimental verification of the gene groups identified by NPM. The proton flux vH  and the voltage-gated proton conductance gH  was determined for the four selected t-DNA insertion mutant lines compared with wild type (Col-0). S ALK 106162 and SALK 072581 are from the qE-sensitive cluster, SALK 044616 is from the wild-type like cluster, and SALK 114469 is from the low-qE clusterVerification of the photosynthetic parameters for wild type (Col-0, used as the reference) and four t-DNA insertion mutant lines selected from the NPM clustering results. Measurement of q E and LEF was repeated (proportional to U II  light) using an IDEA spectrophotometer. SALK 106162 and SAL K 072581 are from the qE-sensitive cluster. SALK 044616 is from the wildtype like cluster. SALK 114469 is from the low-qE cluster(ii) developing new clustering algorithms that also take into account the sequential order among photosynthesis measurements.
Funding
Q.Gao et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
