Motivation: Nucleosome positioning participates in many cellular activities and plays significant roles in regulating cellular processes. With the avalanche of genome sequences generated in the post-genomic age, it is highly desired to develop automated methods for rapidly and effectively identifying nucleosome positioning. Although some computational methods were proposed, most of them were species specific and neglected the intrinsic local structural properties that might play important roles in determining the nucleosome positioning on a DNA sequence. Results: Here a predictor called 'iNuc-PseKNC' was developed for predicting nucleosome positioning in Homo sapiens, Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster genomes, respectively. In the new predictor, the samples of DNA sequences were formulated by a novel feature-vector called 'pseudo k-tuple nucleotide composition', into which six DNA local structural properties were incorporated. It was observed by the rigorous cross-validation tests on the three stringent benchmark datasets that the overall success rates achieved by iNuc-PseKNC in predicting the nucleosome positioning of the afore-mentioned three genomes were 86.27%, 86.90% and 79.97%, respectively. Meanwhile, the results obtained by iNuc-PseKNC on various benchmark datasets used by the previous investigators for different genomes also indicated that the current predictor remarkably outperformed its counterparts. Availability: A user-friendly web-server, iNuc-PseKNC is freely accessible at http://
INTRODUCTIONThe basic unit of eukaryotic chromatin is nucleosome. Each nucleosome contains a 147-bp core DNA () that is tightly wrapped in 1.67 left-handed super-helical turns around a histone octamer () as shown in. The histone octamer is formed by eight histones, of which two are of H2A, two of H2B, two of H3 and two of H4, and these histones bear highly conservative property in organism evolution (). Under the effect of histone H1, the nucleosome core particle forms a stable structure by further packaging into an advanced structure (). Adjacent nucleosomes are linked via a short DNA sequence, called the linker DNA, which ranges from 10 to 100 bp (). By modulating the accessibility of genomic regions to regulatory proteins (), it was observed that the packaging of DNA around the histone octamer played important roles in many biological processes such as transcriptional control, DNA replication, DNA repair and RNA splicing (). Therefore, it is fundamentally important for indepth understanding the subsequent steps of gene expression toreveal the mechanism involved in controlling nucleosome positioning. High-throughput techniques, such as chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) coupled with microarrays (ChIP-chip) and ChIP coupled with sequencing techniques (ChIP-Seq), have been developed. Also, high-resolution nucleosome-positioning maps are now available for several model organisms including Homo sapiens (), Caenorhabditis elegans (), Drosophila melanogaster (, b) and Sacchoromryces cerevisiae (). These high-resolution data provided unprecedented opportunities, or made it feasible to develop computational methods for accurately predicting nucleosome positioning by feature extraction approaches.for the first time found that a 10-bp interval repetition of AA/TT/TA occurred in the 147-bp core region of nucleosomes.demonstrated that CA dinucleotide played an important role in nucleosome positioning, and the sequences containing the fragment TATAAACGCC had high binding affinity to histone.found that $50% of nucleosome placements were prefigured by genome sequence. It was also observed that nucleosome deficiency always appeared in poly (dA:dT) fragments (). Subsequently, Liu et al. () found that the 1011 bp periodicity signals for some particular dinucleotides, such as AA, TT, TA and GC, were more pronounced in the DNA nucleosomal sequences than in the linker DNA sequences. The above findings have demonstrated that nucleosome positioning is sequence-dependent to some extent. Based on the characteristics of nucleosome positioning sequence (or nucleosomal sequences), various computational methods () were proposed for predicting nucleosome positioning in different genomes. All these methods could yield quite encouraging results, and each of them did play a role in stimulating the development of this area. However, further work is needed due to the following reasons. (i) The datasets constructed in those methods were too small to reflect the statistical profile of nucleosomes. (ii) No cutoff threshold () was imposed to rigorously exclude the redundant samples or those with high sequence similarity with others in a same dataset. (iii) No web-server was provided to most of these methods, and hence their usage is quite limited, especially for the majority of experimental scientists. (iv) All the local DNA structural properties () and their impacts to the global sequence effects were ignored; however, it was demonstrated that this kind of properties might play important roles in determining the rotational positioning of DNA around the histone octamer (). The present article was initiated in an attempt to improve the prediction of nucleosomes from the above four aspects. According to a comprehensive review () and demonstrated by a series of recent publications (), to establish a really useful statistical predictor for a biological system, we need to consider the following procedures: (i) construct or select a valid benchmark dataset to train and test the predictor; (ii) formulate the biological samples with an effective mathematical expression that can truly reflect their intrinsic correlation with the target to be predicted; (iii) introduce or develop a powerful algorithm (or engine) to operate the prediction; (iv) properly perform cross-validation tests to objectively evaluate the anticipated accuracy of the predictor; (v) establish a user-friendly web-server for the predictor that is accessible to the public. Below, let us describe how to deal with these procedures one by one.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Benchmark datasets for the nucleosomal and linker sequencesIn this article, we considered the following three species: (i) H.sapiens; (ii) C.elegans; and (iii) D.melanogaster. The experimental data for nucleosome positions in the first species () were downloaded from http://dir.nhlbi.nih.gov/papers/lmi/epigenomes/hgtcellnucleosomes. aspx; those for the second species from http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu; and those for the third species from (, b) and http:// atlas.bx.psu.edu/. The entire genome sequences for the three species were downloaded from the UCSC genome database at http://hgdownload.cse. ucsc.edu/, where the hg18 version, WS170/ce4 version and BDGP Release 5 version were used for (i) H.sapiens, (ii) C.elegans and (iii) D.melanogaster genomes, respectively. Since the H.sapiens genome and its nucleosome map contain a huge amount of data, according to Liu's strategy () the nucleosome-forming sequence samples (positive data) and the linkers or nucleosome-inhibiting sequence samples (negative data) were extracted from chromosome 20. As for the other two species, namely C.elegans and D.melanogaster, the positive and negative data were extracted from their entire genomes. In the datasets thus formed from the three organisms, each of the DNA fragments was assigned with a nucleosome formation score to reflect its propensity to form nucleosome: the higher the score was, the more likely the fragment would be in forming a nucleosome. The DNA fragments with the highest nucleosome formation scores were selected as the nucleosomal sequences, while those with the lowest scores as the linker sequences. As elaborated in (), a dataset containing many redundant samples with high similarity would be lack of statistical representativeness. A predictor, if trained and tested by such a biased benchmark dataset, might yield misleading results with overestimated accuracy (). To get rid of redundancy and avoid bias, the CD-HIT software () was used with the cutoff threshold set at 80% to remove those DNA fragments with high sequence similarity (note that the most stringent cutoff threshold for DNA sequences by CD-HIT was 75%). Finally, we obtained three benchmark datasets as formulated by
Pseudo k-tuple nucleotide compositionSuppose a DNA sequence D with L nucleic acid residues; i.e.where R 1 denotes the nucleic acid residue at the sequence position 1, R 2 the nucleic acid residue at position 2 and so forth. If the DNA sequence is represented by the k-tuple nucleotide composition (), the corresponding feature vector will contain 4 k components, as given byAs we can see from the above equation, with the gradual increase of k, although most of the base sequence-order information within a local or short range could be included, none of the global or long-range sequenceorder information would be reflected by the formulation. Actually, in computational proteomics, we have also faced the same situation; i.e. although the dipeptide composition, tripeptide composition, and k-tuple peptide composition were used by many investigators to represent protein sequences, their global or long-range sequence-order information could still not be reflected. To deal with this problem, the concept of pseudo amino acid composition (Chou, 2001a) or Chou's PseAAC () was proposed. Since then, the PseAAC approach has rapidly penetrated into many areas of computational proteomics (see, e.g.) and a long list of references cited in a review (). Owing to its wide usage, recently two powerful softwares, called 'PseAAC-Builder' () and 'propy' (), were established for generating various special pseudo-amino acid compositions. Stimulated by the PseAAC approach () in computational proteomics, below we are to propose a novel feature vector, called 'pseudo k-tuple nucleotide composition' (PseKNC), to represent DNA-sequence samples by incorporating the global or long-range sequence-order effects so as to improve the prediction quality in identifying nucleosomes. Similar to Equation (5) of Chou (2001a) or Equation (3) of, the PseKNC can be formulated asIn the above equation, is the number of the total counted ranks (or tiers) of the correlations along a DNA sequence; f u (u  1, 2,. .. , 4 k ) are the same as Equation (3) that are now normalized to P 4 k i1 f i  1; while w is the weight factor. The concrete values of and w as well as k will be further discussed later, while j is given by
DNA local structural property parametersIt has been reported that DNA structural properties play important roles in many biological processes, such as prokaryotic transcription initiation, proteinDNA interactions, formation of chromosomes and meiotic recombination (). Recently,developed a model to predict nucleosome occupancy by using basic physical properties. Their model captures a substantial part of chromatin's structural complexity, thus leading to a much better prediction of nucleosome occupancy than the methods based only on periodic curved-DNA motifs (). Illuminated by Miele's work (), in this article, the DNA local structural properties were considered to define PseKNC. Generally speaking, the spatial arrangements of two neighboring base pairs are characterized by six parameters (), of which three are local translational parameters and other three the local angular parameters, as summarized inof Supplementary Material S4, which will be used to calculate the global or long-rangesequence-order effects for the nucleosome and linker sequences via Equation (7) as well as Equations (46). Note that before substituting them into Equation (7), all the original values inof Supplementary Material S4 for P v (R i R i1 ). A schematic drawing to show the correlations of dinucleotides along a DNA sequence for (A) the first-tier coupling that reflects the correlation mode between all the most contiguous dinucleotide, (B) the second-tier coupling between all the second-most contiguous dinucleotide and (C) the third-tier coupling between all the third-most contiguous dinucleotide (v  1, 2,. .. , 6) were subjected to a standard conversion () as described by the following equation:where the symbol 54 means taking the average of the quantity therein over 16 different dinucleotides, and SD means the corresponding standard deviation. The converted values obtained by Equation (9) will have a zero mean value over the 16 different dinucleotides, and will remain unchanged if going through the same conversion procedure again. Listed inof Supplementary Material S4 are the values of, 2,. .. , 6) obtained via the standard conversion of Equation (9) from those ofSupplementary Material S4.
Support vector machineSupport vector machine (SVM) is a powerful and popular method for pattern recognition that has been widely used in the realm of bioinformatics (). The basic idea of SVM is to transform the data into a high dimensional feature space, and then determine the optimal separating hyper plane using a kernel function. To handle a multi-class problem, 'one-versus-one (OVO)' and 'one-versus-rest (OVR)' are generally applied to extend the traditional SVM. For a brief formulation of SVM and how it works, see (). For more details about SVM, see a monograph Cristianini and Shawe-Taylor (2000). In the current article, the LIBSVM 2.86 package () was used as an implementation of SVM, which can be downloaded from http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/*cjlin/libsvm/. The radial basis function was selected as the kernel function due to its effectiveness and speed in training process. The optimal penalty constant C and width parameter were determined via an optimization procedure using a grid search approach. The predictor obtained via the above procedures is called iNucPseKNC, where 'i' stands for 'identify', 'Nuc' for 'nucleosome', 'Pse' for 'pseudo', 'K' for 'k-tuple', 'N' for 'nucleotide' and 'C' for 'composition'. Moreover, its web-server has also been established as will be further described later.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Criteria for performance evaluationOne of the important procedures in developing a useful statistical predictor () is to objectively evaluate its performance or anticipated success rate. To realize this, we first need a set of metrics to quantitatively measure the performance of a predictor. Here, let us use the criterion proposed in (Chou, 2001b, c) to develop a set of more intuitive and easier-to-understand metrics. According to that criterion, the rates of correct predictions for the nucleosome-forming sequences and the nucleosome-inhibiting sequences are, respectively, defined bythe nucleosome-forming sequencesthe nucleosome-inhibiting sequences 8 < :
10where N  is the total number of the nucleosome-forming sequences investigated while N   the number of the nucleosome-forming sequences incorrectly predicted as the nucleosome-inhibiting sequences; N  the total number of the nucleosome-inhibiting sequences investigated while N   the number of the nucleosome-inhibiting sequences incorrectly predicted as nucleosome-forming sequences. Based on the symbols in Equation (10), the following set of metrics can be obtained ()where Sn stands for the sensitivity, Sp for the specificity, Acc for the accuracy and MCC for the Mathew's correlation coefficient. Such four metrics are generally used in statistical prediction for quantitatively measuring the performance of a predictor from four different angles. In some statistical analysis, Sn is also called the 'true positive rate' and (1  Sp) the 'false positive rate', as will be further discussed later. From Equation (11), we can easily see the following. When N    0 meaning none of the nucleosome-forming sequences was incorrectly predicted to be a nucleosome-inhibiting sequence, we have the sensitivity Sn  1. When N    N  meaning that all the nucleosome-forming sequences were incorrectly predicted to be the nucleosome-inhibiting sequences, we have the sensitivity Sn  0. Likewise, when N    0 meaning none of the nucleosome-inhibiting sequences was incorrectly predicted to be a nucleosome-forming sequence, we have the specificity Sp  1; whereas N    N  meaning all the nucleosome-inhibiting sequences were incorrectly predicted to be the nucleosome-forming sequences, we have the specificity Sp  0. When N    N   0 meaning that none of the nucleosome-forming sequences and none of the nucleosome-inhibiting sequences were incorrectly predicted, we have the overall accuracy Acc  1 and Mathew's correlation coefficient MCC  1; whenthat all the nucleosome-forming sequences and all the nucleosome-inhibiting sequences were incorrectly predicted, we have Acc  0 and MCC  1; whereas when N    N  =2 and N    N  =2 we have Acc  0.5 and MCC  0 meaning no better than random prediction. As we can see from the above discussion based on Equation (11), the meanings of the four metrics have become much more intuitive and easier-to-understand, particularly for the Mathew's correlation coefficient, which is usually used for measuring the quality of binary (two-class) classifications as in the case of current article. It is instructive to point out that the aforementioned metrics are valid only to the single-label system in which a sample investigated belongs to one, and only one class. In other words, a same nucleotide sequence cannot belong to both nucleosomeforming class and nucleosome-inhibiting class. However, it has been observed recently that some molecular biosystems and biomedical systems are actually the multi-label systems in which some of their constituent molecules may belong to two or more attributes (), and hence need two or more labels to tag them (Chou, 2013).
Cross validationThree cross-validation methods, i.e. independent dataset test, sub-sampling (or K-fold cross validation) test and jackknife test, are often used to evaluate the anticipated success rate of a predictor (). Among the three methods, however, the jackknife test is deemed the least arbitrary and most objective as elucidated in () and demonstrated by Equations (2832) of, and hence has been widely recognized and increasingly adopted by investigators to examine the quality of various predictors (see, e.g.). Accordingly, the jackknife test was also used to examine the performance of the model proposed in the current article. In the jackknife test, each sequence in the training dataset is in turn singled out as an independent test sample and all the rule-parameters are calculated without including the one being identified.
Parameter optimizationAs we can see from Equations (4 and 5), the current prediction model was based on three parameters, namely k, and w, where w is the weight factor usually within the range from 0 to 1, k reflects the local or short-range sequence-order effect, and the global or long-range sequence-order effect. Generally speaking, the greater the k is, the more local sequence-order information the model contains. Also, the greater the is, the more global sequence-order information the model contains. However, if k or is too large, it would reduce the cluster-tolerant capacity () so as to lower down the cross-validation accuracy due to overfitting or 'high dimension disaster' problem (). Therefore, our searching for the optimal values for the three parameters were carried out according to the following 2 k 6, with step   1 1 20, with step   1 0 w 1, with step   0:1As we can see from above, there are 5  20  11  1100 combinations (or points in the 3D parameter space) that need to be considered for finding the optimal parameter values. To reduce the computational time, let us first use the 5-fold cross-validation approach to deal with the parameter optimization. For example, a histogram is given into show how different k values would affect the predicted results. Once the optimal values of the three parameters are determined, the rigorous jackknife test will be performed to finally evaluate the anticipated success rate of the predictor.
Prediction qualityListed inare the prediction quality measured by the four metrics defined in Equation (11) for the iNuc-PseKNC predictor in identifying nucleosomes via the rigorous jackknife cross validation. The optimal values for the predictor's three parameters k, and w are also given in the table. Meanwhile, to provide a graphical illustration to show the performance of the current binary classifier iNuc-PseKNC as its discrimination threshold is varied, a 2D plot, called ROC (receiver operating characteristic) curve, is given in, where its vertical coordinate Y is for the true positive rate or Sn] while horizontal coordinate X for the false positive rate or 1  Sp. The best possible prediction method would yield a point with the coordinate (0,1) representing 100% true positive rate (sensitivity Sn) and 0 false positive rate or 100% specificity. Therefore, the (0,1) point is also called a perfect classification. A completely random guess would give a point along a diagonal from the point (0,0) to (1,1). The AUROC is often used to indicate the performance quality of a. A histogram to show the overall accuracy by iNuc-PseKNC in identifying nucleosomes with different k values. The accuracy for H.sapiens or D.melanogaster reaches a peak when k  4, while that for C.elegans reaches a peak when k  3 binary classifier: the value 0.5 of AUROC is equivalent to random prediction while 1 of AUROC represents a perfect one. As we can see fromand, even for such large and stringent benchmark datasets, the rates obtained by iNucPseKNC were all considerably high, indicating the current predictor is not only accurate, but also quite stable. It is instructive to point out that the prediction accuracy by the current method for D.melanogaster is not as high as those for H.sapiens and C.elegant accuracies. The reason is probably due to the fact that the features of D.melanogaster nucleosomes are not fully extracted. As is well known, the nucleosomal positions are neither fixed at all developmental stages (or tissues) nor uniformly phased with 100% (). Accordingly, it is rational to calculate the nucleosomal-forming probability. If the probability of a sequence is !0.5, the sequence is predicted as nucleosome; otherwise, linker.
Comparison with the existing predictorAs mentioned in the Section 1, the accuracy rates reported by the existing methods in identifying nucleosomes were based on small benchmark datasets without removing high similarity sequences therein, and hence might be over-estimated as shown in Tables S3S6 of Supplementary Material S4, where the success rates obtained with the current predictor by using the same test methods and same benchmark datasets as used in the existing predictors () are given along with the reported rates in those papers. As we can see from these tables, the current predictor iNuc-PseKNC obviously outperformed its counterparts in identifying nucleosomes measured by all the four metrics as defined in Equation (11) as well as by AUROC, indicating that the novel approach by introducing the 'PseKNC' to represent DNA samples is really very useful. For example, it was reported last year that the overall success rate in identifying nucleosomes achieved by iNuc-PhysChem () via the 5-fold cross-validation test was 96%, higher than that by any of its counterparts. Such a high rate, however, was derived from the benchmark dataset collected from S.cerevisiae without undergoing a rigorous screening procedure to exclude the high similarity sequences, just like the benchmark datasets used by its then counterparts. Now, let us see what happened if the identification was made by the current predictor iNuc-PseKNC on the same benchmark dataset via the same test method. The results thus obtained are given inSupplementary Material S4, from which we can see that the rates for Sn, Sp and Acc by iNuc-PseKNC on the same benchmark dataset as used by iNuc-PhysChem () were all 100%!
WEB-SERVER GUIDE OR PROTOCOLFor the convenience of the vast majority of experimental scientists, let us give a step-by-step guide on how to use the iNucPseKNC web-server to get their desired results without the need to follow the complicated mathematic equations that were presented just for the integrity in developing the predictor. The detailed steps are as follows.Step 1. On opening the web server at http://lin.uestc.edu.cn/ server/iNuc-PseKNC, the top page of iNuc-PseKNC on computer screen will be seen, as shown in. Clicking the 'Read Me' button will give a brief introduction about the predictor and the caveat when using it.Step 2. On clicking the open circle, the organism concerned will be selected. Either typed or copy/pasted the query DNA sequences into the input box at the center of. The input sequence should be in the FASTA format. A sequence in FASTA format consists of a single initial line beginning with a greater than symbol (' 4') in the first column, followed by lines of sequence data. The words right after the ' 4' symbol in the single initial line are optional and only used for the purpose of identification and description. The sequence ends if another line starting with a ' 4' appears; this indicates the start of another sequence. Example sequences in FASTA format can be seen by clicking on the 'Example' button right above the input box.Step 3. To see the predicted result, the 'Submit' button has to be clicked. For example, if the three query DNA sequencesSn (%)Sp (%) MCC. A graphical illustration to show the performance of the iNucPseKNC by means of the ROC curves. The areas under the ROC curves, or AUROC, are 0.925, 0.935 and 0.874 for H.sapiens, C.elegans and D.melanogaster, respectively are used from the H.sapiens species in the 'Example' window as the input and checking on the 'H.sapiens' button, after clicking the 'Submit' button, the following shown on the screen of the computer will be seen: the outcome for the first query example (with 147-bp long) is 'nucleosome'; the outcome for the second query sample (with 147-bp long) is 'linker'; the outcome for the third query sample (with 238-bp long) contains 238  147  1  92 sub-results, in which the outcomes for the segments from #1 to #11 are of 'linker', those for the segments from #72 to #92 are of 'nucleosome' and those from #49 to #71 are of 'linker'. The nucleosomeforming probabilities of these 92 sub-results are also provided. All these results are fully consistent with the experimental observations. It takes about few seconds for the above computation before the predicted result appears on your computer screen; the more number of query sequences and longer of each sequence, the more time it is usually needed. To get the anticipated prediction accuracy, 'the species button consistent with the source of query sequences always be checked': if the query sequences are from H.sapiens species, the ''H.sapiens'' button is checked; if from C.elegan, the 'C.elegan' button is checked; if from D.melalogaster, the 'D.melalogaster' button is checked.
H.sapiensStep 4. The 'Data' button is clicked to download the benchmark datasets used to train and test the iNuc-PseKNC predictor.Step 5. The 'Citation' button has to click to find the relevant papers that document the detailed development and algorithm of iNuc-PseKNC.Caveats. Each of the input query sequences must be 147 bp or longer and only contains valid characters: 'A', 'C', 'G', 'T'.
contains 2850 nucleosome-inhibiting sequences; and the symbol [ means the union in the set theory. All the sequence samples are 147-bp long; none of them has 480% pairwise sequence identity with any other. The detailed sequences in the three benchmark datasets S 1 , S 2 and S 3 are given in Supplementary Materials S1, S2 and S3, respectively.
iNuc-PseKNC: predict nucleosome positioning at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Lj1 i1 R i R i1 , R ij R ij1  j  1, 2,. .. , ; 5L 6 which represents the j-tier structural correlation factor between all the j-th most contiguous dinucleotide. For example, 1 is the first-tier correlation factor that reflects the sequence-order correlation between all the most contiguous dinucleotide along a DNA sequence (Fig. 2a); 2 reflects the second-tier correlation factor between all the second-most contiguous dinucleotide (Fig. 2b); 3 reflects the third-tier correlation factor between all the third-most contiguous dinucleotide (Fig. 2c); and so forth. Accordingly, the parameter actually represents the highest counted rank (or tier) of the correlation along a DNA sequence, and hence must be an integer. The correlation function (R i R i1 , R ij R ij1 ) in Equation (6) is defined by R i R i1 , R ij R ij1   1 X v1 P v R i R i1   P v R ij R ij1  2 7 where is the number of local DNA structural properties considered that is equal to 6 in the current article as will be explained below; P v (R i R i1 ), the numerical value of the v-th (v  1, 2,. .. , ) DNA local structural property for the dinucleotide R i R i1 at position i and P v (R ij R ij1 ) the corresponding value for the dinucleotide R ij R ij1 at position ij.
S.-H.Guo et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
