A challenge in biodata analysis is to understand the underlying phenomena among many interactions in signaling pathways. Such study is formulated as the pathway enrichment analysis, which identifies relevant pathways functional enriched in high-throughput data. The question faced here is how to analyze different data types in a unified and integrative way by characterizing pathways that these data simultaneously reveal. To this end, we developed integrative Pathway Enrichment Analysis Platform, iPEAP, which handles transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics and GWAS data under a unified aggregation schema. iPEAP emphasizes on the ability to aggregate various pathway enrichment results generated in different high-throughput experiments, as well as the quantitative measurements of different ranking results, thus providing the first benchmark platform for integration, comparison and evaluation of multiple types of data and enrichment methods. Availability and implementation: iPEAP is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONAs the advent of post-genomic era, omics science and highthroughput technology have generated massive data. Quantitative methods are developed to better relate the underline pattern of the data to biologic concepts, like Gene Ontology terms, biological functions or pathways and so forth. Among them, biochemical pathways are the primary focus, and they are extensively used to interpret biological data in a network viewpoint (). In particular, pathway overrepresentation and enrichment analyses have become important approaches for the interpretation of data from various high-throughput experiments, which aim at projecting a set of genes, proteins or metabolites onto predefined groups, calculating significance of correlation for each group and then ranking them according to the statistic. Correlation statistics can be defined in many ways, and various pathway enrichment analysis algorithms were proposed, like overrepresentation analysis (), gene set enrichment analysis (), network topology-based approaches SPIA (), DEAP () and so forth. With rapid accumulation of massive and various types of omic and genetic data, the major challenge for pathway analysis now becomes how to analyze different types of data for a given experiment in a unified way and interactively mining the underline functions under these data simultaneously. For a given set of samples, multiple types of high-throughput data, such as the transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics and genome-wide association study (GWAS) data can be generated at the same time. These data describe the samples from different perspectives, and each of them can be complementary to each other to obtain the unbiased enrichment pathway list. There are a few works existed on the integrative pathway analysis like integrative GWAS and gene expression analysis in prostate cancer (), IMPaLA (), MAPE () and so forth. But traditionally only one pathway enrichment algorithm or one specific integration method was provided. To the best of our knowledge, integrative benchmark platforms allowing multiple enrichment and integration algorithms to handle multiple omic and genetic data, together with easy-to-use user interface, are absent. To tackle the multiple data integration problem, we presented a software iPEAP, namely integrative Pathway Enrichment Analysis Platform, to perform integrative pathway enrichment analysis. It is a Java based, user-friendly, graphical tool with the aim of integrating transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics and GWAS data for pathway level analysis. Furthermore, various state-of-art pathway enrichment analysis algorithms for the single data type as well as the quantitative evaluation measurements and tools for pathway ranking were incorporated into iPEAP, which are useful for the access, evaluation and comparison of different approaches in one platform.
METHODSiPEAP guides users to follow the following pipeline, i.e. data type selection, data input, enrichment analysis, ranking aggregation and evaluation to perform the integrative pathway enrichment analysis (). The calculated pathway ranking is displayed as a table including pathway *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. names, categories, enrichment scores and so forth. Official KEGG pathway graphs are accessible by double clicking the pathway ID or title. The hit genes/metabolites in pathway are shown in an adjacent window by clicking the corresponding pathway record, together with their expression values, which can be the reads per kilobase per million (RPKM)/fragments per kilobase of exon per million fragments mapped (FPKM) values or the calculated differential expression values. Linkouts to other network sources like STRING (), MetPA (), IMPaLA () and KOBAS () are also provided. Users can also compare and evaluate the pathway rankings using two tools ListComparer and RankEvaluator, respectively, which were developed in iPEAP (See Supplementary Material). For the first time three quantitative measurements, i.e. NDCG (normalized discounted cumulative gain) () ERR (expected reciprocal rank) () and P (proportion) () were included in iPEAP to evaluate ranking results (See Supplementary Methods). In addition, various state-of-art pathway enrichment algorithms were also incorporated for handling transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics and GWAS data, respectively (Supplementary). Two integration schemas, i.e. RobustRankAggreg () and RankAggreg () can be selected to integrate different pathway rankings into one unbiased overall ranking. Some simple aggregation methods such as min, median and mean are also provided () (See Supplementary Methods).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Application to multiple types of dataTo illustrate the use of iPEAP as an integrative tool, we analyzed two cases with multiple types of data integration from two established studies. One case is focused on non-genotoxic carcinogenesis where the human hepatocarcinoma cell line HepG2 was exposed to the environmental carcinogen 2, 3, 7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Both the transcriptomics and metabolomics profiles were integrated with iPEAP, helping to understand the molecular mechanisms induced by toxic compounds in vitro in human cells (). Another one is a non-targeted metabolomics study associated with the single nucleotide polymorphism loci on two cohorts, namely the German KORA F4 Study (n  1768) and the British Twins UK study (n  1052) (). In this case, the metabolomics and GWAS profile were integrated to study the functional pathways using iPEAP. The integrated pathway enrichment results for two cases are listed in Supplementary Table S4 and S7, respectively. Both of them obtained more reasonable and novel biological results compared with that only one single type of data was used. Detailed analysis can be referred in Supplementary Materials.
iPEAP for pathway ranking evaluation and comparison
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Using the built-in tools and quantitatively ranking evaluation measurements in iPEAP, ranking comparison and evaluation can be easily carried out to further interpret the pathway ranking results. In our study, three transcriptomics datasets, namely lung adenocarcinoma, breast cancer and hepatic cell treated with palmitate, initially used by (Draghici et al., 2007), were applied as the benchmark data to evaluate three classical pathway enrichment algorithms, namely overrepresentation analysis, gene set enrichment analysis and SPIA, using the built-in tool RankEvaluator. We evaluated the top 20 pathways of the nine ranking results, using three measurements as NDCG, ERR and P, respectively, provided the first time a quantitative evaluation of distinct pathway enrichment algorithms, as shown in Figure 2. In summary, iPEAP provides a powerful platform to analyze different types of high-throughput data and investigate their pathway-level mechanism in an integrative fashion. Funding: National Natural Science Foundation of China (31100956 and 61173117) and National 863 program (2012AA020405 and 2012AA011005). Conflict of Interest: none declared.
H.Sun et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
iPEAP at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
