Motivation: Post-translational modification by the Small Ubiquitin-like Modifier (SUMO) proteins, a process termed SUMOylation, is involved in many fundamental cellular processes. SUMO proteins are conjugated to a protein substrate, creating an interface for the recruitment of cofactors harboring SUMO-interacting motifs (SIMs). Mapping both SUMO-conjugation sites and SIMs is required to study the functional consequence of SUMOylation. To define the best candidate sites for experimental validation we designed JASSA, a Joint Analyzer of SUMOylation site and SIMs. Results: JASSA is a predictor that uses a scoring system based on a Position Frequency Matrix derived from the alignment of experimental SUMOylation sites or SIMs. Compared with existing web-tools, JASSA displays on par or better performances. Novel features were implemented towards a better evaluation of the prediction, including identification of database hits matching the query sequence and representation of candidate sites within the secondary structural elements and/or the 3D fold of the protein of interest, retrievable from deposited PDB files. Availability and Implementation: JASSA is freely accessible at http://www.jassa.fr/. Website is implemented in PHP and MySQL, with all major browsers supported. Contact:
IntroductionSUMOylation is a eukaryotic post-translational modification which consists in the reversible attachment of members of the Small Ubiquitin-like Modifier (SUMO) protein family on a protein substrate resulting in the dynamic regulation of its biochemical properties. Proteins involved in many fundamental cellular processes like DNA repair, transcription control, chromatin organization, macromolecular assembly and signal transduction are SUMOylated [for a review see (. Thus, it is not surprising that deregulation of SUMOylation is associated to various pathological conditions like neurological disorders, cancers and pathogen proliferation [for reviews (. SUMO proteins are conjugated to a lysine (K) residue of the substrate through the sequential action of SUMO-specific activating (E1), conjugating (E2) and ligating (E3) enzymes and de-conjugation relies on SUMO-specific proteases. Virtually all eukaryotes express SUMO proteins, mammals and plants harboring several paralogues,and the components of the conjugation pathway are highly conserved across eukaryote proteomes (;). Analysis of SUMO targets shows that the modified K is often embedded within the consensus sequence WKxE (where W is a hydrophobic residue and x any amino acid), which is a binding site for Ubc9, the single E2 conjugating enzyme (). Extended variants of this motif were described, including negatively charged amino acid-dependent SUMOylation motifs (NDSM) (), phosphorylation-dependent SUMOylation motifs (PDSM) () and phosphorylation SUMOylation motif (), where a cluster of negatively charged and/or phosphorylatable residues downstream of the core motif promotes SUMO conjugation by strengthening the interaction between the substrate and Ubc9 (). SUMOylation of the inverted consensus motif (xKW) was also reported (). However, not every sequence conforming to the consensus motifs is modified, likely because the environment of the target K must adopt a favorable conformation to be accessible to the SUMO machinery (). Notably, modification by SUMO occurs at nonconsensus sites. This is the case for $50% of the SUMOylated substrates identified by the Vertegaal's group (). SUMO creates an interface for the recruitment of protein cofactors that harbor short peptide sequences known as SUMOinteracting motifs (SIMs). Most SIMs feature a loose consensus sequence composed of 34 aliphatic residues often flanked by acidic and/or phosphorylatable amino acids (). The hydrophobic core adopts a b-strand conformation that can accommodate in a pocket formed by the a 1-helix and the b 2-strand of SUMO (). Adjacent negatively charged residues control the affinity, the polarity and the paraloguespecificity of the SIM/SUMO interaction (). Mapping SUMO-conjugation sites and SIMs is mandatory to fully characterize the biological consequences of SUMOylation. Large-scale mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic studies allowed the identification of hundreds of proteins harboring SUMOylation sites and/or SIMs (). However, the use of this approach is limited by the transient nature of the modification, the small fraction of a protein that is SUMOylated and the difficulty to identify branched peptides resulting for the tryptic digestion of SUMOylated proteins. When MS data are not available, computer-aided prediction of SUMOylation sites and SIMs by in silico analysis represents a promising strategy to reduce the number of potential targets for experimental verification. We developed JASSA (Joint analyzer of SUMOylation site and SIMs) to provide a comprehensive overview of potential SUMOylation sites and SIMs. The prediction relies on a scoring system based on a Position Frequency Matrix (PFM) derived from the alignment of experimentally validated sequences. When compared with existing bioinformatics tools, JASSA displays on par or better predictive performances. To increase the reliability of the prediction, JASSA offers additional features such as identification of database (DB) hits matching the query sequence, systematic pattern search against extended motifs, analysis of the physico-chemical properties of adjacent residues and, when a PDB file is available, the possibility to represent candidate sites within the secondary structural elements and the 3D fold of the query protein. We believe that JASSA will provide a valuable support for selecting the best candidate sites for experimental studies.
System and methods
Databases of SUMOylation sites and SIMsThe training DB of SUMOylation sites was generated by collecting data from PhosphoSite (), Teng et al. () and NCBI (publication until January 2011) using 'SUMO' and 'SUMOylation' as keywords. It encompasses 877 unique SUMOylated experimentally defined K residues from 505 proteins. The sequence of the 21-mer centered on the modified K was retrieved from UniProt (). JASSA operates using either of three clusters of experimental SUMOylation sites: ALL, DIRECT or INVERTED, which include all the sequences of the DB or the sequences following the direct WKxa or the inverted axKW consensus, respectively (where W is an hydrophobic residue; a is E or D and x is any amino acid) (see below). The collection of SIMs consists of 102 non-redundant motifs from 66 proteins obtained from NCBI using '(SIM or SBD or SBM) and SUMO' as keywords (publication until January 2014). Putative SIMs from proteins interacting with SUMO in yeast two-hybrid screens, but not validated further, were not included.
Characterization of the SUMOylation sites DB and motifs clustering strategyMost of the SUMOylation sites retrieved from the scientific literature and included in our training DB are from Homo sapiens (71.9%) and rodents (14.7%). The remaining motifs are from yeast, viruses and plants (5.6, 3.1 and 2.5%, respectively) (Supplementary). A pattern search against known SUMOylation consensus motifs showed that 598 sites (68.2%) of the DB fit with the direct WKxa motif (where W  A, F, G, I, L, M, P, V or Y; a  D or E; x  any amino acid). Among these 26.3% are NSDM, 3.6% PSDM, 12% HSCM and 20% synergy control motif (). We also found that 80 sites of the DB (9.1%) follow the inverted axKW consensus, while 30 (3.4%) fit both the direct and the inverted consensus motif. The remaining 229 sites (26.1%) do not conform to any of these motifs and are considered as non-consensus. Based on these observations we grouped the experimental SUMOylation sites in three clusters which encompass all the sequences of the DB (ALL), the sites following the direct WKxa (DIRECT) or the inverted axKW consensus (INVERTED). We reasoned that the DB of JASSA being enriched in sequences that match the direct WKxa motif (>68%), while inverted motifs are underrepresented (<10%), could undermine the prediction of sites that fit the axKW pattern. Next, we analyzed the local target protein context in a 21-mer window centered on the SUMOylated K (position 0) for each cluster with WebLogo3 () (). The sequence logo for the cluster ALL agrees with the prevalence of the WKxa motif in the DB. At position 1 there is a higher occurrence of hydrophobic amino acids most of which are residues with aliphatic side chains (67.5% among which 27.7% are I, 12.7% are L and 23.7% are V), whereas aromatic amino acids are rare (5.4% of which 4.6% are F) (Supplementary). At position 2 acidic residues are significantly enriched (70% E, 5.4% D). Finally, no particular amino acid is overrepresented at position 1. As expected, the sequence logo of the cluster DIRECT is similar except that position 1 is occupied exclusively by hydrophobic residues, whereas E ($94%) and D ($6%) are the only amino acids found at position 2. Consistent with the fact that about a third of the SUMOylation sites of the collection match with the NDSM or the PDSM motifs, acidic and/or phosphorylatable residues are enriched downstream of the core consensus motif (and). The amino acids distribution around the SUMO-acceptor K is different for the cluster INVERTED (and Supplementary). A similar incidence of E (55%) and D (45%) is found at position 2. Non-polar residues are still enriched at position 1 (97.5 %). However, there is a greater variety of residues, with a higher rate of P (22.5%), A (15%), F (12.5%) and M ($9%), and a lower occurrence of I ($6.3%), L ($6.3%) and V (25%) compared with the sequences of the cluster ALL or DIRECT. Finally, the sequence logo for the non-consensus sites has an ambiguous profile, the SUMOylated K being the only conserved residue (). In agreement with the fact that the SUMOylation pathway is highly conserved among eukaryotes, similar sequence logos were obtained for the SUMOylation sites belonging to yeast proteins (Supplementary).
Characterization of the SIMs DB and motifs clustering strategyThe identification of SIMs, which act as SUMO recognition modules, is necessary to better understand the functional consequences of SUMOylation. To develop a protocol for computer-aided prediction, we generated a DB by collecting 102 experimentally validated SIMs, most of which are from human proteins (62.4%). The remaining sequences are from rodent (3.0%), yeast (12.9%) and viruses (16.8%) (Supplementary). Alignment of the hydrophobic core (positions 2 to 2) of these sequences showed that V and I represent more than 50% of the amino acids occurring at position 2 and 1, respectively, while having a rate ranging from 19 to 28% at other positions (Supplementary). L is the most frequent residue at position 2 (45%). Although its occurrence is around 6% at other positions, L is nevertheless the more represented residue after V and I, the other amino acids having rates below 3%. We manually curated the alignment of the 24-mer centered on the hydrophobic core for the 102 motifs of the DB and defined 5 types of SIMs (and). The SIM consensus being degenerate, some experimental sites could fit with more than one pattern. MotifsNote: PDSM, phosphorylation-dependent SUMOylation motif; NSDM, negatively charged amino acid-dependent SUMOylation motif; HCSM, hydrophobic cluster SUMOylation motif; SC-SUMO, synergy control motif; pSuM, phosphorylated SUMOylation motif. The abundance [number (Nb) and percentage (%)] of each motif in the DB is indicated. W 1  I, L or V; W 2  A, F, I, L, M, P,V or W; W 3  A, F, G, I, L, M, P, V, W or Y; W 4  A, F, G, I, L, P or V; a  D or E; pS/T, phosphorylated serine/threonine.. Characterization of the collection of SUMOylation sites. The sequence logo representations of the 21-mer harboring the SUMO-acceptor K residue for motifs included in the cluster ALL, DIRECT or INVERTED were obtained with WebLogo3 () using bits unit (left) or probability unit (right). The 5-mer (positions 2 to 2) used to define the frequency plots (Supplementary) is indicated
Prediction of SUMOylation sites and SIMsmatching the consensus WWxW (type 1), WxWW (type 2), WWWW (type 3), xWWW (type 4) and WaWaW (type 5) (where W  V, I or L; a  D or E and x  any amino acids), represent $60, 40, 20, 30 and 4% of the collection, respectively. A deeper analysis of the sequences of type 1 cluster showed that $40% of the sites match with the V[I/V]DLT pattern. In this context,showed that aromatic residues can be accommodated at position 2 as in the SIMs of FLASH/ CASP8AP2 and C5orf25. Thus, we named the group of sites which comprise an F or Y residue at position 2 'type 1 bis' cluster (). Only 5 out of 102 known SIMs could not be included in any cluster.
Determination of the prediction performancesTo compute the area under the curve (AUC) of the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves for the prediction of SUMOylation sites by JASSA using any of the three clusters (ALL, DIRECT, INVERTED) or GPS-SUMO, we used the R package pROC, notably the 'roc()' function with no smoothing method (R Core). The evaluation was performed using (i) the testing dataset of SUMOhydro which consists of 24 positive and 510 negative motifs (); (ii) the 4351 positive site identified by the Vertegaal's group in 1489 proteins (). As a matching negative dataset, we selected the 68325 K residues from the same proteins which SUMOylation was not detected. The results were plotted using the R package ggplot2 ().
Algorithm
Scoring strategy and definition of cut-off values for the prediction of SUMOylation sitesSequence analysis of SUMOylation sites points to a hydrophobic and an acidic amino acids surrounding the target K (position 0) as major determinants of SUMO conjugation (). Thus, we established a scoring system where the occurrence of these residues, which are found at position 1 and 2 in direct consensus motifs or 2 and 1 in inverted consensus motifs, is used to quantify the eventuality of a K residue to lie within a SUMOylation site. The method is based on a PFM at four positions generated by aligning the sequences of the selected cluster (ALL, DIRECT or INVERTED) (Supplementary). Each K residue of a query is given two predictive scores (PS) termed PSd and PSi. When either the cluster ALL or DIRECT is selected, the scores are defined asis the frequency at position p of the amino acid (amino acids) at position q for the selected cluster. Note that f 0 K 0   1 and the frequency of residues that are absent is set to 0.0001. Since the majority of SUMOylation sites of the DB conform to the canonical consensus pattern, hydrophobic residues are overrepresented at position 1 (and Supplementary). To avoid any bias when analyzing putative inverted SUMOylation sites, the frequencies of the amino acids at position 1 and 1 are not considered in the calculation of the PSd and the PSi, respectively. Two cut-off values were defined by decision tree analysis for each cluster of SUMOylation sites (C). To this aim, a positive and a negative datasets composed of 358 bona fide SUMOylated motifs and 8071 non-SUMOylated sites, respectively (), were analyzed with JASSA choosing either the cluster ALL, DIRECT or INVERTED. The best score (either PSd or PSi) for each sequence tested was submitted to SIPINA Research (http://eric.univ-lyon2.fr/$ricco/sipina.html).
Scoring strategy and definition of cut-off values for the prediction of SIMsFor the detection of putative SIMs, the query protein is scanned against multiple consensus motifs (), and a PS is calculated
Prediction of SUMOylation sites and SIMs(). The positive test dataset consists of the 102 known SIMs. The negative test dataset is composed of the remaining 868 motifs that match at least one of the previously defined consensus patterns () within the same proteins, and not included in the positive dataset.
Prediction of a negatively charged-residue stretch flanking a putative SIMWe manually curated the 10-amino acids long sequences upstream and downstream the 102 SIMs of the DB and arbitrarily decided on the presence or the absence of astretch. Each sequence was given a score calculated as follows:when E, D or S is found at position i; or v i  0 if any other residue is found position i. Next, the positive and negative clusters were analyzed with SIPINA Research and a cut-off was set at PS stretch  5 (Supplementary). The letter 'N' (PS stretch 5) or 'Y' (PS stretch > 5) in the result output indicates the absence or the presence of acluster, respectively.
Predictive performance assessment and comparison with other predictorsThe prediction performances of JASSA were evaluated using the independent test datasets of. Accuracy (Ac), sensitivity (Sn), specificity (Sp) and strength (St) were calculated as follows:TP (true positives) and TN (true negative) are the number of SUMOylated and non-SUMOylated K residues that were correctly predicted or rejected, respectively; FP (false positive) and FN (false negative) are the number of over-predicted or under-predicted K residues, respectively. The Matthews' correlation coefficient (MCC) is calculated as follows:The results of these assessments for JASSA are shown in Supplementary Table S2. The performances of JASSA were also benchmarked against GPS-SUMO (). Indeed, the authors of GPS-SUMO proved the superiority of their algorithm over other available methods and their web-based service allows for batched prediction. We used the test dataset from SUMOhydro () and the dataset created from the extensive results of Vertegaal's lab (). We plotted the ROC curves and calculated the AUC for JASSA (with any of the three clusters ALL, DIRECT and INVERTED) and for GPS-SUMO. In all the cases, JASSA displayed superior performances (). The performances of the SIM prediction tool of JASSA were evaluated by a bootstrap approach and compared with the SIM predictor of GPS-SUMO (). The whole DB was randomly distributed in five equal-sized portions. Four portionsNote: The highest value obtained for each parameter is in bold. Ac, accuracy; Sp, specificity; Sn, sensitivity; St, strength; MCC, Matthews' correlation coefficient.were used to create a frequency table. The remaining 20% of the positive dataset was tested in parallel with 20% of the negative dataset to establish the number of TP, TN, FP and FN. This analysis was reiterated a thousand times. Since GPS-SUMO does not analyze some of the motifs contained in the DB of JASSA (19/102 positive and 140/826 negative), their score was set to 0, not to introduce a strong bias in favor of JASSA. Overall, the performances of JASSA are better or on par with those of GPS-SUMO (). Notably, JASSA features a 'Very High' threshold, which allows the identification of putative SIMs with Sp reaching 99.5% and an Ac of 91% (). Altogether these results indicate that JASSA is a robust and accurate tool for the prediction of both SUMOylation sites and SIMs.
Implementation
Additional features of JASSA complement the scoring system and improve prediction evaluationIdentification of potential SUMOylation sites and SIMs faces major challenges represented by sequences matching the consensus but that are not functional (false positive) or functional sequences diverging from the consensus (false negative). We implemented several options that complement the scoring system towards a better evaluation of the predication. @BULLET Pattern search against extended motifs. Although the sequence of the core consensus motifs is a key determinant, other factors like the local protein composition influence the propensity of a substrate to interact with SUMO in either a covalent or a noncovalent manner. For instance, more than a half of the experimental sites fitting the WKxa pattern are included within extended motifs characterized by a high occurrence of phosphorylatable and/or negatively charged residues (). JASSA systematically scans the sequence flanking each candidate site against known extended SUMOylation motifs or SIM variants (Tables 1 and 2). A positive match, which is indicated in the output with the corresponding sequence highlighted (Supplementary), might support the prediction of a functionally relevant site. @BULLET Analysis of the physico-chemical properties of adjacent amino acids. Since extended variants of inverted SUMOylation motifs have not been characterized yet, we designed an option to highlight negatively charged, phosphorylatable or hydrophobic amino acids within the 21-mer surrounding each candidate site. By analyzing the sequence surrounding experimental SIMs we noted a high prevalence of negatively-charged and/or phosphorylatable residues. In particular, more than 50% of the known SIMs position 3 is occupied by E, S, D and T (). We therefore developed an algorithm to predict whether negatively charged amino acids and/or serine residues are enriched near the candidate site. Given that the consensus for SIM is degenerate, this information will be helpful to select or reject a candidate site. @BULLET Graphical representation of the prediction with secondary protein elements and within the 3D fold of the protein. An important parameter which impacts on both SUMO conjugation and the SUMO-SIM interaction is the topology of the candidate site. Most validated SUMOylation events occur in extended loops or intrinsically disordered regions of the substrate outside its globular fold, and all known SIMs display a b-strand conformation (). To have an insight on the local protein conformation at a candidate site, an option is provided to represent secondary structural elements extracted from a PDB file below the protein sequence where candidate sites are annotated allowing an easy comparison (Supplementaryand C). This feature might ease for instance the identification of tandem arrays of SIMs, a feature of SUMO-dependent Ubiquitin ligases (STUbL) (). @BULLET When a PDB reference is provided, a PyMol script file is also generated, where candidate sites are annotated within the 3D fold of the protein of interest (Supplementary). Altogether, these informations will help reject false positive, i.e. sites having a high PS because their sequence matches the consensus motif but which do not adapt a favorable conformation or are buried within the globular fold of the protein. @BULLET 'DB hit' finder: This feature indicates whether a candidate site matches a previously validated SUMOylation site or SIM. Each 5-mer centered on a K and each putative SIM of the query is systematically scanned against the proper DB to retrieve matching hits. The number of experimentally validated SUMOylation site or SIM corresponding to the candidate site is returned in the output. For each hit JASSA provides the link to the protein deposited on NCBI and UniProt and the PubMed reference of the publication. This option allows the detection of sites that diverge from the consensus and would otherwise be rejected because of their low PS. Moreover, this feature has been updated with a list of motifs known until 2014 ().
Use of JASSA and output descriptionspecific features in terms of amino acid composition. As an example, the acidic residue (a) is almost exclusively an E in direct sites, whereas a similar incidence of E and D is found in inverted motifs. Regarding the hydrophobic residue (W), this position is occupied by P in more than 22% of the inverted sites, whereas this amino acid is found in only 4.2% of the direct sites. Based on these findings, we established two clusters including sites matching either the direct or the inverted SUMOylation consensus motif, to favor the prediction of SUMO-conjugation sites which are underrepresented in the full DB, such as inverted SUMOylation sites. As an example the peptide DVKA obtains a PSi of 0.174 or 0.114 using the clusters ALL or DIRECT, respectively. Both scores being below the low threshold (), this site would be rejected. The same query would receive a score above the threshold (PSi  6.750), if the prediction is performed choosing the cluster INVERTED, and would therefore be considered further. JASSA also allows identifying putative SIMs, a feature currently performed only by GPS-SUMO (). SIMs are found in a wide variety of proteins such as downstream effectors of the SUMO pathway and SUMO enzymes. Some SUMO substrates [i.e. Daxx () and USP25 (also harbor SIMs, which were proposed to recruit SUMO-loaded Ubc9 leading to the conjugation of SUMO to proximal sites including K within non-consensus sequences. The major shortcoming of SUMOylation sites and SIMs prediction is the difficulty to correctly classify the false positive and the false negative. To overcome this problem, we developed features that can help the user to refine the prediction. Indeed, JASSA's output can give informations about the structure and the physicochemical environment of the candidate site and whether or not it has already been experimentally validated. We benchmarked JASSA against existing predictors and found that it reaches better or equivalent levels of performance. Thus, we believe that JASSA will be a valuable tool to help biologists identifying the best candidate sites for experimentations aiming to better understand SUMOylation and its contribution to cell biology.
G.Beauclair et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
JASSA is a freely accessible web-based tool which offers a userfriendly interface. The default parameters are designed to give the best results in most cases, but they can be adjusted for particular needs. The user can submit a sequence (protein or nucleotide sequence) in either Text or FASTA format, upload a FASTA file or input a UniProt protein ID. The results are returned in the form of a table-list reporting the position of the candidate K residue, the sequence of the 21mer centered on it, the PS, the consensus type and the number of DB hits. Under default settings ('Analyze with: Best Predictions'), every 5mer centered on a K is scored using independently the cluster ALL, DIRECT and INVERTED. The default parameter for the result output (only 'interesting' results) displays the sites that either have a PS at least above the low threshold or fit with a consensus motif or match a motif in the DB. A second table resumes the results for putative SIMs: position, PS, consensus type, presence of a potential acidic/serine stretch and the DB hit count. A graphical representation of the protein sequence of the query, where candidate sites are annotated is also provided. The results of a query are exportable under the GeneProt format. When a .pdb file is given, corresponding secondary structural elements can be visualized in the output and an annotated 3D structure can be downloaded under the form of a PyMol script. 5 Discussion We designed JASSA to provide a comprehensive overview of potential SUMOylation sites and SIMs of a protein of interest, assisting in the selection of candidate sites for further experimentation. Prediction of SUMO-modified K is based on a large DB encompassing 877 experimentally characterized SUMOylation sites, among which $68% match the direct WKxa motif and $9% the inverted axKW motif. We also observed that either consensus pattern displays Prediction of SUMOylation sites and SIMs
