We present LaTcOm, a new web tool, which offers several alternative methods for 'rare codon cluster' (RCC) identification from a single and simple graphical user interface. In the current version, three RCC detection schemes are implemented: the recently described %MinMax algorithm and a simplified sliding window approach, along with a novel modification of a linear-time algorithm for the detection of maximally scoring subsequences tailored to the RCC detection problem. Among a number of user tunable parameters, several codon-based scales relevant for RCC detection are available, including tRNA abundance values from Escherichia coli and several codon usage tables from a selection of genomes. Furthermore, useful scale transformations may be performed upon user request (e.g. linear, sigmoid). Users may choose to visualize RCC positions within the submitted sequences either with graphical representations or in textual form for further processing. Availability: LaTcOm is freely available online at the URL http:// troodos.biol.ucy.ac.cy/latcom.html.
INTRODUCTIONtRNA abundance is asymmetric (non-uniform) in cells of different organisms and can cause variation in the translation rate for each codon. It has been suggested that rare codons and their clusters are associated with translational pausing (). The translational rate can be maximized at mRNA regions with codons read by high cellular levels of cognate tRNA species and minimized at sites corresponding to rare tRNAs (RCCs) (). A critical issue is that the concentration of isoaccepting tRNAs for a set of synonymous codons varies among organisms, tissues and stages of differentiation (). Moreover, different organisms show specific preferences for codons encoding the same amino acid (codon bias), reflected in the frequency of occurrence of synonymous codons in genomic DNA. In Escherichia coli, it has been shown that the nonrandom choice of codons is mostly attributable to the availability of transfer RNA within a cell (); however, more recent * To whom correspondence should be addressed. work byhas shown that the correlation of codon usage and tRNA level is not perfect. In principle, the RCC detection process is the identification of codon clusters corresponding to rare tRNA species along mRNAs, as quantified using scales of experimental cellular tRNA levels. A complete dataset of this type is only available for E.coli (); therefore, approaches based on codon usage scales are alternatively used. Recently, two different methods have been developed for identifying RCCs in coding sequences: the %MinMax algorithm (; http://www.codons.org) and RiboTempo). An obvious limitation of window-based methods is the detection of RCCs with length at least equal to the applied window size. We present LaTcOm, a novel flexible web server, aiming to address shortcomings of the existing methods and to also provide new tools and features for RCC detection. LaTcOm offers users the option to use the %MinMax and RiboTempo methods, along with a new window-less RCC detection approach, based on the linear time Maximal Scoring Subsequences algorithm [MSS; (. In addition, both tRNA-abundance and codon usage scales are supported, including the option for users to enter their own scales, and a selection of novel transformations that may prove useful for RCC analyses. Moreover, the ability to choose different values of w for window-based RCC detection schemes, the explicit report of RCC coordinates and simulation-based P-values as a measure for statistical RCC validation, enable more sophisticated analyses of RCCs.
METHODSImplementation: we developed in Perl a generic sliding window algorithm, for implementing the %MinMax and RiboTempo methods. Contrary to the initial implementations, the sliding window procedure offered by LaTcOm is purposedly of decreasing size when approaching sequence extremeties for enabling computing biologically relevant values near the 5 and 3 termini. In addition, LaTcOm offers access to a novel RCC identification scheme, based on tailoring the Maximal Scoring Subsequences algorithm [MSS;
A.Theodosiou and V.J.PromponasRuzzo and. Briefly, MSS takes as input an array of numerical values and is guaranteed to find in linear time all maximal segments with an aggregate score exceeding some predefined threshold. Scales for RCC identification integrated in LaTcOm include (see also Supplementary Material and Supplementaryfor details): @BULLET Escherichia coli tRNA abundance values, based on data from, as calculated in, and an in-house calculated variant; @BULLET (weighted) codon usage from a subset of highly expressed E.coli genes, taken from@BULLET codon usage tables available from http://www.kazusa.or.jp/codon/ (); and @BULLET user defined scales in GCG format. Tunable parameters include the window size or the least RCC length and the genetic code. A number of scale transformations is available (see below) and their utility is discussed in Supplementary Material and SupplementaryWorkflow: users may enter or upload FASTA formatted coding DNA/mRNA sequences, and choose the desired RCC identification algorithm, parameters and output type (Supplementary). LaTcOm validates user input (see Supplementary Material) and transforms the sequence into a linear array of tRNA abundance or codon usage values based on the selected scale (and possibly transformation). This numerical array is fed as input to the selected RCC identification algorithm. Results are presented as PNG images (graphical output) or as the array of values calculated by each algorithm (text output), and returned to the user within an HTML page, along with the set of chosen parameters for reference (Supplementary). Text output enables users to visualize the RCC detection results using third-party tools, and displays the analytically computed expected score value and a simulation-based P-value for each cluster (see Supplementary Material). All output can be visualized online or downloaded as a compressed archive.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
DISCUSSION Clusters of unusual codon composition have been the focus of several recent research efforts, especially as indicators of an extra level of cell regulation (Tuller et al., 2011), as well as possible mediators of correct protein folding (Saunders and Deane, 2010). We developed LaTcOm, which is to the best of our knowledge the first flexible web application offering alternative methods for detecting RCCs, and we introduce a new window-less RCC identification algorithm. It is worth mentioning that when the LaTcOm web server was being developed, another window-less RCC-detection approach, based on the spatial scan method [introduced by Huang et al. (2007)] was published (Ponnala, 2010). A detailed comparison of the features offered by different RCC-detection algorithms is available as Supplementary Material (Supplementary Table S1). We anticipate that the availability of a versatile online tool for RCC identification will enable a number of analyses to be performed. For example, when optimizing coding sequences for heterologous gene expression experiments, LaTcOm results could be indicative of codon choices that may interfere with proper folding of the polypeptide chain. More specifically, RCCs according to the host organism's tRNA abundance/codon usage may have to be preserved for expressing functional proteins. In addition, LaTcOm may be used to study patterns of translational rate within diverged protein families, or the correlation of translational rate with protein structural and functional features, such as protein disorder, aggregation and co-translational folding. Such applications may trigger extensions of the current methods, as for example for the analysis of multiple sequence alignments (Widmann et al., 2008) and the study of the mechanics of translation (Tuller et al., 2011).
