Large numbers of long intergenic non-coding RNA (lincRNA) have been detected through high-throughput sequencing technology. However, currently we still know very little about their functions. Therefore, a lincRNA function annotation database is needed to facilitate the study in this field. In this article, we present Linc2GO, a web resource that aims to provide comprehensive functional annotations for human lincRNA. MicroRNA-mRNA and microRNA-lincRNA interaction data were integrated to generate lincRNA functional annotations based on the 'competing endogenous RNA hypothesis'. To the best of our knowledge, Linc2GO is the first database that makes use of the 'competing endogenous RNA hypoth-esis' to predict lincRNA functions. Availability: Freely available at
INTRODUCTIONLong intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) are endogenous long non-coding RNA molecules that transcribed from 'intergenic' regions of the genome. In recent years, as highthroughput sequencing technology developed, more and more lincRNA have been identified (). It has been demonstrated that lincRNAs play critical roles in regulating multiple important biological processes (). However, currently most lincRNAs are still poorly studied. Owing to the importance of lincRNA, it has become very necessary to develop computational tools to predict lincRNA functions. Previous researchers have proposed a 'co-expression-based' method to predict lincRNA functions and achieved many meaningful results (). That is, if a lincRNA is coexpressed with a protein-coding gene whose function is already known, then the lincRNA is predicted to take similar functions.In this article, we predict lincRNA functions in a rather different approach and present Linc2GO, a novel lincRNA function annotation database. Instead of using the co-expression information of lincRNA and protein coding-gene, our work is based on the competing endogenous RNA hypothesis (ceRNA hypothesis): lincRNA can function as microRNA 'sponge' to interact directly with microRNA and prevent them from binding to mRNA. In this way, lincRNA regulates gene expression and meanwhile regulates the biological processes in which they get involved in (). For example, MAML1 and MEF2C are two important transcription factors that activate muscle-specific gene expression. Marcellashowed that a lincRNA, linc-MD1, regulates muscle differentiation by interacting with two microRNAs, miR-135 and miR-133, which can bind to MAML1 and MEF2C to regulate their expressions (). Based on the above fact, it is natural to infer that if a lincRNA and an mRNA share some microRNAs that can interact with both of them, then the two have similar biological functions.
METHODSWe downloaded three microRNA-mRNA interaction datasets predicted by three different algorithms: TargetScan (), miRanda () and PITA (). Then we integrated them into one dataset, which is much more accurate (See Supplementary Material). Finally, we got 1 218 961 microRNAmRNA interactions. Human lincRNAs are from 'Human lincRNA Catalog' (). All lincRNA sequences were downloaded from UCSC genome browser. MicroRNA sequences were downloaded from miRBase (). The miRanda software is used to predict microRNA-lincRNA interactions with default parameters. We finally got 2 198 132 human microRNA-lincRNA interactions. Having acquired the microRNA-mRNA and microRNA-lincRNA interaction data, we followed the principle and workflow shown into generate lincRNA functional annotations. First, for each ceRNA-ceRNA pair (the ceRNA-ceRNA pairs here include lincRNA-mRNA pairs, mRNA-mRNA pairs and lincRNAlincRNA pairs), hypergeometric distribution was used to measure whether the two ceRNAs significantly share some microRNAs that can interact with both of them. The P-value was calculated as:where N is the total number of microRNA, M is the number of microRNAs that interact with the first ceRNA, L is the number of microRNAs that interact with the second ceRNA and x is the number *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. of microRNAs that interact with both of them. Only the ceRNA-ceRNA pairs with a small P-value (FDR 50.05) were kept for further analyses. Next, we combined the kept ceRNA-ceRNA pairs to generate a 'ceRNA network' with network nodes represented by ceRNA (either lincRNA or mRNA), and the two ceRNAs presented in the same ceRNA-ceRNA pair were connected by an edge. For each lincRNA in the ceRNA network, we collected all its mRNA neighbors and mapped them to corresponding genes, getting a gene set. GO enrichment analysis and KEGG enrichment analysis were then applied to the gene set. The final generated GO terms and KEGG pathway terms were assigned to the lincRNA as its functional annotation.
RESULTSIn the finally generated functional annotations, there were 7202 lincRNAs that were assigned with at least one GO BP term. We did a detailed analysis of GO BP terms and showed that lincRNAs play critical roles in multiple biological processes such as nervous system processes, cellular development, cell-cell communication, biological adhesion, cellular component organization and so on (see Supplementary Material). As we know, Linc2GO is the first database that provides comprehensive human lincRNA function annotations. The Linc2GO has provided a user-friendly interface to access functional annotations (See Supplementary). Three additional text files in csv format that contain all predicted functional annotations are also downloadable to provide convenient access in computational projects.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
K.Liu et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
