Thousands of human long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been identified in cancers and played important roles in a wide range of tumorigenesis. However, the functions of vast majority of human lncRNAs are still elusive. Emerging studies revealed that the expression level of majority lncRNAs shows discordant expression pattern with their protein-coding gene neighbors in various model organisms. Therefore, it may be useful to infer lncRNAs' potential biological function in cancer development by more comprehensive functional views of co-expressed cancer genes beyond mere physical proximity of genes. To this aim, we performed thorough searches and analyses of the interactions between lncRNA and non-neighboring cancer genes and provide a comprehensive co-expression data resource, LnCaNet. In current version, LnCaNet contains the pre-computed 8 494 907 significant co-expression pairs of 9641 lncRNAs and 2544 well-classified cancer genes in 2922 matched TCGA samples. In detail, we integrated 10 cancer gene lists from public database and calculate the co-expression with all the lncRNAs in 11 TCGA cancer types separately. Based on the resulted 110 co-expression networks, we identified 17 common regulatory pairs related to extracellular space shared in 11 cancers. We expect LnCaNet will enable researcher to explore lncRNA expression pattern, their affected cancer genes and pathways, biological significance in the context of specific cancer types and other useful annotation related to particular kind of lncRNA-cancer gene interaction. Availability and implementation: http://
IntroductionLong non-coding RNA (lncRNA) refers as non-coding transcripts longer than 200 bases and are abundant in various normal and cancer tissues (). Rather than being regarded as 'transcriptional noise', there is emerging evidence that lncRNAs play important roles in regulation of gene expression through influencing chromatin modification, transcriptional complexes targeting, mRNA splicing, protein translation (). However, most lncRNAs are poorly annotated, and their functions including their roles in complex diseases have not been widely studies.
MethodsTo bring a more functional information of human lncRNAs in cancer, we first collected 10 cancer gene lists such as experimentally characterized tumor suppressors (). To provide the co-expression pattern of cancer genes with lncRNAs, we downloaded all the lncRNAs expression data from Mitranscriptome database (were calculate. For all the P-values, a false discovery rate (FDR) was applied to correct the statistical significance of multiple testing. Finally, 8 494 907 pairs with 9641 lncRNAs can satisfy our criteria that the absolute expression correlation scores are greater than 0.3 and the FDR adjusted P-values are less than 0.01. In addition to gene-lncRNA coexpression, we also computed lncRNA-lncRNA and gene-gene co-expression pairs based on same TCGA cancer samples for broader data mining about collected cancer genes and lncRNAs in pan-cancer level.
ResultsAs shown inand B, a typical cancer gene entry contains seven categories information by clicking the label 'General information,' 'Expression,' 'lncRNA,' 'Regulation,' 'Mutation,' 'Homolog,' and 'Interaction' on the top. For the pre-computed co-expression pattern between cancer genes and lncRNAs, user can obtain the correlation coefficients and the corrected statistical P-values (). In addition, the expression plots of the corresponding lncRNAs were also integrated from MiTranscriptome database. All the 110 co-expression networks are available to browse and download separately for advanced integrative study. Based on the pre-computed results of co-expression pairs in 11 cancers, we found thousands of co-expression pairs are shared in cancers (). For example, 17 pairs associated with 17 lncRNAs and 16 cancer genes are common in all 11 cancers. The gene CD24 has been co-expressed with 2 lncRNAs across 11 cancers. Based on the functional analysis, we found 6 cancer genes are mainly located extracellular space related to cell adhesion (Corrected enrichment P  0.0335, Supplementary Table S1), and 4 of them are clusters of differentiation(CDs) which deserve the further experimental validation on the relationship of CD molecules and lncRNA.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Y.Liu and M.Zhao at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Conclusion The pan-cancer analysis of the co-expression revealed that the lncRNAs are frequently co-expressed with cancer genes in multiple cancers. To provide a reusable resource for cancer community, we published all the pre-computed networks about lncRNA and cancer genes at http://lncanet.bioinfo-minzhao.org. Conflict of Interest: none declared.
