Motivation: Classical nuclear export signals (NESs) are short cognate peptides that direct proteins out of the nucleus via the CRM1-mediated export pathway. CRM1 regulates the localization of hundreds of macromolecules involved in various cellular functions and diseases. Due to the diverse and complex nature of NESs, reliable prediction of the signal remains a challenge despite several attempts made in the last decade. Results: We present a new NES predictor, LocNES. LocNES scans query proteins for NES consensus-fitting peptides and assigns these peptides probability scores using Support Vector Machine model, whose feature set includes amino acid sequence, disorder propensity, and the rank of position-specific scoring matrix score. LocNES demonstrates both higher sensitivity and precision over existing NES prediction tools upon comparative analysis using experimentally identified NESs.
IntroductionActive transport of macromolecules between the nucleus and the cytoplasm controls the localization and functions of many proteins and RNAs. The majority of nuclear-cytoplasmic transport of macromolecules is mediated by nuclear transport receptors of the Karyopherin b (Kap) family, which bind nuclear localization or export signals (NLSs or NESs) in their cargoes (). CRM1 (for Chromosome Region Maintenance 1, also known as Exportin-1 or XPO1) is the best characterized export-Kap or exportin (). Approximately 300 broadly functioning protein cargoes for CRM1 have been experimentally identified and compiled into three separate databases NESbase, NESdb, and). Many CRM1 cargoes participate in important cellular processes such as gene expression, signal transduction, immune response, and cell differentiation. Aberrant CRM1-mediated nuclear export causes diseases such as cancer, viral and inflammatory diseases (). Cognate peptide segments in protein cargoes that bind CRM1 are known as classical nuclear export signals or NESs (previously also known as leucine-rich NESs). NES peptides are usually 815 amino acids long with regularly spaced conserved hydrophobic residues. The first NES consensus of L-X 2,3X 2,3-L-Xwas established from results of in vivo NES randomization-selection assays (). Subsequently, La Cour et al. re-defined the NES consensus as U1-X 2,3-U2-X 2,3-U3-X-U4 (Leu, Val, Ile, Phe or Met; X stands for any amino acid) according to alignment of 80 experimentally defined NESs (thereafter shortened as experimental NESs) collected in). Inclusion of additional hydrophobic residues significantly increased the NES consensus coverage. Kosugi et al. further expanded the NES consensus through analysis of 101 distinct NES peptides obtained from a random peptide library screen (). The Kosugi set of consensus sequences included four previously defined patterns, termed NES Classes 1a-d (Class 1a: U1-X 3-U2-X 2U3-X-U4; Class 1b: U1-X 2-U2-X 2-U3-X-U4; Class 1c: U1-X 3-U2X 3-U3-X-U4; Class 1d: U1-X 2-U2-X 3-U3-X-U4;) and two new patterns (Class 2: U1-X-U2-X 2-U3-X-U4; Class 3: U1-X 2-U2-X 3U3-X 2-U4), to describe additional spacings between key hydrophobic residues of their NES peptides. The set of consensus sequences also allowed Ala, Thr, Cys or Trp to occur only once at hydrophobic positions of an NES. Crystal structures of CRM1 bound to NESs from PKIa, Snurportin-1 and the HIV-1 Rev protein revealed that NESs bind directly to a groove on the convex surface of CRM1. The NES groove contains five hydrophobic pockets that accommodate conserved hydrophobic NES residues (). The PKIa (LALKLAGLDI, Class 1a) and Snurportin (MEELSQALASSFSV, Class 1c) NESs adopt a-helical conformations at their N-termini and transition to loops at the C-termini when bound to CRM1. In contrast, the CRM1-bound Rev NES (LPPLERLTL, Class 2) adopts an extended conformation. Examination of CRM1-NES interactions led to a structure-based consensus, which adds a fifth hydrophobic position at the Nterminus of the NES (U0) as modulator of CRM1-NES binding affinities (). Of the different proposed NES consensus patterns, the Kosugi set of consensus sequences has the highest sensitivity, with 89% coverage of experimental NESs versus 65% for the la Cour consensus. However, the precision rate of the Kosugi consensus is low (4% compared to 12% for the la Cour consensus). The generally low precision rates of the different consensus are probably due to degeneracy of the consensus patterns, which describe the 2-turn amphipathic helix that is ubiquitous in the proteome. We refined the Kosugi consensus sequences based on analysis of 234 experimental NESs collected in NESdb (). The refined consensus only marginally improved the prediction precision (6%), suggesting that NES consensus sequences alone are insufficient to accurately locate NESs in CRM1 cargoes. Several computational tools have been developed to predict classical NESs. A predictor named NES-Finder (http://research.nki.nl/ fornerodlab/NES-Finder.htm) was the first available web-server to identify sequence motifs that fit a subset of NES consensus (Classes 1a, 1b, and 1d). ELM is another pattern matching method although it uses different regular expressions to define NESs (, is the first NES predictor that does not explicitly use consensus patterns (la). Instead, it employs machine-learning algorithms like Neural Networks (NN) and Hidden Markov Models (HMM) and relies only on protein sequence as features. NetNES integrates the outputs of NN and HMM trained with experimental NESs in NESbase to assign a score to each residue in the input protein. NetNES increased prediction precision to $30% at the cost of lowering the maximum recall rate to $40% (). More recently, the NES predictor NESsential applied simplified consensus patterns to the query sequence as a pre-filter followed by Support Vector Machine (SVM) classification that incorporates both sequence and biophysical features such as predicted intrinsic disorder, secondary structure and solvent accessibilities (). NESsential achieved better precision at lower recall levels when tested with 85 experimental NESs collected in ValidNESs. For example, at 20% recall level, NESsential increased precision by 17% compared with NetNES (). In 2014, a NES prediction tool named Wregex was published (). Like NESsential, Wregex scans the query with regular expressions to generate a list of NES candidates. A position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM) is then used to compute a score for these candidates. Comparison between NESsential and Wregex using NES motifs in human deubiquitinases (DUBs) showed that Wregex produces fewer NES candidates than NESsential. However, since Wregex does not incorporate predicted biophysical features, it takes less time to predict NESs. In this study, we present a new computational tool named LocNES to locate classical NESs in CRM1 cargoes. LocNES first ranks the NES consensus fitting peptides according to its PSSM score. The PSSM score rank, protein sequence, consensus pattern, and disorder propensity are used as feature set of a SVM model. LocNES was tested with a large set of experimental NESs and showed improved performance over existing NES prediction methods.
Methods
NES datasetsEntries in two of the most recent NES databases, NESdb and ValidNESs, were examined and compared. At the time of manuscript preparation, NESdb and ValidNESs contain 253 and 221 experimental CRM1 cargoes, respectively. Entries in both databases were combined and 36 entries with contradicting experimental evidence (listed as 'NESs in doubt' in NESdb) were removed. Sequence similarities among the remaining proteins were detected using programs CD-HIT (; clustering threshold 40%) and BLASTClust (; similarity threshold 10%) and identified homologs were removed. 246 non-redundant proteins containing 290 experimental NESs were compiled in a dataset named the Dbase dataset and listed in Supplementary Table S1. Thirty-two functional NES motifs and 78 non-functional NES motifs from 56 DUBs were identified using a nuclear export assay (). A second dataset (DUB dataset) was constructed with these 110 DUB NES motifs (functional and non-functional). The DUB NES motifs used in the export assay are peptides with 1922 amino acids.
NES candidates in the Dbase datasetLocNES scans CRM1 cargoes in both the Dbase and DUB datasets with a sliding window protocol to retrieve NES candidates (peptides that conform to NES consensus patterns). The NES consensus sequences used by LocNES are a modified version of the Kosugi consensus sequences (): U1-X 1,2,3-U22-U3U4; U1-X 2,3-U23-U3U4; or U1-X 2-U2-X2U32-U4 (is any of the 20 amino acids except Trp; Ala or Thr can be used once at U1 or U2; X stands for any amino acid). Each NES candidate consists of 15 amino acids (shorter if located at the protein N-terminus). The C-terminal amino acid of each peptide is U4 in the NES consensus. If the U2-U4 portion of an NES candidate overlaps with an experimental NES, it is deemed as a real NES. Otherwise, the NES candidate is defined as a negative NES. By these criteria, LocNES located 4201 NES candidates in the Dbase dataset. Among them, 493 NES candidates are real NESs and the remaining 3708 are negative NESs. LocNES found no NES candidate for 42 of the 290 experimental NESs in the Dbase dataset. LocNES assigns a zero probability score to these 42 NESs.
NES candidates in the DUB datasetNES motifs in the DUB dataset are longer than existing NES consensus patterns. Consequently, LocNES typically retrieves 23 NES candidates from each DUB NES motif. Since experimental testing of the DUB dataset was conducted at the motif level, LocNES assigns a probability score to each motif in DUB dataset in the following manner. First, LocNES calculates the probability score for each NES candidate in the DUB dataset. Then the highest probability score among NES candidates from the same DUB NES motif is designated as the probability score of the motif. Both NESsential and Wregex (the two most recent NES predictors used in our performance comparison) retrieve NES candidates from query proteins in a similar manner as LocNES. However, since the three predictors use different NES consensus patterns, the number of NES candidates retrieved varies among them.
Calculation of PSSM scoreThe PSSM used to score peptides in each testing set was constructed with the NES peptides (aligned at the U4 position) in its corresponding training set. The element in the matrix is calculated as log likelihood ratio of the position-specific probability and uniform background probability (0.05). A pseudocount of 1 is added for each position. The PSSM score for a given sequence is calculated as the sum of log likelihood ratio of every residue.
Prediction pipeline of LocNESLocNES first retrieves NES candidates from a query protein (see the previous section for details). Next, the PSSM score is computed for each NES candidate and all candidates are ranked according to its PSSM score. The feature set for SVM model is then constructed, which includes PSSM score rank, peptide sequence represented by a vector containing twenty-one indicator variables (one for each amino acid plus a blank position) for each residue, and the types of consensus (Classes 1a, 1b, 1c, 1d, 2, or 3) for the NES candidate. The feature set also contains disorder propensities, computed with DISOPRED () for every residue of the NES candidate and for the 15 residues of both N-and C-terminal peptides flanking the NES candidate. In addition, LocNES includes an indicator variable that is set to 1 if the NES candidate is located within six residues of another NES candidate with higher PSSM score rank (0 if otherwise). To ensure a fair comparison between LocNES and other NES predictors, our SVM model was trained with 124 NESs, which are a subset of the 154 experimental NESs that trained NESsential and Wregex. SVM algorithm was implemented by LIBSVM integrated in Scikit-learn python package (). The output of the SVM model is the probability score of the NES candidate.
Performance evaluationBoth Dbase and DUB datasets were used to compare LocNES with NESsential and Wregex. If the probability score of a real NES is above a pre-defined threshold, it is counted as a true positive. Otherwise, it is a false negative. If the probability score of a negative NES is below the pre-defined threshold, it will be counted as a true negative. Otherwise, it is a false positive. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve and its area under the curve (AUC) are computed to evaluate NES predictors' performance. Precision-recall (PR) curves are also generated. Recall is defined as the fraction of real NESs whose probability score is higher than a threshold value. Precision measures the percentage of real NESs among NES candidates with probability score higher than a threshold value.
Availability of LocNESLocNES is freely available at http://prodata.swmed.edu/LocNES. The web interface was developed using PHP. The only required input is the query protein sequence in FASTA format. A standalone Linux version of LocNES is available upon request.
In vitro CRM1-NES binding assaysExpression constructs for 11 different Class 3 NES peptides were generated by ligation of annealed oligonucleotides into the pGEXTev vector and verified by sequencing. GST-NESs were expressed and purified as previously reported (). Approximately 60 mg of GST-NESs were immobilized on glutathione sepharose beads and incubated with excess human CRM1 in a total volume of 100 ml for 30 min at 4 C in the presence or absence of RanGTP. After extensive washing with buffer containing 20 mM Hepes, pH 7.3, 110 mM potassium acetate, 15% glycerol, 2 mM magnesium acetate, and 2 mM DTT, bound proteins were separated by SDS/PAGE and visualized by Coomassie staining. GST-NESs were analysed by mass spectroscopy to detect potential protease degradation or truncation of the fusion peptides. GST-NESs were also subjected to gel filtration analysis using the Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare) to detect potential aggregation.
Nuclear-cytoplasmic cellular localization assayNuclear-cytoplasmic distribution of EYFP 2-NLS-NES fusion proteins was observed in HeLa cells. Expresion constructs for EYFP 2-NLS-NES fusion proteins were generated by ligation of annealed oligonucleotides into a pEYFP 2-NLS(SV40) vector and verified by sequencing 11 different Class 3 NES peptides. The plasmids were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Life Technologies) into HeLa cells that were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin-streptomycin and amphotericin B, seeded onto glass-bottom 24-well culture plates (MatTek) and grown to 5070% confluency. Live cells were imaged 24 h after transfection. To determine whether CRM1 mediates the nuclear export of EYFP2-NLS-NES fusion proteins, transfected cells were also incubated with 2 nM leptomycin B (LMB) for 16 h. Live cell image acquisition was performed at 37 C in a 5% CO 2 atmosphere using a spinning disk confocal microscope system (Nikon-Andor), the MetaMorph software and analysed using ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).
Results
The Dbase and DUB datasetsTwo datasets, named Dbase and DUB, were compiled for training and evaluating LocNES. The Dbase dataset contains 246 nonredundant CRM1 cargoes with 290 experimental NESs culled from the NESdb and ValidNESs databases (). LocNES retrieved 4201 NES candidates from the Dbase dataset (see Section 2.2 for details). Among them, 493 are real NESs and 3708 are negative NESs. The DUB dataset was constructed using 32 functional and 78 nonfunctional NES motifs (each 1922 amino acids long) in 56 human DUBs proteins. Performance comparison using the DUB The LocNES nuclear export signal predictordataset was conducted at the motif level with prediction scores determined as described in Section 2.3.
Cross-validation of LocNES
Features in the SVM model of LocNESLocNES incorporates four categories of features in its SVM feature space to capture both the biophysical and sequence properties of NES candidate: PSSM score rank, peptide sequence, disorder propensity and the types of consensus pattern (Classes 1a, 1b, 1c, 1d, 2, or 3) for the NES candidate. In addition to these four feature categories, LocNES also includes a feature that indicates whether the NES candidate is located within six residues of another NES candidate with higher PSSM score rank. We name this feature the neighboring feature. The neighboring feature is introduced based on the observation that occasionally several NES candidates overlap with a real NES. We computed the F-scores for LocNES features using LIBSVM's feature selection tool on the combined Dbase dataset (). Results showed that among all the features tested, PSSM score rank has the highest discriminative power and the neighboring feature ranks the second among all the single features by F-score (Supplementary). An SVM model whose feature set includes just PSSM score rank and the neighboring feature produced an average AUC value of 0.71 when tested with Dbase cross-validation sets. PSSM score is less effective than the rank of PSSM score (AUC  0.65). Peptide sequence has a slightly lower discriminative power than PSSM score rank (AUC  0.70). Although disorder propensity is less discriminative than PSSM score rank or peptide sequence, it is still much better than random guessing as an SVM model with disorder propensity as its only feature gave an AUC value of 0.60 (versus AUC  0.5). This is consistent with previous findings that NES regions tend to have higher disorder propensity than false positive matches (). Information on NES consensus sequence types is the least discriminative feature (AUC  0.55). Finally, although NESs found in available 3D structures tend to adopt a-helix-loop conformations and disfavor b-sheet conformations (), an SVM model incorporating predicted secondary structure provided no performance improvement beyond an SVM model using disorder propensity (AUC  0.58). It is likely that other features in our SVM model already implicitly represent secondary structural information., LocNES increases AUC values by 0.1 and 0.14 compared to NESsential's flat and split modes, respectively. The PR curves inshow that LocNES achieves higher precision than NESsential at most recall levels. Wregex is the most recently published NES predictor. The program combines regular expression matching and PSSM score. Several configurations are available in Wregex depending on the choice of regular expression and PSSM. Here, we used the Wregex A configuration, which was trained with the NESsential training set. Since Wregex uses a more restrictive regular expression (. {0,1})()(.{2,3})()({2,3})()()()(. {0,3}) than both LocNES and NESsential, it retrieved only 27 real NESs and 78 negative NESs from the Dbase test set. To compensate for the large discrepancy of real negative NESs between Wregex and LocNES, we added 2009 true negative NES candidatesHowever, since Wregex found no matches for 139 experimental NESs in the test set, its maximum recall rate is only 16% compared to 90% for LocNES and 85% for NESsential. Consequently, the AUC value of Wregex is considerably smaller than that of LocNES and NESsential ().
Comparison of LocNES with NESsential and Wregex using the Dbase dataset
Comparison of LocNES with NESsential and Wregex using the DUB datasetThe DUB dataset includes 32 functional and 78 non-functional NES motifs (). Each NES motif in the DUB dataset is 1922 amino acids long. Since NESs of the DUB dataset were tested at the motif level, performance comparison was conducted only at the same motif level (described in Section 2.3) to ensure that all predictors have the same numbers of real positives and real negatives. LocNES was able to retrieve at least one NES candidate for each of the 32 functional and 71 nonfunctional DUB motifs. NESsential found matches for 32 functional motifs and 75 nonfunctional motifs. LocNES and NESsential found no matches for 7 and 3 nonfunctional DUB motifs, respectively, and the prediction score of these motifs were set to zero. Wregex failed to find NES candidates for 10 functional and 56 nonfunctional DUB motifs. Thus, the maximum recall rate for Wregex is only 69% compared to 100% for LocNES and NESsential.shows that LocNES gives the best AUC value among the three predictors. On the other hand, Wregex achieves the best precision when the recall rate is lower than 40% (). A meta-predictor that combines LocNES with Wregex improves the prediction performance on the DUB dataset compared with individual predictors (see Supplementary). However, such a meta-predictor shows no performance improvement on the Dbase dataset.
Prediction of Class 3 NESs by LocNESThe). Among the 166 experimental NESs in the Dbase test set, 11 contain exclusively Class 3 NES candidates (). None of the class 3 NESs had been tested for CRM1 binding. Therefore, we tested these Class 3 NESs for direct CRM1 binding in pull-down binding assays using recombinantThe LocNES nuclear export signal predictorGST-NESs, CRM1 and RanGTP.shows that seven Class 3 NESs (Rio2, Mad1, CDC7, X11L2, CPEB4, mDia2, and Trip6) bind CRM1 in stoichiometric manner, further validating them as real NESs. We also performed nuclearcytoplasmic localization assays in HeLa cells to probe NES activities of the same eleven Class 3 NESs. As shown inand Supplementary, eight of the eleven NESs (Rio2, Mad1, CDC7, X11L2, CPEB4, mDia2, Trip6 and Nap1) were able to target the EYFP 2-NLS reporter to the cytoplasm. Among these Class 3 NESs, which show positive nuclear export activity, the Nap1 NES is the only one that did not bind CRM1. Interestingly, we observed cytoplasmic localization of EYFP 2-NLS-NES(Nap1) in only 55% of HeLa cells which were transfected with the plasmid as compared to 100% of cells transfected with the seven CRM1 binders (see Supplementary). These results suggest that the Nap1 NES is a very weak NES. The remaining three Class 3 NESs (COMMD1, GagPro, and Deaf1) showed no detectable CRM1 binding nor cytoplasmic localization in HeLa cells, suggesting that they may have been incorrectly identified and are likely negative NESs. NESsential and Wregex were able to identify all four Class 3 non-binders as negative NESs. However, both predictors have 0% recall rate for the seven Class 3 CRM1 binders since they filter out peptides with U3-X2-U4 spacing at the initial stage of prediction. NES-Finder also does not predict any Class 3 NESs binders since it only finds NES candidates that fit Class 1a, 1b or 1d patterns. LocNES is able to retrieve four Class 3 CRM1 binders (mDia2, Trip6, X11L2, and CPEB4; recall rate 57%) at the default threshold value of 0.1 (). LocNES also correctly identified one nonbinder (
Discussion
Features that improved LocNES performanceAmong all the features employed by the LocNES SVM model, the rank of PSSM score has the highest discriminative power. Interestingly, PSSM score is less effective than PSSM score rank (AUC 0.65 versus 0.71). The enhanced effectiveness of PSSM score rank may be due to over-representation of Class 1a NESs among experimental NESs (). Since the PSSM score of a sequence measures how closely it resembles known NESs, a real NES that doesn't fit class 1a spacing may have a low PSSM score. For example, the zebrafish protein Vsx1, a paired-like subclass of homeodomain protein, was shown to have a highly conserved Class 1b NES ( 31 GFRSKGFAITDLLGL 45 ;). LocNES gave the Vsx1 NES a rather low PSSM score of 0.56 but ranks it the highest among all NES candidates within Vsx1. As expected, a SVM model using PSSM score rank as a feature produced a higher prediction score for the Vsx1 NES than a SVM model using the absolute PSSM score as a feature (0.26 versus 0.09). The PSSM currently used by LocNES may not be large or diverse enough to completelysample the entire range of experimental NESs. It will be important to update the PSSM as more NESs are identified experimentally, as prediction performance will likely improve with a more balanced and representative PSSM. Although LocNES uses PSSM to represent sequence information, incorporation of sequence into SVM model did produce a small but obvious improvement to the prediction performance (AUC increased by 0.04). There appears to be additional implicit information encoded in the sequence that enhance CRM1 binding or export activity of NESs but yet not detected by PSSM. Sequence analysis of CRM1 cargoes collected in NESdb revealed that real NESs exhibit distinct amino acid composition from negative NES candidates. In particular, acidic residues such as Asp and Glu are more prevalent in the non-conserved positions in real NESs (). These negatively charged residues may form electrostatic contact with the basic amino acids that lined the NES binding groove as observed in structures of CRM1-NES complexes, thus increasing the CRM1NES binding affinity. In addition, the presence of bulky amino acids like tryptophan in negative NES candidates, which is absent from the C-terminus of real NESs, can potentially cause steric clash with the narrow groove at the C-terminal end of NES binding groove and prevent binding of negative NES candidates. Incorporation of disorder propensity noticeably increases LocNES prediction performance. In fact, the disorder status of the sequence on the C-terminal side of NESs is among the top-10 ranking features (Supplementary). The developers of NESsential also reported similar findings (). It has been noticed that intrinsically disordered region of a protein often contain functionally important sites due to its flexibility and modularity. Comparison of the disorder scores between real NESs and negative NES candidates revealed that sequences flanking real NESs have significantly higher disorder scores than sequences surrounding negative NES candidates. In addition, examination of existing threedimensional structures containing real NESs or negative NES candidates showed that real NESs are more likely to locate at the termini of protein domains or flanked by long loops (). The location of real NESs near protein termini and within loops or disordered regions may increase their accessibility to CRM1 or enhance their adaptability for suitable CRM1-binding conformations. LocNES outperforms existing NES predictors in Class 3 NES prediction. To explore which features of LocNES enhance Class 3 NES prediction, we computed the F-scores on Dbase dataset with the Class 3 NESs removed (Supplementary). Comparison between Supplementary Tables 2 and 4 showed that the neighboring feature, which indicates if another NES candidate is in close proximity (details in Section 3.3), is not among the top-10 ranking features when Class 3 NESs are not included in the dataset. Instead, amino acid identity at positions 6 and 14 become top ranking features, as well as the NES consensus type (if the NES candidate belongs to
Machine learning algorithms in NES predictionAmong the three NES predictors that we compared in performance analysis, Wregex is the only predictor that does not rely on a supervised machine-learning algorithm. Instead, it relies on PSSM to capture the intrinsic contribution of each residue to NES activity. While PSSM based methods have proven a useful tool for annotating functional sites, the low recall rate of Wregex indicates that PSSM by itself is insufficient in predicting NES. The major advantage of Wregex is its speed. It only takes seconds for Wregex to process a large number of proteins. Both NESsential and LocNES need time to generate features (such as disorder propensity or solvent accessibility) for machine-learning methods. Typically, it takes two minutes for LocNES to process a protein with $600 amino acids. However, since machinelearning methods are especially suited for pattern recognition problems when the patterns are not easily described by a well-defined set of rules, the potential improvement in prediction performance outweighs the extra cost in time. In NES prediction, machine-learning methods may be a contributing factor to the significantly higher recall rate of LocNES and NESsential. Furthermore, incorporation of PSSM together with sequence and structural properties of NESs into the feature set of machine-learning algorithm may further boost LocNES performance. Both NESsential and LocNES implemented machinelearning algorithm using SVM. We also experimented with Random forests, another popular machine learning classifier. When the same feature sets were used, Random Forests performed similarly as SVM models (data not shown).
Prediction at the protein levelIn addition to determining NES locations within CRM1 cargoes, NESsential also attempted classification of NES-containing proteins versus non-NES-containing proteins. LocNES, on the other hand, assumes that the query protein is a CRM1 cargo and focuses on locating NES sites within the query. The lack of a large and reliable negative training/testing data is the major reason for this decision. NESsential selected 541 proteins annotated in Uniprot as located in only one compartment, either the nucleus or the cytosol, as nonNES containing proteins. There is concern that cellular localization information in Uniprot may not be up-to-date due to the rapid discovery of CRM1 cargoes. A quick search showed that among the 13 CRM1 cargoes from Saccharomyces cerevisiae collected in NESdb, 20% or three proteins (Hsp70, MCM3 and Map1), are annotated as localized to either the nucleus or the cytosol thus fitting the NESsential criteria of non-NES containing protein (). Furthermore, nuclear import and export processes are highly regulated. Many CRM1 cargos are modified and accessible to CRM1 only in specific cellular or signaling states. Therefore, steady state subcellular localization of protein may not reflect their status as CRM1 cargoes or inform on their localization upon stimulation from external cues or change of cellular states. Enhanced performance of LocNES compared with NESsential and Wregex resulted from a more tolerant pre-filter, a more representative feature set for machine-learning models, a more accurate training dataset, and the combined use of machine-learning method, position specific scoring matrix and biophysical properties of NESs. As more CRM1 cargoes/NESs are discovered, increased size, diversity and accuracy of experimental NES databases will continue to improve training/testing datasets for future NES predictors. The rapid growth of high-resolution protein structures will also guide identification of NES candidates that are inaccessible to CRM1 and thus increase precision of NES prediction. Finally, advances in modeling conformational changes induced by post-transcriptional modification or binding partners may facilitate the discovery of highly regulated NESs and similarly increase the sensitivity of NES prediction.
ConclusionLocNES is a supervised machine-learning algorithm to predict NESs in potential CRM1 cargoes. LocNES integrates the rank of PSSM score, peptide sequence, disorder propensity and NES consensus type into an SVM model. Performance comparison between LocNES and two latest NES predictors, NESsential and Wregex using two separate test datasets showed that LocNES achieved higher precision at most recall levels with more than 0.1 increase of AUC value than NESsential. LocNES produced at least 30% higher maximum recall rate than Wregex. In addition, LocNES is the only tool that can predict Class 3 NESs with over 60% recall rate at the default threshold.
D.Xu et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
