Motivation: The coiled coil is a ubiquitous-helical protein-structure domain that directs and facilitates protein–protein interactions in a wide variety of biological processes. At the protein-sequence level, the coiled coil is readily recognized via a conspicuous heptad repeat of hydrophobic and polar residues. However, structurally coiled coils are more complicated, existing in a wide range of oligomer states and topologies. As a consequence, predicting these various states from sequence remains an unmet challenge. Results: This work introduces LOGICOIL, the first algorithm to address the problem of predicting multiple coiled-coil oligomeric states from protein-sequence information alone. By covering 490% of the known coiled-coil structures, LOGICOIL is a net improvement compared with other existing methods, which achieve a predictive coverage of $31% of this population. This leap in predictive power offers better opportunities for genome-scale analysis, and analyses of coiled-coil containing protein assemblies. Availability: LOGICOIL is available via a web-interface at http:// coiledcoils.chm.bris.ac.uk/LOGICOIL. Source code, training sets and supporting information can be downloaded from the same site.
INTRODUCTIONCoiled coils are protein-structure domains that comprise two or more-helices that wrap around each other, typically in a left-handed fashion, and which interact through specific packing interactions known as knobs-into-hole packing (). Although accounting for $2.9% (range, 0.36.5%) of the protein-encoding regions of genes (), coiled coils are also actively involved in the mediation of proteinprotein interactions across a wide array of biological functions; from transcription, through membrane remodelling, to cell and tissue structure and stability (). Despite its functional diversity, the coiled coil is characterized by a straightforward sequence motif of hydrophobic (H) and polar (P) residues. The positions within this HPPHPPP motif, referred to as the heptad repeat, are typically labelled a through g, with hydrophobic residues generally occupying the a and d positions, and polar residues falling at the other positions. Given this common sequence pattern, the 3D structures adopted by naturally occurring coiled coils display a remarkable diversity (). Applying SOCKET, an algorithm that finds knobs-into-holes packing interactions within structurally resolved proteins (), to the Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics Protein Data Bank (RCSB PDB) () reveals an abundance of coiled-coil architectures and topologies (). Indeed, coiled-coil assemblies have been shown to contain different numbers of helices of parallel or anti-parallel orientation, that may be formed from the same (homo) or different (hetero) helical sequences (). Here, we focus on the prediction of coiled-coil oligomeric state. Six algorithms exist to tackle this problem: SCORER (), which has been recently redefined and retrained in SCORER 2.0 (), and PrOCoil () achieve high success rates when separating coiled-coil sequences, but these methods are strictly limited to the discrimination of parallel dimeric and parallel trimeric coiled-coil structures. Multicoil2 () and its predecessor MultiCoil () follow a different approach to predict both the location and oligomeric state of coiled coils in protein sequences. However, their oligomeric state functions remain limited to the discrimination of parallel dimers and trimers. Thus, these algorithms cover only a small subset of the known coiled-coil structural space, limiting their usefulness. For example, antiparallel dimers, so far excluded from all prediction analysis, account for well 450% of the total coiled-coil structure population and represent a wealth of untapped data (). Current de novo methods cover only $31% of the coiled-coil population. Thus, simple inclusion of antiparallel dimeric and tetrameric structures would increase coverage to 490%. Homology-based approaches, such as SPIRICOIL (), partially accomplish the task of multi-state coiled-coil oligomeric state prediction, but cannot be used to classify the oligomeric state of coiled-coil sequences ab initio that is, those without structurally defined precedents. As a consequence, we regard the development of an ab initio multi-state predictor to be the next logical step in coiled-coil structure analysis and prediction. To the best of our knowledge, no work has yet treated the ab initio problem of multi-state classification of coiled-coil oligomers. As previous attempts have focussed on two-state predictions and, therefore, have been tailored towards binary response problems, they could not be systematically extended for the purpose of multi-state classification. As *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com such, the problem required the development of statistical techniques and algorithm capable of discriminating between multiple coiled-coil oligomeric states.
APPROACHLOGICOIL is based on the simultaneous use of Bayesian variable selection and multinomial probit regression for prediction. We favour this methodology over others for its ability to perform variable selection and parameter estimation simultaneously. Furthermore, the Bayesian paradigm allowed us to obtain informative posterior distributions on the selected parameters while providing a convenient framework for the use of previous information based on biological data and expert knowledge. Although other commonly used methods for classification, such as support vector machines, can incorporate variable selection in the context binary classification problems (), these methods are not yet applicable to multi-class problems. The statistical framework used for LOGICOIL can be easily applied to the prediction of multiple coiled-coil oligomeric states, while accounting for the inclusion of higher-order associations, such as intrahelical pairwise residue associations. Pairwise interaction effects have been included in other algorithms that aim to predict coiled-coil oligomeric state, but these are limited to two-state predictors and are yet to be extended to multinomial classification (). The higher-dimensional models and associated computational challenges that this approach usually may entail are becoming increasingly accessible; notably through the use of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods and increased computational power. After discussing multinomial regression models in the Bayesian context, we describe a Bayesian variable selection scheme that selects the most relevant pairwise associations. Furthermore, we discuss computational and implementation issues of the variable selection scheme and how they were handled.
BAYESIAN MULTINOMIAL PROBIT REGRESSION WITH VARIABLE SELECTION
Problem formulationAssume a dataset fy i ; x i1 ,. .. , x ip g n i1 , where n is the number of observed samples, y i 2 f1,. .. , Cg is a polytomous outcome and x ij is the observed value of the j-th predictor in the i-th sample with j  1, 2,. .. , p. We also denote the predictor matrix X  x ij  n, p as:The relationship between the probability Pry i  cjX i   ic of observing response c given X i can be conveniently modelled using generalized linear models (), and it is determined by a (1  p) matrix of regression coefficients c. Although the unknown parameters in c can be estimated through maximum likelihood techniques, data augmentation techniques and Gibbs sampling can also be used to allow for efficient simulation under the Bayesian paradigm (). Here, we consider a Bayesian auxiliary variable model that assumes the probabilities ic to be related to X i and c through a probit link function. The key idea proposed by () is to generate the y i from the X i through latent vectors Z i  z i, 1 ,. .. , z i, C1 , which are thresholded to determine the y i ; this means that probabilities ic are defined only implicitly. The approach is expressed precisely through the following notation: y i  c, if z i, c  maxfZ i , 0g C, if maxfZ i g 0,, c  i, c i, c  x i c i, c $ N0, 1 c $  c  2 where y i is now conditional on the newly introduced auxiliary variable vector Z i. Writing z c  z 1, c ,. .. , z n, c  T and c   1, c ,. .. , n, c  T , the auxiliary variable can be expressed in vector form as:, AE for c  1,. .. , C  1 3 where X is the (C  1)  p predictor matrix, c is the 1  p matrix of fixed coefficients with respect to the response c, " i is a (C  1)  1 vector of errors, and AE is a (C  1)  (C  1) positive definite matrix with 11  1.
Bayesian variable selectionThe Bayesian multinomial probit model in Equation (2) is well-suited to variable selection problems. Throughout the past decade, a number of special forms of the reversible jump sampler introduced by () have been advanced. In particular, much work has focussed on data augmented models that propose efficient predictor selection methods (Ai-Jun and Xin-Yuan, 2010;;). Here, we use the scheme described in () and ().Their approach introduces a covariate indicator vector that determines whether predictors are in or out of the model: i  1, if j 6  0 the j-th predictor is selected, 0, if j  0 the j-th predictor is not selected
& 4The parameter is then included in Equation (3) so that:, .
.. , C  1 5where X are the elements of X set to 1, and c, consists of all the non-zero elements of c. For the Bayesian variable selection scheme in Equation (5), the remaining task involved the estimation of the indicator vector c  f 1 ,. .. , p g and the corresponding , c and z c. A Gibbs sampler is used to estimate all the parameters in the model. Following from others, we choose a 'ridge' before   N p 0, vI p  on the (C  1)  p matrix of parameters , where N p , b AE represents a p-multivariate normal distribution with mean and covariance matrix b AE and I p is the p  p identity matrix (). It should be noted that alternative choices of previous distribution also exist (). The detailed derivation of the posterior distributions of the parameters and the Gibbs sampler used to estimate the parameter vectors c, , c and z c for Bayesian variable selection are identical to that of Holmes and Held and Gustafson and Lefebvre ().
Computing the response probabilitiesFor the development of LOGICOIL, we treated pairwiseassociation selection and coiled-coil-oligomeric-state classification in two sequential steps. Pairwise associations were first selected using Bayesian variable selection. From the f t , t c , z t c , t  1,. .. , Tg MCMC samples obtained from the Gibbs sampling scheme, the pairwise associations with the highest posterior probability of inclusion were assumed to play the strongest role in predicting the target coiled-coil oligomeric state. Posterior inclusion probabilities were computed according to:1, if i was included in the model at the t-th iteration 0, otherwise & Once the strongest pairwise associations had been identified, the parameter values of the retained predictors were fitted in a separate model. Here, multinomial probit regression was chosen to preserve consistency with the variable-selection process. There is no closed form for the likelihood function of multinomial probit models, but practical MCMC methods have been proposed to compute parameter estimates. Here, parameter values in the multinomial probit model were estimated using the MNL library available in the R software (). From the T samples f t c , z t c , t  1,. .. , Tg of the secondary MCMC scheme, the probability of a given test coiled-coil sequence under each class was computed as:is the multivariate normal distribution and X i is the (C  1)  p dimensional vector for observation i.
PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION
Convergence of MCMC sampling schemesFor all the examples discussed below, the convergence of the MCMC sampling schemes was assessed using multiple chains with different random number seeds and starting values. The number of iterations necessary for the MCMC sampling scheme to converge, otherwise known as the burn-in, was estimated at the point for which the independent MCMC runs displayed similar values. Autocorrelation in the MCMC samples was also checked to ensure that the chains were mixing adequately. Once a suitable burn-in period had been identified, a single long chain was ran and used to compute parameter estimates and posterior probabilities. In line with accepted guidelines, it was also ensured that the acceptance ratio of the Metropolis-Hastings (MH) step was kept in the range of (25 45%) during simulations ().
Pre-selection of variablesBayesian variable selection provided a rigorous framework to select the strongest predictor variables in a model, but was computationally intensive given the large number of variables in the model. To facilitate simulations and reduce the dimensions of our data, a pre-selection filter was used to choose a smaller subset of variables, to which Bayesian variable selection was subsequently applied., c be the number of times the following is observed: amino acid a 1 at register position r 1 and amino acid a 2 at register position r 2 and response c in the dataset; antiparallel dimer, parallel dimer, trimer or tetramer. Using the hypergeometric distribution, the probability of observing the spatial interaction na 1 ! r 1 , a 2 ! r 2 , c exactly k times can be written as:where the symbol  denotes summing out over all other amino acids and c 2 f1,. .. , Cg. A two-sided p-value was assigned to each observation and used to pre-select the most significant pairwise associations. To avoid missing important predictor variables, a relaxed pre-selection criterion was taken by setting a P-value threshold of 0.1.
Previous distributionThe posterior inclusion probabilities p i  1jY, X have been reported to be sensitive to the hyperparameter v in the previous distribution   N p 0, vI p  (). To ensure we selected the variables that helped achieve optimal out-of-sample predictive performance, we followed the methodology adopted in () and used K-fold cross-validation across a range of values on the hyperparameter prior v. The K-fold predictive scores were estimated at l  20 values of v equally spaced in the logarithmic scale with lower value 0.1 and upper value 500. As this cross-validation methodology requires Kl MCMC runs to estimate the K partition scores for the l values of v, we use a value of K  10 to contain computational expenses. Similar predictive performance were obtained for values of v in the interval (0.1, 59), which is in accordance with the guideline range of v proposed in. For the chosen values of v, residue pairs were pre-selected according to the method described in Section 3.5 and subsequently applied to Bayesian variable selection model.
METHODS
Coiled-coil training and test setsThe sequences of antiparallel dimeric, and parallel dimeric, trimeric and tetrameric canonicalthat is, heptad basedcoiled coils of 414 residues in length were obtained from the CC  database (). All coiled-coil sequences were aligned using Clustalw2 () (maximum gap penalties were used to conserve the alignment of the heptad repeat) and were then culled using Cluster Database at High Identity with Tolerance (CD-HIT) () at a redundancy cut-off of 50%. The corresponding structures were validated by eye to ensure that all remaining sequences belonged to well-defined coiled-coil systems. We use a 50% identity threshold rather than 25 30%, often used for culling protein datasets, as we find the latter to be too restrictive for coiled-coil sequences, which have a constricted amino acid usage and, therefore, regarded as regions of low complexity (). The final dataset referred to as the pristine datasetcomprises 670 antiparallel dimeric, 173 parallel dimeric, 55 trimeric and 39 tetrameric coiled-coil sequences.
Assessing predictive performanceFor problems involving binary response classes, a popular method to quantify the prediction accuracy of a classifier during cross-validation is the receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve and the associated area under the curve (AUC) measure (). The overall performance, denoted as mAUC, of a multi-class classifier can be computed using a generalization of the AUC for multiple class classification problems as defined in (). By averaging the AUC obtained for each pair of classes, the mAUC discrimination rate can be obtained through the score:where AUC ci, cj , c i , c j  2 1,. .. , C with c i 6  c j  is the probability that a randomly drawn member from response class i will have a lower estimated probability of belonging to class j than a randomly drawn member of class j. Although no equivalent to ROC curves exists to plot multi-class performance measures, the pairwise AUCs can be visualized in the form on a spider-web diagram. This has the advantage of showing the achieved discrimination rate between all pairs of classes, therefore, allowing for the identification of pairs of classes that are well separated and those that are not, regardless of the reported overall mAUC score. All AUC values were computed using the ROCR and caTools packages in the R software ().
MULTI-STATE PREDICTION OF COILED-COIL OLIGOMERIC STATE
Including pairwise associations in the modelBefore running the Bayesian variable selection scheme on a larger scale, we performed a trial run on a limited set of pairwise associations. Because of its well documented and important role in oligomer formation, we implemented Bayesian variable selection to detect the strongest residue da pairs, which is equivalent to a i ! i  4 association (). The d and a register positions are part of the coiled-coil hydrophobic core and have been extensively studied; indeed, combining various pairs of residues at the a and d positions of the heptad repeat induces specific oligomer state switches (). The posterior inclusion probabilities of pairwise associations at the da pairs provided a noteworthy validation of the Bayesian variable selection scheme that was used. Indeed, the highest-scoring pairwise associations have been validated by experimental studies that incorporated known rules for hydrophobic cores into a designed background. For example, II (isoleucine at register d and a) is a well-established trimer-favouring pairwise interaction, as well as the LL (leucine at register d and a). LV (leucine at register d and valine at register a) associations is a dimer-favouring combination (), whereas the IL (isoleucine at register d and leucine at register a) pairwise interaction has been shown to confer tetrameric conformations (). Because residues at the da register pairs are placed in the hydrophobic core of coiled coils, it was expected that many pairwise associations would involve hydrophobic residues. However, a few high-scoring pairwise associations with polar residues were also found. Once again, these associations have been confirmed by experimental work that studied the effects of including a polar side chain within the otherwise hydrophobic core of a coiled-coil complex. For example, the LN (leucine at register d and. Posterior inclusion probabilities for residues spaced four register positions apart, more specifically at the da register positions. Residue pairs were pre-selected before being run through the OPS Bayesian variable selection model. Posterior inclusion probabilities were obtained after a run-length of 10 000 iterations with 5000 burn-in iterations asparagine at register a) or LK (leucine at register d and lysine at register a) pairs are found more often in dimeric sequences (). Furthermore, the pairwise association NI (asparagine at register d and isoleucine at register a) or IS (isoleucine at register d and serine at register a) tends to favour trimeric structures (). The Bayesian variable selection scheme also detected pairwise associations, such as YT (tyrosine at register d and threonine at register a), that had no precedent in experimental studies. Some work has characterized the effects of placing the polar threonine residue at the a register position, which produce trimers (). However, this work is in the context of a clearly defined design background (i.e. leucine and isoleucine in the hydrophobic core positions) and does not consider the effects of simultaneously placing a tyrosine residue at the a register position. Placing tyrosine in the hydrophobic core may confer higher-order oligomerization, as only these structures could accommodate the large side chain of tyrosine without disrupting the entire coiled-coil conformation (). This hypothesis is supported by the PDB 2GUV structure, an engineered pentamer that incorporates bulky phenylalanine residues in its hydrophobic core (). Overall, the posterior inclusion probabilities pairwise associations at the da pairs, and obtained from first principles, agreed with experimental studies. As the pairwise associations selected through Bayesian variable selection were coherent with experimental and structural interpretation, two main suggestions are proposed: (i) they represented valid pairwise associations to discriminate between coiled-coil oligomeric states and should be included in the LOGICOIL predictive model and (ii) they could be exploited to facilitate the rational design of coiled-coil structures. Here, we focussed on the first point and investigated whether the inclusion of pairwise residue effects at neighbouring positions of coiled-coil sequences improved the predictive power of LOGICOIL. This was achieved by applying Bayesian variable selection on the i ! i  1, i ! i  3 and i ! i  4 positions of the coiled-coil heptad repeat.
Performance of LOGICOILLOGICOIL was assessed using 10-fold cross validation on the pristine dataset, and variable selection was performed internally to the 10-fold cross validation scheme, that is, variables were re-selected whenever the training set and test set were changed. Before assessing the performance on a test fold, LOGICOIL learned from the training fold according to a three-step process:(1) Bayesian variable selection was run on each of the distinct i ! i  1, i ! i  3 and i ! i  4 spatial positions in the coiled-coil heptad repeat. For example, Bayesian variable selection was run on the seven distinct i ! i  1 positions ab, bc, cd, de, ef, fg and ga. The inclusion probabilities of the pairwise associations were then computed from the output obtained for each spatial position.(2) The highest-scoring pairwise associations at all of the i ! i  1, i ! i  3 and i ! i  4 positions were identified, grouped together and ran through a secondary Bayesian variable selection scheme. Inclusion probabilities were computed from the final output, and only the highest scoring pairwise associations were included in the LOGICOIL predictive model. misclassifications occurred between antiparallel and parallel dimers, which might be expected given the similarities between these structures (). Nevertheless, the increased predictive power of LOGICOIL suggested that spatial associations contributed to differentiate between parallel dimers, antiparallel dimers, trimers and tetramers. Interestingly, the separation rate achieved for the antiparallel dimer/tetramer pair was insensitive to changes in the coiled-coil sequence-length cut-off, thus raising questions on the inherent nature of the structures involved. Contrary to tetrameric coiled-coil structures, in-depth analysis of the antiparallel dimers structures in the LOGICOIL dataset suggested that the vast amount of available data for the antiparallel oligomer is in fact biased by many short, buried (i.e. packed within a protein structure) coiled coils. It is possible, therefore, that such structures are influenced into coiled coil-like conformation by interactions involved in tertiary protein structure. Hence, it could be argued that they are highly dependent on packing interactions to adopt a coiled-coil structure and, therefore, do not represent 'real'or free-standingcoiled coils. Although it is possible that the performance of the LOGICOIL algorithm could be optimized if structures that exhibit this property were removed from its dataset, it was judged that this would have been too subjective. Additionally, selectively removing data from the training set could lead to unrepresentative database that would not reflect the known population of coiled coils observed in nature. In conclusion, although the caveats of the LOGICOIL dataset should be highlighted and taken into consideration, it is probably more prudent to strictly rely on the SOCKETannotated data and not tamper with any of the dataset.
Comparing LOGICOIL with other algorithmsLOGICOIL is the only reported method capable of discriminating between multiple coiled-coil oligomeric states, which complicated the benchmarking of LOGICOIL against other existing coiled-coil oligomer-state predictors. Indeed, MultiCoil, Multicoil2, SCORER 2.0 and PrOCoil give predictions for parallel dimeric and parallel trimeric coiled coils only. Although it was already shown that LOGICOIL achieved high predictive accuracy, it was necessary to measure its performance relative to these other algorithms. To do this, LOGICOIL was reduced to a similar two-state predictor. The predictive powers of each algorithm were compared on the non-redundant dataset of parallel dimeric and trimeric coiled-coil sequences developed for the SCORER 2.0 algorithm (). To ensure fair comparison, LOGICOIL, SCORER 2.0 and PrOCoil were retrained and assessed using 10-fold cross-validation to provide independent tests of their utility. Because of the fact that MultiCoil and Multicoil2 could not be re-trained and can only score sequences of 421 residues, we only considered coiled coils with sequence length above this threshold. The AUC values and classification accuracies displayed inshow that LOGICOIL outperformed all other algorithms in this two-state-prediction test, with PrOCoil coming in a close second. Because of the unavailability of the MultiCoil and Multicoil2 source code, it was not possible to carry out cross-validation for these algorithms. As a consequence, there is a possibility of overlap between the coiled-coil sequences contained in the test database and the training set of the concerned algorithms, thus biasing results. Nonetheless,MultiCoil and Multicoil2 did not compare favourably with other algorithms. The performance of MultiCoil was possibly linked to its training set, which is heavily biased towards long parallel two-stranded coiled coils (). This caveat was resolved in the recently retrained and redesigned Multicoil2 predictor, which improved the performance of MultiCoil but was not to the level of the other predictors. PrOCoil nearly matched LOGICOIL on two-state prediction, and it would be interesting to evaluate how this method performs on multi-state classification. SCORER 2.0 also achieved high discrimination rate, but it was slightly surpassed by PrOCoil and LOGICOIL. Interestingly, SCORER 2.0 is the only algorithm to include no pairwise residue effects in its predictive model, which serves as a reminder that including pairwise residue effects does not necessarily increase predictive power. Thus, we suggest that pairwise-association information may not be so relevant in the context of two-state prediction, which is rationalized by the well-characterized differences between parallel dimeric and trimeric coiled coils, that is, there were enough distinctive features between the two structures so that the added sensitivity gained from spatial associations was not necessary. Rather, it is the construction of reliable training sets and methods to detect relevant pairwise associations that seem most important. For example, LOGICOIL and PrOCoil select pairwise associations with a scheme that favours sparsity. Also, their performance was reported with variable selection performed through external cross-validation, whereas there are no indication that the same procedure was applied during the original assessment of MultiCoil and Multicoil2. In addition, higher-order information may well be important in coiled-coil discrimination (). We also assessed how straightforward homology-based searches using the BLAST algorithm performed on multi-state classification of coiled-coil oligomeric state prediction (see Section 2 in the supporting information). Again, the predictive accuracy obtained by LOGICOIL significantly outperformed the BLAST predictions.
CONCLUSIONSThis work has introduced LOGICOIL, the first algorithm to address the problem of predicting multiple coiled-coil oligomeric states from protein-sequence information alone. LOGICOIL increases our predictive coverage of the known coiled-coil structures from 31 to 490%, but also distinctly improves our ability to differentiate between coiled-coil sequences of different oligomeric state. By taking into account the independent contribution of amino acids at different register positions, and subsequently including pairwise association effects between distantly positioned residues, we show that LOGICOIL achieves a high discrimination rate when predicting the oligomeric state of coiled-coil sequences across a range of structures, including antiparallel dimers, parallel dimers, trimers and tetramers. As the only algorithm allowing for such extensive coverage of the total coiled-coil population, LOGICOIL could not be benchmarked against any other algorithms. However, when constrained to the limitations of the currently available coiled-coil oligomeric state predictors, SCORER 2.0, MultiCoil and PrOCoil, it was demonstrated that LOGICOIL offers equal or superior predictive power. Although the improvements that the LOGICOIL algorithm brings to the field of coiled-coil oligomeric state prediction are clear, we propose that LOGICOIL may still benefit from further iterations. Most notably, the LOGICOIL algorithm is currently constrained to the sole function of predicting coiled-coil oligomeric state while depending on third-party softwares for the detection of coiled-coil domains in protein sequence. We suggest that extending the LOGICOIL predictive function to also include coiled-coil domain prediction would greatly benefit users, as this would result in a truly free-standing software capable of simultaneously predicting coiled-coil regions in a protein sequence along with its associated oligomeric state. Although LOGICOIL in its present form is capable of dealing with heptad breaks such as stutters, stammers and skips, it is not explicitly designed to account for the potential effects that may result from these sequence discontinuities. Given the increasing number of newly detected non-canonical coiled-coil sequences, future work will focus on the retrieval of heptad-break specific information to augment the predictive power and coverage of LOGICOIL. Despite these minor caveats, we suggest that the development of LOGICOIL, and the unique features it offers, widens the breadth of opportunities for biologists and bioinformaticians alike. LOGICOIL is publicly and freely available via the world-wide web at the following URL: http://coiledcoils.chm.bris.ac.uk/ LOGICOIL and can be used as stand-alone software for known coiled-coil regions, or in conjunction with MARCOIL, for coiled-coil region detection and oligomeric state assignment.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
T.L.Vincent et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
(3) The parameter values of the retained predictors were fitted in a separate model, and the resulting MCMC samples were used to estimate parameters and class probabilities as in Section 3.3. Generally, we observed that the selected pairwise associations remained uniform throughout the separate folds. The convergence behaviour of the secondary Bayesian variable selection scheme and the pairwise associations that were selected to be included in the LOGICOIL predictive model are listed in Section 1 of the Supplementary Material. Figure 3 shows the average mAUC values and associated variations obtained by LOGICOIL during the 10-fold cross-validation scheme. The inclusion of pairwise residue effects drastically improved our ability to distinguish between coiled-coil sequences belonging to different oligomeric states. In particular, the performance obtained for coiled-coil sequences of 428 residues was high (mAUC  0.93). As shown in Figure 4, pairwise AUCs of the different pair of classes were checked to ensure that the good overall performance was not a side product of a few wellseparated cases. The separation rate for pairs involving tetramers was on average lower, in particular for coiled-coil sequences of528 residues. This could be attributed to the low numbers of tetramers in our training set, meaning that more structural information may be needed to improve predictions. Although AUC measures are useful in estimating the discrimination accuracy of an algorithm, they do not explicitly report the fraction of correct assignments, that is, its accuracy. Therefore, we performed leave-one-out cross-validation on the LOGICOIL pristine dataset. We report the results as a confusion matrix obtained for coiled coils of420 residues, shown in Table 1, which gives correct predictions on the diagonal and incorrect predictions in the off-diagonal cells. On this basis, LOGICOIL showed high classification accuracies for predicting the oligomeric states of coiled-coil sequences in the pristine dataset. We observe that the highest Fig. 3. Boxplot of the mAUC achieved by LOGICOIL when response probabilities were estimated using multinomial logistic regression. The mAUC were obtained using 10-fold cross-validation on coiled-coil structures with sequences of 414 residues (light grey), 21 residues (dark grey) and 28 residues (black) are shown
