Marker2sequence (M2S) aims at mining quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for candidate genes. For each gene, within the QTL region, M2S uses data integration technology to integrate putative gene function with associated gene ontology terms, proteins, pathways and literature. As a typical QTL region easily contains several hundreds of genes, this gene list can then be further filtered using a keyword-based query on the aggregated annotations. M2S will help breeders to identify potential candidate genes for their traits of interest. Availability: Marker2sequence is freely accessible at
INTRODUCTIONQuantitative trait loci (QTLs) are regions on the genome statistically associated with a phenotype. Plant breeders aim to introgress these regions from a donor parent to improve a cultivar (). However, a typical QTL region may contain hundreds of genes, including genes negatively influencing the breeding goals. Complete genome sequences of many crop plants are becoming available, including the genome of important food crops such as tomato (the International Tomato Genome) and potato (the Potato Genome Sequencing). The availability of structural and functional genome annotations makes it possible to investigate the QTL region for genes positively or negatively influencing the trait of interest. A tool that offers this functionality is GBrowse (). However, exploring several hundreds of putative candidate genes with GBrowse will still be a lot of work, as limited information is available for each gene. Identification of putative candidate genes can be improved using data integration approaches. Biologically relevant knowledge about, for example, gene ontology (GO; The Gene Ontology Consortium, 2000), protein functions or metabolic pathways can be combined with expert knowledge about the trait under investigation. The basic principle of Semantic Web technology is to integrate different * To whom correspondence should be addressed. types of data from different sources using standardized ontologies (). Important resources such as UniProt () and GO have become available in a Resource Description Framework (RDF; http://www. w3.org/TR/rdf-primer/) format allowing data integration against these resources. Our research aims to develop a tool, called Marker2sequence (M2S), which plant breeders can use to identify the putative candidate gene for their QTL. We describe how M2S uses semantic data integration approaches to obtain available information for each gene model and combine this with a keyword-based search function to mine for the appropriate candidate gene. M2S, by design, can work with any genome annotation, but we show the functionality of M2S, using the tomato genome annotation.
DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATIONM2S is a web-based tool using Java EE 6 and the Struts framework (v1.3.10). It runs on a Glassfish (v3.1) application server. M2S relies on the availability of a genome annotation and reference genetic linkage map in RDF format. A utility, gff2RDF, has been developed to perform the conversion of the tomato, potato and Arabidopsis genome annotation and linkage maps to the RDF format. It is available at https://github.com/PBR/gff2RDF. This utility extracts for all genes their location, human readable description, associated GO term identifier and associated UniProt protein identifiers () from the annotation. For Tomato, the EXPEN 2000 map was used as reference linkage map (). The Jena library () is used to build the RDF model and write it to disk. These graphs were loaded into a Virtuoso open-source edition (version 6.1.3) () triple store together with the GO (version 2011_11_03) and UniProt (version 2011_10). Any triple store with a SPARQL endpoint can be used with M2S. M2S can handle three types of inputs (Supplementary). The first two inputs are two markers flanking the QTL region or a list of markers spanning the QTL region. These markers should have a physical position on the genome sequence or a position on the reference linkage map. The third input requires a genomic region using the format Chr:start..stop. Either input leads to a summary page divided into three sections; the top section shows the alignment of the reference genetic map with the genomic information, which helps to identify problems in the genetic map or the assembly of the genome. The lower section consists of three tabs. The first tab contains a list of all genes in the specified
P.-Y.Chibon et al.region, with their location and human readable description. The second tab lists all the markers within the region. The third tab shows the genetic map for the specified region. Each list can be exported into a spreadsheet-compatible format or a pdf. The gene list can be searched using a keyword through the box in the middle section. This search is performed using SPARQL (http:// www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/) on all available resources and returns any gene with a matching keyword in any of the queried databases. The details for each gene (Supplementary) include information retrieved from the genome, the GO terms, the proteins (UniProt), pathways (UniPathway) and literature associated with these proteins. The GO terms are obtained from the genome annotation and, for tomato, from AFAWE (). This data integration aids the end-user to determine whether this gene is a good candidate for the trait of interest.
EXAMPLE-Carotene content is a trait influencing the color of tomatoes (). Based on our QTL analysis, using data from the Solanum lycopersicum  Solanum galapagense LA0483 RIL population (), this compound has QTLs on chromosomes 3 (between TG130 and TG74) and 6 (between TG253 and TG314). M2S identified 2003 genes on chromosome 3 and 988 genes on chromosome 6. A query with the keyword 'beta-carotene' returns the gene Solyc03g007960.1.1 on chromosome 3 and the gene Solyc06g074240.1.1 on chromosome 6. The gene Solyc03g007960.1.1 has the description 'carotene beta-hydroxylase', and is associated with the GO term 'carotene beta-ring hydroxylase activity', the protein 'betacarotene hydroxylase'and the pathway for 'carotenoid biosynthesis'. The gene Solyc06g074240.1.1 is associated with the GO term 'carotenoid biosynthetic process', the pathway 'carotenoid biosynthesis' and more specifically, it is part of 'beta-carotene biosynthesis'. Information for each gene can be quickly mined using M2S and both genes are candidates for our trait of interest.
CONCLUSIONSM2S provide plant breeders with a way to obtain all annotated gene models in a QTL region, to query, over multiple databases, within the QTL region of interest and an extensive summary for each gene model. M2S will help breeders to identify potential candidate genes for their traits of interest.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
