Grass seeds are complex organs composed by multiple tissues and cell types that develop coordinately to produce a viable embryo. The identification of genes involved in seed development is of great interest, but systematic spatial analyses of gene expression on maize seeds at the cell level have not yet been performed. MASISH is an online database holding information for gene expression spatial patterns in maize seeds based on in situ hybridization experiments. The web-based query interface allows the execution of gene queries and provides hybridization images, published references and information of the analyzed genes. The maize kernel is classified botanically as a caryopsis. In consequence, it is a fruit composed by one seed and the remnants of the seed coats and nucellus, and is permanently enclosed in the pericarp. The endosperm occupies most of the seed and is basically a storage organ that accumulates starch and proteins. The aleurone layer is part of the endosperm and consists in a continuous layer of large cubical cells, which accumulate protein and lipid granules and surrounds most of the endosperm. In the area of the pedicel, which connects the seed to the mother plant, the cells adopt a special morphology, typical of transfer cells and form the basal transfer cell layer. The embryo consists of an embryonic axis and a single cotyledon, which is called the scutellum. The embryo axis is formed by the plumule, covered by the coleoptile and the radicle, covered by coleorhiza. All these organs are almost completely surrounded by the scutellum, an organ whose major function is to accumulate nutrient reserves, mainly lipids and proteins. A single layer of cells directly in contact with the endosperm, which is called the scutellar epithelium, is important in the digestion and transport of the nutrients from the endosperm to the embryo axis during germination. Both endosperm and embryo derive from the fusion of gametes, but while the embryo is derived from the fertilized egg, triploid endosperm is derived from fertilized polar nuclei. Surrounding the endosperm and embryo lays the pericarp, a protective organ derived from the maternal tissues (more information at
M.Miquel et al.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Full genome sequencing allows the identification of the complete catalog of genes in a species. However, the roles of a high proportion of these genes remain unknown. The description of temporal and spatial gene expression patterns is a first step in the determination of the functional roles of the genes. Microarrays are a useful tool to study gene expression in a tissue but, because it integrates data from all cell types used for RNA extraction, most spatial information is lost. On the other hand, it requires the existence of a microarray chip containing all, or at least most of the genes in the genome, which is not yet available for many plant species. Laser microdissection allows obtaining RNA samples from more homogeneous cell types and has been successfully used, for example, in the study of the maize shoot apical meristem or pericycle cell transcriptomes (Brooks et al., 2009; Dembinsky et al., 2007). The combination of laser microdissection with microarray hybridization is a very promising technique that has been allowed to produce, for example, a cell type transcriptome atlas in rice (Jiao et al., 2009). A complementary strategy is to define the specific cellular expression patterns by in situ hybridization (ISH). ISH is a high-resolution technique for the analysis of gene expression that allows determining the steady state concentration of a specific mRNA at the cellular level. ISH has been successfully applied in maize (Fontanet and Vicient, 2008). Large-scale surveys of gene expression patterns based on ISH analyses have been performed for animals as, for example, Drosophila melanogaster (Zhao et al., 2010), mouse (Richardson et al., 2010) and other mammals (Olsen et al., 2004). In plants, it has only been performed for wheat (Drea et al., 2005). MASISH (Maize Seed In Situ Hybridization; http://masish.uab .cat/) consists of a database of patterns of gene expression in maize seeds based on ISH and a web-based interface that enables users to search and display images and related gene annotations (Fig. 1). The database contains two types of entries. Approximately half of the entries arise from the systematic search of PubMed (http:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/) for publications on maize seed ISH. ISH images of the other genes were generated by the authors themselves as previously described (Fontanet and Vicient, 2008) using digoxygenin-labeled RNA probes and paraffin-embedded samples (and labeled as 'unpublished'). Some minor differences were introduced in the protocol in order to facilitate the systematic analyses. For example, hybridizations with two different probes were performed in a single slide using silicone insulators (Grace Bio-Labs JTR20-1.0). The probes used were obtained from clones of a cDNA library derived from scutellum dissected 30 days after pollination (Genebank entries AM937797 to AM938286). Control images (hybridization with sense probe) were performed for some  The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [13:42 5/1/2011 Bioinformatics-btq654.tex]
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
