Standard transcriptomics measures total cellular RNA levels. Our understanding of gene regulation would be greatly improved if we could measure RNA synthesis and decay rates on a genome-wide level. To that end, the Dynamic Transcriptome Analysis (DTA) method has been developed. DTA combines metabolic RNA labeling with standard transcriptomics to measure RNA synthesis and decay rates in a precise and non-perturbing manner. Here, we present the open source R/Bioconductor software package DTA. It implements all required bioinformatics steps that allow the accurate absolute quantification and comparison of RNA turnover. Availability: DTA is part of R/Bioconductor. To download and install DTA refer to
INTRODUCTIONTotal RNA levels are a consequence of RNA synthesis and decay. These individual contributions can be monitored by Dynamic Transcriptome Analysis (DTA,). DTA requires culturing cells in the presence of a labeling substrate (e.g. 4sU or 4tU). During a short, non-perturbing RNA labeling pulse, cells incorporate 4tUTP into newly transcribed RNA instead of uridine. This setup yields three types of RNA fractions: total cellular RNA, newly transcribed labeled RNA and pre-existing unlabeled RNA. The quantification of these fractions on microarrays or by RNA-seq is used to estimate RNA synthesis and decay rates on a genome-wide scale, assuming exponential decay. For each RNA g, the synthesis rate  g and the decay rate  g are estimated from the equationswhere t is the labeling duration, CCL the cell cycle length, and L g , U g , T g are the measurements of the labeled, unlabeled and total RNA fractions, respectively.  can be set to 0 in the case of primary cells (e.g. macrophages). It has been shown that DTA has higher sensitivity and higher temporal resolution in detecting gene regulatory changes than standard transcriptomics * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(). One of the technical obstacles of standard transcriptomics is the unknown normalization factor between samples, i.e. wild-type and mutant cells. Variations in RNA extraction efficiencies and amplification steps in the biochemical protocol introduce differences in the global intensity levels. The estimation of the normalization factors limits the precision of DTA. We have extended DTA to comparative DTA (cDTA), to eliminate this obstacle (). cDTA allows for direct comparison of RNA synthesis and decay rates between samples. This is done by mixing an internal normalization standard of Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Sp) cells to samples of wild-type or perturbed Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Sc) cells. Here, we present the R/Bioconductor package DTA. It implements all required methods to estimate RNA synthesis and decay rates from pre-processed microarray or RNA-Seq measurements of any organisms that are obtained via the DTA or the cDTA protocol.
IMPLEMENTATION AND AVAILABILITYDTA is implemented in R (version  2.14,) and is part of Bioconductor (version  2.10,). To download and install DTA and all its dependencies refer to http://bioconductor.org/packages/2.10/bioc/html/DTA.html. Other methods to infer RNA decay rates from gene expression data have been published by. So far, onlyhave provided a Java implementation of their estimation procedure. The DTA package is the first to cover all aspects of the RNA labeling technique: Bias correction, detailed visualization of quality control aspects and proper handling of the results. It contains simulation methods and functions for error estimation based on replicates and resampling. Further it contains four example datasets for Yeast, Mouse and Human ().
USAGE AND APPLICATIONDTA can be used for genome-wide synthesis and decay rate estimation under all kinds of perturbations and for all kinds of organisms. The rate extraction procedure can be easily accessed via the core function DTA.estimate. Its input consists of a matrix containing the normalized measurements of the total, labeled and unlabeled RNA fractions (datamat) and a description of the experimental design (phenomat). For a more detailed explanation of the required objects, we refer to the package vignette. In addition to this, the number of uridines in each transcript is needed forlabeling bias assessment. This data is part of our package for a number of model organisms such as yeast, drosophila, mouse and human (Sc.tnumber etc.). Optionally, a vector of transcripts that are considered valid for parameter estimation (reliable) can be specified. We illustrate the functionality of DTA on a dataset from (), which compares an RNA Polymerase II Sc point mutant with a reduced elongation rate to wild-type Sc. As expected, synthesis rates are globally decreased, but surprisingly this is compensated by a global reduction in decay rates (). The R-objects required for this analysis are included in the DTA package.
Dynamic transcriptome analysisThe raw data is first normalized, mapped to Yeast ORF IDs and then the estimation procedure DTA.estimate generates a series of quality control plots, if check = TRUE. These are absolutely essential to check the reliability of the results. RStudio users should consider the parameter RStudio. > cDTA.datamat = DTA.normalize(Raw.datamat, Sp.affy.reliable) > Sc.datamat = DTA.map.it(cDTA.datamat, map = Sc.affy2ensg) > Wt = DTA.estimate(Wt.phenomat,Sc.datamat, Sc.tnumber,Sc.ensg.reliable,ccl = 93.5, LtoTratio = 0.05,check = FALSE) > Pol = DTA.estimate(Pol.phenomat,Sc.datamat, Sc.tnumber,Sc.ensg.reliable,ccl = 149.8, LtoTratio = 0.05,check = FALSE)Note that it is advisable to experimentally determine the median cell cycle length (ccl) of a sample if appropriate as a correction factor. Additionally, the ratio of labeled to total mRNA can be passed to the estimation procedure to yield the reported median wild-type mRNA half-lives of (). The same ratio is then used to estimate the mRNA half-lives of the rpb1-N488D strain (Pol). This is reasonable as the data has been pre-processed via added Sp cells (DTA.normalize). To yield, just execute the following: > r = Sc.ensg.reliable > x = log2(Pol$"6"$"dr"/Wt$"6"$"dr") > y = log2(Pol$"6"$"sr"/Wt$"6"$"sr") > heatscatter(x,y,xlim=c(-4,1),ylim=c(-4,1))
CONCLUSIONThe DTA package delivers straightforward methods to estimate RNA synthesis and decay rates from pre-processed microarray or RNASeq measurements that are obtained via the DTA/cDTA protocol. The DTA package fulfills the high standard of the Bioconductor platform, regarding documentation and usability. It can therefore be easily incorporated in R scripts for pre-processing and further statistical analysis of the results can readily be carried out by other methods within the R/Bioconductor programming environment.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [12:34 2/3/2012 Bioinformatics-bts052.tex]
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
