Motivation: Semantic annotations of the biochemical entities constituting a biological reaction network are indispensable to create biologically meaningful networks. They further heighten efficient exchange, reuse and merging of existing models which concern present-day systems biology research more often. Two types of tools for the reconstruction of biological networks currently exist: (i) several sophisticated programs support graphical network editing and visualization. (ii) Data management systems permit reconstruction and curation of huge networks in a team of scientists including data integration, annotation and cross-referencing. We seeked ways to combine the advantages of both approaches. Results: METANNOGEN, which was previously developed for network reconstruction, has been considerably improved. From now on, METANNOGEN provides SBML import and annotation of networks created elsewhere. This permits users of other network reconstruction platforms or modeling software to annotate their networks using METANNOGEN's advanced information management. We implemented word-autocompletion, multipattern highlighting, spell check, brace-expansion and publication management, and improved annotation, cross-referencing and team work requirements. Unspecific enzymes and transporters acting on a spectrum of different substrates are efficiently handled. The network can be exported in SBML format where the annotations are embedded in line with the MIRIAM standard. For more comfort,
INTRODUCTIONThe first version of Metannogen () was used exclusively to reconstruct metabolic networks as in the case of whole-cell model HepatoNet (). The program * To whom correspondence should be addressed. features of this early version are comparable to other programs like the recently published MetNetMaker () or MEMOSys (). However, limitations became apparent with respect to information management, exchange of networks and representation of unspecific transport processes in eukaryotic cells which forced us to substantially improve Metannogen.
RESULTSFrom all currently available tools for network reconstruction such as BiologicalNetworks CellDesigner, Cytoscape, MetNetMaker, MEMOSys, Meta-All, Ondex, SemanticSBML, Sycamore, VANTED, probably Metannogen represents unspecific enzymes and transmembrane transport carriers most efficiently. Therefore, it is suitable for compartmentalized metabolic models of eukaryotic cells where many carriers transport not just one but several different substrates. To our knowledge, it provides the most advanced management for information attached to individual reactions. To use it, modellers do not need to take Metannogen as the primary network reconstruction tool, but can annotate biological networks created in any other program that provides sbml export. Importing networks: the Metannogen demo session which can be web-started on the download page automatically contains the following three large-scale metabolic networks: kegg (), Recon1 () and ehmn. In addition, any other network given in sbml can be imported either from a local file or from online resources. Metannogen provides direct access to the models stored in the BioModels database and JWS online by model ID. All networks and their annotations can be viewed using browsable graphical trees. kegg provides pathway maps and images of metabolite structures. Cross-references between different networks: to cross-reference equivalent reactions from different networks, Metannogen defines two reactions as identical if they have identical metabolites in the left and right side of the biochemical equation, irrespectively of the order. However, different identifier systems hinder automated workflows (). Here, Metannogen works with dictionaries, to synchronize different metabolite identifier vocabularies and to interchange compounds assumed to be different due to pH-dependent protonation (e.g. carbon dioxide versus hydrogen carbonate) or due to different ontology levels (e.g. -D-glucose versus D-glucose).
Annotatingnetworks: the user can type annotations or may provide automatically generated annotations as a list file. TypingPage: 2764 27632764
C.Gille et al.of complicated reaction and compound names is facilitated by word-auto-completion and spell check. Any single word or a group of selected words in an annotation text has a context menu that exhibits at least two fundamental functions: patternhighlighting and forwarding the text to external applications. Words with special meaning like names or identifiers of network components have additional menu items. For example, the denoted network component can be spotted in the graphical pathway maps. The annotation text can also contain certain expressions that act directly as cross-links for online resources (post or get), annotations or network components. Using strap (http://www.bioinformatics.org/strap/ or http://3d-alignment.eu/), certain cross-references display results of predictions from amino acid sequences ().). Exporting networks: any network created or annotated with Metannogen can be exported in sbml format and, thus, used by other tools for further topological analysis, visualization and model simulation as in fasimu () or OptFlux. Optionally, the library libSBML () is used for sbml-export. The annotations are embedded in the sbml file in line with the miriam standard. Metannogen is highly customizable and users can easily implement other standards for their workflow.
Team work: asin the network annotation platform SemanticSBML (), annotations are stored independently of the exported sbml-file in a Metannogen-specific file format either in a local or shared data repository (). Users can either create a central password protected data store at http://www.bioinformatics.org/strap/metannogen/ or they can set up a central repository on their own web server. If a password-protected central repository is used, all curators can simultaneously work on the same project. Loss of data can potentially occur through concurrent modification by two curators. This is prevented by mechanisms known from modern Wiki systems. Since there is no access control at dataset level, curators may change text from their colleagues. However, data deleted in error are not completely lost, since all data are stored on the client with date and time after each session.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
