Motivation: Meta-analysis of summary statistics is an essential approach to guarantee the success of genome-wide association studies (GWAS). Application of the fixed or random effects model to single-marker association tests is a standard practice. More complex methods of meta-analysis involving multiple parameters have not been used frequently, a gap that could be explained by the lack of a respective meta-analysis pipeline. Meta-analysis based on combining p-values can be applied to any association test. However, to be powerful, meta-analysis methods for high-dimensional models should incorporate additional information such as study-specific properties of parameter estimates, their effect directions, standard errors and covariance structure. Results: We modified 'method for the synthesis of linear regression slopes' recently proposed in the educational sciences to the case of multiple logistic regression, and implemented it in a meta-analysis tool called METAINTER. The software handles models with an arbitrary number of parameters, and can directly be applied to analyze the results of single-SNP tests, global haplotype tests, tests for and under gene– gene or gene–environment interaction. Via simulations for two-single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) models we have shown that the proposed meta-analysis method has correct type I error rate. Moreover, power estimates come close to that of the joint analysis of the entire sample. We conducted a real data analysis of six GWAS of type 2 diabetes , available from dbGaP (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap). For each study, a genome-wide interaction analysis of all SNP pairs was performed by logistic regression tests. The results were then meta-analyzed with METAINTER. Availability: The software is freely available and distributed under the conditions specified on http://metainter.
INTRODUCTIONThe need to summarize the results of related genome-wide association studies (GWAS) has encouraged the rapid development of new meta-analytic methods and tools, see e.g. (;). Meta-analysis of summary statistics is expected to deliver new susceptibility loci without additional genotype and phenotype data being required (). Application of the general fixed effects model () to single-marker 1 degree of freedom (df) association tests has become a standard practice. More complex models involving multiple parameters have been used much less frequently, presumably in view of power issues but also because of the absence of a respective meta-analysis pipeline. The need for meta-analysis multiple parameter methods has been recognized in the field (), and new approaches for performing meta-analysis of rare variant association tests have recently been described in (). Fisher's combination test (), Stouffer's method (or inverse normal method;) and Stouffer's method with weights () are common approaches for combining p-values. However, by design, they do not take advantage of additional information available in high-dimensional models. Results of multiple regression analysis, such as parameter estimates, their standard error and covariance, have rarely been used in meta-analysis owing to the complexities underlying the process of their synthesis. In this context, a method for the synthesis of linear regression slopes has been proposed in the educational sciences (). The method has been recognized to be useful in Genetic Epidemiology and has been adapted for linear regression 2 df geneenvironment tests in (). The method by () involves model parameter estimates and their correlation and provides the overall meta-analytic estimates of regression slopes together with meta-analysis p-values. Here, we elaborate the method by () for multiple logistic regression model. We introduce the analysis tool METAINTER, which, besides Fisher's and Stouffer's methods, implements the method by () for an arbitrary number of model parameters. Thereby, METAINTER enables meta-analysis, for instance, of the single-marker 2 df association test, global haplotype tests and tests for and under genegene or geneenvironment interaction. The synthesis of regression slopes () relies on the availability of the covariance matrix of the model parameters. Because the covariance matrix is not always provided by genetic analysis tools, we support the analysis framework presented here with an update of our own genetic interaction *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com analysis tool INTERSNP () to avoid the potential unavailability of the covariance matrix. We conducted a simulation study for two-single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) models and evaluated the data with 8 df logistic regression test under interaction and 4 df logistic regression test for interaction. We show that the method for the synthesis of regression slopes (MSRS) has correct type I error. Moreover, its power is nearly equal to that of the analysis of the joint sample with covariate parameters indicating sub-study membership. Furthermore, we performed a real data analysis of six GWAS of type 2 diabetes (T2D), available from dbGaP (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap). At first, we conducted a genome-wide interaction analysis (GWIA) with 8 and 4 df logistic regression tests in each study, and then meta-analyzed the results with METAINTER.
METHODSTo model genetic effects of genotypes AA, Aa and aa of a single SNP on a quantitative trait, a standard linear regression equation y= 0 +x+ D x D is used, where y is the outcome variable, x, x D are two genetic predictor variables corresponding to the additive and the dominance effects of a SNP and coded according to the number of copies of the susceptibility allele A. The coding scheme x=1; 0; 1 and x D =  0:5; 0:5; 0:5 is used in our work for the genotypes AA, Aa, aa, respectively (). The model parameters 0 , , D have to be estimated. To model genetic effects on a qualitative trait in e.g. case/control studies, a logistic regression model is used. Let p denote the probability of expressing a phenotype, 05p51: In the logistic regression, the logarithm of odds log p 1p = : logit p is modeled as logit p= 0 +x+ D x D with the same predictor variables as before. The logistic regression model for a single locus can easily be extended to a two-SNP model. Moreover, it can be modified for modeling pair-wise statistical interaction. A full logistic regression model, including marginal effects and allowing for pair-wise interaction, is represented by logit p=).
P-value combination methodsMethods of combining p-values from independent significance tests have a long history, the most popular of them are listed, for instance, in the review article (), see also (). When raw data cannot be pooled across studies, meta-analysis based on combination of p-values represents a convenient and feasible approach. We consider three p-value combination methods. Assume that k studies (sub-studies of the meta-analysis) were conducted to test a particular hypothesis H 1 versus fixed H 0 : In two of three methods, the only information required to perform meta-analysis is p-values p j of each sub-study j and possibly sample size n j ; j=1;. .. ; k: It is well-known that meta-analysis generally benefits from weighting. Carefully chosen weights such as, for instance, square root of sample size may improve power of meta-analysis methods, see () and references therein. Fisher's method (t ; where  and  1 denote the standard normal cumulative distribution function and its inverse, and where w j is study-specific weight, e.g. w j = ffiffiffiffi n j p ; j=1;. .. ; k; see (Zaykin, 2011). Stouffer's method with weights and effect directions. In case of multiple regression model, the Stouffer's method with weights can be modified to include the information on the consistency of effect directions across substudies. Assume that the same regression model is used in all sub-studies, and consider two of them, sub-studies 1 and 2. We assume that a model equation logit Y=Here, ^ jl are estimates of l with the standard error se ^ jl  in sub-study j, j=1; 2; l=1;. .. ; P: Our definition is motivated by the geometrical interpretation of the regression models, where the values of the predictor variables and the corresponding outcomes are considered to be a cloud of points in the Euclidian space; for more details see (). Note also that the simulation study below supports the validity of the suggested criterion. In case, the model equation (2) is tested versus the restricted model logit Y = 0 + 1 X 1 +. .. + S X S ; 1 S5P; one has to address the predictor estimates ^ jl with j = 1, 2 and l=S+1;. .. ; P. According to the Stouffer's method with weights and effect directions, a combined p-value can be found as p=2 1   jZj     ; withwhere j1 =1, if sub-studies j and 1 have the same direction, and j1 =  1, otherwise.
MSRS: method for the synthesis of regression slopesA new meta-analytic approach based on multivariate generalized least squares estimation has recently been suggested in () to summarize the results of multiple linear regression used in related studies. We modified the method to the case of multiple logistic regression and applied our modification to the meta-analysis of case/control GWAS. The method in () can briefly be described as follows. Let k be the number of sub-studies, where the multiple linear regression modelwas tested versus Y= 0 to find the effect of P predictor variables on the outcome variable Y. Note that covariates are allowed to be included. The aim of the meta-analysis is to combine the results of k sub-studies and to obtain the common estimate of the slope vectorThe method relies mutually on the availability of the covariance matrix R j =cov ^ j1 ;. .. ; ^ jP  0  or at least its estimate ^ R j in each sub-study j. Combining k studies, an estimate of the joint covariance matrix R has the form of a block diagonal matrix ^ R=diagThe slopes estimates are modeled as b=Wb+e; i.e. as a function of b and a design matrix W, where the covariance matrix of e has to satisfy the condition cove=R: The design matrix W is composed of zeros and ones that identify which slopes are estimated in each sub-study. In case, when all sub-studies examine the same set of P predictors, a stack of k identity matrices of the dimension P  P serves as W. The generalized least squares approach results in the common estimates of the slope vector b and its covariance matrix:With large samples and under typical regularity conditions ^ b$Nb; cov ^ b; and the confidence intervals for each element of b are ^ i AE Z 1=2 ffiffiffiffiffi ffi C ii p , where Z 1=2 is the upper tail 1  =2 critical value of the standard normal distribution, C ii is the ith diagonal element of cov ^ b matrix, i=1;. .. ; P. Note that in contrast to the presentation in (), we avoid here the parameter 0 ; as it is not relevant for testing in GWAS. Within the MSRS framework, there are several tests available: A test of the composite hypothesis b=0 is given bywhich is 2-distributed with p df. A test of model fit (or a test of homogeneity of model parameters across sub-studies):The test statistic is given byand is 2-distributed with k  1P df. In more general situation, where the model equation (3) is tested versus the restricted model Y= 0 + 1 X 1 +. .. + S X S in each sub-study, 1 S5P, the method can be modified by including the predictor slopes S+1 ;. .. ; P in b; b; R and thus reducing the dimension of W: Then the test of the composite hypothesis S+1 =. .. = P =0 has P  S df, and the test of model fit 1S+1 =. .. = kS+1 ;. .. ; 1P =. .. = kP has k  1P  S df. Note that it is also possible to include in meta-analysis sub-studies that examine subsets of P predictors. If some sub-studies use fewer than the full set of P predictors, one can still apply the generalized least squares approach to integrate the results into the synthesis; see () for further details. The method by () can be adjusted to the case of multiple logistic regression. The only change needed is the proper estimation of the covariance matrices themselves. The formula for the estimation of the covariance matrix used for linear regression model in () ^ R j =X 0 j X j  ^ 2 j is not valid for the case of logistic regression; here X j is n j  P matrix with the elements X jil being a value of the variable X l in (3) for the ith individual, n j is the sample size and ^ 2 j is an estimate of an error variance in sub-study j. We applied an estimation of the covariance matrix for multiple logistic regression models ^ R j =X 0 j V j X j  1 given in (), where X j is defined analogous to the linear regression case but for the model equation (2),^ ji is the estimated logistic probability computed using the maximum likelihood estimate b and the data for the ith individual in sub-study j. Modified MSRS is a powerful method to perform meta-analysis in case/control GWAS and can be used to summarize p-values and to obtain the common estimates of model parameters.
IMPLEMENTATIONMETAINTER is a stand-alone software written in C/C++. It performs meta-analysis of GWAS summary statistics, in particular those obtained by multiple linear or logistic regression models. It is assumed that a unique predefined model is used to analyze the sets of SNP tuples in a series of studies. As input, multiple regression summary statistics of the parti-cipating studies have to be provided in tabulated format. METAINTER supports the output format of the genetic interaction analysis software INTERSNP () as well as freely defined format. Parameters and options of the meta-analysis have to be specified in a simple configuration file. METAINTER takes care of some technical issues in the preprocessing of the input data. Suppose that for a C/T SNP the alleles in input file are given in the order C/T for sub-study 1, but given in the order T/C for sub-study 2. In this case, all parameter estimates of log-additive type that depend on the SNP in the underlying regression model in sub-study 2 will be multiplied by 1 to unify the reference. The procedure will be repeated for all SNPs of the tuple under consideration with diverging reference. In addition, all entries of the covariance matrix (if available) that depend on log-additive terms of the SNP will be multiplied by 1. For parameters of entire dominance variation type, no modification is needed. Note that allele reference is automatically handled by INTERSNP. METAINTER also attempts to resolve strand flips. If a SNP is given as C/T polymorphism in sub-study 1, and as G/A polymorphism in sub-study 2, METAINTER assumes that C $G and T $A. If the alleles of sub-study 2 occur in the order A/G instead, the SNP will in addition undergo the procedure described in the previous paragraph. C/G polymorphism, of course, will not be flipped by METAINTER. For such polymorphisms, strand consistency across studies has to be established before analysis.
SIMULATION STUDYWe simulated genotype data for series of 20 000 cases and 20 000 controls and considered a 'double recessive' disease model. Let i and j be the number of susceptibility alleles at SNP 1 and SNP 2, respectively, i; j 2 f0; 1; 2g: For two-SNP genotypes, we specified a disease penetrance f 22 =0:014 and a baseline penetrance f ij = 0.01 for i; j 6  2: To create a series of disease models, we considered all allele frequency distributions fAF 1 ; AF 2 g with AF i 2 f0:2; 0:3;. .. ; 0:8g; i=1; 2; and with AF 1 AF 2 ; the latter for the reason of symmetry. To investigate the global null hypothesis, we also considered the situation f 22 =0:01: The results were meta-analyzed by all methods described in Section 2. For comparison, we analyzed the entire dataset as well, where covariates indicating sub-study membership were used. Empirical significance level and empirical power level were computed as the portion of the simulated datasets below a pre-specified nominal significance level : Under the null hypothesis, we considered-levels of 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001 and 0.00001. For the power study, we chose =1  10 13 : This is motivated as follows: under the assumption of n = 1 000 000 independent SNP sites in the human genome (The Wellcome), there are nn  1=2=5  10 11 independent SNP pairs in a GWIA. Dividing 0.05 by 5  10 11 yields =1  10 13 as criterion for the experiment-wise significance. To assess the issue of minimal sample size required to provide valid inference of the meta-analysis, we also conducted simulation study for 1000, 3000 and 5000 cases and controls.
RESULTS OF THE SIMULATION STUDYEmpirical levels. The results of the simulation study under the null hypothesis are given for the 8 df logistic regression test in Supplementary Table S1. In this table, we present the empirical significance levels for the four meta-analysis methods, the joint sample analysis and the test of homogeneity of model parameters at two nominal levels: =0:01 for 10 000 simulations and =0:00001 for 100 000 simulations. In general, all methods behave satisfactory under the null hypothesis. We observe some nominally significant excesses of ; which is to be expected because we investigated 336 situations presented in Supplementary Table S1. Deviation from the nominal level is assessed by the exact binomial test. For =0:01; the most significant difference (p=0:0002; after Sidak correction with 336 tests p cor =0:0650) is the empirical level 0.0065 obtained by the test of homogeneity of model parameters for a combination of allele frequencies 0:8=0:8. For =0:00001, the most significant deviation is observed at empirical level of 0.00004. Note that this excess is still only mildly anti-conservative (p=0:02; p cor =1:00). Taking into account multiple comparison in Supplementary Table S1, we conclude that the methods perform well in maintaining the nominal significance level in all settings considered. This is also underlined by the fact that none of the mean empirical levels shows deviation from the respective nominal level. The simulations under the null hypothesis demonstrate the validity of the meta-analysis methods implemented in METAINTER. Power study. Power of all meta-analysis methods considered in our work and implemented in METAINTER is shown infor different combinations of allele frequencies AF 1 , AF 2 ; and the significance level =1  10 13 : The primary analysis was performed by the 8 and 4 df logistic regression tests. Power of these tests, used in the joint sample analysis, is given in the last two columns of the table. Naturally, we see the absence of power for low allele frequencies and observe the increase of power with increasing values of allele frequencies, irrespective of the metaanalysis method used. For almost all settings, the ranking of the meta-analysis approaches leads to the following priority list with respect to power: MSRS, the Stouffer's method with weights and effect directions, the Stouffer's method with weights and, finally, the Fisher's method as the least powerful. The most pronounced divergence in power values between MSRS and the joint sample analysis is observed for the allele frequency combinations 0.3/0.7 and 0.4/0.6 for the 8 df test and is rather small in size. From our study, we can conclude that MSRS outperforms substantially all other meta-analysis methods in terms of power. Moreover, power of MSRS is close to that of the analysis of the entire sample. Furthermore, despite the known problem with low power for small samples (Supplementary), MSRS provides reasonable model parameters estimates. In particular, as shown in, the correlation between meta-analysis estimates and estimates obtained from the joint sample analysis with the 8 df logistic regression test, as computed for AF 1 =AF 2 =0:3 and based on 100 permutation replicates, is40.93, indicating the validity of the method even for reasonable sample sizes. These facts demonstrate the usefulness of the information contained in the covariance matrix of model parameters. In case the covariance matrix is not available and MSRS can not be applied, the Stouffer's method with weights and effect directions represents an effective alternative to perform0. 2 / 0. 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0. 2 / 0. 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0. 2 / 0. 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0. 2 / 0. 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0. 2 / 0. 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0. 2 / 0. 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0. 0 0 1 0 0. 2 / 0 .
REAL DATA ANALYSISWe investigated six GWAS datasets of T2D that are available from dbGaP (), cf.and relied on the quality controlled data available there. Primary analysis of six T2D GWAS was performed by the 8 df logistic regression test under interaction and by the 4 df logistic regression test for interaction. We use both regression models to give examples of the applicability of the meta-analysis approach. Summary statistics of single-marker GWAS can typically be integrated in one-step meta-analysis. To meta-analyze the results of two-marker GWAS, however, a two-stage procedure is necessary to guarantee computational feasibility. A GWIA involves a large number of SNP pairs (10 10 10 12 ). This implies that (i) for running time reasons a fast screening test has to be used in the initial GWIA in all participating studies; (ii) not all results of this GWIA can be stored for lack of hard-disk memory. Therefore, we applied the following two-stage design. In stage I, we conducted a GWIA on all SNP pairs in each study with the 8 df and 4 df logistic regression tests; we did not use any covariates at this stage. In this case, the test statistic can be obtained in closed form (), and running time depends on how quickly two-SNP genotypes can be counted in cases and controls. The implementation of the Hamming weight method () in INTERSNP () allowed us to test all SNP pairs from each study, with maximum of 4:22  10 11 pairs in the second T2D study. It was analyzed by INTERSNP within $16 h on a dedicated computing node (3 GHz) and required 2 GB working memory. From the stage I analysis, we retained a list of candidate SNP pairs with p-value 1  10 4 in at least one study. After stage I, we merged the candidate lists obtained from each study to form a 'joint' list. In stage II, the joint list was sent back to each study and analyzed with INTERSNP by the 8 and 4 df logistic regression tests. To adjust for potential population stratification, we performed multidimensional scaling as implemented in () for each study and retained 3 leading dimensions as covariate parameters for the analysis. After stage II, summary statistics from 2 149 025 (8 df) and 2 950 354 (4 df) candidate SNP pairs were available in all six T2D studies and were meta-analyzed with METAINTER. The meta-analysis took METAINTER 23 min (8 df) and 11 min (4 df). In, the top five results of the meta-analysis of six T2D GWAS are shown for both logistic regression tests. In, three further experiment-wide significant results are given with the indication which test they refer to. In these tables we present the p-values of six individual studies, the p-values of the metaanalysis performed by four methods implemented in METAINTER and the p-values of the test of homogeneity of model parameters across studies; see Section 2.2. All top SNP pairs for the 8 df logistic regression test contain SNP rs7901695, located within the TCF7L2 gene. This gene is known to harbor the most important genetic risk factor for T2D, as identified by GWAS (). Because the 8 df test includes marginal SNP effects, the accumulation of rs7901695 in the top ranking results corroborates the validity and utility of our analysis. The strongest association signals are seen for MSRS method, which coincides with the results of the power study. Among the top five results for the 8 df logistic regression test, the second SNP of each pair is not located in regions previously implicated in T2D. However, those SNPs can be viewed as candidates for either marginal association or potential interaction with rs7901695.presents two experiment-wide significant SNP pairs for the 8 df logistic regression test. Each pair contains a further SNP previously implicated in T2D. The SNP rs12195232, located 20 kb upstream of SAYSD1 gene, has been suggested as a T2D risk factor by the standard single SNP analysis in (). Another SNP, rs10012946, is located in the WFS1 gene. Mutations in this gene are associated with Wolfram syndrome, also called DIDMOAD (diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy and deafness). WFS1 was also found to be associated with T2D (). The presence of rs12195232 and rs10012946 in experiment-wide significant pairs demonstrates the potential of multiple regression models in general. In single-marker analysis, both SNPs would have gone undetected with the data that were available to us (p = 0.023 and p = 0.012, respectively). However, in the multiple regression meta-analysis, these SNPs come into focus, while analyzing six comparatively small T2D GWAS. Hence, investigation of interaction between SAYSD1 and TCF7L2, WFS1 and TCF7L2 and the marginal effects of both SAYSD1 and WFS1 in larger studies would be of interest. In, among the top five results of the T2D meta-analysis for the 4 df logistic regression test, none of the SNP pairs reached a genome-wide significant p-value. However, SNP pair rs6446498/ rs12109266 (rank No. 9), listed in, represents a plausiblecandidate. Rs6446498 is located in PPP2R2C gene, previously shown to be associated with T2D (). Rs12109266 located near LOC101928448 gene, which was reported to be associated with body fat distribution using waste circumference in male individuals of African ancestry (). Moreover, in () it was shown that LOC101928448 interacts with two environmental factors: carbohydrate for fasting insulin and homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance, making significant contribution to the genotype by environment variance for T2D-related traits. Because the first SNP of the pair rs6446498/rs12109266 is already known as a T2D risk variant, one can argue that the significance threshold of 1  10 13 for entirely new pairs is not required here, and that 5  10 8 is an appropriate threshold for a test for interaction with a known SNP. In this sense, the pair is significant after adjustment for multiple testing. Replication in independent datasets is nevertheless warranted. The p-values p H of the test of homogeneity of model parameters across six T2D GWAS, computed for the predictor slopes only (omitting intercepts), are shown in the last column of Tables 4 and 5. The p-values p H provide evidence of homogeneity for almost all SNP pairs except for rs1834134/rs7901695 (p H = 0.046). The meta-analysis by MSRS allows us to estimate not only p-values but effect sizes as well.presents the slopes estimates for the 8 df logistic regression model from each of the six T2D GWAS, and shows meta-analysis estimates obtained by MSRS for one SNP pair listed in. By applying MSRS we are provided with an overall model based on the synthesis of the results in the primary studies, where the interrelationships among predictors are accounted for. For comparison, we included inthe slopes estimates obtained from the joint sample analysis ('mega-analysis'), see 'JointS' row. The estimates of both approaches are in good concordance.
DISCUSSIONNew methods to meta-analyze genetic data are obviously of growing demand (). Meta-analysis of summary statistics of single-marker tests applied in GWAS is an established standard, which however needs to be extended to more complex multiple parameter testing strategies. In context of rare variant analysis, which typically addresses multiple parameters from a genomic region, an important improvement of p-values combination methods has recently been made by (). The method presented there is based on the correlation structure of single-variant test statistics, and, in terms of power, comes close to power of the rare variant analysis of the combined sample. The method for the synthesis of linear regression slopes () has been applied to meta-analyze the results of a linear regression geneenvironment interaction test (). Here, we presented a general framework that enables application of MSRS to meta-analysis of both linear and logistic multiple regression models. In addition, a test that assesses across-study heterogeneity can easily be formulated within MSRS framework and is a part of our implementation. The method can be used to filter out signals that are driven byp-Fisher is p-value of the Fisher's method; p-Stouf is p-value of the Stouffer's method with weights; p-StoufDir is p-value of the Stouffer's method with weights and effect directions; p-MSRS is p-value of the MSRS; p i is p-value of the sub-study i in the primary analysis, i=1;. .. ; 6; p-JointS is p-value of the regression test in the joint sample analysis; p H is p-value of a test of homogeneity of model parameters across sub-studies.p-Fisher is p-value of the Fisher's method; p-Stouf is p-value of the Stouffer's method with weights; p-StoufDir is p-value of the Stouffer's method with weights and effect directions; p-MSRS is p-value of the MSRS; p i is p-value of the sub-study i in the primary analysis, i=1;. .. ; 6; p-JointS is p-value of the regression test in the joint sample analysis; p H is p-value of a test of homogeneity of model parameters across sub-studies. just a few studies alone, thereby it captures the main advantage of random effects models. Via application to six T2D GWAS, we could demonstrate that the implementation of MSRS in METAINTER allows efficient computation. Meta-analysis of 2.2 million SNP pairs analyzed in six studies took METAINTER 23 min. We supported the analysis by updating our INTERSNP tool (). INTERSNP provides now the necessary covariance matrix of parameter estimates in multiple regression models. The implementation of MSRS in METAINTER allows efficient meta-analysis for multiple linear and logistic regression models. However, the method should be used with caution, if the evidence of strong dependence between predictor variables exists. The phenomenon of multicollinearity can manifest itself, for example, when the inverse covariance matrix has to be computed. If the model is well specified in each sub-study, there should be no strong multicollinearity. Otherwise model reduction can be useful to get around this problem. For GWAS with small samples and for SNPs with low allele frequencies (e.g. both50.2 or for one SNP 50.05) a test with fewer parameters, for instance, 3 df allelic test under interaction, might be a reasonable choice. MSRS assumes that the multicollinearity issue was checked in sub-studies and that any of them is relatively free from this problem. If the covariance matrix is non-invertible for a particular SNP pair (or SNP, or SNP set) in a sub-study, METAINTER will exclude the sub-study from the meta-analysis for the respective pair. MSRS is an appropriate generalization of the existing techniques in the following sense: in case of one parameter models, the method is equivalent to the fixed effect model, and in the multiple parameter case its power comes close to that of the analysis of the joint sample, as we have shown in our simulation study. Moreover, power comparison of MSRS with the Fisher's and the Stouffer's methods re-emphasizes the importance of going beyond p-valuebased meta-analysis for higher-dimensional models.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
T.Vaitsiakhovich et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
METAINTER at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
