mimicMe is a web server for prediction and analysis of host-like proteins (mimics) encoded by microbial pathogens. Users select a host species and any set of pathogen and control proteomes (bacterial, fungal, protozoan or viral) and mimicMe reports host-like proteins that are unique to or enriched among pathogens. Additional server features include visualization of structural similarities between pathogen and host proteins as well as function-enrichment analysis. Availability and implementation: mimicMe is available at http://
INTRODUCTIONMany pathogens encode virulence factors that mimic the function of one or more host proteins. These host-like proteins, called mimics, exploit host pathways and/or facilitate evasion of host immune detection (). Mimics may be homologous to their host counterparts, and originate through host-to-pathogen horizontal transfer, or may evolve through convergent evolution (). Several studies have focused on the latter type, identifying pathogen mimics of short host peptide fragments (). Here, we focus on pathogen mimicry involving host-pathogen sequence homology, which can be more easily detected through standard bioinformatic approaches. In previous work, we used a BLAST-based, comparative proteomics approach to detect mimics of this type in human pathogenic bacteria (). By detecting human-like proteins highly unique to pathogens and relatively absent in non-pathogens (controls), known mimics [e.g. Legionella RalF mimicry of human ADP-ribosylation factor guanine nucleotide exchange factors (, and novel ones (e.g. multi-species mimics of human collagen and leucinerich repeats) could be identified. Here, we report mimicMe, a web server for exploration of host-like proteins and potential mimics in pathogens. mimicMe automates and extends our previous analysis to include a range of common host species from mammals to plants, and pathogens from bacteria, viruses, protozoans and fungi. The tool is best suited for predicting mimics that are homologous to host proteins, but other types of mimicry may be detected through altered parameters. The tool allows for structural visualization of predicted mimicry relationships as well as function-enrichment analysis to identify host gene families, functions or pathways that are targets of molecular mimicry by pathogens of interest. We anticipate that the tool will be useful in comparative analyses of pathogens, where it may serve to generate hypotheses for future experimental studies.
METHODS AND IMPLEMENTATION
Data sourcesProteome sequence data for selected hosts and microbes were retrieved from the NCBI's ftp resource (ftp://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ genomes/) and the NCBI BioProject Database (). This included several host species of interest (e.g. Arabidopsis, human, cow, zebrafish) and 2765 bacterial, 2321 viral, 35 fungal and 49 protozoan proteomes.
Host versus microbial proteome BLASTingFor mimicMe to rapidly predict molecular mimicry relationships in any selection of organisms, proteome-to-proteome alignments were precomputed for all possible hostmicrobe relationships. Computations were performed using the blast+ suite () distributed among cluster nodes in SHARCNET, a high-performance computing network. After alignment output was parsed, all host and microbial protein pairs sharing at least one high scoring pair alignment with an E-value 0.05 were stored in a MongoDB database, along with corresponding alignment data.
mimicMe input/output
QueriesThe front end of mimicMe provides a simple web interface for selecting a host organism, and a set of pathogen species (where mimics are expected to be found) and control species (where mimics are not expected). Suggested lists of pathogens and controls are also provided as an option. The interface includes additional parameters to adjust the stringency of predictions, including an E-value threshold, as well as the minimum and maximum number of allowed hits in pathogens and nonpathogens, respectively [see (of pathogens that meet the specified criteria. Results are sorted by pathogen versus non-pathogen abundance and alignment score, searchable by keyword to focus on functions of interest, and similar (redundant) predictions are grouped together to reduce redundancy. PSORTb () predictions of subcellular localization are also available for most bacterial proteins.
SAMPLE ANALYSIS AND MIMICME FEATURESAs an example analysis, suppose one aims to identify mimics conserved in multiple species of Legionella that are absent in broad range of non-pathogens (). mimicMe predicts a ranked list of 50 mimicry relationships () unique to Legionella. The top prediction involves detected mimicry of the Sec7 domain of human ARF-GEFs by the Legionella RalF protein, a known mimic and virulence factor, present in 11 Legionella proteomes and 0 controls (). Further analysis can be performed using some of mimicMe's built-in tools described below.
Multiple sequence alignmentmimicMe offers the user the option of performing a MUSCLE (http://www.drive5.com/muscle/) multiple sequence alignment (MSA) between a host protein and all of its pathogen hits (). The alignment is colored based on sequence similarities to the host protein, to highlight particular regions or motifs mimicked by the pathogen/s.
Structural visualizationThe conservation pattern from the MSA can also be mapped onto a known PDB structure (http://www.pdb.org) of the host protein, and visualized using GLmol (http://webglmol.source forge.jp) (). This may highlight particular regions of structural mimicry.
Function enrichmentThe user is also provided with the option to determine statistically enriched functions among the set of predicted mimicry targets (host proteins), which may reflect common host functions targeted by the pathogen. Gene enrichment analysis is performed using goatools (https://github.com/tanghaibao/goatools), with Gene Ontology annotations retrieved from the EBI Gene Ontology Annotation project (). In the example described above, mimicMe returns GO:0016192 ( " vesiclemediated transport " ) as the top enriched function (P = 1.18e5). Indeed, manipulation of host vesicular trafficking is a hallmark of Legionella pathogenesis ().mimicMe provides an automated pipeline for BLAST-based detection and exploration of host-like proteins (mimics) in microbial pathogens. Predictions made by mimicMe may serve as a guide for experimentalists interested in mimicry-related mechanisms of hostmicrobe interactions and virulence.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
mimicMe: analysis of host-like proteins in pathogens at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
