Motivation: Pathway diagrams from PubMed and World Wide Web (WWW) contain valuable highly curated information difficult to reach without tools specifically designed and customized for the biological semantics and high-content density of the images. There is currently no search engine or tool that can analyze pathway images, extract their pathway components (molecules, genes, proteins, organelles, cells, organs, etc.) and indicate their relationships. Results: Here, we describe a resource of pathway diagrams retrieved from article and web-page images through optical character recognition, in conjunction with data mining and data integration methods. The recognized pathways are integrated into the BiologicalNetworks research environment linking them to a
INTRODUCTIONBiological pathways provide intuitive views of the myriad of interactions involved in biological processes. A typical signaling pathway, for example, can represent receptor-binding events, protein complexes, phosphorylation reactions, translocations and transcriptional regulation, usually depicted with a set of symbols, with lines and arrows. Automated detection of genes and proteins and inference of signaling network architecture and dynamics from general () as well as domain specific () imaging data, has been of increasing interest during last years. These sophisticated methods were implemented only for a specific domain and do not provide public services for extracted pathways analysis or a software for a broader use. Thus in spite of the importance of collecting and maintaining pathway information, with the attendant biological annotations and experimental data, pathways construction, curation and integration * To whom correspondence should be addressed.with public databases and experimental data remain a tedious and time-consuming task (). A small number of systems have considered the issue of figure retrieval: Sub-cellular Location Image Finder () that retrieves fluorescence micrograph images from a single-journal corpus; BioText () and Yale Image Finder (YIF) () that performs text queries of figures legends. None of these methods analyzes information embedded in the image itself, nor do they compare with and supplement knowledge available in public databases and PudMed. Here we present the system that addresses the problems of extraction, comparison, searching and managing biological knowledge embedded in pathway imaging data. The system provides a repository of freely available pathways recognized from imaging data. The repository allows biologists to explore, search over pathway components in open access publications and World Wide Web (WWW) and construct user's pathways and interaction networks. These pathways can be visualized and dynamically analyzed in concert with data integrated from other public databases and literature.
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
MethodsThe process of image recognition, data extraction and integration consists of several steps (Supplementary). First, objects and relations are extracted from the image, together with their coordinates. This is done using mathematical morphology and binary analysis routines of ImageJ (http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/). The image is transferred to binary gray-scale 32-bit RGB mode by applying a threshold adjustment with a Huang Filter. Special mathematical morphology 'Opening' after 'Closing' operations are applied to reduce the number of domains for recognition by removing areas that are too small. Finally, an 'analyze particles' procedure applied to the last image retrieves all possible candidates for nodes as objects represented by points of an enclosing polygon. Text recognition is done separately with preliminary image processing (). Cleaning non-textual elements using properties that characterize horizontal text objects, such as alignment, heightwidth ratio, character separation and connectedness, is performed. 'Cognitive OpenOCR (Cuneiform)' (http://en.openocr.org) software is used for batch image text recognition and 'AutoIt v3' (http://www.autoitscript.com) for automated batch operations. The scanning procedure is executed both horizontally and vertically to extract horizontal and vertical text. The next step involves the extracted text, objects and relations being sent to the IntegromeDB () (back-end
S.Kozhenkov and M.Baitalukdatabase) data integration pipeline to check the consistency of the data (Supplementaryand). We check that all recognized objects are genes/proteins, processes, cell types, diseases or any other object type constituting BioNets ontology () in our database. Recognized relations are compared with the existing (literature or pubic databases) interactions, reactions and relations integrated in the IntegromeDB from >100 of public databases. Only those recognized relations that are supported by at least one type of evidence from our integrated database are included in the final pathway.) is used to index, retrieve and rank the image text descriptions (using the default statistical ranking). In case of publication, the image description is the image legend, whereas in the case of a web page, the specifically designed algorithm retrieves the most appropriate description from the web page text surrounding the image. Image publication date and source journal are stored as separate fields that can also be used to sort the results.
Quality evaluationOut of the top 1012 pathways, 600 were randomly chosen for expert evaluation (see also Section 2 in Supplementary Material). We asked six experts (each evaluating 100 different pathways/images) to tell which pair of pathway image is close or equivalent from the point of view of a biological user. The recognized pathways were considered close/equivalent to its source image if the difference between them was < 10% of the total number of objects and relations in the pathway. In the experiments in which the experts made 600 similarity assertions on different random pathways, the quality of recognition was estimated as 87%, i.e. 521/600 recognized pathways were qualified as equivalent to its image by the experts. For additional quality evaluation and community assessment, every pathway in the repository has a 'Like/Don't Like' option button () and a Report Form for the user's opinion and to leave comments on the quality of the pathway. This feedback will be used in refining our data mining and integration methods.
Data accessThe constantly growing 'Imaging Pathways' repository currently contains 1012 pathways. To access 'Imaging Pathways' repository, run BiologicalNetworks integrated environment and open Pathway Data Panel on the left (). The pathways recognized from imaging data are under 'Imaging Pathways' node in the pathways data tree. An example of NF-kB signaling pathway () and related data are also accessible upon launching the program from the Welcome Screen (click on the 'Imaging Pathways' demo project). Additionally, BiologicalNetworks' back-end database IntegromeDB integrates Reactome, KEGG, BioCarta, NCI-Nature pathways,WikiPathways and HumanCyc thus making the BiologicalNetworks the richest compendium of integrated pathways.
Functionality'Imaging Pathways' can be explored in conjunction with public knowledge and experimental data () collected in the BiologicalNetworks' back-end database, IntegromeDB, for a variety of species from >100 data sources (). BiologicalNetworks allows the building of integrative models starting from a given pathway (, A', B and B') exploring gene/protein () and interaction/relation () properties, interaction networks (and F), microarrays and other experimental data (e.g. transcriptomic, metabolomic, proteomic) (), functional sequences, drugs, tissues, developmental stages and other types of data (). Users can start with a simple search over the pathway repository from the Quick Search bar located above the Pathway Data Panel (, left) for pathways, gene/protein descriptions and other metadata. For example, searching 'p53' in the current pathway collection produces only 14 results when run over figure caption text (as most of the current search engines do), but returns 68 results if analyzing information embedded in the image itself (). The search results can be viewed either in a tree list view or in a grid view (), which is especially useful for seeing commonalities among topics, such as all the pathways that include a given gene, or seeing all pathways/images of embryo development of some species. Text description as well as source image together with image caption, references to PubMed articles and links to source web pages are provided for every pathway (). The 'Similar Pathways' Window/Tab () shows pathways having the highest number of common objects (gene, proteins, etc.) with the opened pathway. Advanced functionality on pathways exploration is described in the Supplementary File and Video Tutorial (Demo #5, 'Pathway Collection') on the BiologicalNetworks main page.
Page: 741 739742
Mining and integration of pathway diagrams
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
