Motivation: The need for more effective and safer pharmaceuticals is a persistent quest. Microbial adaptations create the need to permanently develop new antimicrobials (AMPs), for instance. Similarly, intracellular delivery of drugs is still a challenge and translocation of membranes for drug delivery is an area of intense research. Peptides can be used both as AMP drug leads and drug carrier systems for intracellular delivery. Multifunctional proteins are abundant in viruses but, surprisingly, have never been thoroughly screened for bioactive peptide sequences. Results: Using the AMPA and CellPPD online tools, we have evaluated the propensity of viral proteins to comprise AMP or cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs). Capsid proteins from both enveloped and non-enveloped viruses, and membrane and envelope proteins from enveloped viruses, in a total of 272 proteins from 133 viruses, were screened to detect the presence of potential AMP and CPP sequences. A pool of 2444 and 426 CPP and AMP sequences, respectively, were discovered. The capsids of flaviviruses are the best sources of these peptides reaching more than 80% of CPP sequence coverage per protein. Selected sequences were tested experimentally and validated the results. Overall, this study reveals that viruses form a natural multiva-lent biotechnological platform still underexplored in drug discovery and the heterogeneous abundance of CPP/AMP sequences among viral families opens new avenues in viral biology
IntroductionViruses are molecular machines that are present in all sorts of environments and conditions, being the most abundant entity in the biological world (). Traditionally considered as a threat to most living systems, viruses are now seen also as an asset in biotechnological and biomedical research. Taking advantage of their natural properties, such as encapsulation of materials, self-packing, cell internalization by diverse routes and multivalent post-translational and chemical modifications to display surface ligands, viruses are now important tools in the fields of nanoengineering and nanomedicine. For instance, viral-like particles are used for gene delivery and viral capsid nanocapsules to incorporate bioactive compounds (). There is a constant endless quest from the scientific and pharmaceutical communities to find innovative approaches to overcome issues on safety or efficacy of current drugs, such as the increased microbial resistance to conventional antibiotics () or the inability of most therapeutic molecules to reach their cellular targets (). Peptide and protein-based drugs are good drug leads because they can find use as). AMP () and CPP () are typically short cationic peptides, usually 530 amino acid residues long, that are found in a wide diversity of natural sources from microbes to plants and animals (). AMP and CPP sequences may result from the identification of bioactive compounds on natural extracts, in silico analysis of natural proteins, de novo or structure-based design or chimeras of peptide fragments (and Supplementary). Concerning AMP and CPP from natural origin,shows that only a few of them, identified up to now, rely on viral protein sources. Albeit rare, viral-based CPP are more frequent than AMP, which is in agreement with data in the literature (). Interestingly, the first CPP that was discovered was from a viral source; Frankel andfound that the HIV-1 transcription-transactivating protein (Tat) could enter cells and translocate into the nucleus. In addition to Tat, there were CPP found in proteins from other viruses such as herpes simplex (), herpesvirus 8 (), human respiratory syncytial virus (), hepatitis-B (), flock house virus () and alphaviruses (). More recently, our group characterized Dengue virus capsid protein (DENV C) as a supercharged protein (SCP) (), with ability to efficiently deliver nucleic acids into a wide range of cells. Two intrinsic DENV C domains with CPP properties, pepM and pepR, were identified () (Supplementary). Moreover, all Flavivirus capsid proteins revealed to belong to the SCP family suggesting that these proteins contain intrinsic cellpenetrating domains (). Despite being more rare, AMP have also been found in viral proteins. AMP sequences were found in proteins of hepatitis B virus, Bacillus phage SPbeta, Bean golden mosaic virus, Lactococcus phage mv1, Pneumococcus phage Dp-1 and Streptococcus phage Cp-1 (). The rapidly expanding primary data volume on both AMP and CPP raised the need to create systematic databases with their sequences, origin, activity and mode-of-action (Supplementaryshows a summary of the available repositories on AMP and CPP). It is noticeable that the information regarding CPP is confined to CPPsite (), whereas for AMP, several databases exist. A search in CAMP () and CPPsite () databases shows that about 46% and 63% of the known AMP and CPP, respectively, are from natural origin (). From those, only 0.1% of the AMP and 11% of the CPP are from viral source. In this study, we performed a thorough search for the discovery of AMP and CPP in all structural viral proteins available in the Viralzone database () using AMPA () and CellPPD () servers, respectively (Supplementary). An AMP/CPP sequence heat map was thus obtained for each protein. The corresponding AMP and CPP sequences are libraries of potential antibiotic and drug delivery systems drug leads, respectively, to be further explored. As a basic proof-of-principle validation of viral AMP and CPP discovery, we screened DENV C protein for AMP () and CPP () (Supplementary). obtained. Supplementary Section 2 and Viral_proteins.xls provide more details regarding the predicting tools parameters and analysis as well as the viral proteins used in the query. We used DENV C as a model protein to validate the metaanalysis described above. AMPA retrieved the sequence 66-99 as AMP and CellPPD identified the entire sequence of the protein as having CPP properties (Supplementary). The peptide which sequence corresponds to amino acid residues 67100 from DENVC is known as pepR and has been characterized experimentally as an antibiotic () (Supplementary). The whole protein has cell-penetrating ability, which is characteristic of SCP. This ability is maintained by the individual domains of the protein () (Supplementary). In addition, two other proteins with well-characterized AMP and CPP domains were also used to validate the methodology: HIV-Tat and the Human neutrophil Bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (BPI) (Supplementary). HIV-Tat is the template for one of the 'gold standard' CPP: tat (). The protein region comprised by amino acid residues 3772 was targeted by CellPPD and includes the tat sequence (amino acid residues 37-60). AMPA revealed sequences 23-44 and 47-62 as intrinsic AMP motifs, in agreement with experimental data (). AMPA also retrieved the BPI AMP domains, corresponding to the sequences 84101 and 142162, which are included in the 21 kDa N-terminal fragment of rBPI21. This fragment is known for the strong AMP activity (). CellPPD is a SVM tool trained with several proteins including HIV-Tat but not BPI or DENV C. The CPP sequence found in Tat reveals the self-consistency of the method. The retrieval of AMP and CPP validated experimentally in these proteins demonstrates the robustness of the method to identify positive hits. The possibility of false positives in the libraries of new CPP and AMP, however, remained and had to be addressed experimentally. Fourteen CPP sequences and 15 AMP sequences were selected to be tested experimentally for their efficacy. A broad range of conditions (hydrophobicity, amphipathicity and hit scores) were covered (Supplementary Information, Section 4.1, Supplementaryand). Cell penetration in a human cell line and antibacterial activity against two bacterial strains reveal that very few false positives exist for CPP, in contrast with AMP. AMP found range from moderate to extremely potent, but the fraction of false positives is significant. CellPPD retrieved extensive putative CPP regions in C proteins of flaviviruses. AMP profiling, despite less consistent, is still significantly shared over these proteins (and Supplementary). This homogeneity is not surprising because all documented flaviviruses C proteins are SCP (). The same evaluation was carried out for flaviviruses E and M structural proteins (, Supplementary Figs. S6 and S7). These proteins share higher sequence conservation than C proteins (). The search for AMP and CPP sequences within M proteins revealed that these proteins lack AMP sequences and are poor in CPP sequences. As for E proteins, the results show that within the sequences, the region between amino acid residues 100 and 250 has high propensity to be a CPP. This result is consistent with the fact that E proteins are involved in promoting viral-host membrane hemifusion during viral infection ().summarizes the data of the occurrence of intrinsic AMP and/or CPP sequences in each class of structural proteins from flaviviruses. C proteins clearly show high potential as sources for peptide sequences with cell-penetrating properties. Moreover, data inare the families with the biggest relative abundance of CPP or AMP domains. It is important to stress that all families have proteins with a significant extent of CPP domains, ranging from nearly 9% in the envelope proteins of double-stranded RNA to more than 30% in the C proteins of ssRNA(). The data collected allowed identifying 426 and 2444 new viruses-derived AMP and CPP, respectively. The similarity among the new AMP is nil (Supplementary Information, Section 2.3). Although there is mild similarity among new CPP, both libraries are remarkable considering that they are the result of guided rational drug discovery. Viruses encode, package and transport viral nucleic acids. It is, therefore, not surprising that they contain proteins with domains that are membrane active (AMP or CPP). The unusually high charge density of viral C proteins, compatible with its inherent genome binding and delivery functions is the basis for the huge potential these molecules have to include AMP and CPP sequences. Nevertheless, the incidence of CPP on specific protein classes with preferred viral families shows this property fits specific biological functions. Viruses form functional macromolecular assemblies of proteins, genomic data (RNA or DNA) and in some cases lipids, which are geometrically organized and very elegantly built (). These entities self-assemble forming metastable structures, interact with membranes (host and viral), while transporting nucleic acids. Multifunctional proteins confer greater evolutionary fitness to a virus with length-wise restrained genomes, a strategy also shared in some bacteria such as E. coli (). Completely adapted to surpass different chemical and cellular barriers to fulfill its ultimate goal, viruses are in general composed by very few genes (). Thus, viral proteins must be. Fraction of AMP and cell-penetrating domains in structural viral proteins ss, single-stranded; ds, double-stranded; (), positive sense; (), negative sense; RT, reverse transcribing. The percentage of amino acid residues present in CPP (%CPP) or AMP (%AMP) domains was calculated as detailed in Section 2 of Supplementary Information for capsid, envelope and membrane proteins from flaviviruses and viral classes according to the Baltimore classification as cataloged in Viralzone (). Only viruses with characterized structural protein (capsid, envelope and membrane) sequences in UniProt were selected for the analysis. Background colors highlight different intervals:
ConclusionsThe data presented in this study shows that structural viral proteins are rich scaffolds for new AMP and CPP. Moreover, new biological questions are raised regarding the ubiquity of AMP and cellpenetrating properties of viral protein domains, with special incidence in capsid proteins of specific viral families, such as ssDNA, ssRNA(RT) and ssRNA(). Identifying potential AMP sequences from structural viral proteins is a new tool available to biotech-and pharma companies in their quest for new leads of AMP agents. In addition to the amino acid sequences identified directly by the methodologies applied in our study, the possibility of constructing chimeric drug leads makes viral proteins-associated drug discovery and delivery even more appealing. Because of their remarkable properties, the number of peptide-based drugs and drug candidates have been steadily increasing in the past decade (), with more than 100 having reached the market and some already surpassed the global sales threshold of a thousand million US$ (). CPP and AMP are key players in the development of innovative drug delivery systems () and reliable alternatives to conventional antibiotics (Fox, 2013). We have turned a corner from viewing viruses only as hostile enemies to using them as an asset for the discovery of new AMP and CPP leads, a research and development field restlessly seeking for new ideas and formulations. The usage of these natural occurring and evolutionarily optimized viral-encrusted AMP and CPP sequences paves the way for a new source of biotechnological leads, enabling more rational/guided molecular designs, which may impact directly on the advance of biomedical areas such as genetic manipulation. Moreover, chemical grafting of the viral AMP and CPP to nanoparticles and nanotechnologies may be of paramount importance to modulate their properties, combining the best of evolution and truly intelligent design. Nevertheless, it should be stressed that the method by itself does not assure that the newly found CPP will perform better in biomedical applications than existing ones. Regarding AMP, it is remarkable that the method has retrieved an AMP sequence having minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) < 1 mM. This high activity is extremely rare for membrane-targeting AMP (). Finding such an effective AMP is not only astonishing, it also proves that both external and internal membranes in bacteria can be disrupted with similar mechanisms, a controversial but evidence-based hypothesis ().
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Meta-analysis of viral protein repositories for AMP and CPP The study of protein domains is highly relevant in biochemistry and molecular biology. Researchers aim to unravel and catalog the biological function of sequences of amino acid residues. Several repositories have been created to assign, curate and predict the structure and function of protein domains (Bateman et al., 1999; MarchlerBauer et al., 2010; The UniProt Consortium, 2009; Wilkins et al., 1999). These domains vary from regions prone to post-translational modifications (Bateman et al., 1999; Hulo et al., 2008) and catalytic sites in enzymes (Hulo et al., 2008; Wilkins et al., 1999) to sequence signal peptides (Hiller et al., 2004). More specific domains, such as AMP/lytic domains, present in bacterial proteins bacteriocins (de Jong et al., 2010; Hammami et al., 2010), and cell-penetrating protein transduction domains (van den Berg and Dowdy, 2011; Zahid and Robbins, 2012) are also annotated. This article deals with the discovery of AMP and CPP sequences within viral proteins, which revealed to be a rich source for novel drugs. The amino acid residue sequences of the structural proteins of viruses were analyzed to detect the domains with intrinsic propensity to constitute AMP or CPP. The flowchart in Supplementary Figure S1 explains the main steps for AMP/CPP screening in viral proteins. First, the 272 annotated proteins from 133 viruses in ViralZone (Hulo et al., 2011) were classified according to the Baltimore system, which clusters viruses according to their type of genome. Furthermore, the proteins were divided in three different classes: Capsid (C), Envelope (E) and Membrane (M). Each protein sequence was obtained from the UniProt database (The UniProt Consortium, 2009). All the sequences were then submitted to CellPPD (Gautam et al., 2013) for CPP identification and AMPA (Torrent et al., 2012) to predict AMP sequences. A library of 2444 potential new CPP and a library of 426 potential new AMP were Fig. 1. Origin of AMP/CPP sequences present in databases. Top panel Relative frequency of the origin of AMP sequences annotated at the CAMP AMP database (Waghu et al., 2014). Bottom panelRelative frequency of the origin of CPP sequences annotated at the CPPsite (Gautam et al., 2012) (the databases were consulted in January 2014). (Color version of this figure is available at Bioinformatics online.)
J.M.Freire et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
