Motivation: Microbial consortia are frequently defined by numerous interactions within the community that are key to understanding their function. While microbial interactions have been extensively studied experimentally, information regarding them is dispersed in the scientific literature. As manual collation is an infeasible option, automated data processing tools are needed to make this information easily accessible. Results: We present @MInter, an automated information extraction system based on Support Vector Machines to analyze paper abstracts and infer microbial interactions. @MInter was trained and tested on a manually curated gold standard dataset of 735 species interactions and 3917 annotated abstracts, constructed as part of this study. Cross-validation analysis showed that @MInter was able to detect abstracts pertaining to one or more microbial interactions with high specificity (specificity ¼ 95%, AUC ¼ 0.97). Despite challenges in identifying specific microbial interactions in an abstract (interaction level recall ¼ 95%, precision ¼ 25%), @MInter was shown to reduce annota-tor workload 13-fold compared to alternate approaches. Applying @MInter to 175 bacterial species abundant on human skin, we identified a network of 357 literature-reported microbial interactions, demonstrating its utility for the study of microbial communities. Availability and implementation: @MInter is freely available at https://github.com/CSB5/atminter.
IntroductionIn its natural state, microbial life often does not form a homogenous population, but is instead present as heterogeneous communities composed of distinct species i.e. a Microbiome. Microbiomes are virtually ubiquitous amongst telluric environments; soil, banknotes and even macroscopic organisms are all environmental niches that play host to one or more microbial communities (). In recent years, microbial consortia resident in the human body have become a topic of particular interest. The human microbiome is now known to be intricately linked to overall human health (). Microbiome dysfunction has been implicated in a number of disease conditions (), while bacteria in a 'healthy' microbiome are known to act in a mutualistic fashion towards their host (). Despite this, the ecological structure and functional interconnections of the human microbiome are still not well understood (). These gaps in our knowledge can be attributed in part to the fundamental complexity of microbial communities. Microbiota functions as a system of multiple interdependent actors (). The stability and dynamics of this system are thus not the direct result of any one organism but instead emerge from the sum total of the interactions contained within (). Understanding the functional behavior of a microbiome thus requires information on not only the composition of the microbiome, but also how its individual components interact (). Data from large-scale studies of the human microbiome provide an avenue for a data-driven understanding of interactions within a community. These studies typically use high-throughput sequencing to quantify individual abundances within a microbial community. These abundances can then be used by a number of statistical techniques to predict microbial interactions (). However, the general performance of such methods can be difficult to assess in the absence of a 'gold standard' database of experimentally validated interactions. Microbial interactions have long been experimentally investigated. Coculture experiments and growth assays allow for identification of both direction and strength of bacterial interactions (). However, current information describing microbial interactions is spread across a large, constantly increasing set of papers; PubMed alone references upwards of 24 million articles at the time of writing, of which almost two million refer to bacteria. Consolidation of literature curated data into a single gold-standard database would be a valuable resource for refining microbial interaction models. However, the sheer quantity of information makes this an imposing proposition with brute-force manual collation being infeasible. Microbial interactions are not the first field to experience this challenge. The implementation of automated systems for information extraction has been frequently used to mine large datasets such as the unstructured text compendiums of scientific literature. Textmining techniques have shown promising results in biomedical information extraction tasks involving ProteinProtein Interactions (PPIs) (), diseasedrug/drugdrug interactions () and literature annotation () among others. For example, the database preBIND augmented traditional curation methods with a PPI identification system. By pre-filtering of the literature to remove irrelevant data, they achieved an estimated 60% reduction in annotation time (). For microbial interactions,performed the pioneering, and at the time of writing, only automated analysis of the literature surrounding microbial interactions. They analyzed the co-occurrence of bacterial species in the literature through a statistical testing approach, organizing hits into a co-occurrence network. However, other than this study, text-mining has not been applied for the identification of microbial interactions. In particular, the application of machine learning approaches has not been explored and is also not straightforward, as evidence for a microbial interaction can be embedded in a hard to parse fashion in paper abstracts. For example, a paper abstract could describe the production of a specific molecule M by species A in the first part of the abstract, while the second part highlights the reduction in growth of species B in the presence of M, without explicitly stating that A can inhibit the growth of B. While this is a simplified example, in practice, even more complex textual and logical analysis may be needed to mine this information. A more tractable approach may be to use combinations of keywords to first identify abstracts reporting microbial interactions as proposed here. An additional challenge for machine learning approaches is the absence of sufficiently large datasets for model training. Here, we describe @MInter (acronym for Automated Text-mining of Microbial Interactions), a machine-learning-based text-mining system for automated identification and extraction of microbial interaction data. @MInter complements manual annotation and curation through the identification of potentially informative texts, to accelerate the pace of data curation. The @MInter system comprises two core components, a Bioconductor-based crawler for the acquisition of article data and a Support-Vector Machine (SVM)-based classifier for the identification of abstracts containing interaction information. For comparison, we also evaluated the performance of the co-occurrence method devised by Freilich et al., as well as a rudimentary pattern-based classifier available as part of @MInter. @MInter's SVM-based approach was found to classify abstracts containing one or more microbial interactions with a specificity of 95% and notably reduce annotator workload for identifying specific microbial interactions (13-fold compared to competing approaches). In addition, we present a large annotated dataset for microbial interactions consisting of 3917 abstracts (annotated to describe the presence and type of the interaction), as well as a collated set of 735 known species interactions, that can serve as a resource for the development of new interaction mining algorithms. In addition, as a proof-of-concept, @MInter was employed to systematically construct a curated database of interactions between 175 bacterial species commonly found on human skin, highlighting the feasibility of large-scale use and providing a resource for ongoing studies of the human microbiome.
Materials and methods
Creation of a training dataset for @MInter
Acquisition of paper abstractsSupervised classifiers such as the SVM used in the @MInter system require an annotated set for training and testing purposes. To facilitate this, we first created an annotated corpus of PubMed abstracts. To acquire raw abstract data, 1747 query species associated with the human gastrointestinal tract were initially selected as reported in MEDUSA data (). Due to practicality concerns, species with low abundance (mean read count <50) were discarded, resulting in a total of 482 species. Queries following the pattern 'Species_1 AND Species_2' were then derived from all possible species pairs. These were queried against the PubMed database to produce a collection of all papers containing both species names. The PubMed ID, abstract text and title of each paper were retained and organized into their respective interaction pairs for later analysis. Only pairs possessing at least one article were retained. For the initial dataset, information for 11 546 interaction pairs was collected and sampled from.
Construction of a core datasetLactobacillus acidophilus is a probiotic bacterium well known for its antagonistic interactions with multiple other bacteria such as Escherichia coli. As such, the L. acidophilusE. coli query pair was selected as a core dataset for the training of all SVMs. For this dataset, all abstracts pertaining to the pair (n  350) were manually classified as follows (Supplementary File S1):
Construction of an extended datasetTo construct an extended dataset for training and evaluation of classifiers, a subset of 1000 species pairs (735 after excluding ambiguous species names) was randomly sampled from the abstract dataset and annotated on two levels. First, species level annotation considered whether any of the abstracts containing a species pair described a true interaction. To do this, abstracts were manually scanned by a single annotator (L.K.M.K.) for information pertaining to interaction between species pairs in the list. Species pairs where the first 200 abstracts containing both species did not report an interaction were considered to be not interacting (to reduce annotator load). Overall, 62 interacting pairs were identified (out of 735) out of which 56 were inhibitory and only 6 were non-inhibitory (Supplementary File S2). Second, abstract level annotation identified abstracts that describe a true interaction. Here, brute force random sampling from all abstracts produced a heavily unbalanced set (3 positives; 197 negatives) that is not well suited for the training of a supervised classifier. To address this, an SVM trained on the core dataset (see Section 2.2) was applied to abstracts from the species level annotation to identify and enrich for true positives. Putative positives from the core dataset trained SVM were then manually annotated. By comparing to known interaction pairs from the species level annotation, false-negative species pairs reported by the core SVM were identified, i.e. species pairs that are known to be interacting but with no abstracts identified by the SVM. All abstracts for such pairs were further manually annotated. In total, 3917 (350 core, 3567 extended) individual abstracts (241 positives and 3676 negatives) were annotated at this level (Supplementary Files S1 and S3). Thus the abstract level annotation only includes abstracts from interacting species pairs. Because of the use of a SVM classifier to aid the generation of the dataset, it is expected to be biased and distinct from a random sampling of abstracts. However, the exclusion of abstracts from true-negative species pairs from the extended abstract dataset (likely to be easy to classify), and the inclusion of all falsepositive and false-negative abstracts from the core SVM is likely to bias the training dataset to harder test cases for SVM training. Results from annotation of interactions between skin bacteria (see Section 3.4) further support the notion that the training datasets for the SVM were more challenging than real datasets.
Training of the @MInter classifierA SVM is a supervised machine learning model based upon the principle of structural risk minimization (). SVMs are capable of learning patterns from text datasets, and have seen extensive use in a number of data categorization tasks (). @MInter's classifier is based on the SVM module in the skLearn package (). Training was done on the core dataset along with 5-fold cross-validation based on the extended dataset i.e. core dataset and four-fifths of extended dataset were used to train and one-fifth of the extended dataset was used to test. Abstracts were converted to a feature vector (count for each word as a feature) using the inbuilt skLearn vectorizer. Feature vectors were sparse as expected (0.4% non-zero elements), with an average abstract containing 183 words and feature space dimensionality of 25 783. Feature values were weighted using Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF), a heuristic measure of term relevance commonly used in text analysis (). Unlike raw term frequency counts, TF-IDF weighs document term frequencies against its frequency across the entire corpus, downscaling the relevance of frequently occurring terms. The implementation of TF-IDF used in this study is as follows:where tf t; d    f t;d , the frequency of term t in document(s) d and, IDF t; D  lnN=f t;D , with N being the total number of documents in corpus D. A linear kernel was chosen for the SVM. Radial basis function kernels were also evaluated, but did not provide significant performance improvement. The C parameter was kept at default value (C  1; lower misclassification penalty) as optimizing it with a grid search and cross-validation did not result in significant performance improvements and we wished to conserve our limited training set. To account for class imbalance in the dataset, automated class weighting was used (). Note that the SVM classifier in @MInter can only identify abstracts that are likely to report a microbial interaction. This is based on the ability of the SVM to identify combinations of features/terms that are more enriched in abstracts reporting interactions. Once an abstract is identified, all pairs of species reported in it then need to be considered as candidate microbial interactions, as abstracts frequently report multiple interactions.
An alternate pattern-based method in @MInterA simple pattern-based system for interaction identification was implemented to complement and compare with the machine-learning approach used in @MInter. Source data consisted of abstracts from the core dataset, as well as the extended dataset. Permutations of bacterial names, as well as interaction-describing keywords were manually derived from the source data for later use as patterns. Due to the limited number of abstracts containing non-inhibitory interactions in the annotated dataset, keywords were restricted to those suggesting inhibitory interactions. Keywords included words such as 'inhibit', 'bacteriocin' and 'lysed'. To account for inflective variations in individual words, abstracts and keywords were stemmed using the Snowball algorithm (). Derived rules were implemented using patterns of regular expression, where terms were species names from the evaluated bacterial pair, as well as selected keywords. The terms were then joined with the '.*' token (allowing for arbitrary intervening matches) to give the final pattern expressions. A sample pattern, 'Species_1 inhibits Species_2' would thus convert to the regex 'Species_1.*inhibit.*Species_2'. A full list of patterns used can be found in Supplementary File S4.
Reimplementation of a co-occurrence-based approachThe co-occurrence-based approach proposed by, and a straightforward extension, were implemented for comparison with @MInter. Specifically, for each species pair in the extended dataset, three queries were performed on PubMed to compute the number of papers containing each species (species name as query term), and the number containing both species (both species names joined by an 'AND' as query term). A straightforward extension also included the stemmed keywords from a manually curated term set (Supplementary File S4). To compute statistical significance for the number of abstracts for any species pair (or pair and term), a Fisher's exact test was performed with a contingency table containing four categories: abstracts containing solely species A, abstracts containing solely species B, abstracts containing neither species A or B and abstracts containing both A and B. A Bonferroni corrected P-value threshold @Minter: automated text-mining of microbial interactionsof 0.01 was used to identify overrepresented and thus potentially interacting species pairs.
Evaluation metricsDue to the presence of a skewed evaluation dataset (in terms of number of positives and negatives) accuracy-based measures were not used and instead, we report primarily the recall, specificity and precision of the methods, as well as the papers-per-hit (PPH) metric described below. All evaluations were done based on a held out test set in a cross-validation framework using the manually curated extended dataset.
Recall, specificity and precisionGiven a set of classified entries, recall, specificity and precision are defined as follows: Recall  TP=TP  FN Specificity  TN=TN  FP Precision  TP=TP  FP where TP, TN, FP and FN are true positives, true negatives, false positives and false negatives, respectively.
Papers-per-hitIn order to capture the value of the various approaches in reducing annotator effort, we computed PPH as an additional metric. Specifically, PPH is computed as the average number of abstracts reported by a method per true-positive interaction identified. For the co-occurrence-based approaches, all abstracts from false-positive and true-positive interaction pairs were considered as being reported.
Analysis of skin microbiome dataSkin metagenomic profiles from(291 samples in total) were used to infer interacting species based on correlations in abundances (Spearman correlation). In addition, CCREPE () was used to correct for the compositional effect () arising from working with relative abundance profiles. Correlations with P-value less than 0.01 were compared with literature-curated interactions from @MInter analysis (see Section 3.4).
Software@MInter and associated programs were written entirely in the Python 3 programming language. Source code is available at https:// github.com/CSB5/atminter under the MIT license.
Results
@MInter has high specificity at the abstract levelThe performance of @MInter was first evaluated at the level of abstracts (using the abstract level annotation). Cross-validation-based analysis indicated an 'area under curve of receiver operating characteristic' (AUC-ROC) of 0.97 for the SVM method (). At a confidence threshold of 0.5, this provided 82% recall, 95% specificity and 49% precision. In comparison, the alternate 'pattern scanner' approach had lower recall (19%) with similar specificity (96%) and precision (44%). As multiple abstracts can potentially provide information about the same interaction pair, low recall at the abstract level could be compensated for at the species level. However, this may not be the case if recall is too low. Since the primary purpose of @MInter was to serve as a first-pass filter to enrich for abstracts that pertain to microbial interactions, high recall at the species level was set as the primary design goal (see Section 3.2). For applications where higher precision may be required, using a larger confidence value threshold for the SVM classifier might be more appropriate (e.g. threshold of 0.9 provided 72% precision, 16% recall and 99.5% specificity).
@MInter improves performance at the species levelWe next evaluated @MInter's SVM and pattern scanner approach at the species level and compared them to the Fisher's exact test used in Freilich et al. (as well as a modified version with inhibition terms: 'Fisher w/inhibition'). Note that the approaches based on statistical testing cannot be applied at the abstract level. To measure enrichment over random selection, the ratio of recall to proportion of species pairs returned as true positives was computed and plotted for 5-fold cross-validation analysis (). Both the SVM and pattern scanner approaches provided an improvement (>2-fold) over random sampling where the ratio is expected to be 1. The pattern scanner approach was found to have better enrichment due to its high specificity (). In contrast, the approach proposed in Freilich et al. (NaveNave Fisher) provided a more modest improvement that was further boosted by the inclusion of inhibition terms as proposed here. Species-level results for @MInter and other methods are further summarized in. As expected, compared to the abstract level analysis, @MInter's SVM predictions have high recall at 95% (versus 82% at abstract level). This allows sensitive mining of abstracts, albeit at the expense of modest specificity (78%). Overall, @MInter's SVM performance was found to be a notable improvement compared to Freilich et al., even compared to the improved approach using inhibition terms (). The pattern scanner approach on the other hand provided the best specificity (92%) but with low recall (24%). @MInter's species-level precision was found to be low despite being the best across all methods. This is partly because it identifies abstracts containing interactions and reports all pairs of species names in such abstracts. A more refined approach
Impact on annotator workload using @MInterThe primary utility of an information extraction system such as @MInter is the reduction of annotator workload, in this case when identifying microbial interactions from paper abstracts. As scientific abstracts can be complex to parse and often contain specialized vocabulary, it is unlikely that human intervention can be completely eliminated. We used the notion of PPH to measure the utility of various approaches from an annotator's perspective (see Section 2.5.2). Overall, both the SVM and pattern scanner approach in @MInter allow annotators to identify a reported microbial interaction by reading 6 abstracts on average (). This is a significant reduction compared to the statistical approach infold) as well as a navenave approach involving the annotation of all abstracts (AP; 13-fold). Notably, due to lower recall, the statistical approaches place a greater burden on the annotator than even a navenave approach (). The SVM-based approach was chosen as the default option in @MInter, due to its high species level recall (95%) compared to the pattern scanner approach.
Application of @MInter for large-scale annotationTraining of the @MInter SVM classifier was found to be quite efficient taking <5 min overall. Classification of abstracts can then be performed at the rate of >90 abstracts/s. Applying the @MInter SVM classifier to the PubMed database (>25 million abstracts) would, therefore, require slightly more than 3 days on a single compute core. The principal bottleneck for applying @MInter to the PubMed database is thus in the acquisition and storage of abstracts for further processing. To investigate the feasibility of applying @MInter for large-scale annotation, we explored its use for constructing a microbial interaction database focused on skin bacteria. Specifically, we selected a set of 175 bacterial species known to be relatively abundant on human skin (Supplementary File S5) (). The PubMed database was then queried with @MInter for abstracts containing all pairs of species from this list. In total, 29 948 abstracts were obtained of which 3196 were marked as containing interactions by the @MInter SVM. Disjoint subsets of these were than manually annotated by a team of 11 annotators to obtain an interaction network involving >100 species and 357 literature-reported microbial interactions (Supplementary File S6). Reassuringly, observed annotator workload was lower than originally estimated in our test datasets (PPH  3.3). The curated network of interactions between bacteria commonly found on skin (Supplementary File S7; a subset of Supplementary File S6 as abstracts can contain other species interactions as well) highlighted several relevant interactions including the inhibition of Staphylococcus aureus (an important skin pathogen) by several Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium species (known probiotics;). Interestingly, multiple Streptococcus species were also observed to exert inhibitory influence over S. aureus. To evaluate overlap with in vivo data, correlation analysis was used to identify bacterial interactions from skin microbiome data (see Section 2. 6). From the significant edge overlap between the two networks (Fisher's exact test P-value  0.00038), we obtained a high confidence sub-network that combines in vivo as well as in vitro evidence, and describes interactions involving two important skin pathogens (S. aureus and Propionibacterium acnes) (). Furthermore, the network provides information on the directionality of interactions (manually curated from abstracts) enabling the modeling of this core interaction network.
Discussion and conclusionInteractions reported in the scientific literature are likely to have a culturability and 'interest' bias. In addition, this information can be sparse as most interactions have likely not been tested or have been tested under limited in vitro conditions. On the other hand, approaches that look for correlations in microbiome sequencing profiles are expected to be less biased and provide an in vivo perspective (). Such predictive methods can,The 'All Positives' approach reports all considered species pairs as being interacting ones and is provided here as a control method for comparison. Bold entries represent highest scores for each column.@Minter: automated text-mining of microbial interactionshowever, be influenced by many sources of noise (sparse profiles, transitive interactions, etc.) that reduce their specificity and sensitivity. Collections of in vitro validated interactions curated from the literature can thus play a complementary role, facilitating the evaluation of interaction prediction algorithms and enabling a better understanding of microbial interaction networks. The concept of microbial interactions is complex as it is context dependent and not restricted to two entities. The analysis in this manuscript was restricted to binary interactions, and interactions were collated at the species level as this is typically the taxonomic level for descriptions in abstracts. The text mining approach used in @MInter is however agnostic to the taxonomic level of analysis or mode of interaction and with appropriate training could be used to e.g. mine ternary interactions at the strain level. @MInter improves significantly over existing approaches for text-mining of microbial interactions and it enables the large scale curation of interaction information. However, @MInter does not identify the mode/directionality of interactions or eliminate the need for manual curation. While further work in developing methods with higher precision (potentially by analyzing full manuscripts) could reduce manual effort, based on our own experience with the complexity of information in abstracts, we believe that it is unlikely that human input can be eliminated completely. We hope that the availability of curated datasets generated and used here would enable the further development of supervised machine learning approaches for this problem.The network was obtained based on overlap between literature-curated interactions (generally in vitro;) and correlation analysis based on in vivo skin microbiome data
K.M.K.Lim et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
