The interaction between genetic factors and environmental factors has critical roles in determining the phenotype of an organism. In recent years, a number of studies have reported that the dysfunctions on microRNA (miRNAs), environmental factors and their interactions have strong effects on phenotypes and even may result in abnormal phenotypes and diseases, whereas there has been no a database linking miRNAs, environmental factors and phenotypes. Such a resource platform is believed to be of great value in the understanding of miRNAs, environmental factors, especially drugs and diseases. In this study, we constructed the miREnvironment database, which contains a comprehensive collection and curation of experimentally supported interactions among miRNAs, environmental factors and phenotypes. The names of miRNAs, phenotypes, environmental factors, conditions of environmental factors, samples, species, evidence and references were further annotated. miREnvironment represents a biomedical resource for researches on miRNAs, environmental factors and diseases.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. of miRNAs are thus associated with various diseases (Lu, 2008). Like other genetic factors, it has been reported in recent years that miRNAs also have complex interactions with a wide spectrum of experimental factors including stress (Gidron et al., 2010), drugs (Lima et al., 2011), virus (Lin and Flemington, 2011), alcohol (Ladeiro et al., 2008), cigarette (Izzotti et al., 2010), air pollution (Jardim, 2011), radiation (Niemoeller et al., 2011), diet (Alisi et al., 2011) etc. These interactions have crucial roles in many phenotypes including diseases. The studies on experimental factor and miRNA associations are becoming increasingly important in biomedical sciences. Therefore, a database linking miRNAs, experimental factors and phenotypes becomes emergently needed but is still not available. To meet such need, we searched the PubMed database for literature that matched this study by the union of two keyword sets. One keyword set is 'miR or miRNA or microRNA', which ensures that literature about miRNA study is retrieved. The other keyword set contains a list of experimental factors (Supplementary File S1). We further manually curated miRNAs and environmental factors that have associations. The researchers read the original references and manually summarized the data. The condition of environmental factors, treated samples, species, the details of associations and the reference PubMed ID are also manually retrieved. The data are further manually standardized and annotated. Items (i.e. miRNA genes) that cannot be standardized or annotated are represented by 'n/a'. Furthermore, different researchers double checked the data including miRNAs environmental factors, conditions of environmental factors, phenotypes, evidences describing the relationships among miRNAs, environmental factors and phenotypes, and references. Based on above data, we constructed the miREnvironment database. As a result, miREnvironment integrated >2500 entries including 800 miRNAs, 260 experimental factors, 180 phenotypes, 17 species from 370 publications. Human, mouse and rat are the top three species that have the greatest numbers of entries. They represent 98% of the total entries (Fig. 1A). We also list the statistical details for data of human, mouse and rat (Fig. 1B). The database also provides hyperlinks to the original references in NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) for each entry. All data were organized in the 'miREnvironment' database using SQLite, a lightweight database management system. The website is presented using Django, a Python web framework and is available at http://cmbi.bjmu.edu.cn/miren. miREnvironment contains pages for browsing, searching, submitting and downloading.  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
