Motivation: Identification of microRNA regulatory modules (MiRMs) will aid deciphering aberrant transcriptional regulatory network in cancer but is computationally challenging. Existing methods are sto-chastic or require a fixed number of regulatory modules. Results: We propose Mirsynergy, an efficient deterministic overlapping clustering algorithm adapted from a recently developed framework. Mirsynergy operates in two stages: it first forms MiRMs based on co-occurring microRNA (miRNA) targets and then expands each MiRM by greedily including (excluding) mRNAs into (from) the MiRM to maximize the synergy score, which is a function of miRNA–mRNA and gene–gene interactions. Using expression data for ovarian, breast and thyroid cancer from The Cancer Genome Atlas, we compared Mirsynergy with internal controls and existing methods. Mirsynergy-MiRMs exhibit significantly higher functional enrichment and more coherent miRNA–mRNA expression anti-correlation. Based on Kaplan–Meier survival analysis, we proposed several prognostically promising MiRMs and envisioned their utility in cancer research. Availability and implementation: Mirsynergy is implemented/ available as an R/Bioconductor package at www.cs.utoronto.ca/ $yueli/Mirsynergy.html Contact:
INTRODUCTIONMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are $22 nt small non-coding RNA that base pair with mRNAs primarily at the 3 0 untranslated region (UTR) to cause mRNA degradation or translational repression (). Aberrant miRNA expression is implicated in tumourigenesis (). Based on miRBase (release 20) (), the human genome encodes 1872 (2578) precursor (mature) miRNAs, which potentially target majority of the human genes (). Although targets of individual miRNAs are significantly enriched for certain biological processes (), it is also likely that multiple miRNAs are coordinated together to synergistically regulate one or more pathways (). Despite their limited number, miRNAs may be in charge of more evolutionarily robust and potent regulatory effects through coordinated collective actions. The hypothesis of miRNA synergism is also parsimonious or biologically plausible because the number of possible combinations of the 2578 human miRNAs is extremely large to potentially react to virtually countless environmental changes. Intuitively, if a group of (miRNA) workers perform similar tasks together, then removing a single worker will not be as detrimental as assigning each worker a unique task (). Several related methods have been developed to study miRNA synergism. Some early methods were based on pairwise overlaps () or score-specific correlation () between predicted target sites of any given two (co-expressed) miRNAs. For instance,devised an overlapping scoring scheme to account for differential 3 0 UTR lengths of the miRNA targets, which may otherwise bias the results if standard hypergeometric test was used. Methods beyond pairwise overlaps have also been described. These methods consider not only the sequence-based miRNA-target site information but also the respective miRNAmRNA expression correlation (MiMEC) across various conditions to detect miRNA regulatory modules (MiRMs). Briefly,developed a probabilistic search procedure to separately sample from the mRNA and miRNA pools candidate module members with probabilities proportional to their overall frequency of being chosen as the 'fittest', which is determined by their target sites and MiMEC relative to the counterparts. The algorithm finds only a single best MiRM, which varies depending on the initial mRNA and miRNA set.used a maximal bi-clique enumeration (MBE) technique to discover complete bipartite subgraphs, where every miRNA is connected with every mRNA. The approach operates on unweighted edges only, which requires discretizing MiMEC. Moreover, maximal bi-clique does not necessarily imply functional MiRMs and vice versa. Le anddeveloped GroupMiR to form MiRMs by assigning each miRNA or mRNA (m/miRNA) one or more memberships *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors. based on a non-parametric Bayesian prior called Indian Buffet Process. Although GroupMiR is statistically sound, it has time complexity cubic to the number of observations and converges slow on large datasets (). More recently,described a framework of sparse network-regularized multiple non-negative matrix factorization (SNMNMF) to identify miRNAmRNA modules based on the factorized coefficient matrices. Importantly, SNMNMF uses not only the expression and target-site information but also the genegene interaction (GGI) derived from proteinprotein interaction (PPI) and transcription factor binding sites (TFBS). To define the reduced dimensionality of the factorized matrices, however, the SNMNMF approach requires a predefined number of modules, which may be data-dependent and difficult to determine beforehand. Additionally, the solution to NMF is often not unique, and the identified modules do not necessarily include both miRNAs and mRNAs, which makes reproducing and interpreting the results difficult. Similarly, the regression-based model called PIMiM (Protein Interaction-based MicroRNA Modules) developed by Le and Bar-Joseph (2013) also requires a fixed number of unique memberships, and the non-convexity of the algorithm leads to different outcomes with random initializations. Additionally, both algorithms incur a time complexity quadratic to both the number of miRNA and mRNA multiplied by the (squared) total number of modules per iteration. We herein hypothesize that an intuitively simple and efficient deterministic framework may serve as an attractive alternative. In this article, we propose a novel model called Mirsynergy that integrates m/miRNA expression profiles, target site information and GGI to form MiRMs, where an m/miRNA may participate in multiple MiRMs, and the module number is systematically determined given the predefined model parameters. The clustering algorithm of Mirsynergy adapts from ClusterONE (), which was intended to identify protein complex from PPI data. The ultimate goal here, however, is to construct a priori the MiRMs and exploit them to better explain clinical outcomes such as patient survival rate. We apply Mirsynergy to ovarian (OV), breast (BRCA) and thyroid cancer (THCA) datasets from TCGA (Cancer Genome Atlas Research). Comparing with alternative formalisms, we find that the Mirsynergy-based modules are more functionally enriched and exhibit more negative MiMEC. Through Kaplan Meier (KM) survival analysis, we propose several prognostically promising cancer-specific MiRMs as biomarkers.
METHODS
Mirsynergy model overviewWe formulate the construction of synergistic MiRMs as an overlapping clustering problem with two main stages.depicts our model schema. Before the two clustering stages, we first inferred miRNA mRNA interaction weights (MMIW) (W) using m/miRNA expression data and target site information (Section 2.2). At stage 1, we only cluster miRNAs to greedily maximize miRNAmiRNA synergy, which is proportional to the correlation between miRNAs in terms of their MMIW (See Section 2.2). At stage 2, we fix the MiRM assignments and greedily add (remove) genes to (from) each MiRM to maximize the synergy score, which is defined as a function of the MMIW matrix and the genegene interaction weight (GGIW) matrix (H). The underlying clustering algorithm at both stages (Section 2.3) adapts from ClusterONE, which was originally developed for PPI network ().
Evaluation of expression-based prediction modelsTo compute MMIW as the edge-weight matrix for downstream clustering, we first evaluated four prominent expression-based miRNA target prediction algorithms, namely Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) (), GenMiR++ () and two formulations of LASSO (). Specifically, PCC between each pair of m/miRNA across T samples was computed using R built-in function cor. Targets with negative correlation were ranked at the top. GenMiR++ was ran in Matlab with default setting using as input the binary target site matrix and the expression profiles. We implemented two versions of LASSO both using glmnet with = 1 except that the best was chosen using cross-validation function cv.glmnet (). For the first LASSO, we used expression of miRNAs k 2 f1;. .. ; Mg that have non-zero target sites to model the correspondinginformation, we first derive an expression-based MMIW matrix W using L1-norm regularized linear regression model (i.e. LASSO). We then compute miRNAmiRNA synergistic scores S based on the MMIW matrix, which is subsequently provided as input to form miRNA clusters V 0 at Stage 1 by an overlapping neighbourhood expansion clustering algorithm. Next, we fix the MiRM assignments V 0 and greedily add (remove) mRNA to (from) each module that maximizes the synergy score, where the edge weights are defined by the MMIW matrix and GGIW matrix involving known TFBS and PPI. The end results are overlapping clustering assignments of m/miRNAs (i.e., MiRMs) mRNA expression i 2 f1. .. ; Ng across samples t 2 f1. . .The rationale behind LASSO_RISC is that Ago2 is the only protein component known to catalyse target mRNA degradation whereas the non-catalytic Ago 1,3,4 proteins may compete with Ago2 to bind to miRNAs; thus, the expression changes in the Ago 1, 3, 4 proteins will affect the ability of Ago2 to bind to miRNAs (). For LASSO and LASSO_RISC, interactions associated with negative linear coefficients w i,k (i.e. MMIW) were ranked at the top as the candidate interactions. Because of the scarcity of the validated miRNA targets, conventional power analysis such as ROC (receiver operating characteristic) cannot distinguish the method performances. Instead, we assessed each method by the number of validated interactions they identified among their top ranked 10005000 targets (1000-interval) based on miRTarBase (). Among the four methods, LASSO achieved the best overall performance on our test data (Supplementary). Accordingly, we adopted the linear coefficient matrix w i;k 2 W from LASSO as the N  M MMIW matrix and set all of its positive coefficients to zero, assuming only negative miRNA regulation.
Two-stage clusteringLet W denote the expression-based N  M MMIW matrix obtained from LASSO, determined as the best performing target prediction model in Section 2.2, where w i,k is the scoring weight for miRNA k targeting mRNA i. Similar to the 'Meet/Min' score defined byfor binary interactions of co-occurring targets of miRNA pairs, we define an M  M scoring matrix denoted as S, indicating miRNAmiRNA synergistic scores between miRNA j and k (j 6  k):AlgorithmsV t [ j 0 , where w j 0 ;k 6  0 for k 2 V t l Choose the best miRNA in the cluster to remove 9: j arg max j2Vt sV t n j l Grow, contract, or do nothing, whichever produces the highest synergy 10: if sV t
Method comparisonsTo compare the performance of Mirsynergy, we applied SNMNMF () to the same testing data. SNMNMF is one of the most cited works in the recent literature and has been shown to outperform the MBE approach introduced earlier by. SNMNMF was implemented in Matlab with source code available. As suggested by the authors, we set the required module number to 50 and used the default settings throughout the tests. Additionally, we also compared our results (using the same test dataset) with the published results from another recent algorithm called PIMiM developed by Le and BarJoseph (2013), which was shown to outperform SNMNMF, but the software is not publicly available.
Functional enrichment comparisonWe examined whether the target genes in each MiRM are involved in biologically meaningful Gene Ontology (GO) or pathways via functional enrichment analysis. Specifically, GO terms in biological processes (BPs) (GO-BPs) were downloaded using getBM function from R package biomaRt, where GO terms with fewer than five genes or with evidence codes equal to Electronic Annotation, Non-traceable Author Statement or No biological Data available were discarded, giving 2007 GO-BP terms and 10 315 unique genes. The canonical pathways were downloaded from MSigDB (c2.cp.v4.0.symbols.gmt) (). The list of Ensembl gene IDs for each MiRM was then subjected to hypergeometric enrichment test for each GO-BP term or pathways using R built-in function phyper. The P-values were corrected for multiple testing by R function p.adjust to produce false discovery rates (FDR).
Data collection and pre-processingFor the first test dataset, we obtained the same ovarian cancer dataset processed by the SNMNMF authors (). The expression data from this dataset were originally downloaded from TCGA along with the target site information from MicroCosm (v5) and GGI from TRANSFAC (). The expression dataset contains 385 samples, each measuring 559 miRNAs and 12 456 mRNAs. For the second and third test datasets, we downloaded the expression data for BRCA and THCA from TCGA data portal. The BRCA and THCA data contain 331 and 543 samples, respectively, each measuring 710 miRNAs and 13 306 mRNAs. For both datasets, processed (level 3) RNA-seq(V2) and miRNA-seq data were used, which record the RPKM (read per kilobase of exon per million mapped reads) values for mRNAs and RPM (reads per million miRNAs mapped) for miRNAs. The data were further log2-transformed and mean-centred. Clinical information for OV, BRCA and THCA were also collected from TCGA. For the BRCA and THCA, we used target site information from TargetScanHuman 6.2 database (). For each mRNAmiRNA pair that have measured expression in TCGA data, we extracted the corresponding conserved target sites. For multiple transcripts of the same gene, we used transcripts with the longest 3 0 UTR. GGI data matrix H including TFBS and PPI data were processed from TRANSFAC () and BioGrid () databases, respectively. Cancer-related miRNAs as oncomirs or tumour suppressors (i.e. miRNAs highly or lowly expressed in cancers) were downloaded fromTables 1 and 2, where 97 oncomirs have measured expression in the TCGA data.
RESULTS
Comparison of module sizes and connectivitiesMirsynergy identified 84, 53, 50 MiRMs in OV, BRCA and THCA datasets, respectively (, Supplementary). Intriguingly, the overall synergy landscapes are distinct for each cancer type at both clustering stages (Supplementary). Comparing with the MiRMs from SNMNMF, however, the modules identified by Mirsynergy are clearly more densely connected within and between MiRMs (, Supplementary Figs S4, S5), which are comparable with the module density associated with PIMiM-MiRMs (on the same OV dataset) () and perhaps more consistent with the intricacy of the underlying biological network. Moreover, Mirsynergy identified more modules (84, 53, 50) than SNMNMF did (49, 39, 39) for OV, BRCA and THCA, respectively (). Notably, although we set K = 50 for SNMNMF, some modules were empty and thus discarded by the algorithm. For OV, BRCA and THCA datasets, the respective averaged number of miRNAs (genes) per module are 4.76, 5.77, 7.60 (7.57, 24.15, 32.26) for) for SNMNMF (). For the BRCA and THCA datasets, 8/ 39 modules from SNMNMF have only one miRNA (i.e. 'starshape' basic network structure) and 20/39 modules have less than three miRNAs. In contrast, all of the modules from Mirsynergy have more than one miRNA, and most modules have at least three miRNAs (Supplementary). Moreover, the maximum number of miRNAs in a single Mirsynergy-MiRM are 12, 20 and 19 for OV, BRCA and THCA, respectively. In contrast, PIMiM obtained at maximum eight miRNAs per module for the OV dataset, and the highest miRNA counts for the SNMNMF modules are 9, 5 and 7 for OV, BRCA and THCA, respectively. Notably, there are considerably fewer genes in the Mirsynergy-MiRMs than in modules identified by SNMNMF and PIMiM. This perhaps implies that each MiRM identified by Mirsynergy is responsible for a more specific biological process or pathway, which is supported by the functional enrichment analysis described below. Thus, Mirsynergy predictions are in better agreement with the notion of miRNA synergistic regulation, where a relatively large number of miRNAs can engage in regulating a specialized cohort of interconnected genes.
Evaluating MiRMs by functional enrichmentsAs an internal control, we first compared whether the nodes included in each MiRM (i.e. internal nodes) tend to be more functionally enriched than the boundary nodes, which have non-zero connections to the internal nodes but were either disregarded or removed from the modules during the neighbourhood expansion. As illustrated in(Supplementary), the number of significant GO-BP terms at FDR50.05 (upper panel) and the total enrichment scores across all terms (lower panel) are significantly higher (P51e-3; one-sided Wilcoxon signed rank test) for the internal nodes comparing with boundary nodes. Interestingly, we also observed modestly positive Pearson correlations ( OV = 0.14; BRCA = 0.28; THCA = 0.39) between the synergy and enrichment scores (Supplementary), further supporting the biological function of the identified modules. To compare functional enrichments of the predicted modules from Mirsynergy and SNMNMF, we counted as a function of enrichment score the number of significant modules having at least one significant canonical pathways (CPs) or GO-BPs and the total number of significant CPs or GO-BPs across all modules. As depicted in(Supplementary), comparing with SNMNMF, Mirsynergy produced significantly higher number of functionally meaningful MiRMs (upper panel) (P50.00781, 0.00707, respectively; one-sided Wilcoxon signed rank test), which together contribute significantly higher number of distinct CPs or GO-BPs (P50.00781, 0.00195, respectively). Moreover, Mirsynergy also compares favourably with PIMiM, which used the same ovarian dataset, target site information and GGI data based on the published results from Le and Bar-Joseph (2013) (). Notably, the averaged enrichment scores over all of the Mirsynergy-MiRMs are also higher than the scores from SNMNMF in all three test datasets (). Examining enriched GO terms exclusive to MirsynergyMiRMs (Supplementary) revealed several interesting cancer-related processes, e.g. 'DNA damage response, signal transduction by p53 class mediator' (GO:0030330; FDR50.016; OV-MiRM-4), which involves oncogene BCL3 () and OV-related oncomir miR-20a (); 'ovarian follicle development'(GO:0001541; FDR50.022; OV-MiRM-58), involving an OVrelated oncomir miR-221; and 'negative regulation of epithelial to mesenchymal transition' (GO:0010719; FDR50.037; BRCAMiRM-1; also see Supplementary), which is known to be associated with breast cancer (). It is also interesting to note that the miR-30 family members hsa-miR-30a (chr6: 72113254-324) and miR-30e (chr1: 41220027-118) () were both identified by Mirsynergy to be involved in BRCA-MiRM-1. Moreover, miR-30 has been predicted to regulate a number of breast cancer-associated genes in patients, who are non-carriers of BRCA1/2 mutations, lending the possibility that familial breast cancer may be caused by variation in these miRNAs (). Additionally, module 11 and 23 from THCA data are respectively enriched for 'thymus development' (GO:0048538; FDR50.012; Supplementary Figs S10, S11) and 'positive regulation of natural killer cell mediated cytotoxicity directed against tumour cell target' (GO:0002860; FDR50.00012), both of which are exclusive to MirsynergyMiRMs. Moreover, module 11 and 23 involve THCA-related oncomirs miR-17 and 197, respectively (Supplementary) ().
Co-expression within MiRMsWe next examined the MiMEC involved in each predicted MiRM from Mirsynergy comparing with the boundary nodes (i.e. neighbour nodes of each MiRM) as the internal control and MiRMs identified by SNMNMF. Because miRNAs are known to repress mRNAs, the negativity of MiMEC is a reasonable indicator of the MiRM quality. In particular, we used OV, BRCA and THCA expression data from TCGA to compute for each module (or control) the averaged pairwise MiMEC. We then compared the cumulative density functions of the MiMEC from each method. We first compared the MiMEC between internal nodes (m/miRNAs within the modules) and boundary nodes (neighbour m/miRNAs with non-zero connection to the internal nodes) from each Mirsynergy-MiRMs. Indeed, miRNAs involved in the MiRMs exhibit significantly more negative correlation with the included mRNA targets for all three datasets (left panels) [P59.81e-10, 3.35e-12, 0 for OV, BRCA, THCA, respectively; one-sided KolmogorovSmirnov (KS) test]. More impressively, Mirsynergy-MiRMs exhibit significantly higher MiMEC than SNMNMF-MiRMs (P55.35e-12, 0.0041, 0.013 for OV, BRCA and THCA, respectively) (right panels). As summarized in, the MiMEC averaged over all of the Mirsynergy modules (0.08, 0.08) are also twice as more negative as those of SNMNMF (0.04, 0.04) for BRCA and THCA, and almost four folds more negative than the published result from PIMiM () on the same OV dataset.and THCA, respectively (Supplementary). For each module, we divided the samples into two groups based on the lower and higher MiRM-averaged miRNA expression levels than the sample means. We then used KM method using R package survival to compare the survival characteristics of the two groups, with significance determined by the log-rank test. The resulting P-values were then corrected for multiple testing using the BenjaminiHochberg method over all of the MiRMs (). As a result, we found four, one and three MiRMs with FDR50.1 for OV, BRCA and THCA datasets, respectively (Supplementary). In contrast, when testing using individual miRNA expression profiles alone, none of the miRNAs survived the multiple testing correction, highlighting the statistical power gained by our network approach. For BRCA, oncomir miR-100 is involved in the potential prognostic module 31. For THCA, we found oncomirs miR29a (MiRM-8), miR-215 (MiRM-40) and miR-23a/191 (MiRM-45).illustrates the KM survival curves for modules 62 and 44 in ovarian cancer and the visualization of the two clusters generated from Cytoscape (). Notably, OV-MiRM-62 involves three oncogenes, namely BUB1B, CDKN2A, MYST4 (), and an oncomir miR-125a-3p (). Moreover, the two modules share a common miRNA miR-768-3p. Intriguingly,showed that downregulation miR-768-3p is associated with MEK/ERK-mediated enhancement of protein synthesis in melanoma cells. Here we provided to our knowledge the first evidence of the potential prognostic value of miR-768-3p in the ovarian cancer network.
KM survival analyses of MiRMs
DISCUSSIONRecent works on miRNA dysregulation prove useful in cancer research (). To identify condition-specific networks, however, most existing methods exploited only the curated pathways or GO terms. Methods for de novo network reconstruction in some recent literatures operate only on interactions involving differentially expressed genes (DEG) or differentially expressed miRNA () because the corresponding solutions quickly become intractable with increasing number of m/miRNAs. However, the DEG/M-driven approaches cannot capture subnetworks with accumulative changes of m/miRNA that have been filtered out either by individual hypothesis testings or by multiple testing corrections. In this article, we introduce Mirsynergy as a reasonable alternative approach. Notably, standard clustering methods such as k-means or hierarchical clustering are not suitable for constructing MiRMs, as these methods assign each data point to a unique B Awere plotted as a CDF for internal nodes/Mirsynergy (solid) and boundary nodes/SNMNMF outputs (dash). We observe a significantly more negative MiMEC distribution for the internal nodes or Mirsynergy-MiRMs, as their curves are clearly located on the left of the curves from the counterparts. P-values were computed by one-sided KS test cluster. A recently developed greedy-based clustering method ClusterONE is more realistic because it allows overlap between clusters (). However, ClusterONE was developed with physical PPI in mind. Mirsynergy extends from ClusterONE to detecting MiRMs. The novelty of our approach resides in a two-stage clustering strategy with each stage maximizing a synergy score as a function of either the miRNAmiRNA synergistic co-regulation or miRNAmRNA/gene gene interactions. Several methods have incorporated GGI as PPI/TFBS in predicting MiRMs (), which proved to be a more accurate approach than using miRNA-mRNA alone. Comparing with recent methods such as SNMNMF () and PIMiM (Le and), however, an advantage of our deterministic formalism is the automatic determination of module number (given the predefined thresholds to merge and filter low quality clusters) and efficient computation with theoretical bound reduced from O(K(T + N + M) 2 ) per iteration to only O(M(N + M)) for N (M) mRNAs (miRNAs) across T samples. Because N is usually much larger than M and T, our algorithm runs orders of faster. Based on our tests on a linux server, Mirsynergy took about 2 h including the run time for LASSO to compute OV (N = 12 456; M = 559; T = 385), BRCA or THCA (N = 13 306; M = 710; T = 331 or 543, respectively), whereas SNMNMF took more than a day for each dataset. More importantly, Mirsynergy-MiRMs are significantly more functionally enriched, coherently expressed and thus more likely to be biologically functional. The success of our model is likely attributable to its ability to explicitly leverage two types of information at each clustering stage: (i) the miRNAmiRNA synergism based on the correlation of the inferred miRNA target score profiles from MMIW matrix; (ii) the combinatorial miRNA regulatory effects on existing genetic network, implicated in the combined MMIW and GGIW matrices. We also explored other model formulations such as clustering m/miRNAs in a single clustering stage or using different MMIW matrices other than the one produced from LASSO, which tends to produce MiRMs each containing only one or a few miRNAs or several large low-quality MiRMs, which were then filtered out by the density threshold in either clustering stage. Notably, an MiRM containing only a single miRNA can be directly derived from the MMIW without any clustering approach. Moreover, Mirsynergy considers only neighbour nodes with non-zero edges. Thus, our model works the best on a sparse MMIW matrix such as the outputs from LASSO, which is the best performing expression-based methods based on our comparison with other alternatives. Nonetheless, the performance of Mirsynergy is sensitive to the quality of MMIW and GGIW. In this regard, other MMIW or GGIW matrices (generated from improved methods) can be easily incorporated into Mirsynergy as the function parameters by the users of the Bioconductor package (please refer to the package vignette for more details). In conclusion, with large amount of m/miRNA expression data becoming available, we believe that Mirsynergy will serve as a powerful tool for analysing condition-specific miRNA regulatory networks.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Y.Li et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Notably, if W were a binary matrix, Equation 1 became the ratio of number of targets shared between miRNA j and k over the minimum number of targets possessed by j or k, which is essentially the original 'Meet/Min' score. Similar to the cohesiveness defined by Nepusz et al. (2012), we define synergy score s(V c ) for any given MiRM V c as follows. Let w in V c  denote the total weights of the internal edges within the miRNA cluster, w bound V c  the total weights of the boundary edges connecting the miRNAs within V c to the miRNAs outside V c , and (V c ) the penalty scores for forming cluster V c. The synergy of V c (i.e. the objective function) is as follows: sV c = w in V c  w in V c +w bound V c +V c  2 where (V c ) reflects our limited knowledge on potential unknown targets of the added miRNAs as well as the false-positive targets within the cluster. Presumably, these unknown factors will affect our decision on whether miRNA k belong to cluster V c. For instance, miRNAs may target non-coding RNAs and seedless targets, which are the mRNAs with no perfect seed-match (Helwak et al., 2013). We currently consider only mRNA targets with seed-match to minimize the number of falsepositive results. By default, we set V c =2jV c j, where jV c j is the cardinality of V c. Additionally, we define two scoring functions to assess the overlap !V c ; V c 0  between V c and V c 0 for c 6  c 0 and the density d 1 (V c ) of any given V c : !V c ; V c 0 = jV c \ V c 0 j 2 jV c jjV c 0 j 3 d 1 V c = 2w in V c  mm  1 4 where jV c \ V c 0 j is the total number of common elements in V c and V c 0 , and m is the number of miRNAs in V c. The general solution for solving an overlapping clustering problem is Non-deterministic Polynomial-time hard (NP-hard) (Barth elemy and Brucker, 2001). Thus, we adapt a greedy-based approach (Nepusz et al., 2012). The algorithm can be divided into two major steps. In step 1, we select as an initial seed miRNA k with the highest total weights. We then grow an MiRM V t from seed k by iteratively including boundary or excluding internal miRNAs to maximize the synergy s(V t ) (Equation 2) until no more node can be added or removed to improve s(V t ). We then pick another miRNA that has neither been considered as seed nor included in any previously expanded V t to form V t+1. The entire process terminates when all of the miRNAs are considered. In step 2, we treat the clusters as a graph with V c as nodes and !V c ; V c 0  ! as edges. Here is a free parameter. Empirically, we observed that most MiRMs are quite distinct from one another in terms of !V c ; V c 0  (before the merging) (Supplementary Fig. S2A). Accordingly, we set to 0.8 to ensure merging only similar MiRMs, which avoids producing large MiRMs (when is too small). We then perform a breath-first search to find all of the weakly connected components (CC), each containing clusters that can reach directly/indirectly to one another within the CC. We merge all of the clusters in the same CC and update the synergy score accordingly. Algorithm 1 outlines the pseudocode. After forming MiRMs at stage 1, we perform a similar clustering procedure as in Algorithm 1 by adding (removing) only the mRNAs to (from) each MiRM. Different from stage 1, however, we grow each existing MiRM separately with no prioritized seed selection or cluster merging, which allows us to implement a parallel computation by taking advantage of the multicore processors in the modern computers. In growing/contracting each MiRM, we maximize the same synergy function (Equation 2) but changing the edge weight matrix from S to a (N + M)  (N + M) matrix by combining W (the N  M MMIW matrix) and H (the N  N GGIW matrix). Notably, here we assume miRNAmiRNA edges to be zero. Additionally, we do not add/remove miRNAs to/from the MiRM at each greedy step. Finally, we define a new density function because of the connectivity change at stage 2: d 2 V c = w in V c  nm+n  1 5 where n (m) are the number of mRNAs (miRNAs) in V c. By default, we filter out MiRMs with d 1 V i 51e2 and d 2 V j 55e3 at stage 1 and 2, respectively. Both density thresholds were chosen based on our empirical analyses (Supplementary Fig. S2). For some datasets, in particular, we found that our greedy approach tends to produce a large cluster involving several hundred miRNAs or several thousand mRNAs at Stage 1 or 2, respectively, which are unlikely to be biologically meaningful. Despite the ever increasing synergy (by definition), however, the anomaly modules all have low density scores, which allows us to filter them out using the above chosen thresholds. The time complexity of the algorithm is O(M(N + M)): stage 1 takes O(M 2 ) in the worst case scenario by checking every miRNA in forming an MiRM using every miRNA as a seed; given that the maximum number of MiRMs is M, stage 2 takes O(NM). In our actual implementation, the total weights of each node is pre-computed so that the synergy update is O(1). Moreover, we maintain a sorted list using numbers to represent m/miRNA nodes for efficient binary search of neighbour or removable nodes.
Mirsynergy at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
