MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate various biological functions by binding hundreds of transcripts to impart post-transcriptional repression. Recently, by applying a transcriptome-wide experimental method for identifying miRNA target sites (Ago HITS-CLIP), a novel non-canonical target site, named 'nucleation bulge', was discovered as widespread, functional and evolutionally conserved. Although such non-canonical nucleation bulges have been proven to be predictive by using 'pivot pairing rule' and sequence conservation, this approach has not been applied yet. To facilitate the functional studies of non-canonical miRNA targets, we implement miRTCat: a comprehensive searchable map of miRNA target sites, including non-canonical nucle-ation bulges, not only mapped in experimentally verified miRNA-bound regions but also predicted in all 3 0-untranslated regions (3 0-UTRs) derived from human and mouse ($15.6% as expected false-positive results).
INTRODUCTIONMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small RNA molecules ($22 nt) that induce post-transcriptional repression of messenger RNAs (mRNAs), affecting various biological phenotypes (). Animal miRNAs typically recognize mRNA targets through imperfect matches, making the problem of predicting miRNA target sites challenging. Among these partial pairings, it is well known that miRNAs bind canonical miRNA target sites through short consecutive pairings with their seed regions (position 28; called 'seed pairing rule') (). Besides sequence complementarity, evolutional conservation has been considered, improving the performance of miRNA target predictions (). However, a critical caveat of all seed-centric approaches is its inability to identify non-canonical miRNA target sites (), overlooking priori recognized non-canonical target sites validated as functionally important (). Recently, by applying cross-linking immunoprecipitation method (CLIP) coupled with high-throughput sequencing (HITS) () to a protein called Argonaute (Ago HITS-CLIP), all miRNA-binding regions in target mRNAs were experimentally mapped in high resolution (). However, not all miRNA-bound regions could be explained by the canonical seed pairing rule, implicating existence of non-canonical miRNAtarget interactions. By performing bioinformatic analyses in such orphan regions, non-canonical sites called 'nucleation bulges' were identified and validated as widespread, functional and evolutionally conserved (). Non-canonical nucleation bulge sites are predictable, as the mode of their interactions is generalized by 'pivot pairing rule', dictating a nucleotide in bulge (position 5 and 6) to be competent to pair with a nucleotide in position six of a miRNA, named 'pivot' to confer the thermodynamic stability on consecutive five base pairings (position 26, Supplementary). Such initial five base pairings are proposed to be served as nuclei of interactions (nucleation), followed by bulge formation where originally matched pivot nucleotide in position six becomes bulged-out and propagating hybridization toward 3 0-end of the miRNA. However, such a rule based on a pivot pairing has not been applied for miRNA target prediction yet. To offer opportunities of studying non-canonical miRNA targets, here we describe miRNA target maps specialized for nucleation bulge sites, named 'miRTCat'. miRTCat provides comprehensive maps searchable for miRNA target sites including non-canonical nucleation bulges, of which locations are not only predicted in all 3 0-untranslated regions (3 0-UTRs; annotated by RefSeq in human and mouse) but also mapped in miRNA-bound regions that are experimentally verified (). Such functionalities will aid to generate hypothesis starting from interactions between miRNA and non-canonical targets.
IMPLEMENTATIONBased on the established principles: sequence complementarity and evolutional conservation (see Supplementary Material for details), miRTCat pipeline (), implemented mainly by using Perl, PHP and MySQL, identifies miRNA target sites of both canonical and non-canonical types for microRNA families, which were previously defined as mostly conserved across vertebrates (). For canonical seed sites, a seed pairing rule is used to find motifs46mers that match to the 5 0-end seed regions of miRNAs (position 28;and Supplementary). For non-canonical nucleation bulge sites, a pivot pairing rule is applied to *To whom correspondence should be addressed. search 7mer motifs of which bulged sequence (position 5 and 6) is complement to pair with pivot (position six;and Supplementary). To consider evolutional conservation, phastCons score, derived from Multiz 46 or 30 way whole-genome alignments () is used.
RESULTSAs previously reported (), nucleation bulge sites have propensity to be more conserved in miRNA-bound regionsthis notion, we examine the performance of miRTCat depending on the level of conservation by using experimentally identified miRNA-bound regions (), determine default cut-offs (PCS ! 0.9 for both sites) and estimate the false-positive rate (15.6%; 13.6% for seed matches and 20.1% for nucleation bulges) (and SupplementaryD). Validation analysis using experiment datasets of miRNA-dependant repression (shows that transcripts identified by miRTCat (PCS ! 0.9) are more significantly downregulated than the targets found by simple seed matching (P  5.0  10 8 ) (and Supplementary). Furthermore, miRTCat is estimated to outperform in sensitivity ($2.6-fold increase) with comparable precision with other prediction methods (and Supplementary). Overall, miRTCat offers comprehensive mappings with increased number of target sites by identifying non-canonical nucleation bulges, predicting bona fide 245 454 sites (33 461 nucleation bulges (7mers), comparable with 47 478 7mer seed sites) in human 3 0-UTRs and mapping 263 361 sites (32 471 nucleation bulges, 44 665 7mer seed sites) in all compiled data from experimentally identified miRNA-bound regions (3272).
FUNCTIONALITYThe miRTCat web-interface offers search functionality of both canonical and non-canonical miRNA targets sites in two species, human and mouse. Users can retrieve two types of identification: bona fide prediction in 3 0-UTR and experimentally mapping results in miRNA-bound regions, freely defining cut-off values of PCS (0.11.0) for both non-canonical nucleation bulge and canonical seed sites. Users are informed to decide cut-off values for their purpose of search considering experimentally estimated predictive values depending on the extent of evolutional conservation (and Supplementary). Centered on target mRNAs and/or regulator miRNAs, results of the target sites are returned in the form of lists as a table providing sorting functionality and links for UCSC genome browser (), enabling to browse with other genome information. In addition, all results are also available for download as an excel file format and easily used for other computational analysis. In summary, here we provide a comprehensive map of miRNA target sites including non-canonical nucleation bulges in several formats to facilitate further biological studies of miRNA regulation through non-canonical targets, which has not been offered by current approaches based on seed pairings.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
miRTCat at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
