Motivation: MOBI is a web server for the identification of structurally mobile regions in NMR protein ensembles. It provides a binary mobility definition that is analogous to the commonly used definition of intrinsic disorder in X-ray crystallographic structures. At least three different use cases can be envisaged: (i) visualization of NMR mobility for structural analysis; (ii) definition of regions for reliable comparative modelling in protein structure prediction and (iii) definition of mobility in analogy to intrinsic disorder. MOBI uses structural superposition and local conformational differences to derive a robust binary mobility definition that is in excellent agreement with the manually curated definition used in the CASP8 experiment for intrinsic disorder in NMR structure. The output includes mobility-coloured PDB files, mobility plots and a FASTA formatted sequence file summarizing the mobility results. Availability: The MOBI server and supplementary methods are available for non-commercial use at
INTRODUCTIONNMR solved structures deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB;) often contain an ensemble of structurally different conformers, where each model equally satisfies the experimentally obtained restrains. Among other reasons, differences between models are due to incompleteness or noise in the experimental data, as well as reflecting the dynamic behaviour of proteins in solution (). To gain insight into protein dynamics, the structural ensemble can be further enriched () or used to deduce quasi-rigid dynamical-domains (). In order to make sense of this structural variability, e.g. to identify reliable regions for protein structure prediction, it is commonly sieved for conserved regions () or to select the best representative (). An intuitive representation of NMR variability through colouring of the structure by RMSD values has been recently proposed in CARON (). Extreme structural variability in proteins is called intrinsic disorder and commonly has functional implications (Dyson and
METHODS
Mobility definitionMOBI combines two basic measures of mobility, structural superposition and changes in local conformation (i.e. torsion angles), into a consensus definition. TM-Score (), a method designed to superimpose models with identical sequence (e.g. comparative models or NMR structures), is used to superimpose each of the models in a NMR PDB file on all the other models. Distances between the same Cs in all superimpositions are computed and scaled according to the formula SD = 1/((1 + (d/d 0 ) 2 ), where d is the distance between two Cs and d 0 is a normalization factor. Average and standard deviation of the scaled distances are computed. Secondly,  and  angles standard deviation for all the amino acids in all the models are also computed. These are used to assign mobility to neighbouring amino acids to those assigned as mobile according to SD average and standard deviation. DSSP () is then used to assign secondary structure to each of the models. If secondary structure is the same for an amino acid in all the models (no coils), the amino acid is not mobile, and if the secondary structure changes from model to model it is assigned as mobile independently of the other criteria. Finally, regular expressions are used to assign as mobile one or two ordered positions surrounded by mobile residues, and to filter out single and two consecutive mobile amino acids. A full description of the binary mobility definition can be found in the Online Methods page.
Agreement with CASP8 disorder definitionThe thresholds for each of the mobility measurements are optimized by grid search to maximize the agreement with disorder definitions on the 18 NMR solved targets evaluated at CASP8 with a corresponding PDB structure file. Only amino acids with the same identity in PDB and the CASP8 sequence are considered in the optimization. Residues with no coordinates in the PDB file are also not considered. To optimize the agreement, d 0 is set to 4 . SD, its standard deviation and  and  angles standard deviation thresholds are set toThe scaled distance graph describes the variability shown in (A) numerically.Shows the correspondence between the protein sequence (top row) and mobility according to the single MOBI criteria, as well as the final MOBI consensus (bottom row). 0.85, 0.09, 20 @BULLET and 20 @BULLET respectively. The optimized binary definition has an F value (the average of precision and recall) of 93.9, indicating almost perfect agreement with the manual CASP8 assignment. See the Online Methods page for a full description of the optimization protocol.
IMPLEMENTATIONMOBI has been implemented as a web server which uses a set of Perl scripts and the Jmol (URL: http://www.jmol.org/) and Jalview () helper applications. In the following, we will briefly describe the MOBI input and output pages. Detailed help pages and examples are available online.
InputThe server requires a PDB file which can be either selected by PDB identifier from the local PDB database or uploaded, but has to conform to the PDB NMR structure specification. Multiple chains are supported. A sequence name and the E-mail address are optional. A more complex interface allows the user to manipulate various parameters used in the mobility definition. A batch mode for processing multiple queries is also available.
OutputThe output has been designed for usage to visualize structural variability and the corresponding mobility definition in various ways () including binary mobility for each residue as a sequence alignment (optionally in Jalview). The mobility is visualized in Jmol from a modified PDB file (available for download) where B-factors and occupancy are replaced either by scaled distance or binary mobility, allowing easy visual interpretation. Several plots are available in PDF format, describing mobility in terms of structural superposition, torsion angle difference and consensus binary definition.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Wright, 2005). In the recent 8th round of the Critical Assessment of techniques for protein Structure Prediction experiment (CASP8), 19 structures solved by NMR were evaluated in the disordered regions prediction category (Noivirt-Brik et al., 2009). The 18 structures (one was fully disordered) with a PDB entry were visually and manually inspected by the CASP assessors to determine which amino acids do not have a fixed conformation. To the best of our knowledge, this was the first and fully manual attempt to define intrinsic disorder from NMR structural ensembles. Here we present MOBI, a new web server to detect and visualize mobile regions in NMR solved structures in analogy to intrinsic disorder in X-ray crystallography. MOBI is based on a simple algorithm to find regions with different conformations among all the models in an ensemble optimized to replicate the ordered-disordered definition used in CASP8.
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
