Motivation: Most prokaryotic genomes are circular with a single chromosome (called circular genomes), which consist of bacteria and archaea. Orthologous genes (abbreviated as orthologs) are genes directly evolved from an ancestor gene, and can be traced through different species in evolution. Shared orthologs between bacterial genomes have been used to measure their genome evolution. Here, organization of circular genomes is analyzed via distributions of shared orthologs between genomes. However, these distributions are often asymmetric and bimodal; to date, there is no joint distribution to model such data. This motivated us to develop a family of bivariate distributions with generalized von Mises marginals (BGVM) and its statistical inference. Results: A new measure based on circular grade correlation and the fraction of shared orthologs is proposed for association between circular genomes, and a visualization tool developed to depict genome structure similarity. The proposed procedures are applied to eight pairs of prokaryotes separated from domain down to species, and 13 mycoplasma bacteria that are mammalian pathogens belonging to the same genus. We close with remarks on further applications to many features of genomic organization, e.g. shared transcription factor binding sites, between any pair of circular genomes. Thus, the proposed procedures may be applied to identifying conserved chromosome backbones, among others, for genome construction in synthetic biology. Availability: All codes of the BGVM procedures and 1000+ prokaryotic genomes are available at
INTRODUCTIONMost of the prokaryotic genomes (1158 out of 1194, NCBI, August 2010) are circular with a single chromosome (called circular genomes henceforth). Orthologous genes (abbreviated as orthologs)are genes directly evolved from an ancestor gene (), and can be traced through different species in evolution. The fraction of shared orthologs between two circular genomes was found to be better conserved than the order of genes (), in which the fraction of shared orthologs between genomes was employed to measure genome evolution of nine prokaryotes. Here, our emphasis is on the structure of circular genomes, which, for example, plays an important role in synthetic biology. A review paper in synthetic genomics () indicates that genome organization may influence gene expression, which is vital for organisms. Further, predicting or modeling the rules of genome organization via comparative genomics may provide valuable information for genome construction. We reason that genome structure can be studied via distributions of shared orthologs between genomes, e.g. the most or least favored region in which shared orthologs between each pair of bacterial genomes are located. While the marginal distributions of shared orthologs are often found to be asymmetric and bimodal, to date there is no joint distribution with closed-formed marginals to model such data. This motivated us to develop a family of joint distribution and its related statistical inferences. Recent studies show that gene order is extensively conserved between closely related species, but rapidly become less conserved among more distantly related species. This trend is likely to be universal in prokaryotes (). However, the fraction of shared orthologs between two circular genomes is more conserved than the order of genes (seeof). In addition to the fraction of shared orthologs between bacterial genomes, we further incorporate the distributions of shared orthologs of paired circular genomes to infer similarity of their genome organization. By converting the locations of shared orthologs in any paired circular genomes into angles, these pairs of angles can be viewed as bivariate circular vectors. Most of the marginal distributions of shared orthologs in circular genomes are asymmetric and/or multimodal, which can be modeled by the generalized von Mises distribution (GVM) (). Therefore, we propose a family of bivariate circular distributions with each marginal assuming a GVM distribution, and call this family the bivariate generalized von-Mises (BGVM). The inference procedures, estimation of the parameters in BGVM and testing for independence of structures of paired circular genomes, are developed. A novel correlation measure, which is based on the fraction of shared orthologs and a circular grade correlation derived here, is introduced to measure organization
Modeling and comparing circular genomessimilarity between circular genomes. Furthermore, this similarity is visually depicted by the rose diagrams of shared orthologs. The marginal distributions of BGVM are quite flexible since GVM can model either symmetric or asymmetric, unimodal or multimodal circular data, depending on the values of its four parameters. The probability density function (pdf) of GVM is in closed form and thus is convenient for inferences; see Yfantis and Borgman (1982) for details. In the following, we briefly review literature on modeling bivariate circular data, e.g. shared orthologs of paired prokaryotic genomes.mentioned the wrapped bivariate normal distribution.proposed a generalized von MisesFisher model for paired angles ( 1 , 2 ). Wehrly and Johnson (1980) generated families of bivariate circular distributions with jpdf:wheredistribution. Unfortunately, the marginals of these distributions are symmetric and unimodal, hence they cannot be employed to model distributions of shared orthologs in paired circular genomes. Bivariate circular distributions with asymmetric and/or multimodal but closed-formed marginals have not been well explored, thus we study them here.
METHODSHere, we investigate inference procedures under BGVM which has the probability density function:}. These  j and  j ( j and  j ) are location (dispersion) parameters, and we denote this GVM distribution as GVM ( j , j , j , j ) henceforth. The joint density BGVM involves the cumulative distributions F jd, but with todays computing power this is not a serious drawback. We note that this class of bivariate circular distributions can include other marginals, e.g. t-distribution (), von Mises distribution () and Jones and Pewsey's distribution ().
Roles of some parameters in the BGVM modelThe parameters  and  in a GVM (,,,) marginal control not only the concentration at  =  and  =  but also the graphic shape of the density. If  = 0, the GVM is antipodally symmetric and has two modes, depending on , at  =  and  = . If  = 0, the GVM reduces to the von Mises distribution, which is symmetric and unimodal, with mean direction  and concentration ; the larger  is the more concentrated when the distribution is at . If  12 = 0 , the BGVM is a unimodal distribution, and as  12 increases the association between 1 and 2 increases, which indicates that the association between the given pair of circular genomes increases. From the copula representation in Section 2 of, we have that 1 = 2F 1 ( 1 ) given  2 is VM ( 12 +2F 2 ( 2 ), 12 ). When  12 = 0, 1 centers on 2F 2 ( 2 ), and the dependence of 1 on 2 is controlled by the magnitude of  12. A BGVM generator written in R is available at http//:www.stat.sinica.edu .tw/gshieh/bgvm.htm.
Estimation and testing hypothesis under a BGVM distribution
MLEs of the parametersAssuming that shared orthologs between a pair of circular genomes follow a BGVM distribution, given their converted angles we can immediately obtain the fitted BGVM distribution by applying the MLE algorithm in MLE_LR-test.R of the Supplementary Material. The MLE algorithm was modified from the NewtonRaphson method (), to prevent the estimates for the model in Equation (2) being trapped in local maxima, which was caused by the sinusoidal functions in the joint density. Next, we derive the limiting distribution of MLEs for the parameters in BGVM. The likelihood ratio test for independence of the organization between genomes is addressed at the end of this section. To see how the MLE algorithm performs, we show its estimation results using data generated from BGVM with the parametersfor i = 1,2. Let l n () denote the log-likelihood function, and U n () and I n () the first and the second derivatives of l n (), respectively.When the vector of parameters  belongs to the interior of the parameter set, the regularity conditions (see Section 3 offor details) hold, and the consistency of the MLEs follows, which implies that the vector of MLEs multiplied by  n converges to their true parameters. Asymptotic multivariate normality of the MLEs then follows from Lemma 1 and Theorem 2 of, which indicates that this centered vector converges to a multivariate normal distribution as stated below.where I is the Fisher information matrix with entriesThe 10 partial derivatives are straightforward and are omitted.where each partial derivative is evaluated at the MLEs. Different asymptotics apply if we include  12 = 0 in the parameter space. If  i and  i , i = 1,2 are still bounded away from 0, then according to the results in Self and, Theorem 2 and Case 2 of page 606,  nn 12 has limiting distribution
Remark, where Z 1 has a normal distribution with variance determined from I 1. The cases where  1 = 0,  1 = 0,  2 = 0 and/or  2 = 0 are treated similarly.
Testing for independence of the organization between circular genomesTo test the hypothesis that the organization of paired prokaryotic genomes are independent or not, e.g. whether the structure organization of Thermotoga and that of Sulfolobus are independent, we consider likelihood ratio tests (LR tests), which include two cases. In both cases, under the BGVM joint distribution this test is equivalent to testingThe likelihood ratio statistic is 2ln n , whereThere are really two cases, and the second case is the most complicated.,
A novel circular correlation measure r pgHuynen and Bork (1998) used the fraction of shared orthologs between genomes to study genome evolution. The ratio of shared orthologs between a pair of genomes to the maximum possible number of shared orthologs, which is estimated by the size of the smaller genome in each pair of genomes, is a reasonable index for association of organization between circular genomes. This ratio (denoted by r p ) can be written asTo characterize association between a pair of circular genomes more finely, the similarity of their distributions of shared orthologs should be taken into account. This association can be measured by a circular grade correlation (r g ) derived in the next subsection. Weighting both r p and r g equally gives rise to a novel circular correlation measureNote that there is a parameter, namely protein sequence similarity, involved when choosing one-to-one orthologs between genomes. The rule of thumb is to choose a protein sequence similarity value such that r p and r g are of the same scale, e.g. 0.7 was suggested for the threshold of protein sequence similarity in a pilot study, in which the BGVM procedures were applied to the nine prokaryotic genomes in Application 1.
A circular grade correlation measure r gWhen the joint pdf of two r.v.'s on the real line, say X 1 and X 2 , involves the marginal cumulative,2, the grade correlation ( H ) () was shown to be suitable for correlation of X 1 and X 2. This correlation measure is defined as,...,n, denote the mapped angles of n pairs of shared orthologs between prokaryotic Genomes 1 and 2. When the joint pdf of these pairs of angles involves the marginal cumulative distributions F i ( i ),i = 1,2, a suitable correlation may be modified from the grade correlation  H. Similar to previous works on deriving association measures for bivariate circular data (), a new circular grade correlation coefficient for bivariate circular data, that allows for different choices of the origins in each genome, is). Via some computation in Appendix1.pdf of the Supplementary Material, we obtained that the circular grade correlationThe MLE for the circular grade correlation  g assumes the following form.,where A ={2 i/n : i = 0,1,...,n1},
Modeling and comparing circular genomes
The large sample (limiting) distribution of r gFor each pair of genomes, the number of shared orthologs can range from a few hundred to more than two thousand. With such large sample sizes, the limiting distribution of the circular grade correlation estimate r g in general follows a normal distribution. To provide confidence intervals for  g to judge whether the similarity on distributions of shared orthologs of paired circular genomes is different from zero (independence) or not, we derive the limiting distribution of the centered r g. Because r g is the MLE of  g , the large sample distribution of r g follows a normal distribution with its covariance matrix computed from angles of shared orthologs. That is,where the covariance matrix D 2 can be computed by our code, 12 are derived in Appendix2.pdf of the Supplementary Material, which provides a proof for the convergence of the centered r g to a normal distribution. The 1 confidence interval of, where 0 <<1 and Z /2 is the critical value of the standard normal distribution N(0,1) at the level of /2.
A visualization tool: rose diagramsTo visually depict association between paired circular genomes, we applied rose diagrams (a kind of angular histogram;) to each pair of shared orthologs. The radius of each sector with a binwidth of 10 @BULLET or other angles is proportional to the relative frequency of shared orthologs, whose corresponding angles belong to the sector, e.g. 60 @BULLET  70 @BULLET of the rose diagram of Sulfolobus in, where the inner dotted (outer) circle denotes the frequency being 10 (20). In general, a small binwidth results in a bumpier rose diagram than that of a large one.
RESULTSIn this section, we apply the proposed procedures to shared orthologs between paired prokaryotic genomes to measure similarity of their genome organization. However, we note that our procedures can be applied to many features of genomic organization, e.g. shared TFBSs, shared repeated elements () and shared non-coding genes (e.g. rRNA and small RNA), by inputting their corresponding angles instead of those of shared orthologs to our algorithm. For instance, both Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis have more verified TFBSs than other bacteria, and we can analyze their shared TFBSs using procedures developed here.
Data preprocessingTo let the shared orthologs between paired circular genomes reflect their similarity, we filtered out predicted horizontal transferred genes. The filtering was performed using data from the Horizontal Gene Transfer Database (), which were accessed at http://genomes.urv.es/HGT-DB/. After the filtering, only species-specific genes were left in each circular genome, and we mapped their physical positions into angles ranged in [0,2). As an ortholog in each circular genome has a clustered orthologous group (COG) ID (), the genes having the same COG ID in any paired circular genomes were identified as orthologs. Paralogous genes (abbreviated as paralogs) are genes related by duplication within a genome. Due to gene duplication, there may be orthologous sets of paralogs within one genome, and several Page: 916 912918. The shared orthologs of three pairs of circular genomes, identified by protein sequence similarity 0.7, fitted by BGVM models Genome (i,j) of the distributions of their shared orthologs. This association can also be seen easily from their rose diagrams, in particular those of
G.S.Shieh et al.
Bacillus anthracis Ames and Bacillus anthracisSterne. Next, we estimated the association of genome organizations of each of the eight pairs of prokaryotes. Note that the origins of most prokaryotic genomes are unknown (and having no rules to predict) or predicted, which demonstrates the importance of r pg 's being invariant to the origins of both circular genomes. The values of r p , r g and r pg of these pairs (in) are incidentally consistent with their phylogeny relationships. The rose diagrams show that the genome structures of Bacillus anthracis Ames and Bacillus anthracis Sterne are almost identical, while those of Thermotoga and Sulfolobus are not at all alike.
Application 2: 13 mycoplasma bacteriaAbove we showed that the BGVM distribution and its inference procedures can be applied to distinguish genome organization of eight pairs of bacteria in Application 1, in which genomes of six pairs were relatively distant (from different genus or beyond). Here, we apply the proposed procedures to a set of 13 mycoplasma bacteria, which are relatively close in phylogeny, to see if r pg can distinguish their genome organization. These bacteria are mammalian pathogens with small genomes, which belong to the same genus. Specifically, their phylogeny tree based on 16S ribosomal sequence, constructed by the software MEGA4, is in Application2.pdf of the Supplementary Material. Among these bacterial genomes, three origins are unknown and nine are predicted, which demonstrates the need of a correlation measure invariant to the origin of a circular genome such as r pg .
Page: 918 912918
G.S.Shieh et al.summarize associations between prokaryotic genomes well. While the rose diagrams further depict their associations via distributions of the shared orthologs. Our results are consistent with those of other analysis. Thus, the BGVM procedures may provide useful information on the organization of circular genomes. We note that the BGVM procedures can be applied to identify shared TFBSs, shared coding or non-coding genes and shared repeated elements between circular genomes. Thus, they may be applied to identifying conserved chromosome backbones, detecting conserved gene clusters such as operons, among others, which can be used for genome construction in synthetic biology.
,1,1,1,2) and the sample size 100. We first estimated parameters of the marginals and obtained (   1 ,   1 ,   1 ,   1 ) = (1.40,1.52,0.99,0.86) and (   2 ,   2 ,   2 ,   2 ) = (1.46,1.56,1.09,0.94). Next, we used these estimates as initial values and applied the MLE algorithm to estimate parameters of the joint density. The estimates obtained are (   1 ,   1 ,   1 ,   1 ,   2 ,   2 ,   2 ,   2 ,   12 ,   12 ) = (1.33,1.65, 0.92, 0.95, 1.62, 1.55, 1.02, 0.90, 0.92, 2.32), which are quite close to the true values. After the MLEs been computed, estimates of their variances and covariances can be obtained from derivatives of the likelihood or by numerical integration of the squares and products of the partial derivatives given in Section 3 of Shieh et al. (2006). Let  = ( 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 , 2 , 2 , 2 , 2 ,  12 , 12 ) T be the vector of 10 unknown parameters. The parameter space is
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
paralogs may share the same COG ID. That is, there are one-to-many, many-to-one and many-to-many corresponding shared orthologs besides the one-to-one corresponding ones. Using the following minimum angle distance, we can identify one-to-one shared orthologs. Let D(A,B) denote the distance between orthologs A and B, and D(A,B) = min{|angle of Aangle of B|,2 |angle of A angle of B|}. For an orthologous set (multiple paralogs with the same COG ID), we use the shortest distance ortholog pairs (A,B), where D min (A, B) = min i,j D(A i ,B j ) and 1  i  m, 1  j  n, provided that m and n are orthologs in genomes A and B corresponding to one COG ID. Let  ij and  kj for 1  j  n, denote the corresponding angle of the first base of the shared ortholog j in genomes i and k, which were used for statistical inferences. Note that within any given pair of genomes, the locations of distinct ortholog pairs are assumed to be independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples. Because marginals of shared ortholog genomes were often found to be asymmetric and bimodal, we fitted a BGVM model to each pair of shared orthologs for the prokaryotic genomes studied. In the following, we apply the proposed BGVM procedures and rose diagrams to two sets of prokaryotic genomes, consisting of eight pairs of prokaryotic genomes separated from domain down Fig. 1. The rose diagrams of shared orthologs, identified by protein sequence similarity 0.7, of three pairs of prokaryotic genomes. 915 at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
In this application, we compare the structure organizations for each of the following pairs of bacterial genomes, which are (Thermotoga, Sulfolobus), (Clostridium, Thermotoga), (Lactobacillus, Clostridium), (Staphylococcus, Lactobacillus), (Oceanobacillus, Staphylococcus), (Bacillus, Oceanobacillus), (Bacillus anthracis, Bacillus subtitlis) and (Bacillus anthracis Ames, Bacillus anthracis Sterne). These pairs of genomes belong to different domains, the same domain, phylum class, order, family, genus and the same species, respectively. Among them, we first tested whether the genome structures of each pair are independent or not. After using the threshold of 0.7 for protein similarity to identify shared orthologs between each pair of genomes, we plotted their rose diagrams, which showed that several of the marginals are bimodal. Due to a space limit, only the rose diagrams (using a binwidth of 10  ) of the first three pairs are presented in Figure 1; see Supplementary Figure S1 in Application1.pdf for all rose diagrams. Some marginal distributions of these pairs of bacterial genomes were asymmetric, based on the result of the test for symmetry in Pewsey (2002). For instance, some marginals of (Thermotoga, Sulfolobus), (Clostridium, Thermotoga) and (Lactobacillus, Clostridium) are asymmetric at the 95% significance level; see Table 1 for details. For asymmetric and bimodal marginals of shared orthologs, it was reasonable to fit GVM distributions. Goodness-of-fit was checked by QQ-plots, similar to those in Shieh et al. (2006), which indicated that the fits were adequate for the marginals. For the fitted GVMs and QQ-plots, please see the file at http://www.stat.sinica .edu.tw/gshieh/bgvm.htm. The asymmetry and bimodality of the marginals suggested fitting a BGVM to shared orthologs for each pair of prokaryotic genomes. The MLE estimates of parameters in BGVM of (Thermotoga, Sulfolobus), (Clostridium, Thermotoga) and (Lactobacillus, Clostridium) are given in Table 2. Employing the LR-test based on the distributions of shared orthologs, we test whether genome organization of each pair of these prokaryotes are independent. (Not) rejecting this hypothesis indicates that their genome organizations are (not) correlated. For each pair of prokaryotic genomes, a LR-test of shared orthologs was computed, and the result showed that except (Thermotoga, Sulfolobus), the hypothesis was rejected for the other seven pairs at a 95% level using Case 2; see Application1.pdf of the Supplementary Material for details. This result indicates that for these seven pairs, their genome organizations are correlated based on the similarity
DISCUSSION The proposed BGVM distribution, with flexible and closed-formed marginal distributions, was shown to model paired angular data well, in which each marginal of the pair can be asymmetric or/and multimodal, e.g. shared orthologs between paired bacterial genomes. Statistical inferences employing the MLEs for parameters of the BGVM distribution and the LR-test for independence of the organization between circular genomes are established. A novel circular correlation measure (r pg ), invariant to the choices of origins of circular genomes which are mainly unknown or predicted, was derived and a visualization tool provided. We applied these procedures to two sets of prokaryotic genomes, consisting a set of relatively distant prokaryotes and a set of closely related bacteria. The novel correlation measure r pg was shown to 917 at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
