Motivation: Standard rate laws are a key requisite for systematically turning metabolic networks into kinetic models. They should provide simple, general and biochemically plausible formulae for reaction velocities and reaction elasticities. At the same time, they need to respect thermodynamic relations between the kinetic constants and the metabolic fluxes and concentrations. Results: We present a family of reversible rate laws for reactions with arbitrary stoichiometries and various types of regulation, including mass–action, Michaelis–Menten and uni–uni reversible Hill kinetics as special cases. With a thermodynamically safe parameterization of these rate laws, parameter sets obtained by model fitting, sampling or optimization are guaranteed to lead to consistent chemical equilibrium states. A reformulation using saturation values yields simple formulae for rates and elasticities, which can be easily adjusted to the given stationary flux distributions. Furthermore, this formulation highlights the role of chemical potential differences as thermodynamic driving forces. We compare the modular rate laws to the thermodynamic–kinetic modelling formalism and discuss a simplified rate law in which the reaction rate directly depends on the reaction affinity. For automatic handling of modular rate laws, we propose a standard syntax and semantic annotations for the Systems Biology Markup Language. Availability: An online tool for inserting the rate laws into SBML models is freely available at www.semanticsbml.org Contact
INTRODUCTIONOnce a metabolic network is available as a stoichiometric matrix or in standard formats such as Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML;), its potential dynamics can be studied by various kinds of mathematical analysis. Constraint-based methods such as flux balance analysis () help to predict the possible metabolic fluxes; energy balance analysis (, network-embedded thermodynamic (NET) analysis () or related methods () also account for the thermodynamic * To whom correspondence should be addressed. forces driving the fluxes. Finally, given a stationary flux distribution, the potential dynamic behaviour close to this steady state can be explored by random sampling of reaction elasticities (). Precise dynamic simulations, in contrast, require quantitative rate laws for the enzymatic reactions. The catalytic mechanisms of key enzymes have been investigated in great detail and described by mathematical formulae (for an overview, see). But many kinetic equations are still unknown and have to be substituted by standard rate laws () such as massaction kinetics, power laws (), reversible Hill kinetics (), lin-log kinetics (), convenience kinetics (), generic rate equations () or TKM rate laws (). Many mechanistically inspired rate laws share the form (The numerator T r contains turnover rates k  r (in s 1 ), metabolite concentrations c i (in mM), reactant constants k M ri (in mM) and substrate and product molecularities m  ri. It resembles a reversible massaction rate law, but in Equation (1), it is multiplied by the enzyme amount u r and a factor f r for enzyme regulation. The denominator D r is a polynomial of scaled concentrations, e.g.The individual denominator terms correspond to different binding states of the enzyme, which effectively reduce the enzyme amount available for catalysis. Terms arising from the specific enzyme regulation (see) are separately listed in the term D reg r. Depending on the reaction stoichiometry, on the enzymatic mechanism and on allosteric regulation, the terms f r , T r , D r and D reg r may assume various mathematical forms. In this article, we propose several variants for each of them, which can be combined in a modular manner (see). The resulting rate laws represent a good compromise between biochemical detail (description of enzyme saturation, activation and inhibition, correct thermodynamic properties, and interpretable parameters) and mathematical abstraction (simple and standardized formulae for various reaction stoichiometries and types of allosteric regulation) and provide a good way to parameterize metabolic network models.Page: 1529 15281534depend on reaction stoichiometry, rate law, allosteric regulation and on the preferred model parameterization.
Modular rate laws for biochemical reactions
METHODS
Five rate lawsIn this article, we shall discuss five modular rate laws (called 'common', 'direct binding', 'simultaneous binding', 'power-law' and 'forcedependent'), characterized by different formulae of their denominators. The common modular (CM) rate law is a generalized form of the reversible MichaelisMenten kinetics that applies to any reaction stoichiometry. For a non-regulated reaction A+B  2 C with concentrations a, b and c, the rate (in mol/s) readswith the abbreviations a). The enzyme level u is given as an amount (mmol). It can also be a concentration (mM), but then the rate has to be multiplied by the compartment volume (l). The rate law can be obtained from the random-order enzyme mechanism shown in. Each term in the denominator D = 1+a +b +a b + c +c +c 2 represents one binding state of the enzyme. The k M values are dissociation constants, just like the K M values in MichaelisMenten kinetics, and define a scale for high and low concentrations of a reactant. The CM rate law resembles the convenience kinetics (), with a slight difference for molecularities m  = 1: in the convenience kinetics, in Equation (3), the denominator term for the product C would read 1+c +c 2 instead of 1+2c +c 2. The reason is that in the CM rate law, the first C molecule can bind to either of the two binding sites, while in the convenience kinetics, the sites are bound in a fixed order. The other four rate have simpler denominators. By omitting some of the terms, we obtain the direct binding modular (DM) rate lawin which the k M values can be joined to parameters k M+ = k M A k M B and k M = (k M C ) 2. In contrast to the CM rate law, the denominator contains just the substrate and product terms of the highest order. With the same choice of parameters, the reaction rate is higher than in the CM rate law, especially at low concentrations where the lower-order terms dominate. The simultaneous binding modular (SM) rate lawon the other hand, contains additional denominator terms, so the reaction rate is lower, especially at high concentrations. By setting the denominator to a constant value of 1, we obtain the powerlaw modular (PM) rate lawas an illustration case for the role of thermodynamics (details below).
General form of the modular rate lawsWe can rewrite all modular rate laws in a general notation that covers various stoichiometries, rate laws and types of allosteric regulation; for a list of symbols, see. A biochemical network with reaction rates v r and concentrations c i is described by the stoichiometric matrix N = (n ir ). The index i runs over all compounds with variable or fixed concentrations (called 'internal' or 'external' compounds, respectively). To define the rate laws, we introduce structure numbers m  ri and w  ri describing how many molecules of compound i are apparently involved in a reaction rwith positive cooperativity factors h r. We can always replacefor convenience, we define m ri = m + ri +m  ri. The cooperativity factor h r yields sigmoidal rate laws similar to reversible Hill kinetics () and provides some freedom to rescale the sum formulae. For a reaction 0.5 A  B, for instance, we are not obliged to use a rate law v  k + a 1/2 k  b, but can choose v  k + ak  b 2 instead. But in any case, the structure numbers m  ri need to have the form (8) because otherwise, the rate laws would be thermodynamically inconsistent (see Supplementary Material). Next, we introduce the saturation valuesPage: 1530 15281534
W.Liebermeister et al.Superscripts M, A and I are related to reactant, activation or inhibition arrows in the compound/reaction network; X represents either of them. Subscripts r and i refer to reactions and compounds, respectively. A detailed table can be found in the Supplementary Material. other saturation values are determined byWe now define the modular rate laws by formula (1), where the numerator of Equation (2) is written in the compact formand the possible denominators read CM:Rate laws for unspecific enzymes can be constructed by combining denominators from the different catalysed reactions (see Supplementary Material). Allosteric regulation is implemented by the termsThe relative basal rates  A rj can vary between 0 and 1 and represent the rate without activator divided by the rate at saturating activator levels. Relative basal rates  I rl for inhibitors are defined accordingly. If a basal rate is set to zero, the regulation is called complete activation or inhibition (or in more familiar terms, essential activation and non-competitive inhibition). Otherwise, we obtain partial activation or inhibition, which are also called stimulation and hyperbolic inhibition. In addition, we consider another type of regulation, which we call specific activation or inhibition. Regulation arrows of this type are listed separately in regulation matrices w + * ri and w  * ri and lead to the additive termin the denominator of the rate law. In the case of inhibitors, this formula describes the well-known competitive inhibition.
Thermodynamic propertiesThe laws of thermodynamics link the reaction rates tightly to thermodynamic forces and to the molar Gibbs free energies of the compounds involved, called chemical potentials  i. In an ideal mixture, the chemical potentials are linked to the concentrations c i (measured in units of a standard concentration, usually 1 mM) viawith the absolute temperature T (K) and Boltzmann's gas constant R. A central concept in reaction thermodynamics is the chemical equilibrium state, in which the total Gibbs free energy is minimal and all net reaction rates vanish. The massaction ratios q ma) n ir in equilibrium follow from thermodynamic properties of the molecules. They are identical for all equilibrium states and, therefore, called equilibrium constants k eqA kinetic model that does not show consistent equilibrium states runs the risk of describing a perpetuum mobile. We can test it by numerical simulations (see Supplementary Material); but thermodynamical consistency can be directly ensured when choosing the kinetic constants. First, the numerator oflinking the kinetic constants to the equilibrium constants. The equilibrium constants themselves depend on the standard chemical potentials If we consider an entire reaction network, Equation (16) implies Wegscheider conditions for the equilibrium constantswhere K is a right nullspace matrix of the stoichiometric matrix N describing all (internal and external) metabolites. The columns of K represent cyclic stationary fluxes without the net production of metabolites. Out of equilibrium, all chemical reactions are driven by the chemical potentials  i or more precisely, by their negative balancescalled reaction affinities (kJ/mol). The second law of thermodynamic requires that chemical reactions consume Gibbs free energy, so reaction rates and affinities must share the same sign:A vanishing reaction rate implies that either there is no driving force (A r = 0, chemical equilibrium) or the reaction is kinetically blocked, e.g. because there is no enzyme (u r = 0, but A = 0). Given a metabolic network, feasible fluxes v r and reaction affinities A r respecting condition (19) can be determined by energy balance analysis or NET analysis.
Page: 1531 15281534
Modular rate laws for biochemical reactions) 2 appears in the secondorder elasticities. It is shown on log-scale as a function of the reaction affinity A r , again with h r = 1.
Velocity ratios and reaction affinitiesThe reaction rate Equation (1) can be written as a difference v r = v + r v  r of forward and backward rates with the ratioBy using the Haldane relationship (15) and the chemical potentials [] for ideal mixtures, we can rewrite it aswith the massaction ratio q ma r = i (c i ) n ir. We obtain the two important relations) and the sum of forward and backward velocities reads
RESULTS
Properties of the saturable rate lawsThe five modular rate laws, shown in, have particular strengths and weaknesses. While the CM rate law is biochemically most plausible, the DM, SM and PM rate laws can be obtained by ignoring (DM and PM rate laws) or adding (SM rate law) some of the binding states and, therefore, some of the denominator terms. As a consequence, these rate laws represent upper (DM and PM rate laws) and lower (SM rate law) bounds of the CM rate law. This simplification can reduce the number of parameters. In the DM enzyme mechanism, the substrate molecules bind in a single step, so their k M values can be combined into a single parameter k M+ , and likewise for the reaction products. In the PM rate law, the k M+ values can further be merged with the catalytic constants k . TheSM rate law, on the other hand, can be factorized intowhich leads to simple formulae for the reaction elasticities. However, its enzyme mechanism assumes a simultaneous binding of all substrates and products, which is biochemically arguable and would block the enzyme at high reactant concentrations.
Thermodynamically safe parameterizationWe already saw that the kinetic constants in a metabolic system need to satisfy the Wegscheider conditions (17) and Haldane relationships (15). This may lead to numerous and complicated constraints in parameter fitting and optimization. Luckily, this obstacle can be overcome by a special, thermodynamically safe parameterization using independent parameter sets (). First, we introduce the standard chemical potentials With Equations (16) and (25), all kinetic constants can be written as linear functions of the independent parameters. This parameterization automatically ensures correct Wegscheider Page: 1532 15281534
W.Liebermeister et al.conditions and Haldane relations, which can greatly simplify parameter fitting and optimization (). For practical purposes, the numerator can be parameterized in alternative ways: the explicit version, as in Equation (2), contains the turnover rates k  r as parameters. In the Haldane-compliant version, they are substituted by Equation (25), so the Haldane relationships are automatically satisfied and the equilibrium constants and the k V r appear as parameters. In the Wegscheider-compliant version, the equilibrium constants are further expressed by the standard chemical potentials via Equation (16), so the Wegscheider conditions will also be satisfied. This version yields thermodynamically correct models, but it comes with a higher numerical effort. In practice, one may first employ the Wegscheider-compliant version, estimate the parameters, and then use them to compute parameters for the other versions. An example is given in the Supplementary Material.
The FM rate lawWith the help of Equations (22) and (25), and using the identity), the numerator (2) can be rewritten asWith this formula, any modular rate law (1) can be written as a product of positive terms multiplied by the force term sinh, which depends directly on the reaction affinity. The reaction rate increases with the reaction affinity A r and has the same sign. However, the numerator cannot be solely written as a function of A r because of the remaining term   +   , which also involves the reactant concentrations. But if we repeat the same term in the denominator, it cancels out and we obtain the simple rate lawwithout any explicit dependence on concentrations or k M values. This is nothing but the FM rate law. In contrast to the other modular rate laws, the FM rate law lacks the biochemically required denominator summand 1 and is not supported by a biochemical mechanism. Even worse, as one of the substrate or product concentrations goes to zero, the reaction affinity and accordingly the rate becomes infinitea drawback that is also shared by the lin-log kinetics (). Despite these shortcomings, the FM rate law is a simple and practical choice because it can easily be adjusted to given stationary flux distributions. If the reaction rates and affinities in a network are given, e.g. from a previous energy balance analysis, the remaining prefactor u r k V r can be computed and the rate law is completely specified. The direct relationship between rate and affinity makes the FM rate law a nice illustration case for Prigogine's principle of minimal entropy production (). In thermodynamic systems with a linear velocityforce relationship v r  A r , states of minimal entropy production have to be stationary. For metabolic systems, this principle does usually not even apply as an approximation because the fluxes cannot be directly written as a function of the reaction affinities. For the FM rate law, however, this is possible and we obtain a simple criterion for minimal chemical entropy productionClose to chemical equilibrium (A r  0), the term in square brackets approaches a constant value of 2, so minimal entropy production implies N v = 0, i.e. a stationary state. Far from equilibrium, Equation (28) starts to deviate from the steady-state condition. At the same time, also the approximation sinh(x)  x breaks down, so the rate (27) depends nonlinearly on the force and the principle of minimal entropy production ceases to hold.
Modular rate laws are equivalent to thermodynamickinetic modelling rate lawsThe thermodynamickinetic modelling (TKM) formalism () describes biochemical networks in the language of electrical engineering and highlights the relationship between concentrations and thermodynamic forces. The TKM rate laws readwith a concentration-dependent conductivity  r and thermokinetic potentials  i = e  i /RT. Originally, the m  ri values represent the stoichiometric coefficients n ir , but we may also employ Equation (8) instead. In analogy to Equation (26), the TKM rate law can be rewritten asIf we assume an ideal mixture, a direct comparison toshows that modular rate laws are identical to TKM rate laws with concentration-dependent conductivitiesThe capacity C i of compound i is defined as
Reaction elasticities and control coefficientsThe dynamics of kinetic models close to a steady state depends on their reaction elasticities, i.e. the sensitivities of the reaction rates to changes of substrate concentrations and other parameters. The scaled elasticities, defined as the partial derivativesare dimensionless and represent an effective reaction order (1 for irreversible massaction kinetics, 0 in full saturation). They are used to describe the effects of relative changes, for Taylor expansion on a logarithmic scale, and in the context of log-normal parameter distributions (). Reaction elasticities for metabolite concentrations, enzyme amounts and kinetic constants can be computed from derivatives of the saturation values. The first and second order, scaled and unscaled elasticities for all modular rate laws and different types of regulation are given in the Supplementary Material. If we consider the case of Page: 1533 15281534
Modular rate laws for biochemical reactionscomplete activation or inhibition, the scaled substance elasticities contain three termsrelated to thermodynamics, enzyme mechanism and regulation. The thermodynamic term E T r c i can be expressed by the  r values (i.e. reaction affinities) or by the forward and backward rateswhere dg() denotes diagonal matrices and1and and1 = (1,1,..) T. For reactions close to equilibrium (A r  0,v r  0), this term becomes infinite, just as expected for scaled elasticities. For an irreversible forward reaction (|A r |), in contrast, the thermodynamic term simply reads m + ri , so a non-regulated PM rate law will show substrate elasticity 1 and product elasticity 0. In general, the elasticities are further shifted by the denominator termwhere A = BC denotes the elementwise multiplication of two matrices (i.e. a ij = b ij c ij ). The elasticity matrix of the non-regulated FM rate law can also be written in the simple formwith v * = v + +v . Complete enzyme activation and inhibition lead to the regulation termThe system's Jacobian matrix and the metabolic control and response coefficients () can be computed from the reaction elasticities (33) and the stoichiometric matrix. In a system with non-regulated PM rate laws, for instance, the elasticities are given by Eq. (34) and the scaled control matrix readswhich can be directly computed from the reaction rates and affinities via Equation (23). Due to the equivalence of modular and TKM rate laws, Equation (38) also represents the response matrix Rof a TKM rate law with constant conductivity  r. For systems with other rate laws and regulated enzymes, the terms (35) and (37) have to be factored in. The second-order elasticities describe the interactive effects of perturbations. In analogy to Equation (33), they can be computed asThe thermodynamic term, the kinetic term for the SM rate law, and the term for complete activation and inhibition readwhere  X rj =  X rj  X rj. The kinetic terms E D cc for the other rate laws are more complicated and are given in the Supplementary Material.
Page: 1534 15281534
W.Liebermeister et al.help to specify quantitative rate laws within the Systems Biology Graphical Notation (SBGN;).
CONCLUSIONSTo translate metabolic networks into kinetic models, standard rate laws are needed as substitutes for unknown rate equations. The modular rate laws are less accurate than the detailed kinetic equations, but they are flexible and biochemically plausible, yield simple formulae for reaction rates and elasticities, and can be easily inserted into SBML models. Thermodynamically safe reformulations make it easy to handle the Wegscheider conditions and Haldane relations. They guarantee consistent chemical equilibrium states and clarify the role of thermodynamic forces.
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
i (1+ c i k M ri ) m  ri , (9) where k X ri is a proxy for k M ri , k A ri or k I ri values. The value  X ri quantifies how strongly enzyme r is saturated with respect to compound i and ranges from  X ri = 0 (linear range) to  X ri = 1 (full saturation). Given a set of  X ri values, all
DISCUSSION The modular rate laws cover all possible stoichiometries and several types of regulation with relatively few kinetic parameters and are, therefore, well suited for translating metabolic networks systematically into kinetic models. The reaction rate is determined by four main factors: the thermodynamic force arising from energies and concentrations of reactants (numerator T ), the enzyme level, the enzymatic mechanism (denominator D) and allosteric regulation (f and D reg ). All modular rate laws share the same thermodynamic properties and are reversible, which is a precondition for thermodynamically correct models. If thermodynamic correctness is not required, irreversible reactionsimplying infinite reaction affinitiescan be obtained by omitting the negative term in the numerator. A reformulation based on reaction affinities links the reaction rates to the underlying thermodynamic forces, in close analogy to the thermodynamickinetic formalism (Ederer and Gilles, 2007). A prototypic example is the FM rate law, in which the rate solely depends on the reaction affinity; the resulting entropy production density conforms to Prigogine's principle of minimal entropy production. The reaction affinities also have an impact on the reaction elasticities. Owing to the thermodynamic term, different reaction elasticities are dependent, so independent random sampling as proposed by Steuer et al. (2006) is thermodynamically incorrect. However, our formulae pave the way to an alternative, thermodynamically safe sampling scheme: (i) thermodynamically consistent fluxes and reaction affinities A r are chosen, for instance, by energy balance analysis based on experimental data; (ii) the saturation values  X ri are chosen independently, e.g. from a uniform probability distribution, leading to (iii) thermodynamically correct first-and second-order elasticities. With the PM and FM rate law, the sampling step can be omitted because the elasticities are determined by the reaction rates and affinities alone. Modular rate laws can be automatically inserted into SBML models using semanticSBML (www.semanticsbml.org) or the tool SBMLsqueezer (Drger et al., 2008), which also works as a plug-in for CellDesigner. The stoichiometry and regulators are read from the SBML model, while other information, e.g. about the types of regulation, can be given by Systems Biology Ontology (SBO) terms. Further details (such as cooperativity factors) or the type of thermodynamic parameterization needs to be set by the user. To facilitate this process and to establish a consistent syntax for SBML models, we propose a nomenclature and SBO (Le Novre, 2006) annotations for the rate laws and their kinetic parameters in the Supplementary Material. Among other things, these conventions
