MSeasy performs unsupervised data mining on gas chro-matography–mass spectrometry data. It detects putative compounds within complex metabolic mixtures through the clustering of mass spectra. Retention times or retention indices are used after clustering, together with other validation criteria, for quality control of putative compounds. The package generates a fingerprinting or profiling matrix compatible with NIST mass spectral search program and ARISTO webtool (Automatic Reduction of Ion Spectra To Ontology) for molecule identification. Most commonly used file formats, NetCDF, mzXML and ASCII, are acceptable. A graphical and user-friendly interface , MSeasyTkGUI, is available for R novices. Availability: MSeasy and MSeasytkGUI are implemented as R packages available at http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/MSeasy/index .html and http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/MSeasyTkGUI/index .html
1Universit de Lyon, F-69003, Lyon; Universit de Saint-Etienne, F-42000, Saint-Etienne; Laboratoire BVpam, EA 3061; 23 rue du Dr Michelon, F-42000, Saint-Etienne, 2 INRA USTL UMR SADV 1281 Stress Abiotiques et Diff renciation des V g taux Cultiv s, Universit Lille Nord de France, Lille 1, SN2, F-59655 Villeneuve D'Ascq, 3 Station d'e  cologie exp rimentale du CNRS a ` Moulis, 2 route du CNRS, 09200 Moulis, 4 Centre d'Ecologie Fonctionnelle et Evolutive UMR 5175, 1919, route de Mende-34293 Montpellier cedex 5, France and 5 Universit de Lyon, F-69622, Lyon, France; Universit Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, France; CNRS, UMR5557, Ecologie Microbienne, Villeurbanne, France Associate Editor: Trey Ideker ABSTRACT Summary: MSeasy performs unsupervised data mining on gas chromatographymass spectrometry data. It detects putative compounds within complex metabolic mixtures through the clustering of mass spectra. Retention times or retention indices are used after clustering, together with other validation criteria, for quality control of putative compounds. The package generates a fingerprinting or profiling matrix compatible with NIST mass spectral search program and ARISTO webtool (Automatic Reduction of Ion Spectra To Ontology) for molecule identification. Most commonly used file formats, NetCDF, mzXML and ASCII, are acceptable. A graphical and user-friendly interface, MSeasyTkGUI, is available for R novices. Availability: MSeasy and MSeasytkGUI are implemented as R packages available at http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/MSeasy/index .html and http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/MSeasyTkGUI/index .html Contact: florence.nicole@univ-st-etienne.fr Supplementary information: Additional information, self-guided tutorials and demonstration data are available on the web site: http:
INTRODUCTIONUnveiling metabolic profiles of biological systems and their interface with their environment are being studied increasingly in an untargeted holistic manner. Indeed, global metabolic profiling or fingerprinting () provides a very powerful means of classifying, comparing and discriminating groups of samples. Gas chromatographymass spectrometry (GC-MS) is one of the leading analytical platforms for this approach (). This hyphenated mass spectrometric technique produces large multidimensional data with retention times and peak quantification from gas chromatography and mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) and fragment intensity from mass spectrometer. Handling such complex datasets requires efficient bioinformatics processing tools. In a recent review of bioinformatics tools in metabolomics,have shown that the alignment (i.e. the elimination of retention time shifts between datasets) is still a challenging step associated with numerous technical difficulties. Here, we present an alternative approach for GC-MS data processing, insensitive to shift in retention time. MSeasy works directly on the raw mass spectra (MS) rather than on extensively corrected chromatograms. Unsupervised clustering algorithms group MS into putative compounds. The optimal number of putative compounds in the dataset is identified when the total number of molecules is unknown. MSeasy accelerates the data processing and helps to interpret complex GC-MS datasets by extracting human-understandable structure and supplying quality control criteria. The method was developed as an R package offering substantial flexibility and opportunities for further developments.
DESCRIPTION
RequirementsMSeasy and MSeasyTkGUI depend on the following R packages: fpc, clValid and amap. To read netCDF or mzXML files and to activate GUI, the XCMS and tcltk packages are, respectively, needed.(netCDF, mzXML and ASCII) and can be obtained from many providers. When DataType''CDF'', netCDF or mzXML are the input formats of MS, a peak list named peaklist.txt should be added in each sample folder. When DataType''ASCII'', data have to go through the trans.ASCII function to obtain compatible sample folders. Then the MS.DataCreation function smoothes the chromatograms (N_filt option) and detects peaks by the succession of three points of increasing intensity directly followed by three points of decreasing intensity. When working with data from Agilent Technologies (DataType  ''Agilent''), the peak list is directly extracted from the rteres.txt file in the .D directory and MS are extracted from the AIA/ANDI files generated with the Chemstation software. Depending on the apex option, the relative MS of a peak is obtained by either averaging several MS around the apex or directly extracting the MS at the apex. If quantTRUE, one or two quantification measures of peak size are added in initial_DATA. This option generates one or two distinct profiling matrices after MS.clust. If the two quantification columns are absent, then a fingerprinting matrix (absence or presence of each putative compound) is generated. From Agilent Technologies constructor files, the two measures are corrected peak area and percentage of the total corrected area. The user can skip Step 1 and go directly to Step 2 by entering a file corresponding to initial_DATA.txt. In Step 2, MS.clust runs unsupervised clustering methods on MS from the initial_DATA matrix or equivalent. Prior to MS.clust, an optional function MS.test.clust can be used to identify the best clustering algorithm. User should create a training dataset where molecules are already well identified and represented by several sample MS. Since the total number of true molecules is usually unknown in untargeted metabolic approaches, the use of unsupervised clustering algorithms is required. These include partitional and hierarchical algorithms with various combinations of distance metrics and link methods (). The results of clustering algorithms are evaluated with three cluster validity indices that assess which clustering scheme best fits the data. The matching coefficient computes for correct assignment of each MS to the expected molecules. Silhouette Width () and Dunn's Index (), based on cluster compactness and isolation, assess for the quality of clustering. MS.test.clust was run on various datasets: lavender species on Agilent GC-MS (), tropical trees on Varian GC-MS (), Petrel birds on Varian GC-MS () and Mandrills on Shimadzu GC-MS (Charpentier, pers. com.). Perfect clustering and best performances were always obtained with the hierarchical agglomerative clustering with Euclidean distance and Ward link. This method is recommended by default in MS.clust. Since the best clustering method is established, the function MS.clust can be used. When the total number of molecules in the dataset is unknown, MS.clust can first identify the optimal number of clusters. After running the clustering on a user-defined range of numbers of clusters (clV  TRUE), a graphic window displays the mean Silhouette Width as a function of the number of clusters. A red line indicates the optimal number of clusters. The user can define one or several optimal numbers of clusters (multimodal distribution or limits of a plateau). For each user-defined number of clusters, a set of output files is generated to control the quality and identify putative compounds: Output_cluster.txt and Output_peak.txt summarize, respectively, cluster and peak information. They provide different quality criteria for manual investigation: among others, peak and cluster Silhouette Width, the eight more abundant mass fragments per peak, peak redundancy (indicate if a cluster contains several peaks from the same chromatogram), the range of retention time and homogeneous cluster status. Homogeneous clusters are defined by a shift in RT/RI lower than varRT (varRT  RT max  RT min 5 0.1 by default but can be fixed to high value for omission). For molecule identification, automatic assignment is performed if a set of commercial standards or manually assigned reference compounds are added in the initial_DATA matrix. In addition, MSeasy output files can be used directly for molecule identifications with NIST mass spectral search program (MSeasytoNIST, SeachNIST) and ARISTO webtool (MSeasyToARISTO). Finally, depending on the quant option, MS.clust returns a fingerprinting matrix (0 for absence and 1 for presence) or one or two profiling matrices for homogeneous clusters. These matrices of processed data can be directly used for data analysis.
Workflow
CONCLUSIONThe novel R package MSeasy is a free, easy-to-use and powerful raw data processing pipeline that extracts essential information from raw GC-MS data with minimal effort. It is insensitive to shift in retention time and does not require chromatogram alignment. MSeasy speeds up greatly GC-MS data processing, allows handling large amount of data and limits labor-intensive and error-prone tasks.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
F. Nicol et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
