Many natural nucleic acid sequences have evolutionarily conserved secondary structures with diverse biological functions. A reliable computational tool for identifying such structures would be very useful in guiding experimental analyses of their biological functions. NASP (Nucleic Acid Structure Predictor) is a program that takes into account thermodynamic stability, Boltzmann base pair probabilities, alignment uncertainty, covarying sites and evolutionary conservation to identify biologically relevant secondary structures within multiple sequence alignments. Unique to NASP is the consideration of all this information together with a recursive permutation-based approach to progressively identify and list the most conserved probable secondary structures that are likely to have the greatest biological relevance. By focusing on identifying only evolutionarily conserved structures, NASP forgoes the prediction of complete nucleotide folds but outperforms various other secondary structure prediction methods in its ability to selectively identify actual base pairings. Availability: Downloable and web-based versions of NASP are freely available at
NASPthan that of RNAalifold (which was overall the most accurate of the programs we tested; Supplementary). Nevertheless, we must stress that the primary focus of NASP is the identification of base pairings with a false positive rate that is as low as possible: a focus that should prove particularly useful in studies aiming to evaluate the function of evolutionarily conserved (and therefore probably functional) nucleic acid secondary structures in that it should substantially reduce the time and expense needed to home in on those structures with the greatest biological relevance.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
(1) The coordinates of nucleotides within the bounds of what appear to be the largest and most evolutionarily conserved structure represented in M are added to a list of potentially paired sites (Supplementary Figure S1). (2) All alignment columns that are not included in this list are randomly shuffled 100 or more times with the MFEs of each sequence in each shuffled alignment being compared with those of sequences in the original alignment. (3) The existence of additional unaccounted for structural motifs in the sequences is inferred when the MFE estimates of all sequences in the unshuffled alignment are smaller than those of at least 95% of the corresponding sequences in the shuffled alignments. The probability that there remain no unaccounted for paired nucleotides within the alignment fraction excluded from the potentially paired site list is estimated as the fraction of shuffled sequences with MFE estimates lower than those of their unshuffled counterparts. (4) When the MFEs of the unshuffled sequences are less than those of 95% of their shuffled counterparts, the recursion continues from (1) with sites in the next most evolutionarily conserved structure being added to the paired site list. The time complexity of NASP, which should be substantially reduced given that MFEs are computed in parallel, is O(NPL 3 ) and the space complexity is O(L 2 ) where L is the length, N the number of sequences in the alignment and P the number of permutation tests. Currently our web version of NASP accepts datasets of, for example 303 Kb sequences or 1010 Kb sequences and analyses these within 144 h (results from comparison of computational times are shown in Supplementary Table S1). Given a sequence alignment containing evidence of evolutionarily conserved secondary structures as input, NASP outputs (i) the coordinates of potentially conserved stems and P-values indicating statistical support for additional unaccounted for secondary structures remaining in the sequences following each recursion, (ii) the consensus structure in both the Vienna bracket-dot and a concatenation file formats and (iii) the consensus base-pairing matrix, M, in both text and graphical formats. Tests using known reference RNA structures (Table 1 for examples and Supplementary Table S1 for the complete set) indicate that the overall selectivity (the proportion of inferred base pairs that are actually in the reference structures) of NASP is considerably better than that of RNAalifold (Bernhart et al., 2008), Pfold (Knudsen and Hein, 2003), CentroidAliFold (Hamada et al., 2009) and EvoFold (Pedersen et al., 2006). The cost of NASP's low false positive rate is, however, a decreased true positive rate such that its overall accuracy (measured here using the Mathews Correlation Coefficient, MCC of Gardner and Giegerich, 2004) is slightly lower
