The nucleotide binding site leucine-rich repeats (NBSLRRs) belong to one of the largest known families of disease resistance genes that encode resistance proteins (R-protein) against the pathogens of plants. Various defence mechanisms have explained the regulation of plant immunity , but still, we have limited understanding about plant defence against different pathogens. Identification of R-proteins and proteins having R-protein-like features across the genome, tran-scriptome and proteome would be highly useful to develop the global understanding of plant defence mechanisms, but it is laborious and time-consuming task. Therefore, we have developed a support vector machine-based high-throughput pipeline called NBSPred to differentiate NBSLRR and NBSLRR-like protein from Non-NBSLRR proteins from genome, transcriptome and protein sequences. The pipeline was tested and validated with input sequences from three dicot and two monocot plants including Arabidopsis thaliana, Boechera stricta, Brachypodium distachyon Solanum lycopersicum and Zea mays. Availability and implementation: The NBSPred pipeline is available at http://soilecology.biol.lu.se/ nbs/.
IntroductionR-proteins are well known as plant defence proteins against pathogens that contain different domains like nucleotide binding domain (NB-ARC), leucine-rich repeat (LRR), Toll-interleukin-like receptor (TIR), Coiled-Coiled (CC) and kinase (KIN). Five different kinds of R-protein domain association categories () were found as majority including TIR-NBS-LRR (TNL), CC-NBS-LRR (CNL), Receptor-like kinase, Receptor-like proteins and last category Others. A number of hypotheses have been proposed for explaining the regulation of plant immunity against pathogens such as the guard hypothesis, the receptorligand hypothesis () and the structure-based functional hypothesis (). But several questions are still unanswered: How many R-genes need to be expressed to acquire resistance against microorganisms acting as pathogens in plants? How many other proteins are involved directly or indirectly in the resistance process ()? How is the dynamic intracellular localization achieved, as the majority of nucleotide binding site leucine-rich repeat (NBSLRR) proteins lack signal peptides (Currently, sequence and motif similarity, domain matching and domain association-based methods are in use, each demanding a lot of data processing and time for genome-wide identification of R-proteins (). Disease Resistance Analysis and Gene Orthology (DRAGO) pipeline of the PRG database is also based on BLAST search and domain analysis (), whereas the NLR-parser is based on MAST motif search (). Prediction of R-proteins on the basis of sequence and domain similarity with a small set of reference R-genes is challenging due to the high level of diversity, as R-genes are under high selection pressure to adapt their immunity to the rapidly evolving effector genes in the pathogens (). Experimental screening of R-genes in plants would be difficult to perform at large scale. But presently, a large number of plant genomes and transcriptomes have been sequenced and assembled. Despite data availability, identification of NBSLRR sequences in sequenced plants is still limited at large scale with present available tools. Nowadays, machinelearning techniques are used much more efficiently for answering biological questions. As a solution, the NBSPred an automated pipeline have been proposed by using support vector machine (SVM) technique. NBSPred is facilitating the high-throughput identification of NBSLRR sequences from genome, transcripts and protein sequences as input.
MethodsR-protein and non-R-protein sequences were retrieved from the GenBank database. Redundancy removal was performed through clustering. A domain-based approach was used for the final selection of sequences in both datasets. The sequences having both NB-ARC and LRR domain together along with other additional domains like Pkinase, TIR, CC and so forth were selected in the positive dataset, whereas the sequences that had domains of positive dataset were removed from negative dataset. Six types of sequence compositional frequencies (amino acid frequency, dipeptide frequency, tripeptide frequency, multiplet frequency, charge and hydrophobicity composition) were calculated for each sequence, and a numerical feature vector was created for each sequence of positive and negative datasets (). SVM_learn and SVM_classify modules from the SVM light package () were used to generate an SVM classifier for NBSLRR protein prediction. Best classifiers were identified through 5-fold cross validation technique (Supplementary Sections S1 and S2). Augustus 2.7 was used in the pipeline for the annotation of plant genome (). TransDecoder () was used for the protein Open Reading Frame generation from transcripts. The Pfam database was used for the domain identification in predicted NBSLRR proteins. The flowchart of the pipeline is given in.
ImplementationThe NBSPred pipeline was hosted on a Dell PowerEdge T320 Server E5-2430 with 12 core processors of 2.2 GHz, running on CentOS 7.0 64 bits. The pipeline is freely accessible as a web interface which was developed in PHP version 5.5.10 along with other freely available academic software. Moreover, the NBSPred pipeline also provides non-interactive options for batch submission and user notification via email.
Results and discussionA total of 974 sequences were involved in the training, which have NB-ARC and LRR domain together (Supplementary). Composition-based amino-acid frequencies were used for prediction after the analysis of training sequences (Supplementary Section S1.4). Five-hundred eighty-eight models were generated through variable input of different kernel function and kernel-associated parameters. For the polynomial kernel, values of d and C were increased stepwise through a combination of 1, 2, 3, 4. .. to. .. 9 for the d and 10 5 , 10 6. .. to. .. 10 15 for C. For the Radial basis function kernel, the gamma (g) was incremented stepwise 10 15. .. to. .. 10 3 and parameter C from 10 5. .. to. .. 10 15. The mean Matthews correlation coefficient and prediction accuracy of the best performed model, kernel type and kernel-associated values are given in Supplementary Table S2. NBSPred achieved $99% and 83% prediction accuracy for training and independent dataset, respectively (Supplementary Tables S2 and S3). NBSPred has shown high exploration potential than NLR-parser in comparison of different datasets (Supplementary Tables S4S9). NLRParser has detected 91.12% sequences as R-protein from independent dataset but only 49.72% sequences have class assignment. Prediction of R-protein classes (CNL and TNL) through NLRParser are varies like many sequences are predicted as CNL/ TNL but all the domains does not appear in Pfam search.Moreover, NLR-parser is not compatible for prediction from genomic assemblies. All the processed files for prediction and comparison are available at help section of NBSPred website.
High-throughput prediction and validationAs proof, we demonstrated the efficiency of the NBSPred prediction and explorative capability through screening of five plants (three dicots and two monocots) for Phytozome data repository (). Number of detected sequences through NBSPred for transcriptome and proteome are given, respectively, for Boechera stricta (722, 699), Arabidopsisthaliana (604, 595), Solanum lycopersicum (564, 577), Zea Mays (477, 428) and Brachypodium distachyon (752, 738). Three plant genomes (A.thaliana, Solanum lycopersicum and Zea mays) were scanned for R-protein domains from genomic assemblies through Augustus trained gene prediction models (Supplementary Tables S7S9). NBSpred have long-term objective to provide good gene prediction models for crop plants. NBSPred-predicted sequences with high score, with or without NB-ARC and LRR domain are strong R-gene candidates which possess high level of sequence composition similarity like R-genes, but these sequences are required careful annotation and experimental validation.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
S.K.Kushwaha et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
