Non-coding RNA (ncRNA) PROfiling in small RNA (sRNA)-seq (ncPRO-seq) is a stand-alone, comprehensive and flexible ncRNA analysis pipeline. It can interrogate and perform detailed profiling analysis on sRNAs derived from annotated non-coding regions in miRBase, Rfam and RepeatMasker, as well as specific regions defined by users. The ncPRO-seq pipeline performs both gene-based and family-based analyses of sRNAs. It also has a module to identify regions significantly enriched with short reads, which cannot be classified under known ncRNA families, thus enabling the discovery of previously unknown ncRNA-or small interfering RNA (siRNA)-producing regions. The ncPRO-seq pipeline supports input read sequences in fastq, fasta and color space format, as well as alignment results in BAM format, meaning that sRNA raw data from the three current major platforms (Roche-454, Illumina-Solexa and Life technologies-SOLiD) can be analyzed with this pipeline. The ncPRO-seq pipeline can be used to analyze read and alignment data, based on any sequenced genome, including mammals and plants. Availability: Source code, annotation files, manual and online version are available at http://
INTRODUCTIONResearch on small non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) has advanced tremendously over recent years as a consequence of the widespread adoption of small RNA (sRNA)-seq, which has helped to characterize members of known sRNA families, such as microRNAs (miRNAs), small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and piwi-interacting RNA (piRNA) (;). In addition, analysis of sRNA-seq data has led to the identification of several novel small ncRNA families, including heterochromatic sRNA (), small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA)-derived RNAs (sdRNAs) (), transfer RNA (tRNA)-derived RNA fragments (tRFs) (), transcription initiation RNAs (tiRNAs), splice-site RNAs (spliRNAs) () and enhancer RNAs (eRNAs) (). Given that most of the genome is transcribed (), further small ncRNA families are still probably hidden in unannoated regions, awaiting detailed exploration. Despite this, most of the existing sRNA-seq analysis tools only focus on miRNAs (), whereas some other tools are applicable to the prediction of special or general siRNA loci (). As far as we are aware, only two approachesSeqCluster () and DARIO ()are currently available for annotating and classifying whole sRNA-seq data in an unbiased way. SeqCluster not only carefully groups non-miRNA reads into units but also provides classification and annotation of unit-sRNAs. DARIO web server contains both sRNA annotation and prediction engines, but cannot be used to process repeat-associated sRNAs, owing to the size limitation of data submission. Furthermore, these tools perform mostly gene-based analyses, providing information about read mapping in each ncRNA gene/region. However, to systematically investigate small ncRNA species in a given annotation family (i.e. miRNA, other sRNAs families or repeats families), profiling analyses, which refers to detailed descriptions of diverse features of read distribution in annotation families, are necessary. The ncRNA PROfiling in sRNA-seq (ncPRO-seq) pipeline circumvents these limitations by providing detailed information on all types of small ncRNAs and identifying unannotated regions that are significantly enriched in matching sRNAs. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.
zThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the last two authors should be regarded as joint Last Authors.
METHODSThe workflow of the ncPRO-seq pipeline is composed of five main steps: input pre-processing, read mapping, read annotation, annotation analyses and enrichment analyses (Supplementary). The pipeline is able to handle sequence files generated by Solexa, SOLiD and 454 sequencing technologies and alignment files in BAM format as inputs. For sequence file inputs, the pipeline provides several ways to access the basic properties of sequencing reads, such as distribution of read length, positional base, mean positional quality score and GC content. An optional step can be introduced, for both sequence and alignment inputs, by merging reads with identical sequence into non-redundant read groups, which dramatically improves the performance of the pipeline. Bowtie () is used to align reads to the reference genome. The mapping statistics and length distribution of mapped reads are computed to summarize mapping information. All reads, including those matching multiple genomic locations (up to a user-defined threshold), are kept for subsequent analyses and weighted by the number of mapping sites. To find overlaps between read alignments and genomic annotations, i.e. to match reads to ncRNA families according to genomic coordinates, BEDTools () is used. Annotation files for 15 species (including metazoans and plants), based on miRBase (), Rfam (), RepeatMasker, splice site and tRNAs (), are precomputed and now available for download in the ncPRO-seq web site. Custom annotation files in gff3 format are also acceptable, which will be considered as user-defined ncRNA families and be processed in the same way as known ncRNA families. Four types of operations are provided to help users focus on subregions or regions flanking given annotations (Supplementary). Analyses are then performed for reads that have 100% overlap with annotations. Reads annotated as major annotation families, as well as each family of Rfam and repeats, are counted and plotted to provide a systematic view of read annotations. For each annotation family, the table containing the expression of reads in each single member and the track file for visualization are created. To obtain detailed family-based information, read profiling and read logos for each family are computed. Read profiling is represented by the distribution of read coverage along the consensus sequence and by the distribution of read length (Supplementary). Read logos describe the positional base bias in all reads mapped in the family. For reads that cannot be annotated as known features, a sliding-window process coupled with model fitting is performed to identify regions that are significantly enriched with such reads ().
IMPLEMENTATIONThe ncPRO-seq pipeline can be used in a Linux/Unix-like operating system, where several required softwares have been pre-installed. Two different ways of running the pipeline are provided, a stand-alone command line version and a local web interface. Both versions require a configuration file to set up the analysis parameters. After editing the configuration file, the user can easily run the complete analysis workflow with a simple command line. The pipeline is modular and sequential, which allows the user to focus on a specific part of the pipeline without running the complete workflow. The pipeline also provides a local web interface (Supplementary), which offers the possibility to set up the parameters of the configuration files in a user-friendly way, to run the pipeline. Finally, an online version for small datasets and tests is also available at http://ncpro.curie .fr/online.html.
OUTPUTAfter running ncPRO-seq, an html report is generated, facilitating the visualization of the results that are organized under different web tabs. Besides essential tabs containing information about pipeline performance, tables and figures of read quality controls, mapping and annotations, each annotation family specified by the user has an independent tab displaying the results of detailed profiling analyses. All images and tables generated by the pipeline can be visualized at high resolution or downloaded for further analysis. An example of a report from a test library is available at http://ncpro.curie.fr/results.html.
CONCLUSIONThe ncPRO-seq pipeline provides a comprehensive approach for the annotation and prediction of small ncRNAs in sRNA-seq data. The pipeline can analyse different annotation families rather than just focusing on miRNAs. Various sequence and alignment inputs from different metazoan and plant genomes are supported. The great advantage of the pipeline over others is the capacity to perform profiling analyses of annotation families, which is critically important to investigate known small ncRNA families and to define novel small ncRNA families. The significant regions predicted in the pipeline can be further interpreted to identify novel miRNA loci and siRNA clusters.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
C.-J.Chen et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ncPRO-seq at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
