Motivation: Gene enrichment is a requisite for the interpretation of biological complexity related to specific molecular pathways and biological processes. Furthermore, when interpreting NGS data and human variations, including those related to pathologies, gene enrichment allows the inclusion of other genes that in the human interactome space may also play important key roles in the emergency of the phenotype. Here, we describe NET-GE, a web server for associating biological processes and pathways to sets of human proteins involved in the same phenotype Results: NET-GE is based on protein–protein interaction networks, following the notion that for a set of proteins, the context of their specific interactions can better define their function and the processes they can be related to in the biological complexity of the cell. Our method is suited to extract statistically validated enriched terms from Gene Ontology, KEGG and REACTOME annotation databases. Furthermore, NET-GE is effective even when the number of input proteins is small. Availability and Implementation: NET-GE web server is publicly available and accessible at http:// net-ge.biocomp.unibo.it/enrich.
IntroductionBig Data production in biomedicine is rapidly changing the way in which molecular knowledge is translated into health care (). The spread and establishment of High Throughput Sequencing (HTS) technologies allows retrieving lists of interesting variations characterizing the investigated phenotype. In the context of functional genomics, each phenotype needs annotations for reconciling variations with known and putatively common biological processes and pathways, such as Gene Ontology (, KEGG2015), based on the extraction of subnetworks connecting proteins that share the same functional terms from a proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network (). Differently from other methods also based on networks, our approach extracts modules that are function-specific by constructions and include all the seeds (proteins annotated with the same term) that in the PPI network are related to a specific functional annotation. One peculiarity of NET-GE is the possibility to enrich terms that are not present in the annotation of the starting protein set (and thus not detectable through a standard enrichment). When tested on the OMIM-derived benchmark sets, NET-GE is able to enrich sets of genes related to the same disease with biologically meaningful terms neglected by other methods (). The server, in addition, allows annotation based on KEGG and REACTOME pathways and a comparison between standard and network based enrichment.tion term we collect the seeds and evaluate the quality of the connecting nodes among seeds (for more details, see Supplementary). After constraining seed distance, we determine the subset associated to a specific annotation term by retaining the minimal connecting subnetwork (). Considering STRING, NET-GE presently includes 20 391 annotation subsets (see http:// net-ge.biocomp.unibo.it/enrich/statistics), 14 845 of which contain from two to 10 700 genes. The number of genes per subset is inversely proportional to the information content and the most informative terms correspond to small networks (). The server implements both a standard and a network-based gene enrichment. Given a gene/protein list, each gene/protein is located in the different subsets of the annotation database. With a Fisher's exact test, the method estimates the overrepresentation significance of input genes/proteins in each precomputed subset for the corresponding annotation term. Standard enrichment includes only annotations of seed nodes; network-based enrichment includes seeds and their connecting nodes. For multiple testing correction, we use both the Bonferroni and the Benjamini-Hochberg (False Discovery Rate, FDR) procedures and evaluate a corrected p-value (). Updating of the system, including human interactome and annotation databases is planned once a year, following the major releases.
NET-GE
Web serverNET-GE Web interface accepts UniProtKB Accession Numbers, Ensembl and HGNC gene names. The end user can select: (i) annotation modules based on STRING or STRING 0.9; (ii) the annotation (GO terms, KEGG, REACTOME); (iii) the multiple testing correction methods (Bonferroni or the Benjamini-Hochberg correction); (iv) the significance threshold. The output lists two enrichment tables: one for the standard and one for the network-based method (see the online tutorial for more details). Each table contains the annotation term identifier, linked to the corresponding database; the number and the list of input genes/ proteins associated to the term; the P-value of the association; the description of the term and for the network based enrichment a visualization of the subnetwork. Enriched terms not included in the annotations of the input gene/protein are highlighted with a double star (see on line tutorial). It is also possible to access the complete set of annotations (for both the enrichment modes) of the submitted genes/proteins through the link provided at the bottom of the page. The front-end for the Web server follows the Model-ViewController (MVC) paradigm, thanks to the web2py framework (http://www.web2py.com/), and it is optimized to work with all common web browsers. The analysis runs asynchronously: after submitting the query, the server displays a bookmarkable page reporting the status of the job. This page is periodically updated. A link to the results, accessible as soon as the job is completed, is given to the user. The final visualization of the results exploits the Graphviz library (http://www.graphviz.org/) and the JavaScript
(Kanehisa et al., 2016), REACTOME (Fabregat et al., 2016). At this level of biological complexity, a set of genes and their variations can acquire biological meaning and feature annotation only with an enrichment procedure (Laukens et al., 2015). Enrichment helps in identifying within a set of genes some statistically significant and over-represented annotation features. Standard enrichment methods rely on the statistical over representation of the annotations that characterize the genes in the input set. Alternatively, network-based approaches extract graph properties from different interaction networks and pathways for modelling the complexity of the processes occurring in the cell and exploit this information for accomplishing the annotation enrichment in the context of protein functional interaction. Lists of web sites are available (Huang et al., 2009; Laukens et al., 2015; Mooney and Wilmot, 2015). Here, we introduce NETGE, a web server that implements our method (Di Lena et al., V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 1 Bioinformatics, 2016, 13 doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw508 Advance Access Publication Date: 2 August 2016 Application note Bioinformatics Advance Access published August 20, 2016 at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
