Neuropeptides are essential for cell–cell communication in neurological and endocrine physiological processes in health and disease. While many neuropeptides have been identified in previous studies, the resulting data has not been structured to facilitate further analysis by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), the main technology for high-throughput neuropeptide identification. Many neuropeptides are difficult to identify when searching MS/MS spectra against large protein databases because of their atypical lengths (e.g. shorter/longer than common tryptic peptides) and lack of tryptic residues to facilitate peptide ionization/fragmentation. NeuroPedia is a neuropeptide encyclopedia of peptide sequences (including genomic and taxonomic information) and spectral libraries of identified MS/MS spectra of homolog neuropeptides from multiple species. Searching neuropeptide MS/MS data against known NeuroPedia sequences will improve the sensitivity of database search tools. Moreover, the availability of neuropeptide spectral libraries will also enable the utilization of spectral library search tools, which are known to further improve the sensitivity of peptide identification. These will also reinforce the confidence in peptide identifications by enabling visual comparisons between new and previously identified neuropeptide MS/MS spectra.
INTRODUCTIONNeuropeptides are peptide neurotransmitters and hormones that mediate cellcell communication for regulation of physiological functions and biological processes. Understanding the role and regulation of neuropeptide forms in health, disease and drug treatments requires the ability to globally analyze neuropeptide expression in an unbiased form. Mass spectrometry (MS) based neuropeptidomics is highly suited for untargeted, global neuropeptides studies (). However, the unique characteristics of neuropeptides (e.g. short/long sequences or nontryptic) presents difficulties for identification from tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) with popular database search tools such as SEQUEST (), and Mascot (). For * To whom correspondence should be addressed. example, short neuropeptides can lead to inaccurate search results because the database search tools usually assign lower scores to short peptides. Conversely, long or nontryptic neuropeptides are difficult to identify because most database search tools are trained for tryptic peptides cleaved at K/R and because peptide fragmentation processes for long neuropeptides is usually not efficient. In addition, searching larger databases takes more time because of the number of comparisons and reduces the number of resulting identifications by allowing more choices for false positives (). Therefore, while some neuropeptides can be identified with current bioinformatics approaches, complete neuropeptidomics will require the design of novel computational tools for identifying both short and longer neuropeptides using tandem mass spectrometry (). The online neuropeptide repository at www.neuropeptides.nl provides non-searchable neuropeptide sequences, gene names, precursor names and expected expression in the human brain. It also offers hyperlinks to bioinformatics databases on genomes, transcripts, protein structure and brain expression (). Unfortunately, this resource is not designed to enable identification from MS/MS data. Users must search their data using other peptide database search tools and later compare the results against the neuropeptide list. This process is much less sensitive and requires time-consuming manual matching of search results to information in existing resources. NeuroPedia is a specialized neuropeptide database and spectral library that is directly searchable using mass spectrometry data. In addition to the expected improvement in sensitivity from searching against a small targeted sequence database, the neuropeptide spectral libraries further improve identification efficiency, sensitivity and reliability by considering all spectral features, including actual fragment intensities, neutral losses from fragments and various uncommon or even unknown fragments to determine the best matches. NeuroPedia spectral libraries are compatible with the publicly available spectral library search tool M-SPLIT () and can be easily converted to other spectral library formats. To further facilitate visual evaluation of neuropeptide MS/MS spectra, NeuroPedia provides annotated spectrum images for every library spectrum and further separates spectral libraries by species, digestion enzyme and instrument type (see Supplementary Table).
METHODSNeuroPedia aggregates neuropeptide data from in-house mass spectrometry experiments with data from multiple reference websites and public spectral library. Using python HTML parsing and manual typing, we gathered neuropeptide names, gene families, gene names and their protein names), and UniProt (). In addition, we also obtained neuropeptide sequences, their start and end positions on the precursor protein, species, RefSeq ID and UniProt ID from UniProt. We collected NCBI taxonomy ID and gene reference ID from NCBI. Using cluster searching at 50% identity in UniProt, we expanded the catalog of species from human into chimpanzee, mouse, rat, bovine, rhesus macaque and California sea hare. We further analyzed the collected neuropeptide sequences to classify sequence similarities between neuropeptides into three match types: (a) identical if the sequences are exactly the same, (b) overlapping if the prefix of one sequence exactly matches the suffix of the other sequence for at least k characters, where k is half the length of longest sequence and (c) homolog if overlapping as in (b) but allowing up to two amino acid substitutions. Neuropeptide spectra were collected from NIST spectral libraries (), and in-house datasets (). All collected MS/MS spectra were searched against the NeuroPedia sequences database using InsPecT () at http://proteomics .ucsd.edu with search parameters: Instrument (ESI-ION-TRAP or QTOF), Cysteine protecting group (Carbamidomethylation +57), Protease (Trypsin, None), 2Da Parent mass tolerance, 0.5Da Ion tolerance, no post-translational modifications and including common contaminants (digestion enzymes and Human Keratins). V8 digested runs were searched as above but with the protease parameter set to 'None'.
RESULTSThe NeuroPedia spectral library contains a total of 3401 identified spectra in 10 MGF files as described in SupplementaryIn addition to providing libraries for all identified spectra, NeuroPedia also contains libraries of manually validated high/lowquality spectra for unique combinations of peptide sequence and precursor charge states. The NeuroPedia sequence database contains 847 neuropeptides from human, chimpanzee, mouse, rat, cow, California sea hare, rhesus macaque and medicinal leech. Using InsPecT or any other database search tool, new MS/MS data can be searched against this sequence database. As shown in Total/UniProt in Supplementary Table, searching against NeuroPedia identifies many more spectra than the UniProt database. Out of all possible 340 725 pairs of neuropeptides sequences (without considering species), there are 531 pairs with identical sequences (type a), 5020 pairs with overlapping sequences (type b), and 9185 pairs with homolog sequences (type c). A detailed description of the format of the databases is provided in Supplementary Materials.
CONCLUSIONSNeuroPedia is a convenient and accessible repository of neuropeptide sequences and MS/MS spectral libraries. It offers advantages in terms of faster and more precise identification of small sized or nontryptic neuropeptides. We anticipate that NeuroPedia will continue to grow as data from more laboratories and experiments are contributed directly to NeuroPedia or otherwise become publicly available in mass spectrometry data repositories. In particular, it is expected that NeuroPedia will expand to include neuropeptide information for more species and mass spectrometry data of post-translationally modified neuropeptides. NeuroPedia can be accessed at http://proteomics.ucsd.edu/Software/ NeuroPedia.html.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
