Motivation: Biofuel cells (BFCs) based on enzymes and microbes are the promising future alternative sources of sustainable electrical energy under mild conditions (i.e. ambient temperature and neutral pH). By combining the adaptive behavior of BFCs self-regulating energy release with the versatility of biocomputing, we construct a novel gas-controlled biocomputing security system, which could be used as the potential implantable self-powered and 'smart' medical system with the logic diagnosis aim. Results: We have demonstrated a biocomputing security system based on BFCs. Due to the unique 'RESET' reagent of N 2 applied in this work, the prepared biocomputing security system can be reset and cycled for a large number of times with no 'RESET' reagent-based 'waste'. This would be advantageous for the potential practical applications of such keypad lock as well as the development of biocomputing security devices. In order to validate the universality of the system and also to harvest energy directly from biofuels with enhanced power output, we replace the glucose with orange juice as the biofuel to operate BFCs-based biocomputing system, which also possesses the function of keypad lock. In addition, by introducing BFCs into the biocomputing security system, the adaptive behavior of the BFCs self-regulating the power release would be an immense advantage of such security keypad lock devices in potential self-powered implantable medical systems. The designed sequence gives the maximum power output and discriminate itself from the rest of the sequences. From this, we find that maximizing the dimensionless ratio of gap versus SD of the power output spectrum (a funnel in power outputs) gives the quantitative optimal design criterion. Therefore, our construction here may also provide a practical example and microscopic structural basis for mimicking the real biological network systems and bridge the gaps between the theoretical concepts and experiments important for biomolecular systems and synthetic biology. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONBiofuel cells (BFCs) based on enzymes () and microbes () are the promising future alternative sources of sustainable electrical energy under mild conditions (i.e. ambient temperature and neutral pH). The uses of the biomass, such as glucose, endogenously existing in the biological systems suggest the important potential applications of BFCs as one kind of implantable power sources for biomedical devices including micropumps, pacemakers, neuromorphic circuits, etc. (). So such adaptive behavior of the implantable BFC self-regulating the power release would be an immense advantage of these bioelectronic devices (). Logic lies at the heart of modern computers, and the components that carry out its operations are logic gates (). In electronic computers, logic gates are sculpted on the surface of silicon wafers. Their inputs and outputs are electrical voltages, but these are not the only systems that can form logic circuits. In recent years, much research interest was directed to unconventional chemical computing (), performing Boolean logic operations without the involvement of electronic computers and responding to a large variety of activating input signals in homogeneous solutions or at interfaces functionalized with molecular/supramolecular moieties. Recently, the combination of unconventional chemical logic gates and logic circuits has been used for developing keypad locks based on unconventional chemical system (). It is an attractive research goal in the area of unconventional chemical computing and offers a new approach for protecting information. Biocomputing, belonging to a subarea of unconventional chemical computing and performed by living organisms (e.g. proteins/enzymes, DNA, RNA and whole biological cells) (), is aiming at the information processing using biochemical means. Two different branches of the biocomputing systems are being developed in different directions. One is aiming at competing with traditional electronic computation taking advantages of parallel computing performed by numerous biomolecules (usuallyPage: 400 399404
M.Zhou et al.represented by DNA computing) (). This is expected to solve complex combinatorial problems faster and more effectively than conventional computers. Another direction is not aiming at any complex computation but rather creating a 'smart' information processing interface between biological and electronic systems, operating as a logic information preprocessing unit (, b, c). In this work, by combining the adaptive behavior of the BFCs self-regulating the energy release with the keypad lock function of biocomputing system, we fabricated a novel reusable BFCs-based biocomputing security system mimicking a keypad lock device. Due to the unique non-destructive SET and RESET operations on the system, such device can be readily 'SET-RESET' without introducing any 'RESET' reagent-based 'waste'. Additionally, by replacing glucose with orange juice as the biofuel, the fabricated BFC not only can operate with enhanced power output, but also can be used as the biocomputing keypad lock. Furthermore, according to the Boolean logic operations 'programmed' in such biocomputing system, the proof-of-concept experiments with BFC operating in serum, air injection mimicking dissolved oxygen in blood and electrolyte-agitation mimicking blood flow suggest that such device could be used as the potential self-powered and 'smart' implantable medical system with the diagnosis aim. And it can further mimic real natural logic operations of genetic networks which may provide new direction of the systems biology (). We performed a global study by analyzing the power output spectrum of various input sequences. The designed sequence gives the maximum power output and discriminates itself from the rest of the sequences. From this, we find that maximizing the dimensionless ratio of gap versus SD of the power output spectrum (a funnel in power outputs) gives the quantitative optimal design criterion.
MATERIALS AND METHODSMaterials and methods part has been shown in the Supplementary Material.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Construction of miniature BFCThe BFCs-based non-destructive 'SET-RESET' keypad lock system was developed on the basis of the compartment-less glucose/O 2 BFC reported by us recently (see the details in Fabrication of bioanode and biocathode in Materials and methods part in the Supplementary Material): () bioanode with the immobilization of glucose dehydrogenase (GDH) exhibited bioelectrocatalytic activity for oxidizing glucose. On the other hand, biocathode was immobilized by laccase (LAC), an enzyme specific for catalyzing a 4-electron reduction of O 2 (). The initial BFCs-based keypad lock system was composed of the prepared compartment-less BFC operating in 2 ml of quiescent N 2-saturated base solutionsystem, which can be presented as the network composed of three concatenated AND gates (). Each AND gate was activated by two input signals: one of them a 2 ml quiescent base solution (saturated with N 2 , air or O 2 ) and the second is an input [75 s of air injection (pumping rate: 10 ml/s), 80 s of O 2 injection (pumping rate: 10 ml/s) or 5 s of electrolyte-agitation (stirring rate: 600 rpm)]. It should be noted that: (i) each input was operated only with the applied time; (ii) the effect of gas injection on the maximum power output (P max ) of BFC was measured after gas injection; (iii) the effect of electrolyte agitation on the P max value of BFC was measured during the electrolyte agitation. The chemical input signals for the system were considered as 1 when they are present and 0 if they are absent. In order to distinguish the output state, the P max value produced by the BFC is as the output signal of 1 when it is above the threshold of 130 W/cm 2 and the output signal of 0 if it is below 130 W/cm 2. It also should be noteworthy that the quiescent N 2-saturated base solution for the first AND gate was always 1, while quiescent air-saturated base solution and quiescent O 2-saturated base solution as input 1 for the second and the third AND gates were produced in situ upon the air and O 2 injections. In addition, we restrict that each signal can be input only once in each SET operation in this work. By pumping O 2 into air-saturated base solution (Input B), the obtained base solution can be considered as O 2-saturated base solution due to the same polarization curves in the O 2-saturated base solution and in the obtained base solution at biocathode (Supplementary). Also due to the enhanced current density for O 2 reduction at biocathode, the P max value of BFC (98 W/cm 2 at +0.54 V,) after Input B was higher compared with that in air-saturated base solution (39 W/cm 2 at +0.54 V,). In the quiescent N 2-saturated base solution (Initial State of the keypad lock,), there was nearly no power output, which is attributed to the lack of oxidizer (i.e. O 2 ) supporting BFC operation. After being pumped with air (Input A), the obtained base solution can be considered as air-saturated base solution, because the polarization curves of biocathode in the obtained base solution and in the air-saturated base solution are the same (Supplementary). As shown incurrent density of biocathode after Input A () than that in N 2-saturated base solution (). Upon stirring the obtained O 2-saturated base solution (Input C), the current density of biocathode (1217 A/cm 2 , near +0.34 V,, i2) increased 2.3-fold compared with that in the quiescent O 2-saturated base solution (523 A/cm 2 , near +0.36 V,). Due to the unconstant convection state of base solution near the biocathode during the stirring process, the current densities are not stable. Based on the similar principle, stirring also led to higher current density at bioanode (1819 A/cm 2 , near +0.14 V,) compared with that in the quiescent base solution (605 A/cm 2 , near +0.07 V,). On the basis of the enhanced current densities at both biocathode and bioanode, the BFC in the stirring O 2-saturated base solution exhibited higher P max value (219 W/cm 2 at +0.54 V,) compared with that in the quiescent O 2-saturated base solution (98 W/cm 2 at +0.54 V,In addition, we performed the experiments when the order of the input signals was varied in six different combinations (, Supplementaryand). Only one correct order of the input signals (ABC) resulted in the TRUE output signal 1 while all othersproduced the FALSE output signal 0. Thus, the TRUE output signal 1 can be used to 'open' the lock while the FALSE signal 0 can result in the 'alarm' signal indicating the wrong password. Another important feature of the present keypad lock system is that it can be reset (Supplementary). It should be noteworthy that the 'RESET' reagent N 2 applied in this work was 'nondestructive', because RESET function did not affect the concentration of other liquid-based solutes in the base solution or introducing any 'RESET' reagent-based 'waste' into the base solution.
Biofuel cell
Global understanding and optimal design criterionIn order to have a global understanding of the process, let us start with a physical analysis of the results we got. We see that every sequence of operations gives one power output as shown in Supplementary Tables S1, S2 and S1 + S2. The sequences form a power output spectrum,. Only the (1,1,1) [equivalent of (ABC)] sequence gives the largest power output. The rest of the sequence generates power outputs less than that of (1,1,1) sequence. Furthermore, the other power outputs are significantly less than that of (1,1,1) sequence. There is a significant gap between the power output of the sequence (1,1,1) and that from the rest of the sequences. The discrimination separating the power output of sequence (1,1,1) from the rest of the sequences can be clearly seen. The power output spectrum here is similar to protein folding and binding energy landscape spectrum. In protein folding (), binding () and signal transduction (, the right sequences of amino acid (or molecules for signal transduction) can form a native functioned state with significant energy gap separating the native state (or destination for signal transduction) with the rest of the other non-native states. The choice of the right sequences for folding, binding and signal transduction is from the evolution selection for stable and optimal function. Here the right sequence of the circuit is selected and designed by us for function (molecular keypad) by the exploration of the sequence space. As we can see the sequences of the power outputs form a funneled landscape with the power output of sequence (1,1,1) separating from the rest, shown inintroduce two quantities, the gap (P max ) and SD (P max ) of the power output spectrum. The gap (P max ) that measures the discrimination is defined as the difference between the largest power output of the sequence) here] and the average power outputs of the rest of the sequences. The SD (P max ) that measures the dispersion is the square root of the variance of the power outputs of the rest of the sequences. The ratio = P max //P max gives an absolute and dimensionless measure of the degree of discrimination and funnel. When is large (significantly larger than 1), the landscape or spectrum of the power output has a large gap relative to the variations of other sequences that effectively separates the (1,1,1) sequence from the rest of the other sequences. This forms an effective funneled landscape of power output toward the (1,1,1) sequence. Therefore, we can see that physically, a funneled landscape toward the selected sequence quantified by the ratio = P max //P max provides an optimal design criterion for discrimination of power outputs for molecular key pad function.
BFCs-based biocomputing keypad lock with orange juice as the biofuelIn order to validate the universality of the system and also to harvest energy directly from biofuels with enhanced power output, we replace the glucose with orange juice (being pressed from fresh orange) as the fuel to operate BFCs-based biocomputing keypad lock.(1,1,1) shows that the P max value of BFC operating in stirred O 2-saturated orange juice (449 W/cm 2 ) is 2-fold compared with that of stirred O 2-saturated glucose solution [219 W/cm 2 ,(1,1,1) and Supplementary]. This means glucose can be replaced by biofuel (i.e. orange juice in this work) for such BFC to harvest energy with enhanced power output. Recently, Dong's group utilized fruit juice to increase the power output of the BFC (), and they attributed the improved power output to many components in fruit juices, whichcan be oxidized by LAC (). So in the current work, the improved power output of the LAC-biocathode based BFC could be also ascribed to the same reason.). Thus, with the biofuel (i.e. orange juice in this work), the fabricated BFC not only can operate with enhanced power output but also can be used as the biocomputing keypad lock. We also analyzed the power output spectrum and found the large discrimination of maximum output with the rest (a funnel) of the orange juice similar to the case of glucose as the fuel. Details are given in Supplementaryand Tables S4S6.
Potential application of BFCs-based biocomputing keypad lock into implantable medical systems with the self-powered diagnosis aimBiomolecular logic and computation may also be applied to medical intelligent diagnostics (). In order to apply the BFCs-based keypad lock into potential implantable medical systems with the self-powered diagnosis aim, the BFC with 3 mM diameter electrode as substrate for bioanode/biocathode mentioned above can be modified to a miniature BFC with 33 m diameter microelectrode (see the details in Construction of Miniature BFC in Materials and methods part in the Supplementary Material). And the initial system was composed of the prepared miniature BFC operating in 2 ml of quiescent N 2-saturated serum containing 20 mM NAD + (mimicking blood). In addition, the three input signals was changed to two input signals: 75 s of air injection (pumping rate: 10 ml/s, Input A, mimicking dissolved oxygen in blood) and 5 s of electrolyte agitation (stirring rate: 600 rpm, Input B, mimicking blood flow).suggests that only when air injection and electrolyte agitation are both present, the P max value of BFC can get the maximum among the four patterns of the input signals; accordingly, Output of Input (1,1) reaches 1. Thus, the system Page: 403 399404). In addition, only one correct order of the input signals (i.e. AB) resulted in the TRUE output signal 1 while all others produced the FALSE output signal 0 (). So the developed system represents the IMPLICATION logic operation and the sequence dependence of inputs (i.e. AB) is mandatory for the BFCs-based biocomputing keypad lock (Supplementary). If we apply the BFCs-based keypad lock into potential implantable medical systems, the medical indications of), which could be attributed to the ischemic state [for Inputs (0,0) and (0,1)] (), heart attack [for Inputs (0,0), (0,1) and (1,0)] () and/or angiemphraxis [for Inputs (0,0) and (1,0)] (). And Output 0 for Input (BA) can be interpreted to normal persons' blood flow rate slows down, because of the angiemphraxis/heart attack (). Only Output 1 from Input (1,1) can be explained to the normal physiological conditions. The detailed medical indications for different patterns and different orders of input signals are shown in Supplementary Tables S7S8, which indicate the coexistence of A and B and the correct input order of AB in the system are both required for getting the information of 'Normal physiological conditions'. Therefore, in addition to the prominent feature of keypad lock, the proof-of-concept experiments above suggest that the fabricated BFCs-based biocomputing security system could be potentially used to intellectually make logic decisions that whether the dissolved oxygen concentration and body fluid rate in blood are both within the normal limits or not. However, the possible future application of the current system for intelligent medical diagnostics is only an expectation in this work. For further intelligent medical diagnostics, the current data of the experiments for the analysis are not enough, and lots of experiments are needed to do step by step, such as minifying the logic detection system, optimizing the system, making the system stable, creating more logic gates to meet different biomedical applications, and etc. And each section is necessary. So for its future application, more works including the data analysis should be done ().
Biofuel cell
CONCLUSIONIn conclusion, we have demonstrated a biocomputing security system based on BFCs. Due to the unique 'RESET' reagent of N 2 applied in this work, the prepared biocomputing security system can be reset and cycled for a large number of times with no 'RESET' reagent-based 'waste'. This would be advantageous for the potential practical applications of such keypad lock as well as the development of biocomputing security devices. In order to validate the universality of the system and also to harvest energy directly from biofuels with enhanced power output, we replace the glucose with orange juice as the biofuel to operate BFCsbased biocomputing system, which also possesses the function of keypad lock. In addition, by introducing BFCs into the biocomputing security system, the adaptive behavior of the BFCs self-regulating the power release would be an immense advantage of such security keypad lock devices in potential self-powered implantable medical systems. And the principle of the influence of gas injection and electrolyte agitation on BFC performance is based on dissolved oxygen and liquid flow, respectively. Thus, based on the relationship between the dissolved oxygen concentration in blood with ischemic state/heart attack (), as well as the relationship between the blood flow rate in blood vessel with the cardiac output/mean blood pressure (), the current biocomputing security system can be used as the potential implant device model for assessing physiological conditions in living organisms and for making autonomous decisions on the use of specific tools/drugs in various implantable medical systems. Nearly all living organisms need oxygen to carry on life processes and blood flow to maintain life. Thus, on the other hand, on the conceptual level, this work might help us understand how living organisms manage to control extremely complex and coupled biochemical reactions; that is, the hope is to cast biochemical (metabolic) pathways in the language of information theory. For example, the underlying landscapes of some signal transduction and metabolic networks can have global funneled landscapes as a result of sequence of cascade of intricate 'logic gate' like motifs (. This guarantees the unique direction of the information flow and biological functions with robustness and stability. We performed a global study and found that maximizing the dimensionless ratio of gap versus SD of the power output spectrum (a funnel in power outputs) gives the quantitative optimal design criterion. Our construction here may provide a practical example and microscopic structural basis for mimicking the real biomolecular and network systems and bridge the gaps between the theoretical concepts and experiments important for biomolecular systems and synthetic biology.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
