
INTRODUCTIONIn recent years, there has been a massive expansion of knowledge regarding the non-coding RNA (ncRNA) gene universe. Following the Encode project (), it is now accepted that while $80% of the genome is transcribed, only $2% of the genome is protein coding. Whereas an increasing body of evidence () supports the existence of purifying selection as well as binding of transcription factors to regulate the expression of ncRNA genes and lends strength to some ncRNA entries, it is still unclear what fraction of this immense molecular repertoire is functional (). Furthermore, well-documented ncRNA genes do not exceed 1% of all transcripts. Obviously, this state of affairs points to a potential of tremendous future augmentation of ncRNA gene counts. Some classes of ncRNA genes (e.g. rRNA and tRNA) have been known for a very long time (), while the discovery of the diversity and magnitude of ncRNA genes has been accelerated in the past few years, reviewed in Mattick and Makunin (2006). Unlike protein-coding genes, which have been extensively studied in structure, orthologue identification and single-nucleotide polymorphism annotation, the study of ncRNA genes lags behind. There exist more than a dozen ncRNA gene databases. Some are dedicated to particular ncRNA classes, such as miRBase (), snoRNA-LBME-db () and piRNABank (Sai), while others such as Rfam (), RNAdb () and fRNAdb () include a variety of ncRNA classes. Many ncRNA genes are also included in the conventional gene databasesEnsembl (), NCBI's Entrez Gene (), HGNC () and GeneCards (). Interestingly, these databases vary greatly in their human ncRNA gene counts, partly because of the use of different sources and integration mechanisms. Grand unification is thus urgently needed (). We have initiated some steps towards this ambitious goal based on the integration capacities within GeneCards. GeneCards is an integrated human gene compendium, which strives to consolidate information about all human genes (). Its previous V3.07 included 15 118 RNA genes, mined from a limited number of sources: Ensembl, Entrez Gene and HGNC (). We have launched an expansion and integration protocol, based chiefly on the use of fRNAdb (), which in turn is mined from seven sources currently untapped by GeneCards. Using judicious unification protocols, we report here the augmentation of the ncRNA gene count to 79 344 in V3.09. While this 5-fold enhancement is in large part due to the addition of 21 812 non-redundant piRNA genes (Sai), our pipeline has also resulted in the addition of 36 151 genes belonging to other classes, yielding a comprehensive, upgradable compendium of ncRNA genes. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
SYSTEM, METHODS AND ALGORITHM
A genome location-based algorithmThe realm of ncRNA gene databases is a complex network of mutually linked data structures (). The integration effort described herein (Supplementary) makes use of the hierarchical position of two databases, fRNAdb and GeneCards, each with a set of mined sources and with complementary data coverage. We use fRNAdb as a major source, as it is the most comprehensive among ncRNA-exclusive database, containing data from many primary and derived sources. Further, the uniform data structures provided by fRNAdb for all its sources reduce the complexity of handling many different data sources. As RNAdb and some of its primary sources (such as piRNA, Antisense, Evofold, RNAz and ncRNAsearch) are not expected to be updated, mining of fRNAdb poses no risk. In distinction, primary sources for which mining fRNAdb might compromise periodical updates are in parallel mined directly at the most updated version (miRBase 19.0, Rfam V11.0 Hinvdb 8.0 and NONCODE V3.0 for the presently described GeneCards V3.09). Our main pipeline thus involves the content merger of these databases into a widely expanded ncRNA category within GeneCards. For this, we have opted for a genome location-based algorithm for ncRNA gene integration, as described below.
Mapping to the genomeAll the mined human ncRNA sequences were downloaded from the relevant sources () and analysed (and Supplementary). Mapping to multiple locations for the same gene was allowed when an ncRNA received exactly the same score in such locations. Entries from fRNAdb annotated as IRES, SECIS and UTR were not considered as genes and thus disregarded.
Clustering overlapping entriesWe strived to overcome the problem of having several entries that map to appreciably overlapping positions. To cope with such redundant ncRNA entries, and to unite presumed parallel versions of the same gene, a clustering algorithm was applied to join entries with overlaps 470% of the genomic territory of the smaller partner, when occurring on the same strand. This unification process was applied judiciously, based on the class affiliations available in the mined sources, reflecting biological evidence. Only entries reported as belonging to the same ncRNA class were united. In 102 940 cases where an entry was not annotated as belonging to a specific ncRNA class (class  'other;'), such entry was joined to another class, with a small minority (220 genes) joined to two to three relevant classes. Notably, neither RNAdb nor fRNAdb performed a. The ncRNA database universe: unification of human ncRNA entries within GeneCards is based on hierarchical data mining flow as shown. Data sources are either derived (grey, also fRNAdb) or primary, with references as follows (see also Supplementary): Entrez Gene (), HGNC (), Ensembl (), RNAdb (), Rfam V11.0 (), NONCODE V3.0 (), FANTOM3 (), H-invDB V8.0 (), RefSeq (), GenBank (), Vega (), GENCODE (), Evofold (), RNAz (), ncRNAsearch (), miRBase 19.0 (), snoRNA-LBME-db 3 (snoRNAdb;), predicted antisense ncRNAs (), piRNABank (Sai) and piRNA papers (). The mined sources, fRNAdb V3.4, miRBase 19.0, Rfam V11.0, ncRNAs from HinvDB V8.0 and lncRNAs from NONCODE V3.0, marked blue. Purely predictive databases are indicated by two grey lines; semi predictive databases are indicated by one grey line similar integration process for the data obtained from the primary sources. Moreover, both allow for clear identification of the origin of the entry and provide the sequences as obtained from primary sources, without manipulation.
Unification of ncRNA clusters with GeneCards entriesUnification of ncRNA clusters with pre-existing GeneCards entries was performed with respect to all GeneCards genes, including protein coding as well as non-protein coding. For pre-existing ncRNA GeneCards entries, we used the same joining criterion as for the clustering algorithm, with the exception of not clustering piRNAs with piRNA clusters (PIRCs; see Section 4). For other GeneCards entries, joining was performed if the GeneCards entry's endpoint (start/end) is within 10 nt of the matched entry's endpoint, and the length of the shorter gene is !50% of the long one. Unification was actually performed on the individual ncRNA entries, and subsequently employed for the cluster as a whole. In the case that a cluster matched more than one GeneCards entry (1342 instances), multiple unification pointers were instituted. Protein-coding genes were not unified with their corresponding antisense ncRNA, since they reside on opposite strands and represent distinct functional entities. This results in an integrated GeneCards list, including all ncRNA clusters, whether joined or unjoined to existing GeneCards genes.
Removal of certain predicted ncRNA singletonsFinally, candidate GeneCards entries stemming from a single prediction in the purely predictive ncRNA gene sources (Evofold, RNAz and ncRNAsearch), and seen in no other source, were excluded. This is to diminish the probability of false entries, stemming the estimated high false-discovery rate (5070%;). Singleton predictions from the semi-predictive sources Rfam and NONCODE were however maintained, as they are supported by additional information within the same source. By the end of this four-stage process (Supplementary), ncRNAs not merged to existing GeneCards genes are added to the compendium as novel entries. As such, these genes do not have HGNC-approved symbols, and we opted to use the GeneCards id () as a newly assigned GeneCards symbol. For piRNAs, the symbol is taken from RNAdb (e.g. PIR61598). For piRNA multi-membered clusters, we use the identifier of one of the members; other members are included as aliases. In the future, every ncRNA gene assigned an HGNC official symbol will be changed accordingly.
Expression evidence and quality scoreAn important issue is how the accuracy and consistency of the catalogued genes can be ensured. We thus provide a quality score for each ncRNA gene, which appears along with the list of relevant identifiers in the Aliases and Descriptions section (see Section 3.5). The quality score Q is computed as the sum Q  10S F  5S E  0.2S P  0.5S N , where S i denotes the count of data sources of the following kind: S F , showing functional annotation; S E , showing expression; S P , reporting prediction and. For genome mapping of ncRNAs, a BLAT search was run for each source entry against the human genome build hg19 with non-default parameters: minimum score  12, minimum match  1, minimum identity  95% (applied to the matched segment). The former two parameters allow more accurate detection of short ncRNAs and the latter was permissive to allow running this initial lengthy procedure only once, with liberty to select different stringencies !95% in subsequent steps. For searching lncRNAs from NONCODE V3.0, we used the non-default parameters: minimum score  50, tile size  18, allowing better efficacy for such lengthy sequences. Sequences that did not obtain a 100% BLAT match were subjected to a BLASTN search with e-value 10 4. Only sequences450 nt were allowed to be interrupted by introns, based on the knowledge that short ncRNA classes (e.g. piRNAs $30 nt and miRNAs $20 nt) are intronless. The better of the BLAT and BLAST results was used to infer a tentative genomic location. Final filtering and determination of exact genomic coordinates were done by reanalysing the BLAT/ BLAST outputs, applying a full-length identity cutoff of !97% or 2 mismatches for sequences 567 nt); lincRNAin GeneCards, these are long intergenic ncRNA mined from Ensembl, identified according to methylation patterns (), while in fRNAdb they are long ncRNA based on length 4200 and sequence ontology (); antisense RNAinvolved in regulation of transcription (); snRNAsmall nuclear RNAincluding spliceosomal RNAs essential for splicing (); snoRNAssmall nucleolar RNA guide chemical modifications on other ncRNA genes (); Y RNArequired for DNA replication and involved in rRNA maturation (); miRNAsmicro RNAs, $20 nt long mediators of transcript silencing (); tRNAadaptors between codons and the coded amino acid (); rRNARNA components of the ribosome () and 7SK RNAinhibitors of RNA polymerase II (S N , none of the above. In this respect, GeneCards does not simply unify information about ncRNAs from other resources but also attempts to convey evidence parameters. GeneCards version 3.09 provides expression information for $60% of its ncRNAs, as derived from four sources, miRBase (1706 GeneCards), NONCODE (7729 GeneCards), H-invDB (16 151 GeneCards) and fRNAdb (21 812 piRNA GeneCards). Of the remaining entries, 2506 ncRNAs are purely predicted as reported by Evofold, RNAz and ncRNAsearch. Expression evidence annotation from additional sources will be provided in upcoming versions.
Functional annotationIn terms of functional annotation, the ncRNA gene universe is still in its infancy. When it comes to protein-coding genes, GeneCards has an elaborate set of sections that provide functional information about genes. This includes Function, Pathways/Interactions, Drugs/Compounds, Expression, Genomic Variants and Disorders/Diseases (). Some of these sections provide links to laboratory products such as inhibitory RNAs, in situ assays, clones, SAGE tags and PCR assays. A recently established companion database, MalaCards (http://malacards. org/, cf. https://www.iscb.org/cms_addon/conferences/ismb2012/latebreakingresearch.php#LBR17), provides a disease-centric view with extensive gene-related links. This infrastructure will sub-serve the mining, dissemination and web display of pertinent information also for ncRNA genes. Currently implemented is miRTarBase () providing experimentally validated miRNA targets.
IMPLEMENTATION
Pre-integration statusTo obtain an integrated compendium of ncRNA genes, we aimed to bring together such genes from two major derived sources, each representing a number of primary sources () as well as several more updated primary sources (see Section 2). The first is fRNAdb with 126 406 human ncRNA entries and the second is GeneCards with 21 451 human ncRNAs, with the additional sources Rfam, miRBase, HinvDB and lncRNAs from NONCODE with respective counts of 2838, 3446, 23 407 and 33 829.shows the current numerical breakdown of different ncRNA gene classes in newly added ncRNA entries versus pre-existing GeneCards. We note that fRNAdb has 84 192 entries purely based on computational algorithm predictions (based on sequence conservation and secondary structure), as derived from three primary sources: Evofold, RNAz and ncRNAsearch. These were completely absent in GeneCards. Another large group of fRNAdb genes belongs to the piRNA class, constituting 32 148 entries. These were previously represented in GeneCards by a mere 114 entries with a PIRC* symbol, which are reported PIRCs () that constitute piRNA precursor transcripts (). In a previous version of GeneCards (V3.07), there were only 15 118 entries categorized as RNA genes. This count is partially based on a restrictive definition which relies on the appearance of the string 'RNA' in several fields in the data sources mined. In preparation for the ncRNA unification effort, we employed a more consistent method of categorization relying more on the sources' own category definition in the three datasets used (Ensembl, HGNC and NCBI's Entrez Gene). This resulted in the addition of 6333 entries, previously annotated as 'uncategorized', to the ncRNA GeneCards roster used for unification, totaling 21 451 ncRNAs.
Mapping of fRNAdb and other source entries to the genomeOut of the total of 126 406 fRNAdb entries, we determined the genomic location for 124 676 by employing the BLAST and BLAT routines. The 1730 sequences for which the genomic location could not be determined based on our mapping criteria (Supplementary) were not considered further. Similarly, we were able to map 2294 (Rfam), 3444 (miRBase), 17 098 (HinvDB) and 33 712 (NONCODE) from the additional sources. Our genome mapping is very similar to the reported mapping via fRNAdb (after conversion from hg18 to hg19)78% of the entries were mapped to the exact same set of locations per entry. However, we also determined genome mapping for 12% of the entries for which the genome mapping was either not reported by fRNAdb due to mapping suppression of multiple locations or due to inability to convert between genome builds.
Clusters of fRNAdb and other source entriesWe applied the algorithm for generating clusters of overlapping RNA genes with unified location to all sequence-mapped fRNAdb entries and additional sources. This process identified 149 863 clusters, of which 135 779 were singleton ncRNA entries and 14 084 had 2143 members (and Supplementary). The latter encompass a total of 45 445 (30%) of the mapped ncRNA entries. Many of these overlapping entries are not unique to fRNAdb and appear also within the individual databases, as exemplified inand available in GeneCards V3.09. It is worth noting that the overlap between the predictive methods is relatively low (only $6% purely predicted clusters were kept). The overlap between RNAz and Evofold was previously found to be only 7.2%, which is attributed to the higher sensitivity of Evofold to AU rich regions, while RNAz is more sensitive to GC rich regions, despite the fact that both were trained using the Rfam database ().
Unifying fRNAdb and GeneCardsThe 149 863 clusters of ncRNA genes were compared with all GeneCards entries. Only 17 648 of these were found to match at least one GeneCards entry, and 86% of these showed an overlap to targets included among GeneCards' 21 451 ncRNAs. Notably, we found that 7801 pre-existing ncRNA genes in GeneCards do not match any cluster of the newly added ncRNA entries. In turn, 57 636 clusters had no match in GeneCards, including 21 812 piRNAs and 33 318 non-computationally predicted RNA genes. These genes have now been added to GeneCards version 3.09. After this unification process, GeneCards includes almost 80 000 human ncRNA genes (), now the largest category within this compendium, quadruple the number of recorded protein-coding genes.
AnnotationThe ncRNA GeneCards entries, both originally present and integrated from fRNAdb and additional sources are annotated by the same procedures used throughout this database (). A crucial facet is the alias section, in which, when relevant, fRNAdb identifiers, as well as primary and derived database identifiers, with deep links to the relevant source data facilities.The ncRNA class affiliation, as well as additional functional information is shown. The genomic location of the entire cluster as well as the separate genomic locations of the cluster members are provided. Other annotations from fRNAdb, such as secondary structure, summaries, OMIM IDs and PubMed identifiers for articles, are also available in the appropriate sections.
DISCUSSIONThe field of ncRNA genes is a dynamic one; new genes and even new classes are continuously discovered. We have strived to generate a comprehensive integrated list of human ncRNA genes within GeneCards, thereby placing them in the context of a complete human gene compendium. For that, two large and mutually complementary sources of human ncRNA genes were put to use, conveying the content of 15 more restricted databases. This resulted in the inclusion of 79 344 GeneCards for ncRNAs, when compared with 15 118 in GeneCards V3.07, and to 21 451 after the reclassification of 6333 previously 'uncategorized' entries as ncRNAs, respectively, $5-fold and $3.5-fold increases. The $58 000 ncRNAs added in this unification process were derived from $180 000 genome-mapped fRNAdb and other source entries. The latter were pruned to $75 500 unique, more reliable ncRNAs (i.e. after clustering and removal of purely predicted singletons), candidates for integration into GeneCards. There was a surprisingly small overlap of $13 900 entries between the pruned ncRNAs and the past GeneCards embodiment, probably stemming from the existence of partially orthogonal worldwide pipelines for ncRNA discovery, and the almost mutually exclusive source lists for fRNAdb and GeneCards (). GeneCards V3.09 thus contains 101 004 molecularly identified functional gene entries (protein coding and ncRNAs). In addition, this version has 21 409 entries for pseudogenes, gene clusters, genetic disease loci and 'uncategorized', providing a grand total of 122 413. A major step in the fRNAdb pruning process was clustering of ncRNA entries with extensive genome overlaps, greatly extending the removal of redundant entries already performed within fRNAdb (). The arguably arbitrary clustering cutoff we have used is not much different from that employed by others, as exemplified by the case of piRNABank (Sai), whereby the 32 148 entries represented in fRNAdb have undergone local removal of redundancies to 23 439, quite similar to our procedure. Our method further eliminated sequences that were predicted only once as ncRNAs on the basis of sequence conservation and/or secondary structure alone. This is because such predictions were reported to comprise a high fraction of false positives, up to 5070% (). We believe that the resulting list of $79 300 ncRNAs represents an adequately comprehensive compendium, in which purely predicted entries are only minimally presented ($3%), allowing effective future scrutiny. GeneCards V3.07 already included 114 piRNA-related entries (with symbols PIRC*). These were mined from HGNC (and originally from piRNABank) and constitute clusters of $404000 (Sai) individual piRNAs. We have decided that GeneCards will have a card for each individual piRNA, with annotation indicating cluster affiliation in GeneCards' Aliases and Descriptions section. Forcontinuity and comprehensive consistency with HGNC, the PIRC entries are included as well. This decision is inspired by the fact that PIRC coordinates are computationally predicted with limited hard evidence for the existence of the 114 PIRCs as transcripts (). Another reason is not omitting piRNAs that are not included in PIRC clusters. Finally, recent studies have found a link between individual piRNAs and tumour development (), emphasizing the importance of regarding each piRNA as an individual gene. In the future, we also intend to add annotations for PIRCs according to several algorithms that provide cluster boundaries often differing from one another (; Sai Lakshmi and). Some of the criteria applied in our clustering procedure are somewhat arbitrary, such as the use of 70% positional overlap. However, we verified that this criterion does not impact much the number of multi-membered clusters created (Supplementary). When comparing the original GeneCards (version 3.07) to the newly added ncRNA sources (), we found that only $13 900 ncRNA entries were shared, while $7800 entries were unique to GeneCards and $57 600 were seen only in the added sources. This is surprising, since our expectation from the much larger size of newly introduced ncRNA collection was that it would include most or all of the original GeneCards ncRNA entries ($21 500). However, many of the non-overlap cases are easily explainable; $21 800 of these fRNAdb-unique entries are piRNAs and $2500 are ncRNA predictions from Evofold, RNAz and ncRNAsearch, both not included in GeneCards V3.07, leaving $33 500 ($58%) to be accounted for. Conversely, $72% of the GeneCards-unique entries come from Ensembl (), a data source not mined by fRNAdb, which addresses only ncRNA-specific databases. Thus, such mutual omissions may not be suspected as erroneous. The foregoing underline the fact that our unification process results in the most comprehensive dataset of human ncRNA genes, containing 7801 entries absent in the newly added sources. These are ncRNA genes uniquely found in the 'general' gene databases Entrez Gene and Ensembl, but not in ncRNA-specific compendia. Further, fRNAdb and the other added sources contain a considerable number ($45 500) of redundant entries, which in our procedure are judiciously unified into $14 000 clusters based on genomic location. Finally, the reduced compendium of ncRNA genes within GeneCards V3.09 is based on the notion that genes predicted by only one source are less likely to be valid. In the current version such genes are removed; in the future, they will be presented with a prediction score probability indicator (see below). We make a distinction between two sets of predicted ncRNAs. The first set is predicted purely by computational algorithms, as exemplified by RNAz and Evofold entries in fRNAdb. The second set includes Rfam entries, predicted based on known ncRNA seeds, and in turn serving (along with miRBase entries) as prediction templates for Ensembl ncRNAs (). Similarly, Ensembl relies on lincRNA discovery that includes identification of chromatin methylation outside protein-coding genes (). Therefore, we included all Ensembl ncRNA predictions while the fRNAdb predictions were further filtered. In the future, other filtration methods will be considered, e.g. based on the reported prediction scores (). In addition, we will make the predictive arsenal more comprehensive, including the use of additional algorithms such as AlifoldZ (), or improved versions of presently utilized algorithms such as RNAz 2.0 (). While at present GeneCards policy is to mine existing repositories of prediction outputs, we will consider also performing prediction runs on our own when needed. We provide here a status description for GeneCards version 3.09. Notably, GeneCards is a dynamic data structure, with three version updates each year. The mining of ncRNA genes from all sources () has now become part of the standard GeneCards generation process. Thus, all inclusion and annotation aspects would be frequently revised. fRNAdb released a minor update in March 2012 and is expected to undergo a major update in December 2012, followed by subsequent releases about every half year. GeneCards in turn will retrieve new fRNAdb content at each of its own updates (three times a year) and add directly primary sources not updated by fRNAdb. The Encode project predicts that $80% of all genomic territories are transcribed in one fashion or another. Using integrated GeneCards information, and disregarding overlaps, we estimate that 56% of the 3.1 Gb of the genome is occupied by genes, taking into account cumulative lengths of all preprocessed mRNA, including introns. The cumulative gene territories of all ncRNA genes in our GeneCards integration effort is 25%, of which the newly added 57 636 clusters add $15%. The total genome territory thus covered amounts to 71% of the human genome. Such difference between ENCODE and GeneCards may simply be due to dataset input and computation discrepancies. However, at least some of this difference may represent genes (mainly ncRNAs) still awaiting identification and characterization.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
F.Belinky et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Non-redundant compendium at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
