We introduce NOVA, a software for the analysis of complexome profiling data. NOVA supports the investigation of the composition of complexes, cluster analysis of the experimental data, visual inspection and comparison of experiments and many other features. Availability and implementation: NOVA is licensed under the Artistic License 2.0. It is freely available at http://www.bioinformatik.uni-frankfurt.de. NOVA requires at least Java 7 and runs under Linux, Microsoft Windows and Mac OS.
INTRODUCTIONTo facilitate diverse cellular functions, proteins can associate to form complex molecular machineries. Complexome profiling (CP,) uses blue-native gel electrophoresis to separate intact proteins and protein complexes up to a molecular weight of 10 MDa () or even 60 MDa () using special large pore gels (LP-BNE). After the separation, the gel strip is cut into 60 equally sized slices. Migration profiles are reconstructed by applying mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to identify the proteins contained in each slice. The relative abundance of each protein is calculated by label-free LC/MS-based quantification (). Through comparison of these profiles by hierarchical clustering, groups of co-migrating proteins are recognized, indicating the composition of quaternary structures and functional complexes (). The method has been successfully applied to analyze mitochondrial complexes in rats () and humans () as well as to explore complex formation in plants and bacteria (). Typically, experimental datasets contain up to thousands of migration profiles, which cannot be manually processed. Bioinformatic tools are needed to efficiently handle and visualize these data. Though several programs like Cluster 3.0 (), Java Treeview () or the MultiExperiment Viewer () have been applied, there is to the best of our knowledge no tool available that supplies all functionalities required for the visualization and evaluation of CP data.
FEATURESWe developed NOVAa flexible interactive tool for the analysis and visual inspection of CP data. Protein abundance profiles obtained by other protein separation techniques, such as density gradient centrifugation or size exclusion chromatography, may also be analyzed with NOVA. Datasets can be imported as XLS, XLSX, CSV or TXT files. NOVA displays the migration profiles as a heat map, see, providing mouse functionality for visual inspection and data management. Links to databases like UniProt () enable the fast access to additional information about the proteins. For the identification of complex formation changes, for example, caused by a knockdown of a specific assembly factor, heat maps of multiple CP data can be compared. NOVA supports the normalization of data by range, maximum values, profile area and unit vector. Migration profiles of selected proteins can be compared, applying the module profile viewer, see. The clustering of migration profiles is the basic step for the prediction of the composition of protein complexes. For this purpose, NOVA implements the distance measures of Euclid, Pearson, Manhattan and hierarchical clustering covering single, complete, average and Wards linkage. A tree viewer displays the cluster hierarchy, see. Proteins and/or entire mass ranges can be excluded from the clustering process allowing the investigation of specific data subsets. Clustered data can be exported as XLS, XLSX, CSV or TXT files, figures as JPEG, PNG, TIFF or BMP files.
SUMMARYNOVA is a freely available software tool for the evaluation and visualization of CP datasets. It supports highly flexible and interactive inspection, exploration and analysis of complexome data. The implemented analysis techniques focus on hierarchical clustering methods that are the current standard approach to *To whom correspondence should be addressed. study the protein composition of quaternary structures. NOVA provides functionalities to assist the study of different experimental conditions, knockout experiments and disease-related changes. It is already applied by various research groups working with CP data.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
NOVA at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
