Motivation: More and more evidences have indicated that long–non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play critical roles in many important biological processes. Therefore, mutations and dysregulations of these lncRNAs would contribute to the development of various complex diseases. Developing powerful computational models for potential disease-related lncRNAs identification would benefit biomarker identification and drug discovery for human disease diagnosis, treatment, prognosis and prevention. Results: In this article, we proposed the assumption that similar diseases tend to be associated with functionally similar lncRNAs. Then, we further developed the method of Laplacian Regularized Least Squares for LncRNA–Disease Association (LRLSLDA) in the semisupervised learning framework. Although known disease– lncRNA associations in the database are rare, LRLSLDA still obtained an AUC of 0.7760 in the leave-one-out cross validation, significantly improving the performance of previous methods. We also illustrated the performance of LRLSLDA is not sensitive (even robust) to the parameters selection and it can obtain a reliable performance in all the test classes. Plenty of potential disease–lncRNA associations were publicly released and some of them have been confirmed by recent results in biological experiments. It is anticipated that LRLSLDA could be an effective and important biological tool for biomedical research. Availability: The code of LRLSLDA is freely available at http://asdcd. amss.ac.cn/Software/Details/2.
INTRODUCTIONIt is well known that genetic information is stored in proteincoding genes, which are referred to as the central dogma of molecular biology (). Therefore, RNA is only considered to be an intermediary between a DNA sequence and its encoded protein during a considerable long period (). Recent studies have shown that protein-coding genes account for only a small fraction of the human genome ($1.5%). In other words, 498% of the human genome does not encode protein sequences (). Especially, it has been observed that the proportion of nonprotein-coding sequence increases with the complexity of organisms (). These facts challenge forementioned traditional view of RNA. Furthermore, accumulating evidences have shown that non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) normally play a critical role in various biological processes. Specially, longnon-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are a class of important ncRNAs with the length 4200 nt (;). In the past few years, increasing number of lncRNAs have been discovered in eukaryotic organisms ranging from nematodes to humans with the rapid development of both experimental technology and computational methods (). It has also been shown that the expression levels of lncRNAs appear to be lower than proteincoding genes (), and some lncRNAs have high tissue specificity (). Accumulating evidences have indicated that plenty of lncRNAs play critical roles in many important biological processes, including transcription, translation, splicing, differentiation, epigenetic regulation, immune responses, cell cycle control and so on (). Therefore, mutations and dysregulations of lncRNAs are associated with a broad range of human diseases (), such as cancers (), cardiovascular diseases () and neurodegeneration diseases (). For example, lncRNA HOTAIR, PCA3 and UCA1 have been treated as potential biomarker of hepatocellular carcinoma recurrence (), prostate cancer aggressiveness (van) and bladder cancer diagnosis, respectively (). Therefore, identifying potential human disease-related lncRNAs can facilitate not only the understanding of molecular mechanisms of human disease at lncRNA level, but also biomarker identification for human disease diagnosis, treatment, prognosis and prevention (). So far, plenty of studies have generated a large amount of lncRNA-related biological data about sequence, expression, function and so on. These datasets *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com have been stored in some publicly available databases, such as NRED (), lncRNAdb (), NONCODE (). However, only relatively few lncRNAdisease associations have been reported. Developing powerful computational models based on these datasets to predict potential diseaselncRNA associations on a large scale has been treated as one of the most important topics of lncRNAs and diseases. Computational model can provide most promising lncRNAdisease associations for further experimental validation, hence decrease the time and cost of biological experiments. In the previous work, we have manually collected experimentally reported diseaselncRNA associations and constructed the first lncRNAdisease association database, LncRNADisease (http://cmbi.bjmu.edu.cn/lncrnadisease) (). This database has included 4480 lncRNAdisease associations, $208 lncRNAs and 166 diseases and laid the solid data fundament for lncRNA-related predictive research. Furthermore, we obtained an important conclusion that lncRNAs tend to be related to the same disease as their genomic neighbor genes and developed a simple lncRNAdisease association prediction method based on the genomic context of a given lncRNA (). The conclusion obtained in this study laid the solid theoretical fundament for diseaselncRNA association prediction research. Based on this conclusion, various disease-related lncRNA prediction methods can be developed. In this article, we logically extended the basic assumption in the previous disease-microRNA (miRNA) association prediction research () and proposed the following assumption for disease-related lncRNA prediction: similar diseases tend to be associated with functionally similar lncRNAs. Based on this assumption and the fact that selecting lncRNAs that are not related to the given disease is currently difficult or even impossible, we developed a computational model of Laplacian Regularized Least Squares for LncRNADisease Association (LRLSLDA) in the semisupervised learning framework. This method prioritizes the entire lncRNAome for disease of interest by integrating known phenome-lncRNAome network obtained from the database of LncRNADisease, disease similarity network and lncRNA similarity network. LRLSLDA is a global approach that can rank candidate diseaselncRNA pairs for all the diseases simultaneously. In the leave-one-out cross validation (LOOCV), LRLSLDA obtained the reliable AUC of 0.7760, demonstrating superiority performance of LRLSLDA to previous methods and potential value for disease-related lncRNA prediction and biomarker detection in the diagnosis, treatment, prognosis and prevention of human disease. We also classified test samples of lncRNAdisease associations into distinct classes, and LRLSLDA obtained reliable performance in different test classes. Plenty of potential diseaselncRNA associations were publicly released for experimental verification. Some of the associations have been confirmed by recent results in biological experiments.
MATERIALS
LncRNAdisease associationsWe downloaded known lncRNAdisease association dataset from the LncRNADisease database in. This dataset is used as gold standard dataset in the cross validation and training dataset in potential diseaselncRNA association prediction. After getting rid of duplicate associations, 293 distinct experimentally confirmed lncRNAdisease associations were obtained, including 118 lncRNAs and 167 diseases (Supplementary). We denoted variable nl as the number of lncRNAs, nd as the number of diseases, matrix A as the adjacency matrix of lncRNAdisease associations, where A(i,j) in row i column j is 1 if lncRNA l(j) is related to the disease d(i), otherwise 0.
LncRNA expression similarityConsidering the current situation that comprehensive expression data of lncRNA is still unavailable and the fact that long intergenic non-coding RNA (lincRNA) accounts for a large fraction of the whole lncRNA set, we downloaded lincRNA expression profiles from UCSC Genome Bioinformatics (http://genome. ucsc.edu/) in October, 2012, including the expression profiles of 21 626 lincRNAs in 22 human tissues or cell types (Supplementary). Then, we defined the lincRNA expression similarity as the Spearman correlation coefficient between the expression profiles of each lincRNA pair. Matrix SPC is denoted as the lncRNA expression similarity matrix, where SPC(i,j) in row i column j is the expression similarity between lncRNA l(i) and l(j) if they are both lincRNA, otherwise 0. LRLSLDA developed in this article can be applied to interactions prediction between all the lncRNAs (not only lincRNAs, but also other members of lncRNA) and diseases by integrating lncRNAdisease association data and lncRNA expression data. Making use of Spearman correlation coefficient between the expression profiles of each pair is the general method in bioinformatics research. Hence, it is likely that this similarity measure would still obtain reliable performance for lncRNA expression data, as already shown for lincRNAs in this article.
METHODS
Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity for diseasesBased on the assumption that similar diseases tend to show a similar interaction and non-interaction pattern with the lncRNAs, we constructed Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity for disease from known lncRNAdisease associations [motivated by van Laarhoven et al.. The procedures of Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity have been illustrated in. Firstly, we denoted the interaction profile IP(d(i)) of disease d(i) as the binary vector encoding the presence or absence of association between disease d(i) and each lncRNA in the known diseaselncRNA association dataset, i.e. the ith row of the adjacency matrix A. Then, we introduced Gaussian kernel for the interaction profiles of diseases. Kernel for disease d(i) and d(j) was defined as follows and used as the similarity score between these two diseases.where the diagonal matrices DD and DL are defined such that DD(i,i) and DL(i,i) are the sum of the ith row of SD and SL, respectively. Then, cost functions will be defined in lncRNA space and disease space, respectively. The optimal classifier meeting above criterions will be obtained by minimizing this cost function. In the lncRNA space, optimal classifier can be obtained by solving the following optimization problem: min). The optimal classification function can be obtained as follows:We can also obtain the optimal classification function in the disease space in a similar way by solving the following optimization problem:where D is also the trade-off parameter. According to the choice in the previous work (van), we set L  1, D  1. Finally, we combined the optimal classifiers in the lncRNA space and disease space into a single classifier by a simple mean operation:where lw is denoted as the weight coefficient of the classification function in the lncRNA space and the entity F  i, j in row i column j reflect the probability that lncRNA l(j) is related to the disease d(i).
RESULTS
Leave-one-out cross validationLOOCV was implemented on the known experimentally verified lncRNAdisease associations to evaluate the performance of LRLSLDA. Here, we combined the lncRNA expression similarity and Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity matrix for lncRNAs into the integrated similarity by a simple mean operation according to the previous studies (, c) and will discuss the parameter effect on the predictive performance in the next section. For the weight coefficients in the final optimal classifier function combination, we implemented similar average operation for classifier combination according to previous successful studies about drug-target prediction and disease-related miRNA environmental factor (EF) interaction prediction (). It has been observed fromthat combined classifier can significantly improve the predictive accuracy of classifier in the single space. Also we will discuss whether this parameter selection would have a great influence on the predictive performance in the next section. To our knowledge, this is the first work making use of known lncRNA disease associations to predict potential ones. Therefore, no previous methods can be compared with our method. We will compare LRLSLDA with the predictive result of classifiers in the single space to show the reasonability of combining classifiers in different spaces into final predictive results. Because there were 167 diseases and 293 diseaselncRNA associations in the known golden standard dataset, i.e. less than two associations per disease, it is inappropriate and infeasible to implement LOOCV for a given disease d. Further, taking into account the fact that LRLSLDA is a global method (i.e. it can prioritize candidate lncRNAs for all the disease simultaneously and can compare the scores of different lncRNAdisease pairs), we implemented LOOCV for all the diseases simultaneously. We left out each known diseaselncRNA association in turn as test sample and further evaluate how well this association was ranked relative to the candidate samples. Here, all other known diseaselncRNA associations were regarded as training samples, and all the diseaselncRNA pairs without confirmed associations were regarded as candidate samples. Receiveroperating characteristics (ROC) curve was used to evaluate the predictive performance, which plots true-positive rate (TPR, sensitivity) versus false-positive rate (FPR, 1-specificity) at different rank cutoffs. Here, sensitivity means the percentage of the leftout associations obtaining the ranking higher than a given rank cutoff; Specificity means the percentage of candidate associations obtaining the ranking lower than this given rank cutoff. When we vary the rank cutoffs of successful prediction, we can obtain the corresponding TPR and FPR. In this way, ROC was drawn and AUC was calculated. The similarity measure defined in this article relies on Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity, which is calculated from known diseaselncRNA associations. When LOOCV was implemented, each known diseaselncRNA association was considered as test sample in turn. Therefore, we would obtain different similarity matrice because of different training samples in the each step of LOOCV (training samples were different when different known associations were considered as test samples, hence obtaining different similarity matrice). Therefore, it is necessary to recalculate Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity for disease and lncRNA (not a fixed similarity matrix in the whole process of LOOCV) in the each step of LOOCV when each known lncRNAdisease association is left out as test sample. As a result, LRLSLDA achieved an AUC of 0.7760and the comparison between LRLSLDA and the predictive results in the single space (disease space or lncRNA space) was shown in. The conclusion can be reached that predictive accuracy has been significantly improved by the operation of combining the classifiers in different spaces. We further implemented LOOCV based on the LRLSLDA without introducing the information of expression profiles. The AUC of 0.7317 has been obtained (), which was slightly lower than LRLSLDA with expression information. From this comparison, we can reach the following two conclusions. For one thing, the performance of LRLSLDA could be further improved by introducing the information of expression profiles. For another, we still can obtain the relative reliable predictive results even if the information of expression profiles can not be obtained for lncRNAs of interest. Considering that each disease is only associated with less than two diseases on average in the known diseaselncRNA associations, the performance of LRLSLDA is reliable and would be further improved after obtaining more known diseaselncRNAs associations.
The effect of weight coefficients on LRLSLDA performanceThere are two kinds of weight coefficients in LRLSLDA: combinatorial coefficients in integrated lncRNA similarity and the final classifier, respectively. In the previous researches of disease-related miRNA-EF interactions prediction and drug target prediction, simple average was adopted to combine different similarity measures of drug, protein target, miRNA and EF, respectively, where reliable performance have been obtained (). Even in the study about drug target interactions prediction, the robustness of predictive accuracy to weight parameters selection has been illustrated. No accurate and practical methods for similarity integration have been developed and applied well to bioinformatics research so far. In the Supplementary, we showed the AUC values under different lncRNA similarity weights in the framework of LOOCV. We again observed the predictive accuracy of LRLSLDA is robust to the selection of lncRNA similarity weight coefficients. Currently, there are no good methods for the selection of weight coefficients to combine different classification functions into the final optimal classification function. In the previous studies of drugtarget prediction and disease-related miRNAEF prediction (), reliable performance has been obtained based on simple average operation for classifier combination. Especially, it has been shown that predictive accuracy of miREFScan in disease-related miRNAEF prediction is not sensitive to the selection of weight parameter (). Here, we assigned 0.10.9 to weight coefficients and calculated corresponding AUC values in the framework of LOOCV (Supplementary). It has been observed that predictive performance of LRLSLDA is not sensitive to weight coefficient selection. Also we can conclude that it is improper to give too much weight to classifier function in the lncRNA space. It is not difficult to understand this conclusion. There were only 293 diseaselncRNA associations for 167 diseases in the known golden standard dataset, i.e. less than two associations per disease. When one association was left out as test sample in the process of LOOCV, it is much likely that there were no lncRNAs associated with this disease in the known training samples. Therefore, only lncRNA similarity is not enough and disease similarity must be introduced to make full use of the information of similar diseases.
Compared with other methodsAs mentioned above, there is no method to predict potential lncRNAdisease associations in the previous studies. However, there are some similar problems in other fields of computational biology and many methods have been already developed to solve these problems. Some of these methods can be applied to predict lncRNAdisease associations. Taking into account the fact there are less than two associations for each disease on average, it is infeasible to implement LOOCV for a given disease, and LOOCV must be implemented for all the diseases simultaneously as we did before. Therefore, only global methods can be used in LOOCV, which can prioritize candidate lncRNAs for all the disease simultaneously, and compare the scores of different lncRNAdisease pairs. Hence, we compared LRLSLDA with three previous published methods as follows in LOOCV based on the same dataset:(i) RLS-kron (van), combining different kernels based on Kronecker product in the drugtarget interaction prediction; (ii) hypergeometric distribution method (), predicting disease-related miRNAs based on the hypergeometric distribution; (iii) network-consistencybased inference (), inferring potential diseasemiRNA associations based on the idea of network consistency. The comparison between LRLSLDA and three previous methods in the LOOCV was shown in, which. Comparison between LRLSLDA and the classifier in the single space was shown, which was implemented based on LOOCV schema in terms of ROC curve and AUC. The result demonstrates LRLSLDA has a reliable performance for potential lncRNAdisease inference and shows the benefit from combining the classifiers from different spaces into the single one. We also implemented LOOCV based on the LRLSLDA without introducing the information of expression profiles. A slightly lower AUC has been obtained, which shows the benefit from the introduction of expression profiles and relative reliable predictive ability even if the information of expression profiles can not be obtained for lncRNAs of interest significantly improved the performance of previous method by at least 0.1199 in the term of AUC values and fully demonstrated the superiority performance of LRLSLDA.
LOOCV in the new validation frameworkRecently, Park and Marcotte (2012) have pointed out that the flaw of evaluation procedure based on cross validation for the pair-input computational prediction problems has affected a number of previous studies. They have demonstrated that the paired nature of inputs leads to a natural partitioning of test pairs, and pair-input methods achieve significantly different predictive performances for distinct test classes (). They further performed experiments for proteinprotein interactions prediction based on seven state-of-the-art methods and observed that the performance of each method differs significantly in different test classes (). According to the evaluation methods proposed in this article, we classified test samples of lncRNAdisease associations into four distinct classes: C1 is composed of the test samples sharing both diseases and lncRNAs with the training samples; C2 is composed of the test samples sharing only diseases with the training samples; C3 is composed of the test samples sharing only lncRNAs with the training samples; C4 is composed of the test samples sharing neither diseases nor lncRNAs with the training samples. To be honest, LRLSLDA strongly relies on the topology structures in known diseaselncRNA association network, so it can not be applied to predict test samples in C4. We implemented LOOCV for the test samples in C1, C2 and C3, respectively. The performance of LRLSLDA in these three classes test samples have been shown in(AUC of 0.7880 in C1, 0.8071 in C2, 0.8736 in C3), which has illustrated that LRLSLDA has a reliable predictive performance in different test classes.
Case studies and novel lncRNAdisease association predictionWe applied LRLSLDA to prioritize all the candidate lncRNAs for each disease investigated in this article. Here, all the known diseaselncRNA associations in the gold standard dataset were used as training samples. Predictive results were publicly released to benefit experimental validation from biologists (Supplementary). It is anticipated that these potential lncRNAdisease associations predicted by LRLSLDA could be confirmed by biological experiments. Recent results in biological experiments confirmed that Alzheimer disease is related to gene RELN and its antisense transcript HAR1A and HAR1B (). These two lncRNAs were both ranked in the top of predictive list for Alzheimer disease (17th and 18th, respectively). Recently,confirmed lincRNA TUG1 is up-related in 44 patients with bladder cancer based on Real-Time qPCR. In the potential bladder cancerrelated lncRNAs list predicted by LRLSLDA, TUG1 was ranked 18th. Aforementioned lncRNAs all have known related diseases in the golden standard dataset. One of advantages of LRLSLDA is that it can predict potential related diseases for lncRNA of interest, even if it does not have any related diseases in the training dataset.identified the potential functional role of lncRNA BRAF-regulated lncRNA 1 (BANCR) in melanoma cell migration. BANCR has not been associated with any diseases in our golden dataset. We ranked all the candidate diseases for BANCR. In the predictive results, melanoma is ranked 10th out of all the 167 candidate diseases. As mentioned above, LRLSLDA is a global ranking approach that can prioritize potential lncRNAdisease associations for all the diseases simultaneously. Therefore, we further applied our method to simultaneously rank all the candidate lncRNA disease associations. We also publicly released predictive results in the Supplementary Table S4. In this global ranking, potential association between lncRNA NEAT1 and breast cancer was ranked fourth out of 19 413 candidate associations. Recent study byconfirmed this potential association. They implemented an integrated in vivo genomics screen and revealed significant upregulation of NEAT1 in breast metastasis tumors. This independent and high-ranking evidence. Here, we implemented LOOCV for the test samples in C1, C2 and C3, respectively, and the performance have been shown, with AUC of 0.7880 in C1, 0.8071 in C2, 0.8736 in C3. Results indicate that LRLSLDA has a reliable predictive performance in different test classes. Here, we compared the performance of LRLSLDA with three previous state-of-the-art methods in LOOCV. It has been indicated that LRLSLDA significantly improved previous methods LOOCV by at least 0.1199 in the term of AUC values further demonstrates the reliable performance of LRLSLDA and gives a strong support to other predicted lncRNAdisease associations (Supplementary).
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
X.Chen and G.-Y.Yan at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from previous work (van Laarhoven et al., 2011). The formula for the calculation of d is d  0 d = 1 nd X nd i1 IPdi  2  Finally, KD is denoted as Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity matrix for diseases, where the entity KD(i,j) in row i column j is the Gaussian interaction profile kernel for disease d(i) and d(j). From relevant research (Vanunu et al., 2010), we could obtain the conclusion that disease similarity after logistic function transformation can improve predictive accuracy of disease-related problems. Therefore, we used the logistic function in the previous study (Vanunu et al., 2010) as follows: SDdi, d j  1 1  e cKDdi, d jd For the two parameters contained in this formula, we adopt the same parameter selection as previous study (Vanunu et al., 2010), i.e. c  15, d  log9999. Disease similarity matrix SD will be used in the optimal classifier construction in the following sections. 3.2 Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity for lncRNAs Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity matrix for lncRNAs, KL, can be constructed in a similar way as follows: KLli, l j  exp l k IPli  IPl j k 2  where IPli for lncRNA l(i) is the binary vector encoding the presence or absence of association between lncRNA l(i) and each disease and l controls the kernel bandwidth, which can be obtained as follows by normalizing a new bandwidth parameter 0 l [ 0 l  1, according to the choice in the previous work (van Laarhoven et al., 2011)]. l  0 l = 1 nl X nl i1 IPli  2  Based on the forementioned lncRNA expression similarity and Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity, we constructed lncRNA integrated similarity matrix SL, where the entity SL(i,j) in row i column j is integrated similarity between lncRNA l(i) and l (j) defined as follows and ew is the weight coefficient of lncRNA expression similarity. SLi, j  ewSPCi, j  1 ewKLi, j bothl i and lj are lincRNAs KLi, j otherwise  3.3 Laplacian Regularized Least Squares for LncRNADisease Association Based on the underlying assumption that similar diseases tend to be associated with similar lncRNAs, here we developed the method of LRLSLDA to predict the potential related lncRNAs for the disease of interest. The flowchart of LRLSLDA has been shown in Figure 2, including the steps of similarity calculation and Laplacian normalization, cost function construction and optimal classifier function calculation, and optimal classifier function combination. Based on the framework of Laplacian Regularized Least Squares (LapRLS), aforementioned assumption will be formulated into two classifiers in the disease space and lncRNA space, respectively. Then these two classifiers will be combined into a single classifier by a simple mean operation to give final prediction about diseaselncRNA association probability. It is anticipated that this classifier would be a continuous classification function, which could reflect the probability that each lncRNA is associated with all the diseases of interest. Hence, following two criterions were used to evaluate constructed classifier: (i) the classifier should comply with known lncRNAdisease associations as accurately as possible; (ii) the classifier should be smooth over disease space and lncRNA space, i.e. the scores for the potential association between similar lncRNAs (diseases) and the same disease (lncRNA) should be similar, which reflect aforementioned basic assumption. Candidate lncRNAdisease pairs with high scores will be expected to have a high priority for biological experiments validation. In this way, we could dramatically reduce the costs and time for potential lncRNAdisease association identification. In the framework of LapRLS, Laplacian operation will be firstly implemented to normalize the similar matrix used in the classifier construction as follows:
LRLSLDA for disease-related lncRNA prediction at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
X.Chen and G.-Y.Yan at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION DiseaselncRNA association inference is important in the design of specific molecular tools for human disease diagnosis, treatment, prognosis and prevention. In this article, we proposed the assumption that similar diseases tend to be associated with functionally similar lncRNAs and further developed a novel method of LRLSLDA in the framework of LapRLS. LRLSLDA can effectively identify potential diseaselncRNA associations on a large scale by integrating the information of known diseaselncRNA associations and lncRNA expression profiles. More importantly, LRLSLDA is a semisupervised method that does not need the information of negative samples. Also, it can prioritize lncRNAdisease pairs for all the diseases simultaneously. The method has shown its reliable performance in the term of LOOCV and significantly improved previous methods. According to the evaluation methods proposed in a recent article, we further demonstrated LRLSLDA can work effectively in the different test samples of lncRNAdisease associations. Therefore, we publicly released plenty of potential lncRNAdisease pairs for biological experiments validation, and some of potential associations have been confirmed by recent results in biological experiments. As an effective and important biological tool, we anticipated LRLSLDA can benefit early diagnosis and treatment of diseases and improvement of the human health in the future. The reliable performance of LRLSLDA could be largely attributed to the following several factors, which are also the reasons for which we integrate LapRLS and Gaussian kernel for potential disease-related lncRNA prediction. Firstly, known diseaselncRNA associations and lncRNA expression profiles could be integrated to capture the potential associations between disease and lncRNA. Especially, this method can be used to predict potential diseaselncRNA associations sharing only diseases or lncRNAs with the known associations in training dataset. Secondly, the classifiers from different spaces would be combined and the predictive ability could be significantly improved in this way, which has been fully demonstrated from the comparison between LRLSLDA and classifier in the single space in Figure 3. More importantly, as a semi-supervised method, the advantage of LRLSLDA over supervised methods has been shown in many previous studies. Especially, semisupervised method could be implemented without any negative diseaselncRNA associations, which are difficult or even impossible to obtain nowadays. Finally, as a global method, LRLSLDA can predict the potential lncRNAdisease associations for all the diseases simultaneously. In conclusion, LRLSLDA represents a novel, important and powerful tool in biomedical research for disease treatment and drug discovery. Some limitations also exist in the LRLSLDA. Firstly, many parameters appear in our model and how to select the parameter is not still solved well. Secondly, for the same lncRNAdisease pair, two different scores from different spaces will be obtained. How to directly obtain a single classifier or reasonably integrate these two classifiers would be an important problem for future research. Thirdly, introducing more reliable measure of disease similarity and lncRNA similarity and developing more reliable similarity integration method would improve the performance of LRLSLDA. Especially, disease similarity in this model totally relies on known diseaselncRNA association. We would construct new similarity measures that do not rely on topology structures in the known association network and hence we can predict potential associations sharing neither diseases nor lncRNAs with known associations. Finally, available experimentally verified diseaselncRNA associations are still comparatively rare. The performance of LRLSLDA would be further improved when more known associations can be obtained.
