Targeted therapies interfering with specifically one protein activity are promising strategies in the treatment of diseases like cancer. However, accumulated empirical experience has shown that targeting multiple proteins in signaling networks involved in the disease is often necessary. Thus, one important problem in biomedical research is the design and prioritization of optimal combinations of interventions to repress a pathological behavior, while minimizing side-effects. OCSANA (optimal combinations of interventions from network analysis) is a new software designed to identify and prioritize optimal and minimal combinations of interventions to disrupt the paths between source nodes and target nodes. When specified by the user, OCSANA seeks to additionally minimize the side effects that a combination of interventions can cause on specified off-target nodes. With the crucial ability to cope with very large networks, OCSANA includes an exact solution and a novel selective enumeration approach for the combina-torial interventions' problem. Availability: The latest version of OCSANA, implemented as a plugin for Cytoscape and distributed under LGPL license, is available together with source code at http://bioinfo.curie.fr/projects/ocsana.
INTRODUCTIONCellular functions and activities are governed by complex signaling and regulatory networks. Diseases arise from abnormal behavior in these networks. Thus, the design of targeted therapies from a systems biology approach aims to identify which molecules to intervene in these networks, to repress a pathological behavior while minimizing side effects. Accumulated empirical experience has shown that combination or multicomponent interventions are necessary to cope with the redundancy and multi-functionality that characterize biological networks (). Redundancy requires for several pathways to be targeted, as alternate routes can compensate the disrupted pathways' function. Multi-functionality implies that intervening molecules that play a central role in the cell may cause side effects, requiring alternative points of intervention (). Some methods have been proposed to address some aspects of this problem (Hadicke). However, limited scalability of the methods and the lack of a prioritization criterion are hindering factors for their applicability to large biological networks. We introduce OCSANA, a software for the identification and prioritization of optimal minimal combinations of interventions (CIs). We define a CI as a set of nodes such that each elementary path (a path from source to target node) contains at least one node from this set. This CI set indicates the nodes to be intervened to disrupt all the identified elementary paths. The interventions can be knock outs (deletion of genes/proteins) and knock ins (overexpressions of genes/proteins). A CI is minimal if no proper subset of the CI is a CI itself, and its optimality is defined in terms of a heuristic scoring (see Section 2). To ensure the method's scalability, OCSANA includes an EXACT SOLUTION via an adaptation of Berge's algorithm () and a novel SELECTIVE ENUMERATION approach based on a weightedgreedy algorithm. The EXACT SOLUTION computes all minimal CIs of all sizes, and, similar to (Hadicke), it is adapted to compute all CIs up to a specified size. The SELECTIVE ENUMERATION computes optimal minimal CIs up to a specified size, and it can be parametrized to identify such CIs sets by FULL ENUMERATION.
METHODSOCSANA is implemented as a plugin to the open source network analysis and visualization software, Cytoscape (). It uses the Java library BiNoM (), to facilitate the import and analysis of networks. Based on the network's structure, OCSANA incorporates a scoring with three purposes: to evaluate the optimality of nodes to become part of a CI, to efficiently compute optimal solutions in the SELECTIVE ENUMERATION and to prioritize the identified minimal CIs. The scoring of a node is based on (i) the lengths of the paths from the node of interest to the targets, (ii) the type of effect on target nodes (e.g. activation/inhibition effect), (iii) side effects with respect to off-target nodes, (iv) the number of elementary paths in which the node participates and (v) the number of targets that such node can reach simultaneously. In the Supplementary File Supp1_AlgDescription, we provide a description of the scoring and the algorithms underlying the software. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Algorithm 1. Algorithm outline to compute CIsInput/mandatory: A network (directed signed graph), a set of source nodes, target nodes and a set of parameters. Input/optional: A set of complementary nodes assigned as off-target nodes (i.e. side effects). Output: Prioritized list of optimal CIs. 1. Pre-processing step: Compute the collection of elementary paths, that is, paths from source nodes to target nodes according to the selected parameters for the path analysis. 2. Score the nodes present in the elementary paths and sort them in a descending order. 3. Compute the so-called minimal hitting sets (MHSs) for the elementary paths according to the selected algorithm approach and sort them according to OCSANA's score. This sorted list of MHSs is the sought list of prioritized optimal CIs.
Software featuresListed below are some of the characteristics of OCSANA's software:(1) Acquisition of the different tools from Cytoscape and BiNoM: (a) A graphical user interface to launch and edit networks, (b) Upload of networks in BioPAX, SBGN and SBML formats and (c) Different path analyses available for the pre-processing step.(2) The user can select between exact solution and selective enumeration approaches.(3) Optional analysis on side effects with respect to off-target nodes.(4) Selection of maximum size of CIs to be identified.(5) Visualization of results in Cytoscape.
PERFORMANCE TESTING AND APPLICATIONTesting performance. We used three biological networks of increasing size. The interaction graph for Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) signaling introduced by (), an Epidermal Growth Factor Family (ErbB) family signaling network involved in breast cancer and a human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 positive breast cancer network (HER2 BCN). All the details on the computations and results are included in the Supplementary File Supp2_PerformanceGraphs. We tested OCSANA's time performance to compute all CIs up to size 5 (and 6 as well for the HER2 BCN) by its EXACT SOLUTION (Berges's algorithm) and compared it with its SELECTIVE ENUMERATION considering either FULL ENUMERATION (exhaustive search) or by reducing the search space to the most optimal candidate CIs (optimal solutions). All the details on the computations and results are included in the Supplementary File Supp2_PerformanceGraphs. In, we present a summary of the results across the three different path analyses available in OCSANA: EGFR network. Across the different algorithms and path analyses, the time performance is identical. ERbB family network. For shortest and optimal and suboptimal path analyses, Berge's algorithm is slower than FULLENUMERATION. For the all nonself-intersecting path analysis, Berge's approach outperforms the FULL ENUMERATION. Across the different path analyses, the SELECTIVE ENUMERATION outperforms Berge's algorithm. Finally, we see that for the three path analyses, at most 12% of the search space was needed in the SELECTIVE ENUMERATION, thus providing evidence that OCSANAs scoring aids to correctly identify all CIs within its optimal solutions. HER2 BCN. Under shortest path analysis, the EXACT SOLUTION performs poorer in comparison with FULL ENUMERATION and SELECTIVE ENUMERATION to compute all CIs up to size 5 and 6. For example, to compute all CIs up to size 6, the EXACT SOLUTION takes 410 h, whereas SELECTIVE ENUMERATION takes 8 min to find the same set of CIs obtained by the EXACT SOLUTION. To compute CIs up to size 5 under optimal and suboptimal and all nonself-intersecting paths analyses, the EXACT SOLUTION outperforms the FULL ENUMERATION, whereas the SELECTIVE ENUMERATION outperforms the EXACT SOLUTION. We observe that none of the algorithms was able to compute all CIs up to size 6 in 512 h. In this case, a method allowing finding a significant number of CIs in a reasonable time becomes useful. Thereupon, we show that the SELECTIVE ENUMERATION finds 40% of all the CIs up to size 6 in just 95 s (the total number of CIs was obtained by letting the EXACT SOLUTION run for more than a day). Application example. Using the cell-fate decision network by (), in the Supp3_ApplicationExample file, we present an application of OCSANA to identify therapeutic CIs. We show that our findings are complementary to the basic network theory approaches, and we validated them with recent literature.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
P.Vera-Licona et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
