Motivation: Single-molecule force spectroscopy has facilitated the experimental investigation of biomolecular force-coupled kinetics, from which the kinetics at zero force can be extrapolated via explicit theoretical models. The atomic force microscope (AFM) in particular is routinely used to study protein unfolding kinetics, but only rarely protein folding kinetics. The discrepancy arises because mechanical protein refolding studies are more technically challenging. Results: We developed software that can drive and analyse mechanical refolding experiments when used with the commercial AFM setup 'Picoforce AFM', Bruker (previously Digital Instruments). We expect the software to be easily adaptable to other AFM setups. We also developed an improved method for the statistical characterization of protein folding kinetics, and implemented it into an AFM-independent software module. Availability: Software and documentation are available at
INTRODUCTIONBiochemical reactions commonly proceed via large conformational changes, resulting in a well-defined mechanical reaction coordinate on which they can be monitored. Since force is a determinant factor in the rate of such reactions, single-molecule force spectroscopy (SMFS) emerged as an invaluable tool in their investigation under mechanical tension (). Thanks to its remarkable ability to stretch and monitor one molecule at a time, SMFS seeks to achieve the long-standing goal of mapping the energy landscape of biomolecules (e.g. proteins, RNA) on a well-defined reaction coordinate, even for proteins which show irreversible thermal or chemical unfolding (). In particular, protein folding kinetics can be studied at the single molecule level using the atomic force microscope (AFM). To this end, protein modules can be first unfolded and subsequently allowed to refold while subjected to a 'force-clamp' (), or they can be directly * To whom correspondence should be addressed. observed to refold at fixed extension via 'lock-in force spectroscopy' (). Such techniques depend on recent technological advances implemented in custom-built AFMs with very limited availability. Alternatively, the AFM can be used in the more traditional 'velocity-clamp' mode to drive protein modules to fold under mechanical tension via the 'double-pulse protocol' (see Suplementary Material). Shortly, the distance between the base of the cantilever and the surface, rather than the stretching force, is maintained constant for some amount of time, allowing previously unfolded protein modules to refold (). Despite the widespread availability of AFM instrumentation supporting the velocity-clamp mode of operation, single molecule folding kinetics studies remain rather scarce in the scientific literature, likely due to the unavailability of mandatory software technology. We fill this gap by making such software freely available. To validate our software, we studied the folding kinetics of protein GB1 () and obtained a kinetics characterization similar to the previously published one ().
APPROACHOur software contains three main components:(1) An automated procedure for driving refolding experiments through Nanoscope v6 software, in conjunction with Picoforce AFM and Nanoscope IIIa controller, Bruker. For each execution of the double-pulse protocol, our software instructs the Nanoscope software to execute a 'Nanoscope script' and capture a 'Nanoscope strip chart'. Importantly, the actual bending of the cantilever is detected from the strip chart file and the starting position is adjusted accordingly for the next double-pulse so as to counterbalance accumulating drift (). Section 1 in Supplementary Material contains more information on the implemented double-pulse protocol.(2) Offline tools for automated peak identification, force measurements, Worm-like chain () fits and data filtering. Tools are also included for manually improving the results of some of the automated tasks such as zero-force baseline and contact point identification.(3) A standalone, AFM-independent offline procedure for the statistical characterization of protein folding kinetics from mechanical refolding experiments with homomeric polyproteins, based on the analytical model of Section 3.1.Page: 424 423425
D.Aioanei et al.
METHODS
Maximum likelihood estimation of folding kinetic parametersWe adopt Bell's approximation () to Kramers' reaction-rate theory (), which describes the forcedependent folding rate as k f, where K b is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature in Kelvin, k 0 f is the spontaneous folding rate and x f is the folding distance. We aim to extract the last two mentioned parameters from refolding experiments. Traditionally, data were collected in a few fixed configurations, where a configuration is defined by the amount of time allowed for refolding and the inferred force at the start of the waiting period. It was therefore assumed that the same configuration can be reproduced exactly multiple times, ignoring any variation between double-pulse protocol executions. It was also assumed that the residual force remains constant during the waiting time (), ignoring the fact that it increases after each folding event. Furthermore, it was assumed that the total number of modules that could refold is limited by the extension during the waiting period (), breaking the assumption of the ideal spring cantilever. The mean and SD of the refolding ratio would then be computed for each configuration and then fitted to an exponential formula based on Bell's equation or to Monte Carlo simulations based on it, ignoring the fact that such summary statistics are not sufficient (), i.e. they do not capture all possible information about the parameters. We overcome all the above limitations by introducing a Maximum Likelihood estimation procedure. Shortly, the stretching force is computed by solving the WLC cubic equation (), and the likelihood function is computed as the product of the probability to observe the actual number of folding events for each double-pulse protocol execution. The maximum likelihood is then located over a grid ofvalues, and estimation errors are computed by case resampling (see Section 2 in Supplementary Material).
Folding kinetics of protein GB1We estimated the kinetic parameters of protein GB1 in buffer TrisHCl (10 mM, pH 7.5) by performing mechanical refolding experiments with homomeric polyproteins (GB1) 8 and (GB1) 16 (see Section 3 in Supplementary Material for experimental data statistics). A sample trace can be seen in. We obtained the kinetic parameters x f = 2.53  0.12 nm and k 0 f = 500  85s 1 errors representing one SD. Our kinetics characterization is roughly compatible with previously published values of x f = 2.1 nm and k 0 f = 720120 s 1 ().
DISCUSSIONMechanical refolding experiments can be performed with typical commercial velocity-clamp AFM instrumentation, and we provide an out-of-the-box software solution for performing and analysing such experiments in conjunction with Picoforce AFM, Bruker. We expect our software to be easily adaptable to other AFM setups. In fact, since the analytical model of Section 3.1 is not specific to a particular AFM, its implementation can already be used with refolding data obtained with any other AFM. Furthermore, we developed all the software in the Java and Python programming languages to ensure its portability across all major operating systems.Colour online) A force-extension trace according to the doublepulse protocol with the homomeric polyprotein (GB1) 16. The lower curve represents the protein fetching phase, during which the polyprotein attached non-specifically to the cantilever and then a total of 15 modules have been subsequently unfolded. The higher curve is shifted by 260 pN just for display purposes, and it represents the phase where the same molecule is pulled for the second time. Note that only 15 out of the 16 modules could have refolded, since one module was not unfolded during the fetching phase. The vertical dashed line represents the piezo position during the waiting time lapse relative to the resting position of the cantilever tip, and its numerical value is shown together with the length of the time lapse at the top of the figure. Each WLC fit is shown redundantly shifted higher for display purposes. The contour length at the start of the waiting time lapse (before any refolding) is indicated in the bottom-right position.
The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
