opm is an R package designed to analyse multidimensional OmniLog Õ phenotype microarray (PM) data. opm provides management , visualization and statistical analysis of PM data, including curve-parameter estimation and discretization, dedicated and customizable plots, metadata management, automated generation of textual and tabular reports, mapping of substrates to databases, batch conversion of files and export to phylogenetic software in the YAML markup language. Availability: opm is distributed under the GPL through the Comprehensive R Archive Network (http://cran.r-project.org/pack age¼opm) along with a comprehensive manual and a user-friendly tutorial. Further information may be found at http://www.dsmz.de/re search/microorganisms/projects/.
INTRODUCTIONHigh-throughput phenotypic testing is increasingly important for exploring the biology of bacteria, fungi, yeasts and animal cell lines, e.g. human cancer cells (), and offers a great potential for testing gene function and improving genome annotation (). The OmniLog  PM system monitors simultaneously, on a longitudinal time scale, the phenotypic reaction to up to 2000 environmental challenges spotted on sets of 96-well microtiter plates () as respiration kinetics with an often sigmoidal shape. As we discussed previously, by using a combination of existing R packages, ad hoc code and even manual manipulations (), there is an increasing demand to explore OmniLog  PM data not only qualitatively but also quantitatively, taking into account associated metadata on the organisms and experimental settings. As a result, we present here the broad and flexible design of the R (R Development Core) package opm, which allows users to analyse OmniLog  PM data within a wide frame of research tasks such as-omics approaches, systems biology, ecology and taxonomy.
FEATURES
Data input and storageThe raw kinetic values can be imported from CSV [from the OmniLog  or MicroStation TM reader (, or YAML (http://www.yaml.org/; used by opm itself), yielding S4 objects (). These containers comprise one object per input plate (with the measurements and the few metadata output by the OmniLog  software) and optionally estimated curve parameters together with the estimate settings, and/or additional metainformation on the experiment. Batch conversion of large numbers of files (optionally non-interactively via Rscript) and parallel computation is supported. R functions and experimental examples are provided and described in great detail in the manual and the user-friendly tutorial. The main opm workflow as described later in the text is summarized in.
Data enrichmentImportant biological information stored in the raw curve kinetics can be summarized in the curve parameters lag phase (), steepness of slope (), maximum curve height (A) and area under the curve (AUC), using a fast and approximate method (only A and AUC) or spline-fit algorithms (). Fitting splines rather than growth models is more robust for these data (). Confidence intervals can be obtained via bootstrapping or aggregating predefined groups. To enable PM data analysis with respect to such organismal or experimental features, the user may include to the objects any metadata of interest for each 96-well plate.
Data manipulation and exportObjects can be indexed for specific plates, time points of measurements or wells. The stored metainformation can be modified and queried with specific functions or infix operators. This allows for easy and flexible subsetting of objects based on any combination of metadata keys and values and on positive versus negative reactions. The aggregated or discretized curve parameters can be extracted into a matrix or data frame for any further analysis outside opm but within R. For storage in files or *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com databases and exchange between laboratories self-describing YAML files containing all stored information can be generated.
Graphical and statistical analysisHigh-quality graphical visualizations of either the raw kinetic measurements or curve parameters are indispensable for quantitative analysis of PM data. Therefore, functions for level plots, x/y plots, confidence interval plots, heat maps and radial plots have been integrated. Plots can be easily annotated with the stored metainformation. Statistical comparison of multiple groups () defined by stored metainformation is also straightforward. Data conversions allow for user-defined visualization strategies based on, e.g. lattice ().
Data discretization and report generationThe continuous curve parameter data can be converted to discrete values in several ways for the export of character data to software for inferring character evolution or phylogenies (). For a qualitative classification of the curves into negative and positive (optionally also weak/ambiguous) reactions relevant for assessing gene function and annotation () or for prokaryote taxonomy, several approaches are available. The results can be displayed as HTML tables or text suitable, e.g. for scientific journals ().
Substrate information provided by opmAlmost all OmniLog  and MicroStation TM plates are supported regarding the mapping of wells to standardized substrate names. To further explore PM data regarding gene function and annotation, CAS, KEGG (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/), MeSH (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mesh) and Metacyc (http://meta cyc.org/) IDs are supplied for each substrate as far as available from literature.
CONCLUSIONThe unique strength of opm is the qualitative and quantitative analysis of raw kinetic OmniLog  PM data via direct visualization and the robust estimation of curve parameters and their confidence intervals. Thereby, the user retains full control on the directions of data analyses according to his research interests. Flexible ways to add and query metainformation enable the user to efficiently explore these data statistically, also across multiple groups. Export to matrices and data frames allows for the exploitation of all functionality available in the R environment, whereas standardized and easily readable output formats ease the interaction with external software.. General workflow of opm and its interplay with R and third-party software
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
L.A.I.Vaas et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
