Motivation: Semantic tagging of organism mentions in full-text articles is an important part of literature mining and semantic enrichment solutions. Tagged organism mentions also play a pivotal role in disambiguating other entities in a text, such as proteins. A high-precision organism tagging system must be able to detect the numerous forms of organism mentions, including common names as well as the traditional taxonomic groups: genus, species and strains. In addition, such a system must resolve abbreviations and acronyms, assign the scientific name and if possible link the detected mention to the NCBI Taxonomy database for further semantic queries and literature navigation. Results: We present the OrganismTagger, a hybrid rule-based/machine learning system to extract organism mentions from the literature. It includes tools for automatically generating lexical and ontological resources from a copy of the NCBI Taxonomy database, thereby facilitating system updates by end users. Its novel ontology-based resources can also be reused in other semantic mining and linked data tasks. Each detected organism mention is normalized to a canonical name through the resolution of acronyms and abbreviations and subsequently grounded with an NCBI Taxonomy database ID. In particular, our system combines a novel machine-learning approach with rule-based and lexical methods for detecting strain mentions in documents. On our manually annotated OT corpus, the OrganismTagger achieves a precision of 95%, a recall of 94% and a grounding accuracy of 97.5%. On the manually annotated corpus of Linnaeus-100, the results show a precision of 99%, recall of 97% and grounding accuracy of 97.4%. Availability: The OrganismTagger, including supporting tools, resources, training data and manual annotations, as well as end user and developer documentation, is freely available under an open-source license at http://www.semanticsoftware.info/ organism-tagger.
INTRODUCTIONText mining solutions have become an integral part of biomedical research. An important class of entities to detect through natural language processing (NLP) techniques are organisms. Their detection facilitates taxonomy-aware text mining systems and provides users with the ability to find relevant subsets of papers based on species-specific queries. When textual mentions are further annotated with an external database identifier, they can provide additional benefits for disambiguation in the recognition of other named entities such as mutations, proteins or genes (). Primarily, organism mentions are based on established hierarchical nomenclature conventions defined in the 18th century (). However, the recognition of taxonomic groups in texts presents a number of ongoing challenges. Specifically, there is considerable ambiguity in the way taxonomic information is formulated in scientific documents. Abbreviations of species names are widespread and the use of common English names instead of Latin names further obscures the taxonomic identity of the organisms described in a text. The use of acronyms, which can be both species specific and species independent, also poses challenges for recognition tasks. Lastly, incorrect spellings have created yet more ambiguity. Finding organism mentions is the task of named entity (NE) detection. Simply tagging an entity as an organism is, however, not sufficient for more advanced text mining tasks. To account for variability within the same document, e.g. the use of both abbreviated and full forms, each mention of an organism must be additionally tagged with a canonical name through normalization. These unique names can then be used for downstream analysis tasks like co-reference resolution. To facilitate the disambiguation of other entities in a text, additional analysis, so-called grounding, is required in order to create a link between a textual reference and its entry in an external database. Combined with semantic technologies, such as ontologies and reasoners, further knowledge discovery approaches are made possible (). Given the labile nature of scientific knowledge in the era of high-throughput biology, online resources are frequently updated and custom applications dependent on such resources must also be readily updated to avoid latency of processed content. Consequently, the ability to easily update the organism tagging system with respect to external taxonomic resources becomes an additional requirement. Further technical requirements include configurability for different classes of organisms, the free availability of the system for its incorporation into custom analysis pipelines, multicore/multiprocessor scalability, embedded or Web service execution and integration into common desktop clients to facilitate literature mining. To address these challenges, a number of species name recognition systems have been developed. In line with the goals of the OrganismTagger, a recent work resolves the ambiguity of genes and gene products with respect to model organisms (); In addition, a corpus annotated with protein/gene mentions associated with species IDs is provided. In this system, detection of species words is simply done by list matching. This list includes the organism names from two dictionariesNCBI Taxonomy and the UniProt Controlled Vocabulary of taxa. Gene mentions are then tagged with species IDs with different methods, like heuristic rules, supervised classification with a maximum entropy model and parsers. TaxonGrab () uses a lexicon of English words (combination of WordNet and SPECIALIST excluding the terms from NCBI Taxonomy, the Integrated Taxonomic Information System and the German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures) to compare against a text. Detected sets of two or three consecutive words that do not exist in the lexicon are further validated with regular expressions. The performance of their system is tested on Volume 1 of 'The Birds of the Belgian Congo' by James Paul Chapin with a precision of 96% and recall of 94%. FindIT (), a Web service, tries to index the taxonomic names using pattern-matching expressions and a lexicon of English words, providing a confidence score for resultant names. Rule-based, word frequency and regular expression-based approaches manage to capture genusspecies combinations with high levels of precision and recall. In some implementations, this is achieved without further grounding to database identifiers (). In some cases, grounding to database identifiers or nodes in a taxonomic tree is made; examples are TaxonFinder (http://code.google.com/p/taxon-finder) and uBioRSS (). For such systems, common names still pose problems, whereas gazetteer-based approaches are able to handle common name issues. A number of gazetteer-based Web services are available for entity recognition and normalization, such as Whatizit (). Most recently, the Linnaeus system () has illustrated good performance tagging species names in biomedical texts using a gazetteer (species dictionary) combined with post-processing techniques for disambiguation, acronym resolution and filtering. However, all these existing approaches have difficulties recognizing and disambiguating strain level information. Our OrganismTagger addresses the above challenges with a number of novel contributions: (i) provision of semantic data models for organisms that can be re-used in other applications; (ii) tools for automatically generating organism-specific resources derived from the NCBI Taxonomy database; (iii) a text mining pipeline for organism detection, normalization and grounding; (iv) a machine learning-based classifier for strain detection; (v) flexible system architecture for running the system embedded, stand-alone, published as a Web service or integrated into a number of desktop clients. We first present an overview of the OrganismTagger in Section 2. Section 3 describes existing taxonomy resources and Section 4their integration into our system. The text mining pipeline is then described in Section 5, followed by its evaluation in Section 6 and conclusions in Section 7.
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR ORGANISM TAGGING, NORMALIZATION AND GROUNDINGThe life cycle of our OrganismTagger has two distinct parts: (i) the generation and initialization of NLP resources (like gazetteer lists and ontologies) from the NCBI database (described in Section 4); and (ii) the run-time processing of documents for semantic tagging, including normalization and grounding of detected entities (described in Section 5). An overview of the OrganismTagger is shown in. Our tagging and extraction methodology relies initially on external resources, namely pre-existing taxonomy databases, which are automatically translated for reuse in our platform, thereby providing users with the ability to update their installation when the database changes. Additionally, we created a custom-built organism ontology, which formally describes the linguistic structure of organism entities at different levels of the taxonomic hierarchy. The run-time processing pipeline, implemented based on the General Architecture for Text Engineering (GATE) (), consists of modules for: strain-specific text tokenization, a gazetteer for matching names or name fragments to the NCBI reference taxonomy, machine learning-based strain classification, grammar-based organism entity detection, normalization of abbreviations and other forms to their scientific names and a grounding step for assigning detected organisms an NCBI Taxonomy database identifier.
REUSE OF PRIMARY TAXONOMY RESOURCESWe use the Taxonomy database () from NCBI (NCBI Taxonomy Homepage, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/) to initialize our gazetteering lists and ontologies. The Taxonomy database is 'a curated set of names and classifications for all of the organisms that are represented in GenBank'), where the names of organisms are derived from taxonomic units in the classification tree. In the NCBI database, every species and taxonomic unit has exactly one entry with a name classified as scientific name, as well as other possible variants. The scientific name is the 'correct'canonical name, whereas others can be synonyms, common misspellings or retired names if the organism has been reclassified.shows part of an entry, constrained to the most important columns, for the organism Escherichia coli (E. coli). In this example, there are five synonyms and one common misspelling shown in addition to the scientific name. Taxonomic units, e.g. genus and species, used in biomedical naming conventions for organisms occur in biomedical texts, along with a more precise strain level identification. All entries containing a rank attribute as 'species', 'species group' and 'subspecies' are derived from the rank field of the taxonomy database. In the NCBI Taxonomy database, unranked nodes are allowed at any point in the classification and not all the taxa are assigned the Linnaean ranks (The NCBI Handbook, http://www.ncbi.nlm. nih.gov/bookshelf/br.fcgi?book=handbook&part=ch4). To provide better accuracy, we decided to exclude mentions of type 'no rank' (comprising 10% of the Taxonomy database entries).
TAXONOMY RESOURCE MANAGEMENTWe now describe the lexical and ontological resources used by our system in detail. As motivated above, we allow our end users to update or customize their installation; the generated resources are then accessed for run-time processing (described in the following section).
Organism ontologyIn order to provide an explicit description of the linguistic structure of organism entities and their relations, we developed, specifically for the OrganismTagger, a formal ontology in OWL-DL format (W3C Recommendation, OWL Web Ontology Language Overview, http://www. w3.org/TR/owl-features/). It is used both as a knowledge base during processing and for validating detected entities (). Where a documenttoken is matched by several ontology tokens from classes in a hierarchical relationship, the most specific class is assigned. Thus, the recorded information is as specific as possible while the class entailment ensures that the token is also associated with the more general classes that it could be classified to. To gain additional expressiveness for plausibility checking, cardinality restrictions have been placed on the relations. For example, an organism can have only one genus or one species.rdfs:range of rdfs:subClassOf are rdfs:Class. For example, the organism Ash River virus (NCBI ID 466216) is encoded in RDF as:
Page: 2724 27212729
N.Naderi et al.
Training of the strain classifierNot all strains that appear in the literature exist in the NCBI Taxonomy database and can be found through gazetteering. To be able to detect the remaining strains, we employ a machine learning approach using a binary classifier. Here, strain candidates are detected through a custom tokenization step and the classifier decides whether a candidate strain is actually a strain. To train our classifier, we extract several features for each strain candidate:(i) the ontology class features of the two taxonomic units preceding the strain candidate (genus or species); (ii) the string of the strain candidate itself; and (iii) the string of the immediately following strain candidate (if any). Our classifier is based on a Support Vector Machine (SVM) model, for it is widely used in text classification tasks with unbalanced training and proved to perform better than other classifiers we also tested, including Naive Bayes and K Nearest Neighbor (KNN). Hence, in this article, we only report results for the SVM classifier. The SVM used is the implementation included with GATE (). For training the classifier, we manually annotated document collections with the aforementioned features and assigned each strain candidate the correct binary feature (true/false). The training set consists of 2643 instances, of which 1046 instances are strains and 1597 are negative instances. The training data are also available in our distribution.
RUN-TIME PROCESSINGWhen all the resources described above have been generated from the NCBI database, 1 the OrganismTagger is ready for annotating documents. This is done through a pipeline of individual processing steps, where each step adds further information to a document in the form of annotations, which are then used by the following component ().
ImplementationThe implementation is based on the General Architecture for Text Engineering (GATE) (). GATE is a component-based architecture implemented in Java, where individual processing steps are performed by processing resources (PRs) that are then combined into a complete analysis pipeline. By basing our implementation on GATE, our components can be easily embedded into more complex analysis pipelines and the results can be exported in various formats (XML, OWL, etc.) or accessed through a Web service. Detailed instructions on how to setup our components within an analysis pipeline are provided with the online documentation.
PreprocessingFirst, documents are undergoing generic pre-processing steps including tokenization and sentence splitting, using the standard NLP components included in the GATE distribution.
Tokenization for strainsSince strains usually appear as character combinations, for instance, mixed upper and lower case or including digits, we developed a strain tokenizer to annotate all tokens that do not look like a normal word as a possible strain. For example, 'C-125', a strain of Bacillus halodurans can be annotated by the strain tokenizer as a possible strain. However, these possible strain words are not always strains and could be other abbreviations or address parts. For example, in Streptomyces thermoviolaceus Xyn1, 'Xyn1' is a protein abbreviation and not a strain. Thus, this tokenizer alone is not sufficient for determining strains. Further analysis is performed in a later step, where the trained Strain Classifier (Section 4.4) analyses the possible strains and makes the final decision whether a given possible strain is actually a strain.
Ontology-aware gazetteeringEach token in the text is now matched against the generated gazetteer lists (Section 4.3). Using an ontology-aware gazetteer, we incorporate mappings between the lists and ontology classes and assign the proper class in case of a term match. For example, the gazetteer will annotate the text segment Escherichia coli with two Lookup annotations, having their class feature set to 'Genus' for Escherichia and 'Species' for coli. Text segments matching the acronyms are associated with Lookup annotations whose 'class' and 'majorType' features are set to 'Organism' and 'acronym', respectively. RDF gazetteering, which is used for the organisms not following the binomial nomenclature rules, is performed in a second step. This gazetteer creates annotations with the type Lookup and two features; 'inst', which contains the URI of the ontology instance, and 'class', which contains the URI of the ontology class that instance belongs to. Note that these Lookup annotations do not yet represent a semantic organism annotation; they still need to be validated with specific grammar rules, described below.
Page: 2725 27212729OrganismTagger
Strain classificationOnly a subset of all strains can be detected through gazetteering and rules. For detecting the remaining strains, we employ the trained machine learning model described in Section 4.4. The classifier analyses the generated possible strains (Section 5.3) using the features described in Section 4.4. It then assigns a binary feature to every strain candidate, set to True if a strain was detected, otherwise the feature is set to False. For example, the possible strain 'endo-1,4-b' in Trichoderma reesei endo1,4-b is detected as a false instance by our strain classifier and 'JM101' in E.coli JM101 is found as a true instance. All possible strains with the feature value of 'True' detected by the classifier are then further processed and annotated as a Strain entity. Additional grammar rules in later steps can then consider these strains for inclusion in an organism entity.
Organism entity detectionIn this step, we can now combine and verify the individual Token, Lookup and Strain annotations in order to create semantic Organism annotations. This is achieved through grammar rules written in the JAPE language (), which are compiled into finitestate transducers. For example, the organism notation [genus species strain?] can be encoded in JAPE as:Rule: OrganismRule1 ( ({ Genus}):gen ({ Species}):spec (({ Strain }): str )?): org1 > (... right hand side of the rule .
..)Five of these hand-written grammar rules are used within our system to detect organism entities. The result of this stage is a set of named organism entities, which are, however, not yet normalized or grounded.
Entity normalization and groundingDetected entities now undergo a normalization and grounding step. First, we ensure that only valid organism names are extracted from texts. For example, we can reject a genus/species combination that might look like a valid name to a simple organism tagger, yet is not supported by the NCBI database. Second, by resolving abbreviations and acronyms, we can assign each detected organism a normalized name, which can subsequently be grounded to the taxonomy database by adding its database identifier.
Normalization. Thisstep determines a canonical name for each organism entity by (i) resolving abbreviations and (ii) adding the scientific name as defined in the NCBI taxonomy database. This scientific name can be obtained through a simple lookup based on the lists generated above. In case of abbreviations, however, finding the canonical name usually involves an additional disambiguation step. For example, if we encounter E.coli in a text, it is first recognized as an organism from the pattern 'species preceded by abbreviation'. Our NLP component can now query the internal lists for a genus instance with a name matching E* and a species named coli, and filter the results for valid genusspecies combinations denoting an existing organism. Ideally, this would yield the single combination of genus Escherichia and species coli, forming the correct organism name. However, the above query returns in fact four entries. Two can be discarded because their names are classified by NCBI as misspellings of Escherichia coli, as shown by the identical tax_id (cf.). Yet the two remaining combinations, with the names Escherichia coli and Entamoeba coli, are both classified as 'scientific name'. A disambiguation step now has to determine which one is the correct normalized form for Escherichia coli. Here, we apply a search heuristic based on the closest non-abbreviated form appearing in the document that matches the genus (). This heuristic relies on the convention that each abbreviated form is usually introduced by the full form at least once within a text.In case the non-abbreviated form does not appear in the document, a second normalization heuristic retrieves all genus mentions that match the abbreviated form. These are considered as candidates and the heuristic attempts to find a matching organism. For example, in pmc1891629, none of the abbreviated forms of C.vishnui, C.annulusa or C.pipiens appear with their full form, but " Culex " does appear separately and we can successfully resolve the abbreviations using this genus. If the abbreviated organism still cannot be resolved, all possible matching entries are returned and added as annotations. Although less precise, this list is still valuable for the disambiguation of other entities in a text, like proteins (). Detected acronyms are also normalized to their scientific name as defined in the NCBI taxonomy database, for example, FMDV is normalized to footand-mouth disease virus.
Grounding. Oncethe normalized name has been determined, we can uniquely ground it in the NCBI database by adding the corresponding ID. Since the database record can now be unambiguously looked up, the entity is grounded with respect to an external source. The end result of this step is a semantic annotation of the named entities as they appear in a text, which includes the detected information from normalization and grounding, as shown in. Some organisms with strains or subspecies are associated with several different NCBI IDs in the taxonomy database. For these organisms, both IDs for the full name of the organism with strain (or subspecies) and also for the organism without the strain (or subspecies) are provided by our tagger. For example, as shown in, Pseudomonas fluorescens subsp. cellulosa is annotated with two NCBI Taxonomy IDs (294, 155077), and two scientific names (Pseudomonas fluorescens, Cellvibrio japonicus), one for the taxa level that is Pseudomonas fluorescens and the other with the subspecies cellulosa. This provides a user of our tagger with the most comprehensive information for further processing. Some common names also cause ambiguity (e.g. mice, rats), which need to be disambiguated and grounded. For example, Mice can refer to Mus with NCBI Taxonomy ID '10088' as 'genus', Mus sp. with NCBI Taxonomy ID '10095' as 'species' and Mus musculus with NCBI Taxonomy ID '10090' as 'species'. We normalize mice based on the document context. When there are mentions of mouse, transgenic mice or nude mice, it is grounded to the NCBI Taxonomy ID '10090'. When it appears alone, we report both NCBI Taxonomy IDs '10090' and '10095', discarding the NCBI Taxonomy ID '10088', as we do not report IDs for genus parts. Rats can be also grounded to Rattus sp. with NCBI Taxonomy ID '10118' as 'species', Rattus with NCBI Taxonomy ID '10114' as 'genus' and Rattus norvegicus with NCBI Taxonomy ID '10116' as 'species'. If there are any mentions of rat, laboratory rat or Sprague-Dawley rat, rats is grounded to the NCBI Taxonomy ID 10116. Otherwise, two NCBI Taxonomy IDs, '10118, 10116', are reported and '10114' is rejected.
EVALUATIONIn this section, we provide a detailed performance evaluation of our system. We first discuss the manually annotated corpora (gold standard) in Section 6.1, followed by the metrics used for evaluation in Section 6.2, the results in Section 6.3, a comparison with other systems in Section 6.4 and an analysis of strain recognition in Section 6.5.
CorporaTwo manually annotated corpora, containing full-text articles, are used for evaluation: (i) a corpus of 41 documents on protein engineering and fungi (in the following named OT corpus) and (ii) a corpus of open access biomedical documents from the PMC (here named Linnaeus-100).
Corpus preparation and manual annotation. Documents
N.Naderi et al.Different entity types are included in different versions to provide for a detailed performance analysis.The reference sections often contain organism names, but are not processed by all external systems. Considering them would lead to inconsistencies when performing cross-system evaluations. Hence, we decided to target only the abstract and main parts of each document and removed the reference sections. For the OT corpus, manual annotation was performed by us, using an XML annotation schema, in the GATE Developer GUI environment (). The annotations are saved, together with the original content, in the XML file using stand-off markup similar to the Tipster standard (). The markup schema allows for annotating the organism names (document names), scientific names, individual taxa (genus, species, strain) and the NCBI ID. Organisms with no existing NCBI taxonomy ID are annotated, but no IDs are assigned to them, hence indicating a valid organism entity that cannot be grounded to the taxonomy database. While we currently cannot distribute the original documents with their added annotations due to copyright restrictions, we provide our manual annotations in a separate file in tab-delimited format, similar to other publicly available gold standards. The Linnaeus-100 corpus has been annotated byand is also freely available online. However, for the detailed evaluation performed here, we needed to map their tab-delimited annotations to the full text in order to compare the resulting annotations. For this, we obtained the documents from the authors of the Linnaeus system and converted them into the same stand-off markup as our corpus. In their original annotations, organisms that do not appear in the taxonomy database received an NCBI ID of '0'. To keep the data consistent for this evaluation, these NCBI IDs were removed and no IDs are assigned to these organisms, since an ID in our system indicates successful grounding to an existing NCBI entry.
Corpus variations. Tobe able to analyze the system performance depending on the type of the organism mention (full form, common name, abbreviation, etc.), we prepared different versions of both the OT and the Linnaeus corpus. The Linnaeus corpus is already distributed with two sets of tags: one set includes only the NCBI and non-NCBI taxonomy names tags and the other set additionally includes non taxonomy names like 'participant', 'children' and 'patient' (L-100-A in). An analysis of the original version of the Linnaeus evaluation data revealed that 45% of strain mentions were missing. This suggests that the performance of our system can be better reflected by our proposed revised data, where we added the missing mentions. Moreover, we corrected some erroneous or missing annotations in the Linnaeus-100 corpus: for example, in the documents: pmcA147033 and pmcA2365090, the organisms transgenic mice and Escherichia coli strain BL21 were not manually annotated. We added these mentions as they would otherwise be flagged as false positives in the evaluation. All these changes are documented in the same format as the original Linnaeus-100 corpus and distributed with the OrganismTagger system.Overall statistics on the corpora are shown in, and the distribution of different organism types by corpus is shown in.
Evaluation metricsWe use the standard metrics precision, recall and F-measure, as well as accuracy, to evaluate the performance of our system (). Here, the number of correctly identified items as a percentage of the total number of correct items is defined as recall (R). Conversely, the number of correctly identified items as a percentage of the number of items identified is specified as precision (P). The F-measure (F) is used as a weighted (geometric) average of precision and recall.
Page: 2727 27212729
OrganismTaggerThe performance results are computed according to different criteria: Strict (S) and Lenient (L). In 'Strict', we measure all partially correct responses as incorrect: e.g. cases where the strains or subspecies are not found or only partially found are considered incorrect. In 'Lenient', all partially correct responses are measured as correct. The accuracy (A) for the correctly retrieved NCBI IDs is separately calculated based on the number of correctly identified NCBI IDs over the number of correctly normalized organisms. If an abbreviated form of an organism mention could not be uniquely resolved in a document, the OrganismTagger retrieves all the possible matching organisms. In this evaluation, these cases are all reported as false positives, even if the result does include the correct NCBI taxonomy ID.
ResultsThe performance of the OrganismTagger (v.1.1) is evaluated in three different steps (): first, the mentions of the organisms are evaluated against the gold standard without taking the NCBI IDs into consideration ('Detected Entities' in). In this step, the focus is on the entity recognition performance of the OrganismTagger. The performance is further evaluated based on the normalized mentions of the organisms, 'Normalized'. If the organism is not successfully normalized, it is removed from the list of retrieved organisms. And finally, the computed NCBI IDs are compared against the manual annotations, specified as 'Grounded'. Linnaeus (), a species name identification system, uses deterministic finite-state automatons (DFA) to capture species mentions and then assign them their NCBI taxonomy IDs. However, when the full form appears but no NCBI IDs exist for the species, all the abbreviated forms of this species are associated with other possible NCBI IDs. To compare our results with the results of the Linnaeus system (v.1.5), we applied it in the same way as the OrganismTagger on the manually annotated corpora. The results for the Linnaeus system are also shown in.
DiscussionFalse negatives of the OrganismTagger in the Linnaeus-100 corpora are mainly due to misspellings. Some acronyms resembling gene and protein names are filtered for minimizing error propagation. These acronym mentions are ignored by the OrganismTagger. Also, we do not cover the occurrence of species ranked as 'no rank' in the Taxonomy database, e.g. Salmonella typhimurium. The Linnaeus system uses additional synonyms to capture terms like 'patient' and 'children'. This is reflected by the recall section of the L-100-A corpus. For better comparison of the Linnaeus performance with that of our system, these additional synonyms of the Linnaeus system are ignored in the L-100-B, L-100-C and L-100-D corpora. False positive mentions in the Linnaeus-100 corpora arise from common names like small white for Pieris rapae, NCBI ID: 64459 and white underwing for Catocala relicta, NCBI ID: 423327. Some acronyms, namely PAR and ATV, captured by the OrganismTagger refer to non-organism mentions. We expect that in some cases, problematic acronyms can be filtered out by more accurate protein and gene name lists. However, the elimination of all false positives will negatively impact on recall. False negatives of the Linnaeus system are due to its inability to handle ligatures and the limited strain recognition, which is analyzed in more detail below. Moreover, some organisms are renamed and the old names usually appear following the new names in parentheses, like in Emericella (Aspergillus) nidulans; these cases are also ignored by the Linnaeus system. While many abbreviated organisms can be resolved to their nonabbreviated form after locating the full form in the document, a few still remain ambiguous. Using our additional heuristic, some of these ambiguous organisms can be resolved to their non-abbreviated format. In particular, L-100-D contains 69 abbreviated organism mentions without the corresponding full form and OT-B contains 27 mentions. After applying the second normalization heuristic, the OrganismTagger successfully resolved 50 and 21 in L-100-D and OT-B, respectively. We also performed comparisons with other systems, but do not report them in detail here as their performance is generally below that of the Linnaeus system. Using a combination of a lexicon with non-taxonomic words and rules, TaxonGrab () finds the longest match without grounding the entity. NaCTeM Species Word Detector and NaCTeM Species Disambiguator () mostly annotate the species level. For example, Pseudomonas fluorescens subsp. cellulosa is grounded with the NCBI Taxonomy ID '294' and Bacillus sp. strain C-125 is grounded with the NCBI Taxonomy ID '1409'. The strain level of the organism mentions is usually ignored by the aforementioned taggers.
Strain recognition analysisStrains are challenging to detect, because they do not follow any systematic naming convention. Moreover, not all strains are recorded in the NCBI taxonomy database, which impedes gazetteering-based approaches. We further analyzed the organism mentions that include strains.shows the number of strains appearing in the evaluation corpora: only about 24%49% of these strains are recorded in the NCBI Taxonomy database. The table also shows how many of these strains have been correctly recognized (81.1%94% for the OrganismTagger versus 20.1%37.6% for the Linnaeus system). For our system, we also analyzed which method contributed to the strain recognition (gazetteering, rule-based or machine learning). If a strain was recognized both through machine learning and another method, we only counted it once for gazetteering or rule based, as we were interested in the number of strains that cannot be captured with either of these two approaches. Overall, mentions of strains are usually ignored by other existing systems or limited to strains that exist in the NCBI Taxonomy database or can be captured by rules. In contrast, the OrganismTagger was explicitly designed to capture strains, and if possible, provide the NCBI database IDs both for the taxa level and the three-part taxonomic designation. In these cases, the Linnaeus system takes the approach of choosing only the longest match, for example, Pseudomonas fluorescens subsp. cellulosa is grounded with the NCBI Taxonomy ID '155077'.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
.2 NCBI-database mapping To provide maintainability and updateability for end users, all gazetteer lists and ontologies required by the system are generated automatically from a download of the NCBI database (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/ taxdump.tar.gz). A Python program was developed for this purpose, which reads the downloaded files and inserts their contents into a MySQL database (http://www.mysql.com), preserving the structure of the NCBI taxonomy by directly mapping each file to a database table and its columns to SQL columns in that table. 4.3 Gazetteer list generation For organism tagging, we use the developed OWL ontology, which encodes the relationships between organism parts (taxa) as shown in Figure 2. In order to support named entity detection of organisms, the ontology must contain the taxonomical names so that they can be matched against words in a text using an onto-gazetteer NLP component. This information is extracted from the MySQL database with a number of Python scripts, including the names themselves and information like the hierarchical structure of taxa and organisms. Organism abbreviations, like P. fluorecens shown in Figure 3, do not appear in the NCBI Taxonomy database, so a list of abbreviated organisms is automatically generated from the database by adding entries with the first letter of the genus part followed by a period. Together with the taxonomical information, we store additional metadata, like the originating database and the 'scientific name', for each ontology instance. This becomes important when delivering provenance information to scientists working with the populated ontology. Some organism names do not follow the binomial nomenclature rules, which is the genus followed by species. To handle these cases, a simple RDF schema (http://www.w3.org/RDF/) was developed that is limited to just one subclass hierarchy and associates the full name of the organism with the class Organism. The format of a triple is C1 rdfs:subClassOf C2, where rdfs:subClassOf is an instance of rdf:Property and states that C1, the entity, is an instance of rdfs:Class and a subclass of C2, an instance of rdfs:Class that is 'Organism'. The rdfs:domain and
<rdf:Description rdf :about="&porg;Ash%20River%20virus"> <rdfs: label>Ash River virus</rdfs: label> <rdfs:subClassOf rdf:resource="&porg;Organism"/> <rdf:type rdf :resource="http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#Class"/> </rdf :Description> Finally, we provide for basic acronym detection by generating a gazetteer list of all acronyms recorded in the NCBI database. To reduce false positives, we further filter this list by removing known gene or protein names as recorded in the UniProtKB (http://ca.expasy.org/sprot/) (2.6% of acronyms are removed in this step). More detail on acronym processing is provided in Section 5.4.
This only needs to be done when the resources are updated.
CONCLUSION In this article, we described the OrganismTagger system for semantically annotating organism mentions in documents. First, we emphasized the importance of system updateability with respect to external resources. Our approach is to provide tools that allow users to automatically transform the well-known NCBI Taxonomy database into data structures suitable for text mining tasks. Second, we provide ontologies for the lexical description of organism mentions using the standardized OWL and RDF formats, which can also be reused in other semantic systems. Third, we have implemented a comprehensive, open-source text mining system for detecting organism mentions, including normalization and grounding. In particular, it includes a novel strain recognition part, which is capable of annotating strains that do not appear in the taxonomy database. Fourth, we evaluated the system on multiple corpora. In this process, we reproduced the results reported for the Linnaeus system and created additional manual annotations for the biomedical literature. We provided detailed evaluations that break down the challenges in detecting organism mentions and demonstrated significant improvements in strain recognition and normalization. Our evaluation shows a number of directions for future improvements. Finding the remaining missing entities is challenging due to their diverse nature: in some cases, misspellings, either introduced by the authors or through format conversions, prevent organism recognition. This could be partially addressed by introducing automatic spelling corrections. Author-defined abbreviations and acronyms are another source of false negatives; this can be partially addressed by integrating a database like Allie (http://allie.dbcls.jp/). Further improvements in this area require the development of new co-reference resolution strategies, which is also important for many other entity types, such as proteins or mutations. The detection of common names introduces a number of ambiguities, in particular for the normalization and grounding tasks. We believe this will ultimately need to be addressed by the end user, by tailoring the system's configuration to their specific subdomain and application scenario. Strain recognition is one of the most challenging parts of organism detection, as strain designations do not follow any naming conventions. While our approach already demonstrates higher performance than existing systems, additional improvements in recall, without sacrificing precision, will be a continuing challenge.
