The use of sodium bisulfite (BS) treatment followed by hybridization to an Illumina Infinium BeadChip (HumanMethylation450 and MethylationEPIC) is a common method for interrogating 5-methylcytosine (5mC) at single nucleotide resolution. However, standard treatment of DNA with BS does not allow disambiguation of 5mC from an additional cytosine modification, 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC). Recently, it has been demonstrated that paired BS and oxidative bisulfite (oxBS) treatment on the same sample followed by hybridization to an Infinium microarray permits the differentiation of 5hmC from 5mC. Nevertheless, estimation of 5hmC and 5mC from tandem-treated arrays has been shown to produce irregular estimates of cytosine modifications. Results: We present a novel method using maximum likelihood estimation to accurately estimate the parameters of unmethylated cytosine (5C), 5mC and 5hmC from Infinium microarray data given the signal intensities from the oxBS and BS replicates. Availability and Implementation: OxyBS is an R package available on CRAN.
Introduction5-methylcytosine (5mC) is an essential epigenetic mark that controls gene expression or gene expression potential (). 5mC is the most widely studied epigenetic mark, and assays are available for mapping 5mC genome-wide at a single base resolution (). Although whole-genome bisulfite sequencing offers a complete characterization of the epigenome, DNA methylation microarray after bisulfite (BS) treatment has been the most commonly used genome-wide application (). Additional modifications to cytosine that modulate normal gene function have been implicated in disease development (). Indeed, the ten-eleven translocation family of proteins has been shown to function as enzymes capable of altering the methylation status of DNA by oxidizing 5mC to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC). Emerging evidence has suggested that 5hmC may act both as a transient intermediate in the process of 5mC demethylation and a functional epigenetic mark that regulates transcription (). Treatment of DNA with BS alone is unable to disambiguate 5hmC from 5mC. A growing appreciation for the role of 5hmC in biological processes and disease prompted the addition of an oxidation step prior to BS treatment (oxBS) that selectively oxidizes 5hmC to resolve 'true' 5mC levels. Paired BS and oxBS treatment on the same samples followed by hybridization to the Illumina 450K array now permits the differentiation of 5hmC from 5mC (). However, navenave estimation of 5hmC via the difference in values between oxBS and BS signals V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com results in some estimates with negative values and summed cytosine modification triplet estimates [unmodified cytosine (5C), 5mC and 5hmC] that exceed a value of 1.0. In the context of cytosine modifications, negative values of 5hmC and triplet sums exceeding 1.0 do not represent valid biological observations and these inconsistencies may represent artifacts of random assay noise.
Materials and methodsHere, we present an R package entitled OxyBS (oxidative bisulfite and bisulfite) that provides utilities for processing paired BS and oxBS Illumina Infinium array data and provides accurate estimations of cytosine modifications. Furthermore, there are several helper functions available that process data into BS-methylated, BS-unmethylated, oxBS-methylated and oxBS-unmethylated signals. Normalization and background correction of raw signals from each BS and oxBS converted sample is achieved using the FunNorm procedure available in the R/Bioconductor package minfi (version 1.14.0) (). Our software applies a novel technique for estimating unmethylated proportions (5C), 5mC and 5hmC. Briefly, each cytosine (i.e. CpG) corresponded to a data vector S BS ; R BS ; S OxBS ; R OxBS , with R k representing total signal (unmethylated  methylated) and S k representing Methylated signal k 2{BS, OxBS}); we used maximum likelihood to fit the data-generating model.The software is amendable to parallelization and is recommended for users as implementation of OxyBS for large sample sizes can be computationally intensive. The output is a user-friendly array containing estimates of 5C, 5mC and 5hmC for each CpG on the array. A guide to use of OxyBS is available: https://github.com/ Christensen-Lab-Dartmouth/OxyBS. A similar method has been developed to simultaneously estimate 5hmC, 5mC from BS-seq, oxBS-seq and TAB-seq experiments (). Key features of our OxyBS software are its implementation in R and its compatibility with the popular Illumina Infinium arrays.
ResultsTo compare the performance of our proposed OxyBS method versus a navenave calculation, we analyzed sample data from the OxyBS R package, paired BS-oxBS data from GSE73895 and data simulated for 'true' cytosine modification triplets (5C, 5mC and 5hmC) based on a Dirichlet distribution fit to the data in GSE73895. First, we used the sample data provided in the OxyBS CRAN package (30 CpGs  30 samples) and estimated 5hmC values using a navenave approach (5hmC  betaBS  betaOxBS) and our proposed OxyBS algorithm. Results clearly demonstrate that the navenave method produces negative values, whereas our proposed method does not (). Next, we expanded our analysis to include data from GSE73895, a study of 30 glioblastomas, and examined the percentage of probes that had negative values of 5hmC via navenave calculation.shows that the percentage of negative 5hmC values in the navenave calculation approaches 40% across all across Infinium probe type and CpG island strata (top panel), and the bottom panel shows the distribution of negative 5hmC values resulting from the navenave approach. We assessed the difference between the 'true' cytosine triplets and observed values obtained from the navenave and proposed OxyBS approaches using median absolute deviation (MAD). In addition to the aforementioned navenave approach (nave0nave0, 5hmC  betaBS  betaOxBS), we also considered navenave approaches that set 5hmC to zero when betaBS < betaOxBS: nave1nave1 (betaOxBS used as a proxy for 5mC) and nave2nave2 (betaBS as a proxy for 5mC). All estimations of simulated data (described in Supplemental information) were stratified by Infinium probe type and CpG island status (5000 values for each strata). MAD was then calculated as the median of the sum of the absolute deviations across 5C, 5mC and 5hmC. Using the 5000 simulated values for each strata, our proposed OxyBS method had the best performance (MAD is minimized across all strata, Supplemental). Notably, the results are comparable when betaBS < betaOxBS and the betaOxBS data is ignored as in nave1nave1 and nave2nave2 (Supplemental). Qualitatively identical results were obtained for root-meansquared-error (RMSE, data not shown). Estimations of negative values from paired BS and oxBS arrays likely reflect values of zero for 5hmC and are technical artifacts. Here we demonstrate that operationalizing the negative 5hmC values from a navenave calculation in a usable manner results in more error than using the OxyBS method, which enforces appropriate constraints on the data. The OxyBS tool can readily be applied to both the Illumina 450K and MethylationEPIC arrays as well as sequencing data withread counts for the four input data types (BS-methylated, BS-unmethylated, oxBS-methylated and oxBS-unmethylated).
Bioinformatics, 32(16), 2016, 25052507 doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw158 Advance Access Publication Date: 19 April 2016 Applications Note at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
E.A.Houseman et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
