PANTHER-PSEP is a new software tool for predicting non-synonymous genetic variants that may play a causal role in human disease. Several previous variant pathogenicity prediction methods have been proposed that quantify evolutionary conservation among homologous proteins from different organisms. PANTHER-PSEP employs a related but distinct metric based on 'evolutionary preservation': homologous proteins are used to reconstruct the likely sequences of ancestral proteins at nodes in a phylogenetic tree, and the history of each amino acid can be traced back in time from its current state to estimate how long that state has been preserved in its ancestors. Here, we describe the PSEP tool, and assess its performance on standard benchmarks for distinguishing disease-associated from neutral variation in humans. On these benchmarks, PSEP out-performs not only previous tools that utilize evolutionary conservation, but also several highly used tools that include multiple other sources of information as well. For predicting pathogenic human variants, the trace back of course starts with a human 'reference' protein sequence, but the PSEP tool can also be applied to predicting deleterious or pathogenic variants in reference proteins from any of the 100 other species in the PANTHER database. Availability and implementation: PANTHER-PSEP is freely available on the web at http://pan therdb.org/tools/csnpScoreForm.jsp. Users can also download the command-line based tool at
IntroductionRecent advances in sequencing technology have increased the rate of genetic variation discoveries, thus exacerbating the problem of interpreting these genetic variations. Here, we focus on non-synonymous single nucleotide variants (NSVs), a type of genetic variation that results in a single amino acid substitution in an encoded protein. Most computational tools for predicting the functional consequences of NSVs, including SIFT (), PolyPhen () and PANTHERPSEC (), rely at least in part on the assumption that crucial amino acids for protein families are conserved through evolution due to negative selection (i.e. amino acid changes at these sites were deleterious in the past), and that mutations at these sites have an increased likelihood of being pathogenic (causing disease) in humans. In general, homologous sequences of a target protein are collected and aligned, and a metric of conservation is computed based on the weighted frequencies of different amino acids observed in the target position in the alignment. Here, we present a new tool, PANTHER-PSEP (position-specific evolutionary preservation) for predicting potentially pathogenic ordeleterious NSVs. PANTHER-PSEP is different from other variant prediction tools, in that PSEP uses a metric based on evolutionary preservation (). Preservation is related to conservation, as it also reflects the effect of negative selection that has acted to prevent evolutionary change at a given site in a protein. It is also related to earlier methods that utilize a phylogenetic tree in addition to a multiple sequence alignment, pioneered by the Evolutionary Trace method () and later applied to variant pathogenicity prediction in the PANTHER-PSECv2 () and Evolutionary Action () methods. But unlike these other approaches, preservation uses ancestral sequence reconstruction to assess evolutionary change specifically in the lineage leading to the sequence of interest. We have previously shown evolutionary preservation to be superior to conservation for identifying deleterious mutations (in a growth-based assay) in the human Mthfr protein, as well as the E.coli lacI protein (). Here, we describe a software tool based on the same concept of ancestral preservation, but using a simple, standardized metric for quantifying preservation. In PANTHER-PSEP, preservation is measured as the approximate length of time a site has been preserved, tracing back the lineage from the relevant human protein, or potentially any other protein in the PANTHER library (). Because PANTHER trees are reconciled with the known species tree, we can use best estimates of speciation times () to date the ancestral preservation of each site.
Methods
Trees, alignments and ancestral sequence reconstructionSequence alignments and phylogenetic trees were obtained from the PANTHER database (), version 9.0. For each family in PANTHER, we reconstructed the ancestral sequences for all common ancestors (internal nodes) in the tree using PAML (), with the PANTHER tree and alignment as input. The reconstruction was performed at the amino acid level, using default parameters and the WAG substitution model ().
Input and outputInput is a reference protein sequence and one or more single-site substitutions in that sequence. The input protein sequence is searched against the PANTHER sequences using BLASTP () to find the best-matching PANTHER sequence (tree leaf node). The target amino acid is traced from the leaf back through increasingly older ancestral proteins in the tree. This trace stops if the target amino acid is different from the corresponding amino acid in the ancestral sequence, or if the amino acid reconstruction probability is less than a predefined threshold, and the age (in millions of years) of the last preserved ancestor is reported. The reconstruction probability threshold is the only free parameter in the PSEP method. We determined the optimal threshold on the HumVar dataset (), a commonly used dataset for pathogenic human variant prediction methods, but we find that the choice of threshold has very little effect on the performance of PSEP (Supplemental).
Testing and comparing to other methodsWe validated PANTHER-PSEP on the SwissVarSelected dataset (), which was recently shown to be the most appropriate set for this purpose as it avoids major issues that can confound comparisons between different methods. This dataset is independent of the HumVar dataset (as well as other datasets that are commonly used for training and parameterization of NSV prediction methods), and is well balanced in representing pathogenic and benign variants across a variety of proteins (). Using SwissVarSelected, we can compare PANTHERPSEP with similar, sequence alignment-based methods as well as with 'combined' methods that include multiple sources of information in addition to sequence alignments (and Supplemental). Finally, in order to facilitate comparisons with previously published results, we also assessed PANTHER-PSEP on the HumVar, SwissVar () and VariBench () datasets (Supplemental Figs S3S5; Supplemental).
ImplementationPANTHER-PSEP is implemented both as a standalone tool and a web server. The software tool is written in Perl. The web server (available at http://pantherdb.org/tools/csnpScoreForm.jsp) uses the same code base as the standalone tool, with an interface written in Java and HTML.shows that on the SwissVarSelected dataset, PANTHERPSEP performs better than previously published sequence alignment-based methods. This performance is somewhat surprising, especially as PSEP does not use any prior information commonly used in evolutionary conservation methods, such as amino acid chemical similarity. The superior performance of PSEP suggests that preservation may be a more informative way to use homologous sequence data than conservation. Perhaps even more surprisingly, PSEP outperforms many trained, multi-feature prediction. Comparison of the performance of PANTHER-PSEP with other tools for predicting pathogenic variants, on the SwissVarSelected dataset. The most closely comparable tools are shown in red; these are all 'unweighted' tools that, like PSEP, use only multiple sequence alignment information (PANTHER-PSEC, SIFT and FATHMM). Other tools are shown in blue; these are weighted methods that use multiple additional features (FATHMM, PolyPhen-2, MutationAssessor, MutationTaster2, LRT and CADD). Data are from (), except for PSEP and PSEC. Bar lengths show the area under the ROC curve for each method. Full ROC curves for all tools are plotted in SupplementalPANTHER-PSEPmethods. The high performance is also reflected in comparisons on the HumVar and SwissVar datasets; performance on VariBench is similar to current sequence-based methods, though the significance of this is unclear due to biases recently uncovered in this benchmark (). PSEP scores are correlated with, but in many cases are complementary to, scores from CADD () (Supplemental). Taken together, these results suggest that PANTHER-PSEP could be a useful addition to multifeature prediction methods such as CADD, PolyPhen-2 (), MutPred () and SNPS&GO (). Finally, we emphasize that the metric for preservation employed here is an extremely simple one. It considers only preservation of the exact amino acid, and therefore chemically conservative substitutions are treated the same as radical changes. It also reports a preservation time, rather than considering how this metric might scale for lineages other than human, that have different generation times and population histories. Future developments could consider more sophisticated metrics based on the same evolutionary model.
Results and conclusions
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
H.Tang and P.D.Thomas at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
