Pleiotropy is common in the genetic architectures of complex diseases. To the best of our knowledge, no analysis tool has been developed for identifying pleiotropic pathways using multiple genome-wide association study (GWAS) summaries by now. Here, we present PAPA, a flexible tool for pleiotropic pathway analysis utilizing GWAS summary results. The performance of PAPA was validated using publicly available GWAS summaries of body mass index and waist-hip ratio of the GIANT datasets. PAPA identified a set of pleiotropic pathways, which have been demonstrated to be involved in the development of obesity. Availability and implementation: PAPA program, document and illustrative example are available at http://sourceforge.net/projects/papav1/files/.
IntroductionPleiotropy describes the genetic phenomenon of a single gene affecting multiple phenotypes. It can be explained by single gene product having various biological functions, or acting as a signal factor implicated in the development of different phenotypes. Pleiotropy is common in the genetic architectures of complex diseases (). A total of 16.9% of genes recorded in the NHGRI Catalog of published genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have pleiotropic effects (). Clarifying the molecular mechanism of pleiotropy is helpful for pathogenetic studies and drug development of human complex diseases. Recent achievements in GWAS provide a good opportunity for systematical pleiotropy studies of complex diseases. A simple approach is to analyse disease phenotypes separately using univariate approaches. The study results of different disease phenotypes are compared, which may result in low statistical power. To address this issue, multiple pleiotropy analysis approaches and tools have been proposed (). A group of genes with pleiotropic effects were identified for complex diseases (). However, current pleiotropic mechanism studies of complex diseases mostly focus on individual pleiotropic genes, which are sometimes functionally independent. Some individual pleiotropic genes participate in multiple cellular processes. The biological functions of a part of genes remain elusive now. Therefore, identifying individual pleiotropic genes often provides limited information for genetic studies of complex diseases. Inspired by the gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) of microarray data (), pathway-based GWAS were proposed () and successfully applied in the genetic studies of complex diseases (). However, to the best of our knowledge, no analysis tool has been developed for identifying pleiotropic pathways using GWAS summary results by now. In this study, we extended the pathway analysis algorithm proposed by, and developed a pleiotropic pathway analysis tool PAPA. We applied PAPA to public available GWAS summaries of V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com body mass index (BMI) and waist-hip ratio (WHR) of the Genetic Investigation of ANthropometric Traits datasets ().
Methods
ImplementationStep 1  Assigning association testing statistics to genes We suppose that GWAS summaries of M genes and N phenotypes were available. Let S ij denote the association testing statistic (for instance, chi-square values for qualitative traits) of jth SNP for ith phenotype (i  1,2,. .. ,N). SNPs are assigned to genes by distance. A physical distance of 500 kb is used to connect a SNP to a gene in this study. For ith phenotype and mth gene (m  1,2,. .. ,M), we select the largest S ij from the SNPs assigned to the gene as the score of the gene, denoted as S im. All genes are ranked by sorting their scores S im from largest to smallest (S r i1 !S r i2 !::::S r iM ), which is denoted as S r i  S r i1; S r i2 ; ::::S r iM .Step 2  Calculating enrichment scores For a given pathway P consisting of M P genes, let G v denote the vth gene (v  1,2,. .. ,M P ) of pathway P. Let ES P i denote the enrichment score (ES) of pathway P for ith phenotype. ES P i is calculated by KolmogorovSmirnov-like running sum statistic ():Step 3  Permutation and centralization To obtain the null distribution of ES P i , permutations were conducted through circular genome permutation (). For kth permutation, let ES Pnull ik denote the ES value of pathway P for ith phenotype, calculating from permutated data. After K times permutations, we can obtain the null distribution of ES P i , denoted as; :::; ES Pnull iK . For pathway P, we calculate the centered ES (CES) of observed data (denote as CES P ) and permutated data (denote as CES Pnull  CES PnullWhere k (k  1,2,. .. ,K) denotes kth permutation. w i is the weight parameter of ith phenotype. For instance, w i can be assigned as the proportion of GWAS samples of ith phenotype in total samples.where k (k  1,2,. .. ,K) denotes kth permutation. After normalization, the NCES values of pathways with different sizes can be directly compared with each other ().Step 5  Calculating P values Statistical testing P value of each pathway is calculated as the proportion of NCES P being smaller than NCES Pnull in K times permutations.
Application to GWAS summaries of BMI and WHR
Results and discussionAs shown by Supplementary, the top three significant pathways functionally involved in adipocyte differentiation, Wnt signalling and synthesis of bile acids and bile salts, which have been demonstrated to be involved in the development of obesity (). The computational cost of PAPA program is affordable. The GWAS datasets of BMI and WHR were analyzed (1000 permutations) on a Dell computer with Intel Xeon CPU E5620 (2.4 GHz) and 4 GB memory. PAPA spent 98 h to complete data analysis. In this study, we extended the GSEA algorithm (), and developed a pleiotropic pathway analysis tool PAPA. Because of integrating GWAS results and prior knowledge of biological pathways, PAPA may provide novel clues for clarifying the pleiotropic mechanisms of human complex diseases. It should be noted that the definition of biological pathways may affect the performance of PAPA. In PAPA package, we provided two pathway gene annotation files, which were collected from public pathway database, including KEGG Pathway Database, Reactome Pathway Database, BioCarta, Ambion GeneAssist Pathway Atlas, Gene Ontology and GSEA Molecular Signatures Database.
FundingThe study was supported by National Natural Scientific Fund of China (81472925).
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Y.Wen et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
