Motivation: Inferring large transcriptional networks using mutual information has been shown to be effective in several experimental setup. Unfortunately, this approach has two main drawbacks: (i) several mutual information estimators are prone to biases and (ii) available software still has large computational costs when processing thousand of genes. Results: Here, we present parmigene (PARallel Mutual Information estimation for GEne NEtwork reconstruction), an R package that tries to fill the above gaps. It implements a mutual information estimator based on k-nearest neighbor distances that is minimally biased with respect to the other methods and uses a parallel computing paradigm to reconstruct gene regulatory networks. We test parmigene on in silico and real data. We show that parmigene gives more precise results than existing softwares with strikingly less computational costs. Availability and Implementation: The parmigene package is available on the CRAN network at http://cran.r-project.org/web/ packages/.
INTRODUCTIONInferring gene regulatory networks (GRNs) is currently one of the most challenging task in systems biology. Several approaches have been proposed to reconstruct GRNs using experimental data (paradigm of reverse engineering approach) such as Bayesian Networks (BN) (), Relevance Networks (RN), () and Graphical Gaussian Models (GGM) (); seefor a comparative review. While BN and GGM should be able to distinguish between direct and indirect edges, RN does not. However, BN and GGM hardly work in the case of thousands of genes and with a small number of replicates, while RN have the ability to deal with them. The seminal paper ofextends RN introducing an algorithm based on the Data Processing Inequality (DPI) for removing indirect edges. Their approach, called ARACNE, has been successfully applied to reconstruct the subnetwork of the MYC gene in human B cells. At the same time, other methodologies have been proposed to remove indirect edges: the CLR and the MRNET algorithms; for additional details, see. Although successfully * To whom correspondence should be addressed. applied in the reconstruction of GRNs, RN based on MI estimation are still affected by two major drawbacks: (i) some MI estimators are biased (see Supplementary Material for details) and (ii) even if RN computational cost is comparatively lower than that of BN and GGM, the time required to reconstruct the GRN of several thousand genes is still extremely large. Here, we present parmigene (PARallel Mutual Information calculation for GEne NEtwork reconstruction) a novel fast and parallel R package that (i) performs network inference implementing a minimally biased MI estimator, following Kraskov's algorithm (hereafter knnmi) () based on k-nearest neighbor distances, and (ii) uses OpenMP to implement a parallel GRN reconstruction with a strikingly fast run times. In the following, we report (i) the bias obtained by knnmi compared with the other MI estimators, (ii) the precision obtained by parmigene in the reconstruction of the MYC subnetwork using real data () and (iii) the computational costs for GRN reconstruction.
RESULTSBias: MI bias has been estimated for variables with low and with perfect non-linear associations. We compare knnmi (from parmigene), MI based on kernel density estimator [implemented in KDEMI,and variable discretizations implemented in Bioconductor packages bioDist and minet () (the shrinkage entropy estimator, the Miller-Madow and the Schurmann-Grassberger estimators, hereafter called shrink, mm and sg). For additional details see Supplementary Material.shows the bias distributions, while Supplementary Table S1 reports the average biases. parmigene with knnmi shows the lowest bias. Lower ks seem to perform better in both scenarios; in the following, we will thus report only the results of parmigene with k = 3. Precision: The impact of the MI estimation on GRN reconstruction has been verified using real data on human B cells (GEO ID GSE2350) (). The precision has been estimated using the subnetwork generated by the hub gene MYC for which several true interactors are known.proposed the ARACNE algorithm with the DPI implemented using a multiplicative tolerance (). minet implements only an additive tolerance () that gives worse levels of precision (). parmigene implements both alternatives.reports precision and rank score (normalized average rank of true positives); values closer to 1 represent the best results (see Supplementary Material for details). The ARACNE inference method with the multiplicative tolerance gives the highest precision. Furthermore, parmigene alwaysoutperforms the other estimators either for precision or for rank position. Computational time: we tested the time required (i) to estimate MI and (ii) to infer GRNs with increasing number of genes.shows the results. In the case of large-scale experiments (the entire gene expression matrix), parmigene computational time is strikingly better than those of exiting methods; it is 12 times faster in the MI estimation and 1.3 and 3.5 times faster, respectively, in the ARACNE and MRNET algorithms. Using parallel computationswith a quad-core system, parmigene is 50 times faster than other methods for MI estimation.
CONCLUSIONThe MI estimator implemented in parmigene gives almost unbiased results and, more importantly, more precise results on real data. In addition, parmigene has strikingly fast execution times.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
