Motivation: Polyadenylation is an essential process during eukaryotic gene expression. Prediction of poly(A) sites helps to define the 3 0 end of genes, which is important for gene annotation and elucidating gene regulation mechanisms. However, due to limited knowledge of poly(A) signals, it is still challenging to predict poly(A) sites in plants and algae. PASPA is a web server for poly(A) site prediction in plants and algae, which integrates many in-house tools as add-ons to facilitate poly(A) site prediction, visualization and mining. This server can predict poly(A) sites for ten species , including seven previously poly(A) signal non-characterized species, with sensitivity and spe-cificity in a range between 0.80 and 0.95. Availability and implementation: http://bmi.
IntroductionPolyadenylation is one of the essential processes and a point of regulation for eukaryotic gene expression. This process involves the cleavage at the 3 0 end of pre-messenger RNA (pre-mRNA) and the addition of a poly(A) tail. A poly(A) site marks the end of a gene, the recognition of which is important to fully understand the functions of genes and to accurately annotate the genomes. Given the connection between polyadenylation and transcription termination, correct identification of poly(A) sites would also predict where transcription termination may occur. Moreover, alternative polyadenylation, the use of different poly(A) sites of a gene, has been recognized as an important gene expression regulator in eukaryotes. A number of computational tools based on support vector machine or discriminant analysis have been developed to predict poly(A) sites or poly(A) signals in human, including Erpin (), POLYAR (), Dragon PolyA Spotter (), etc. Unlike human or animals where the dominant signal AAUAAA is found in >50% of poly(A) sites (), no highly conserved poly(A) signal can be found in plants or algae (), there are subsequently fewer prediction models available. Our group developed a poly(A) site prediction tool called Poly(A) Site Sleuth (PASS) () based on a generalized hidden Markov model (GHMM). PASS and its modified version have been applied on the poly(A) site prediction for Arabidopsis () and rice (), respectively. Another classification based model called poly(A) site classifier (PAC) was developed for green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii ().also developed a classification-based command-line tool called polyA-iEP to predict poly(A) sites in Arabidopsis. To our knowledge, most of the aforementioned tools were implemented as standalone programs with command-line interfaces,Seven of these species are previously non-characterized in terms of their poly(A) signals and poly(A) sites.
Methods
Algorithm updatesPASS 2.0 is the core prediction program to predict poly(A) sites, which is based on the GHMM prediction model. An updated version of PASS with the following improvements is used. First, PASS is a Windows application tool implemented in Delphi language, limiting its use in command prompt or other OSes like Linux. Coded in C, PASS 2.0 is executable in different OSes, as well as in command line. Second, the parameters for GHMM structure in PASS are fixed, e.g. the number of signal states, and therefore its parameters cannot be modified for other species whose poly(A) signals and number of signal states are different. In contrast, PASS 2.0 allows adjustment of the model parameters, such as length of each state, state type, and number of states, according to the characteristics of the surrounding sequences of target species to adapt to the respective poly(A) site profiles. Third, PASS 2.0 offers several probability calculation methods to calculate the state output probability of the GHMM structure, such as heterogeneous first-order Markov submodel and weights of signal patterns and their combination. Moreover, users can train their own GHMM parameter file for the prediction of poly(A) sites in a new species. Several Perl scripts are provided to facilitate better estimation of model parameters for any given species (described in Supplementary Section S1). Additionally, a different method is implemented to locate the exact positions of predicted poly(A) sites in PASS 2.0 rather than the approximate regions in PASS (described in Supplementary Section S2). We have trained our GHMM profiles for ten species and will continue to expand this list in the future when new poly(A) site data become available. However, if the species the user desired is not listed, similar species in the list can be chosen or our program can automatically choose the optimal model parameters according to the given sequence file.
PASPA serverPASPA is a web-based service consisting of a series of Perl scripts, a PHP web application, and PASS 2.0 for poly(A) site prediction, evaluation, and visualization. The input data for our server are a DNA sequence file in FASTA format, with the optional files for known poly(A) sites or model parameters. The output is the poly(A) site(s) predicted along the original target sequences, based on the poly(A) scores. The result pages contain three viewers (described in Supplementary Section S3). The first one is the list viewer in which the prediction results will be shown in a tabulated list. Users may also choose to visualize single nucleotide base compositions and poly(A) signals of the input sequences. The second one is the score viewer () in which all predicted and known poly(A) sites (if available) will be automatically anchored to the score series of the given sequence for visualization. With functions such as motif search, users can identify canonical poly(A) signals (e.g., AAUAAA or UGUAA) and their variants in the pattern viewer. The third viewer () is the EST-polyA viewer in which the input sequences are aligned to the genome to associate any authenticated polyadenylation evidence. There are four authentic poly(A) site datasets from whole-genome studies currently available, including Arabidopsis, rice, M.truncatula, and C.reinhardtii (). Users can search known poly(A) sites in the vicinity of their aligned sequences and visualize both known sites and predicted ones along the genome. More details about the server implementation are described in Supplementary Section S3.
ResultsFor prediction purposes, the positive data set was generated from poly(A) sites in 3 0 untranslated regions (3 0-UTRs). Random sequences and sequences from 5 0-UTRs or coding sequences were used as control datasets (described in Supplementary Section S4). Part of the sequences in the known poly(A) site datasets were randomly selected for model training. Part of the rest of the sequences from the positive ploy(A) datasets and the control datasets were used to estimate sensitivity (SN) and specificity (SP) (described in Supplementary Section S4). Similar to previous studies (), a compromise between SN and SP was used to evaluate the model performance. Additional indexes including Matthew's correlation coefficient, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve, Fmeasure were also employed for a more comprehensive evaluation of the performance. Cross value of SN and SP ranges from 0.80 to 0.95 (). The variation of performance among different species may due to the distinct set of poly(A) signals used in the respective species. In addition, compared with previous prediction tool, PASS for Arabidopsis and rice (), PASPA obtains higher performance with better flexibility. More details about the model evaluation are given in Supplementary Section S5.
ConclusionsPASPA is the first web server for the prediction and visualization of poly(A) sites in plants and algae, with high prediction performance and good flexibility. It will be a valuable addition to the community for the study of polyadenylation, genome annotation, transcription, and gene expression.Ctrl1: cross value for control dataset of 5 0-UTR or coding sequences. Ctrl2: cross value for control dataset of random sequences.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
G.Ji et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
