Prognostic and diagnostic biomarker discovery is one of the key issues for a successful stratification of patients according to clinical risk factors. For this purpose, statistical classification methods, such as support vector machines (SVM), are frequently used tools. Different groups have recently shown that the usage of prior biological knowledge significantly improves the classification results in terms of accuracy as well as reproducibility and interpretability of gene lists. Here, we introduce pathClass, a collection of different SVM-based classification methods for improved gene selection and classfication performance. The methods contained in pathClass do not merely rely on gene expression data but also exploit the information that is carried in gene network data. Availability: pathClass is open source and freely available as an R-Package on the CRAN repository at http://cran.r
INTRODUCTIONMicroarray studies are commonly used in clinical cancer research to investigate molecular profiles associated with tumor development and progression. Several thousand genes are measured to identify predictive or prognostic gene signatures comprising only a couple of genes. The goal is to use these gene signatures for stratification of patients according to clinical relevant endpoints. Classification algorithms are frequently used to identify gene signatures. The support vector machine (SVM,) is a well-known example of such a classification algorithm. Several groups have proposed the so-called feature / gene selection methods for the SVM since the algorithm does not offer an embedded feature selection mechanism. Despite the identification of biomarkers, the aim of feature selection is to reduce the dimensionality of the feature space in order to avoid the so-called curse of dimensionalty (), that is overfitting. Overfitting occurs when the number of features (genes) is large and the amount of samples (i.e. patients) is comparatively small, which is often the case when performing microarray studies. Thus, the algorithm can easily find a hyperplane that separates the training examples. However, the
PACKAGE FEATURESTo this end, the prior knowledge used by the algorithms implemented in pathClass is represented as a network structure or graph, i.e. it carries information on the connectivity of features. In the following sections, the different algorithms and the way they use the network data are briefly explained. For illustration purposes, we show a benchmark of all three algorithms in. However, it is important to note, that these results are specific for this particular dataset. All steps needed to reproduce the result ofare given in the package vignette.
Reweighted Recursive Feature EliminationWe recently proposed an extension of SVM-RFE (), called Reweighted Recursive Feature Elimination (RRFE), which exploits both gene expression data as well as pathway knowledge (). The assumption of RRFE is that a gene which is not differentially expressed but connected to other genes that show a differential expression should have a higherimpact on the classifier compared to those genes that do not have any connections to other deregulated genes. We used a modified version of Google's PageRank algorithm, called GeneRank (), to calculate a ranking of the features based on fold change and network centrality. In a next step, this ranking is combined with the RFE ranking criterion. Based on this combination, features are ordered and 90% of the most important genes are kept for the next iteration. This procedure is then repeated until only one feature is left. Afterwards, the model with the best performance is chosen.
pathClass: an R-package for integration of pathway knowledge into SVMs
Network-based SVMThe approach introduced bytreat neighboring genes is called network-based SVM and uses a network-based penalty which leads to a grouped variable selection. This variable selection is archieved by penalizing the SVM objective function with an F -norm, instead of the commonly used L 1 or L 2 penalization. This norm forces the simultaneous selection or elimination of a group of features from the same pathway.treat neighboring genes in a graph as a group and construct their networkbased penalty as the sum of F -norms of groups of neighboring genes pairs.
Incorporating network knowledge by spectral decompositionThe method bydefines a new metric for gene expression measurements by using diffusion kernel maps. Their assumption is that most biologically relevant information is captured in the low-frequency component of expression profiles. Hence, the projection of the low-frequency component of an expression vector on the gene metabolic network should reveal areas of positive and negative expression on the graph that are likely to correspond to the activation or inhibition of specific branches of the graph.In pathClass, we combined this method with a recursive feature elimination, hence we allow to perform a feature selection when using this algorithm. However, the user also has the possibility to use the original version.
SUMMARYWe introduced pathClass a comprehensive package for classification with prior knowledge of feature connectivity. Up to now, it contains three SVM-based classification methods capable of using prior knowledge in the form of network data represented as a graph. The methods can be used directly or in a repeated crossvalidation setting, which helps to estimate the average classification accuracy. The package is able to run the cross-validation in parallel and thus exploit the architecture of modern multicore computers or computing clusters. A detailed step-by-step tutorial as well as a comparison of the different methods on a cancer dataset is given in the package vignette, which is also available on CRAN.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. generalization performance of such a classifier will be poor and the stability of identified gene signatures will be low (Ein-Dor et al., 2005). In order to overcome these problems, several groups have recently proposed to adapt classification methods in such a way that the algorithms can benefit from using prior biological knowledge (Chuang et al., 2007; Johannes et al., 2010; Rapaport et al., 2007). Common sources of such knowledge are databases that contain pathway information or proteinprotein interactions for a review see Porzelius et al. (2011). pathClass aims at providing the user with comprehensive implementations of these methods in a unified framework in order to allow easy and transparent benchmarking. To our knowledge, it is the first package implementing several SVM-based algorithms that are capable of incorporating network knowledge into the classification process. It is, however, worth mentioning that all methods available in pathClass have previously been published and shown their predominance over standard algorithms. For benchmarking of the more 'classical' methods not using prior knowledge, the user is referred to the packages CMA (Slawski et al., 2008) and MCRestimate (Ruschhaupt et al., 2004). A boosting approach that is capable of using prior knowledge (Binder and Schumacher, 2009) can be found in the package GAMBoost, which is also available on CRAN.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [17:45 18/4/2011 Bioinformatics-btr157.tex]
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
