The International Society for Computational Biology, ISCB, organizes the largest event in the field of computational biology and bioinfor-matics, namely the annual international conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology, the ISMB. This year at ISMB 2012 in Long Beach, ISCB celebrated the 20th anniversary of its flagship meeting. ISCB is a young, lean and efficient society that aspires to make a significant impact with only limited resources. Many constraints make the choice of venues for ISMB a tough challenge. Here, we describe those challenges and invite the contribution of ideas for solutions. Contact: assistant@rostlab.org ISMB evolved. The largest scholarly meeting event in computational biology is the annual conference of the International Society for Computational Biology, the ISCB, namely the international conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology (ISMB). The ISMB meeting series began in 1993 in Bethesda (Maryland, USA) and aimed to connect computational experts to address challenges in molecular biology. That first meeting was so successful that it spawned a series of annual conferences with increasing participation. The 8th ISMB (in 2000 at UCSD in San Diego) was the first ISMB that brought together over 1000 participants. Due to its increased size, it was also the last ISMB that could be held at a university. The 12th ISMB [and the first joint meeting with the European Conference on Computational Biology (ECCB) in Glasgow, 2004] attracted over 2000 attendees. At that point, the concept of a single track with only about 50 talks was no longer sustainable, and ISMB went parallel, beginning with a double track. The 14th ISMB in Fortaleza, Brazil was the last time that most of the organization was shouldered significantly by local scientists. Beginning with the 15th ISMB (and the 2nd ISMB/ECCB) in Vienna in 2007, ISCB took full responsibility for the organization. It has been a great challenge for ISCB to move from the position of what was essentially an 'advisory observer' to that of completely managing the event over the course of six meetings (2007–2012). Taking the leading role in the organization of the conference provides ISCB with many possibilities to simplify and to evolve a 'signature style'. As a result, the organization of each new ISMB has increasingly moved toward an orchestration of tasks carried out autonomously, each of which follows some specific template and is driven by track chairs. Conference organization is guided by a Steering Committee (SC) composed of the meeting and track chairs, staff and key contractors. The committee holds biweekly telephone conferences during which organizational issues are discussed and decisions taken. ISMB involves the participation of over 2000 scientists; it runs on a total budget exceeding 1.5 million dollars; and it was presented for the 20th time this year in Long Beach, CA. Those who contemplate these three numbers may assume that the 'new' organizational structure is an evident necessity. This might seem so, but the realization of this structure was by no means straightforward. Today: massively parallel, big event. Today ISMB is an event of impressive proportions. This leads to immense challenges in every respect. Other conferences/societies meet many of those challenges, but no other society with limited resources similar to those of ISCB successfully takes on such a particular combination of tasks. Meetings of comparable complexity and size typically operate on a budget that is significantly more comfortable. In other words, they spend much more money and involve several times the staff. At the ISMB in Long Beach (July 15–17, 2012), we realized a total of approximately 1600 participants. As is now customary for ISMB, a number of smaller special interest groups (SIGs) and satellite meetings were organized prior to the main ISMB conference. Some of these are, in their own right, the most important annual meetings for particular research areas. The 6 keynote addresses were followed (morning) or preceded (afternoon) by a 2-h session of 4 talks within each of 9 parallel events/tracks, for
2559
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Paving the future: finding suitable ISMB venues at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
B.Rost et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
