Protein features are often displayed along the linear sequence of amino acids that make up that protein, but in reality these features occupy a position in the folded protein's 3D space. Mapping sequence features to known or predicted protein structures is useful when trying to deduce the function of those features and when evaluating sequence or structural predictions. To facilitate this goal, we developed PDBpaint, a simple tool that displays protein sequence features gathered from bioinformatics resources on top of protein structures, which are displayed in an interactive window (using the Jmol Java viewer). PDBpaint can be used either with existing protein structures or with novel structures provided by the user. The current version of PDBpaint allows the visualization of annotations from Pfam, ARD (detection of HEAT-repeats), UniProt, TMHMM2.0 and SignalP. Users can also add other annotations manually. Availability and Implementation: PDBpaint is accessible at
INTRODUCTIONA protein's function is tightly dependant on its 3D structure. In particular, protein features such as catalytic centers, domains and post-translational modifications, have a shape in 3D space that is crucial to understand the function of the protein. However, in protein databases these features are usually defined by their locations in linear protein sequences only. It is actually easier to define and handle protein annotations in a 1D sequence. Second, protein sequence data is much more abundant than protein structure data, which require complex techniques to determine atomic coordinates. As a result, most protein annotations are mapped to protein sequences but not to protein structures (). Nevertheless, tagging available 3D structures with annotations can be extremely informative. This is used in some web tools and databases dealing with protein structures), SCOP (), Dali ()] or with domain predictions), Pfam (. Typically, users have to obtain a file with the atomic coordinates of a protein structure (e.g. in PDB format) and
SIMILAR TOOLSThe problem of automating the mapping of features to structures is almost as old as the molecular graphic programs themselves. In 1994, Saqi and Sayle already presented a script to map protein motifs detected with regular expressions on PDB protein structure () using the RasMol viewer. The PDB website displays secondary structure annotations using Jmol. Standalone graphical molecular viewers like RasMol () or PyMOL (PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 1.3, Schrdinger, LLC) can also do this. Pfam () allows the display of Pfam domains of a protein in a dynamic protein 3D viewer (Jmol) when the protein's structure is available from the PDB. Aside from these well-known tools, several small web services allow to display a variety of features on 3D structures. Motif3D is an online tool that focuses on displaying protein motifs fromwindow, with different options (positions to tag, webservice and window size). 2: custom structure upload window, with its options. 3: output of the structure by Jmol. 4: properties of the protein (from top to bottom, PDB code, name of protein, function of protein, species). 5: legend of annotations performed by PDBpaint. In our example, webservice TMHMM2.0 for detection of transmembrane regions has been chosen. 6: help page, to get some tips about PDBpaint. the prints database on structures from the PDB database (). Amino acid conservation of a sequence using related homologs can be displayed on a 3D structure using ConSurf (). Suits of bioinformatics tools such as SRS 3D (O') or UTOPIA () can be used to display annotations on PDB structures as PDBpaint does; however, these tools require local installation of software and have a significant learning curve.
D.Fournier and M.A.Andrade-Navarro
TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONSPDBpaint was developed in Perl, and uses a JavaScript to call the Jmol program. Jmol requires Java 1.5 or greater.
CONCLUSIONPDBpaint has been specifically designed as an easy to use tool for the tagging of PDB files with a comprehensive collection of features. Display of protein features such as Pfam or UniProt directly on the 3D structure help to better understand protein function; these also allow the user to test the accuracy of predictive methods and see directly their results on modeled or known structures. Researchers who have solved or predicted a novel protein structure can upload their structure and immediately view sequence features predicted for their protein in the context of the novel structure. In particular, we believe that PDBpaint will facilitate the use of predicted protein structures when designing experiments.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. then load it into a molecular graphics display program (O'Donoghue et al., 2010). Then, to incorporate annotation information users need to obtain the corresponding protein sequence, have it analyzed by one or more Webservices and then manually transfer the output of these tools into the molecular viewer for 3D representation. This can be time consuming, especially if many sources of annotation are being used on multiple structures. To facilitate this procedure, we have developed a web tool, PDBpaint, designed specifically to allow loading either existing structures from the PDB, structure models from MODBASE (Pieper et al., 2011), or a PDB file created by the user, for example for a novel structure or from modeling software [e.g. i-TASSER (Roy et al., 2010; Zhang, 2008)], and then tag them according to the user's preferences. PDBpaint can compute predicted features from the sequence extracted from the PDB file using external services and locally run methods: protein domains by Pfam (Finn et al., 2010), alphasolenoid repeats by ARD (Palidwor et al., 2009), signal peptides by SignalP (Emanuelsson et al., 2007) and transmembrane alphahelices by TMHMM (Krogh et al., 2001). PDBpaint can also represent features from the protein's corresponding UniProt entry (Magrane and Consortium, 2011) that were experimentally or computationally derived (mapped to the PDB sequence using sequence alignment to account for possible residue numbering differences). Manual annotations can be also input for any set of residues and colors. The collected sequence features are then mapped and represented in the PDB structure by a script that calls the molecular graphics viewer Jmol [http://www.jmol.org/; (Jmol, 2011)]. The structures to tag are then displayed in an interactive window (Fig. 1).
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [10:09 25/8/2011 Bioinformatics-btr419.tex]
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
