
INTRODUCTIONBiological macromolecules (proteins and nucleic acids) often execute their functions via molecular recognition with other biological macromolecules or organic small molecules. Characterization of the interactions between molecular complexes is thus helpful for interpreting the mechanism of various life processes. Modern X-ray crystallography and multidimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques have produced a wealth of structural information of molecular complexes. The worldwide Protein Data Bank (PDB) holds the largest open resource for experimentally determined biomolecular structures (). It has been growing rapidly during the past 20 years or so. By June 2014, over 100 000 structures had already been deposited into PDB. A number of derivative databases based on PDB have been developed with their own scopes and emphases, such as PDBsum (), Relibase+ (), Het-PDB Navi () and scPDB (). These databases provide annotated proteinligand complex structures or their special features, such as binding pockets and ligand molecules. Collectively, the structural information provided by these databases allows visual examination of interactions between a wide range of molecular complexes. On the other hand, energetic properties are also indispensable for obtaining an in-depth understanding of such events. Here, the major problem is that energetic data, such as binding data, are often scattered in the huge pool of literature so that they are difficult to access. To tackle this problem, some existing databases started to incorporate binding data; for example, ChEMBL () and PubChem () are perhaps the two most comprehensive databases in this category. They currently provide a large amount of experimental binding data of diverse bioactive compounds as well as relevant information on molecular targets, experimental conditions, etc. Other databases were created with a focus on binding data, e.g. BindingDB () and PDSP Ki (). Obviously, the rich knowledge of the interactions between bioactive small molecules and their potential targets provided by these databases is widely welcomed by chemical biologists and medicinal chemists. Nevertheless, the link between structural information and energetic properties is desirable especially for theoretical and computational studies on molecular recognition. This link is missing, or at least not the primary focus of the databases mentioned above. With more and more successful applications of computational methods to modern drug discovery (), the requirement for a combined knowledge of structures and binding data has become increasingly urgent. To fill the gap between structural information and energetic properties of biomolecular complexes, a practical strategy is to collect experimentally measured binding data for the biomolecular complexes deposited *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com in the PDB. Currently, PDBbind () and binding MOAD () are two outstanding databases created for this purpose. Both of them are based on a systematic sampling of the entire PDB. A few early databases also belong to this category, including LPDB (), PLD () and AffiDB (), but they are much smaller in size and have undergone virtually no updates since original release. A summary of current databases collecting structural information and/or binding data of proteinligand complexes in all three categories is given in the Supplementary. The PDBbind database was originally developed by Prof. Shaomeng Wang's group at the University of Michigan and was first released to the public on May, 2004. Since 2007, this database has been maintained and further developed by our group at the Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry in China under a mutual agreement with the University of Michigan. Since then, the database has been released through the PDBbind-CN Web server at http://www.pdbbind-cn.org/ and http://www.pdbbind.org.cn/. Over the years, we have regularly updated the PDBbind database to keep pace with the growth of PDB itself. The methods for compiling the database have also been improved along the way. The latest release of PDBbind, i.e. version 2013, provides binding data for 410 700 molecular complexes in the PDB, making it the largest collection of its kind to date. In all, 42400 registered users from some 40 countries access this database regularly. There are also a large number of anonymous users around the world. In this article, we will describe the current methods used for compiling the PDBbind and its updated status. We will also review some typical applications of PDBbind published in the scientific literature to illustrate the significant value of this database.
METHODS FOR COMPILING THE PDBBIND DATABASE
Classification of biomolecular complexesThe first step of our entire workflow is to classify the valid biomolecular complexes deposited in the PDB. This task is fairly complicated, as PDB itself does not provide a clear and systematic classification on whether a PDB structure is a 'complex'. Our early experience was that keyword-based analysis of the text annotations in PDB files missed too many true complexes. Thus, we have developed a classification scheme completely based on the structural information given in the PDB file. This scheme is automated by a set of in-house programs, and has been continuously refined over the past years. The basic flowchart of our current scheme is shown in. The input is a standard PDB-format structure file. Our program will then classify the given structure as a non-complex (pure protein or nucleic acid molecule), a complex but not in our interests or a valid complex. Valid complexes include four major categories, i.e. (i) complexes formed between protein and small-molecule ligand, (ii) complexes formed between nucleic acid and small-molecule ligand, (iii) complexes formed between two protein molecules and (iv) complexes formed between protein and nucleic acid. The flowchart shown inis basically self-explanatory. Yet, a few issues need to be explained in more detail. First, our scheme relies on a dictionary to distinguish 'valid' organic ligand molecules from biological cofactors/coenzymes, inorganic ions, buffer components, organic solvent molecules and other miscellaneous 'heterogens' included in PDB files. This dictionary is compiled based on the standard 'Chemical Component Dictionary' provided by the PDB. It has been updated annually along with the PDBbind database itself. Second, the definition of a 'valid' proteinprotein complex is also a bit complicated. In our scheme, a valid proteinprotein complex must be formed by at least two peptide chains from two different protein molecules. A homodimer or multimer of the same protein molecule is not counted. Each peptide chain in the complex should have at least 20 amino acid residues. This cutoff is chosen because Trp-cage, which has 20 residues, is arguably the smallest functional protein. Our program also examines the number of interacting residues on the binding interface of two peptide chains. Here, we follow Tsai's method () to define interacting residues. A valid proteinprotein complex must have at least 10 interacting residues at each side. Otherwise, the binding interface is probably the result of a crystal packing rather than a meaningful molecular recognition process. As of January 1, 2013, there were 87 085 experimentally determined structures released by the PDB. Classification of these structures by our scheme is given in. Four categories of valid complexes, including 29 008 proteinligand complexes, 5341 proteinprotein complexes, 3852 proteinnucleic acid complexes and 717 nucleic acidligand complexes, were considered in the following steps.
Collection of binding dataThe second step of our workflow is to collect binding affinity data from the scientific literature for biomolecular complexes classified as 'valid'. Our focus is the 'primary reference' provided in each relevant PDB structure file. This strategy offers a good chance to obtain the desired binding data by examining a single article and has been proven to be effective over the years. The real challenge at this step is that binding affinity data as well as relevant information (such as binding assay method and experimental settings) have to be retrieved from the given reference manually. Virtually no journals offer such data in a standard format. To reduce labor, we have developed a set of computer scripts to conduct a keyword-based search through the full text of a given article. Only the articles containing clues of binding data will be examined manually. Each such article is then examined independently by two persons. Binding data will not be formally recorded unless both persons obtain a consistent result. This quality-control practice effectively reduces human mistakes in our data to a low level. It needs to be reemphasized that every single binding data in the PDBbind was retrieved from an original reference rather than copied from other data resources. Up to now, we have processed 424 000 scientific publications in total. We actually mark where the binding data were found in the original reference. Thus, if someone is suspicious of any data in our database, we can easily find its origin in our archives and make a correction when necessary. We record three major forms of binding data: the dissociation constant (K d ), the inhibition constant (K i ) and the concentration at 50% inhibition (IC 50 ). If multiple forms of binding data of a given complex are available, we actually record all of them but present the end user with only the most preferred data with a priority order of K d 4K i 4IC 50. Similarly, if the binding data of a given complex is measured under different experimental settings, we present the end user with only the data measured at room temperature and neutral pH or a condition closest to this setting. The overall 'yield ratio' at this step is 2530%, i.e. binding data can be found for 2530% of the valid complexes identified at the previous step. In addition to binding data, we also record the basic structural and biological/chemical information of each complex, such as release year, resolution and R-factor of the crystal structure, protein name, protein sequence, ligand name, ligand structure, enzyme commission (EC) number and so on. Although such information is also available from otherdatabases, such as PDB, integration of such information helps the user to find the desired information more conveniently.
Further processing of datasetsA major motivation for creating the PDBbind database is to provide high-quality datasets for the development of molecular docking and scoring methods for structure-based drug design. The proteinligand complexes with known binding data compiled through the previous steps, which we call the 'general set', are not recommended to serve directly as such a dataset. This is because many complexes still may have a problem either with their structures or binding data, and thus, are not 'healthy' enough for docking/scoring studies. The size of the general set is also too large for this purpose. Therefore, as an additional feature of PDBbind, we provide users a set of proteinligand complexes selected out of the general set since the first public release (version 2004). We call this dataset the 'refined set'. A fairly complicated set of rules is applied to the selection of the refined set with considerations of (i) the quality of the complex structures, (ii) the quality of the binding data and (iii) the biological/chemical nature of the complex. This set of rules has also evolved over the years to become more and more stringent. The current rules have been described in detail in our recent publication (). In PDBbind version 2013, 2959 proteinligand complexes are included in the 'refined set'. In addition, to make the refined set readily readable by most molecular modeling software, the original PDB structural file of each complex is split into a protein molecule and a ligand molecule. Both partners in each complex are processed properly and saved in standard formats (such as PDB, Mol2 and SDF). All these processed structural files together with the binding data can be downloaded as a package from our PDBbindCN Web site. Furthermore, a subset of proteinligand complexes, which we call the 'core set', is selected out of the refined set as a standard benchmark for evaluating docking/scoring methods. This is because there is considerable sample redundancy in the refined set. For example, nearly 10% of the proteinligand complexes in the refined set are formed by HIV-1 protease. Our opinion is that a standard benchmark needs to control sample redundancy, otherwise the evaluation results could be biased. Since PDBbind version 2007, we have started to compile the core set through systematic sampling of the refined set. The rules for selection of the core set have also evolved during the past years. The current rules have been described in our recent publication (). The core set in PDBbind version 2013 contains 195 proteinligand complexes in 65 families. The core set can also be downloaded as a package from our PDBbind-CN Web site. Proteinprotein complexes and proteinnucleic acid complexes have been added to PDBbind since version 2008 (). In version 2013, there are already 1804 proteinprotein complexes and 587 proteinnucleic acid complexes with known experimental binding data. Computational studies on the molecular recognition between biological macromolecules need high-quality datasets as well. We are now working on defining the rules for selecting these two types of complexes. Refined sets for these two types of complexes will be provided in PDBbind in the near future.
Design of Web site interfaceThe PDBbind database is now accessible at the PDBbind-CN Web server (http://www.pdbbind-cn.org and http://www. pdbbind.org.cn/). Users can browse, analyze and search the contents of PDBbind on this Web interface. The basic interface is the 'BROWSE' page, where users can view all entries in PDBbind one by one. This page provides binding data and other basic information of each complex. Users can view the 3D structure of the complex, or only the binding pocket, the protein molecule or the ligand molecule with various display options powered by a Java plug-in 'MarvinView' released by ChemAxon (). On this page, hyperlinks to some external databases, including PDB, PDBsum and PubChem, are also provided so that users can get other information about the complex conveniently. Under mutual agreement, users can also find the binding data provided by PDBbind on the Web pages of PDB, PDBsum and PubChem. A text-based search function is provided on the 'DATA' page, which enables three search methods. A number of queries can be used, including complex subset type, PDB code, protein name, ligand name, EC number, release year, resolution, binding data and so on. Users can save outcomes as an Adobe PDF or Microsoft Excel table, and download the related structure files (). Substructure or similarity search of the organic ligand molecules is provided on the 'STRUCTURE' page. A user can input a SMILES text string, or draw a structure with the MarvinSketch plug-in to conduct the structure search (). This search is carried out over all organic ligand molecules in the PDB, not limited to the scope of the PDBbind. The latest release of PDBbind contains 411 000 organic ligand molecules from the PDB. A sequence-based search of protein or nucleic acid molecules is provided on the 'SEQUENCE' page. Users can carry out a BLAST similarity search among all protein and nucleic acid sequences throughout the PDB. A user can input a sequence in the FASTA format to conduct the search. The outcomes can be viewed online or can be downloaded ().
UPDATES OF PDBbind AND FACTS OF THE CURRENT RELEASEAs the PDBbind database was released at our PDBbind-CN Web server in 2007, we have been able to update it on an annual basis to keep up with the growth of the PDB. To conduct an update, we download the entire PDB in the first week of each year, and then complete the classification, data collection, data processing and Web design steps in the next few months. The newly released version is therefore named after the release year.PDBbind has become a true PDB-wide collection of binding data. The latest release of PDBbind is version 2013, which provides the experimental binding data and structures of 10 776 molecular complexes in the PDB. Among them are 8302 proteinligand complexes, 1804 proteinprotein complexes, 587 proteinnucleic acid complexes and 83 nucleic acidligand complexes (). The binding data in this version include 4682 K d values, 3028 K i values and 3066 IC 50 values, spanning over 15 orders of magnitude from 0.29 fM to 400 mM. The distribution of these binding data for four categories of complexes is shown in. One can see that all three types of binding data are significantly populated for proteinligand complexes, whereas the binding data for the other three categories of complexes are primarily reported as K d values in the literature.
TYPICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE PDBbind DATABASESince the public release of PDBbind in 2004, it has been used by a growing number of researchers worldwide. We have noticed that the registered PDBbind users have quite different backgrounds. Sometimes they use the PDBbind data in ways beyond our original expectation. According to our survey, 4120 studies using PDBbind data have already been published in the literature. We will briefly review some typical applications below. Hopefully, our descriptions will inspire the readers to invent even more ingenious ways of applying the PDBbind database.
Development and validation of docking/scoring methodsA primary motivation for creating the PDBbind database is to provide high-quality datasets for developing and validating scoring functions and docking methods. Indeed, a fair number of research groups use our database in this way. For example, Olson et al. developed AutoDock Vina, a new program for molecular docking and virtual screening (with 100-fold speedup and improved binding pose predictions as compared with the previous AutoDock 4. The scoring function in the AutoDock Vina was calibrated on the PDBbind refined set. Other recently published scoring functions, which used proteinligand complex datasets from PDBbind include NNScore (), DSX (), PHOENIX (), LISA (), B2BScore (), SFCscore (), ID-Score (), KECSA () and many others. Our group has also applied PDBbind extensively in this area. For example, we have developed the CASF benchmark, i.e. comparative assessment of scoring functions, over the past years. The first published study was CASF-2007 (). An updated study, i.e. CASF-2013, was recently published (). This benchmark aims at providing an objective and systematic evaluation of scoring function performance, which can be shared among the community. The PDBbind core set served as the primary test set in this benchmark. Another example was a test of the MM-PB/SA method on a set of 24 proteinligand complexes selected from the PDBbind database (). All of these complexes have multiple conformations determined by an NMR technique so that the standard conformational sampling method in MM-PB/SA can be evaluated. Here, we want to mention in particular that the PDBbind refined set as well as the core set is compiled by a set of standards reflecting the commonsense in docking/scoring studies, which we expect to serve the majority in this community. The users of course have the freedom to make selections among the rough data provided by PDBbind based on their own standards. For example, if one is particularly interested in complexes in which a metal ion mediates the interactions between protein and ligand, he/she can compile a subset of such proteinligand complexes out of the general set or the refined set in PDBbind. The users are welcome to do so, and we hope that they are willing to share their selections with others. However, for obvious reasons, we cannot respond to every request of this type from the users.
Analysis of drugtarget interactions and structure-based drug designThe proteinligand complexes included in PDBbind cover a wide range of validated and potential drug targets and many bioactive organic molecules. Such information can be used to study the complex interactions between drugs and their targets. One example is the application of network pharmacology to predict drug effect and toxicity resulting from multi-target interactions.presented an interesting computational approach that combines two machine learning systems and multiple molecular docking methods to assess binding potentials of a given compound against multiple target proteins in a complex molecular network. Both systems were built and validated by using the PDBbind refined set (version 2007). Ligands with known binding data in PDBbind were also used to build a statistical model for discriminating drugs and nondrugs by. In their study, a probability-based approach was introduced for quantitative classification of compounds as drugs and non-drugs. Disease and organ-specificity was also taken into account. In addition to demonstrating good predictive power, their classification model is chemicallyinterpretable. This model is useful as an improved filter before complicated computations or experimental work is carried out.presented a quantitative model regarding the relationship between the intrinsic disorder in protein structure and its biological function. Their predictions were validated by genome-wide surveys on both the level of disorder in protein functions as defined by the GO ontology (The Gene) and binding data from PDBbind. Their results indicate that both catalytic and low-affinity proteins prefer ordered structures; while only high-affinity proteins can have disordered structures. Their results also suggest that binding affinity can be tuned by increasing structural disorder to maximize the specificity of promiscuous interactions. This study provides a new point of view for understanding the mechanism of protein ligand interactions. Recently, we conducted a statistical survey of the so-called characteristic interaction patterns (CIPs) on proteinprotein binding interfaces from PDBbind (). Common CIPs shared by different proteinprotein binding interfaces were analyzed with the annotated functions from the GO ontology. We concluded that proteinprotein interfaces having common CIPs with high conservation scores are usually associated with identical or similar biological functions. Based on the detection of CIPs at a proteinprotein binding interface, we also proposed a fragment-based strategy for designing small-molecule inhibitors of proteinprotein interactions by using the large library of proteinligand complex structures in PDBbind. By comparing the CIPs at proteinprotein interfaces with those at proteinligand interfaces, appropriate fragments were truncated from known ligand molecules and then assembled to form complete ligand molecules. We applied this strategy to the de novo design of Bcl-2 family proteins, a familiar proteinprotein interaction target (). A number of designed molecules were synthesized and tested, and some of them proved to be effective binders of the Mcl-1 protein.
SUMMARYThe PDBbind database aims to provide a PDB-wide collection of binding data for various biomolecular complexes. Since its first public release in 2004, the PDBbind database has been updated on an annual basis. The latest release (version 2013) provides experimental binding data for 10 776 biomolecular complexes in PDB, including 8302 proteinligand complexes and 2474 other types of complexes. All contents are freely accessible at the PDBbind-CN Web server (http://www.pdbbind-cn.org/). This database offers a valuable knowledge basis for computational studies of molecular recognition, structure-based drug design, statistical analysis of drugtarget interaction network and many other applications. The PDBbind database is expected to reach a new level in terms of size and data quality in the coming years. 2012AA020308 to Prof. R., and the Science and Technology Development Fund of Macao SAR [Grant 055/ 2013/A2 to Prof. R.. This work was also supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from MSD China to Dr. Y. Li.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Z.Liu et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
PDB-wide collection of binding data at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
PDB-wide collection of binding data at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from Conflict of interest: none declared.
