Motivation: Many drugs interact with numerous proteins besides their intended therapeutic targets and a substantial portion of these interactions is yet to be elucidated. Protein–Drug Interaction Database (PDID) addresses incompleteness of these data by providing access to putative protein– drug interactions that cover the entire structural human proteome. Results: PDID covers 9652 structures from 3746 proteins and houses 16 800 putative interactions generated from close to 1.1 million accurate, all-atom structure-based predictions for several dozens of popular drugs. The predictions were generated with three modern methods: ILbind, SMAP and eFindSite. They are accompanied by propensity scores that quantify likelihood of interactions and coordinates of the putative location of the binding drugs in the corresponding protein structures. PDID complements the current databases that focus on the curated interactions and the BioDrugScreen database that relies on docking to find putative interactions. Moreover, we also include experimentally curated interactions which are linked to their sources: DrugBank, BindingDB and Protein Data Bank. Our database can be used to facilitate studies related to polypharmacology of drugs including repurposing and explaining side effects of drugs. Availability and implementation: PDID database is freely available at
IntroductionMajority of the molecular targets of drugs are proteins () and there are several databases of the already characterized proteindrug interactions. DrugBank () provides access to biochemical and pharmacological information about a large set of 7759 drugs, including 1600 Food and Drug Administration (FDA)approved compounds, and their known 4104 protein targets. Therapeutic Target Database () offers a comprehensive coverage of over 20 000 drugs, including close to 15 000 experimental drugs, and their interactions with 2360 protein targets. This database also links targets and drugs to about 900 diseases. Other databases expand beyond the drug molecules to cover small drug-like ligands. BindingDB () gives experimentally V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com measured binding affinities between about 7000 known protein targets and a large set of almost half a million of small ligands. ChEMBL () contains structures, physicochemical properties and bioactivity (e.g. binding constants, pharmacology data) of drug-like small molecules. The current release of ChEMBL incorporates 1.7 million distinct compounds and 13.5 million bioactivity data points which are mapped to over 10 thousand protein targets, where the corresponding binding sites are defined at varying levels of granularity (protein, protein domain or residue level). SuperTarget () includes about 6200 protein targets from several dozens of species and close to 200 000 drug-like compounds. It integrates drug-related information from BindingDB, DrugBank and the SuperCyp database of cytochromedrug interactions (), adverse drug effects from SIDER (), drug metabolism and pathways and Gene Ontology (GO) terms for the target proteins. The PROMISCUOUS database (von) integrates data from DrugBank, SuperTarget and SuperCyp and covers about 6500 protein targets and over 25 thousands drug-like compounds that are annotated with side effects. This database also provides facilities that can be used to predict novel targets based on structural similarity between drugs and between side effect profiles of drugs. STITCH () combines information from many sources of experimentally and manually curated interactions between small ligands and proteins including ChEMBL, Protein Data Bank (PDB), DrugBank, Therapeutic Target Database, text mining of articles from MEDLINE and PubMed and several other resources. It currently houses data on 390 000 chemicals and 3.6 million proteins. The recently released IntSide database () links about 1000 drugs with their human protein targets collected from DrugBank and STITCH, and with close to 1200 side effects and other annotations of associated diseases, pathways and cellular functions. Although most of these resources summarize the interactions at the protein or residue level, scPDB () includes molecular-level (all-atom) information for native binding sites in proteins structures collected from PDB () that are suitable for docking of drug-like ligands. It includes molecular-level details of about 9200 binding sites (all-atom annotation of binding sites and list of ligand-binding residues grouped by various types of bonds) and binding modes (all-atom position of ligand inside the site) in 3600 proteins, and summary of physicochemical properties of approximately 5600 drug-like ligands. However, many of the established drugs interact not only with the intended therapeutic target protein(s) but also with other protein targets (off-targets). Individual compounds were shown to on average target 6.3 proteins (). Given a high degree of incompleteness of this information (), the number of off-targets is likely substantially higher. To compare, DrugBank includes 15 199 proteindrug interactions for 7759 drugs with the average number of targets per drug at 1.96, which further substantiates incompleteness of the currently available data. Moreover, this polypharmacology can be both beneficial if a given drug can be repurposed for a different disease and harmful, leading to side effects (). A couple of high-profile examples include imatinib that was repurposed for treatment of gastrointestinal stromal tumors () and sorafenib for the kidney and liver cancers (). The incompleteness of the data combined with the importance of polypharmacology motivates research toward elucidation of novel proteindrug interactions. Conventional (non-computational) methods for the identification of novel off-targets rely on an in vitro counter-screen of a given drug against a 'large' set of enzymes and receptors (). Recognizing corresponding implications related to side effects, pharmaceutical companies have implemented screening protocols for the drugs that they currently develop. For instance, Novartis screens against interactions with a panel of 24 targets associated with serious side effects and high hit rates (), Pfizer screens against between 15 and 30 targets (), and Roche uses a panel of 48 targets (). Compared with the experimental screens, computational methods that find novel drug targets are more cost-and time-effective, allow screening of a larger number of targets and provide insights into the molecular-level mechanisms of proteindrug interactions (). These in silico methods are successful in the context of drug repositioning and identification of off-targets (). A couple of databases that focus on the putative proteindrug and druggable proteinprotein interactions (PPIs) were recently released. BioDrugScreen () stores results of docking of about 1600 small drug-like molecules against 1589 known proteins targets in human, which were annotated based on DrugBank and HCPIN () databases. Docking was ran for close to 2000 cavities on the surfaces of these proteins, for the total of about 3 million receptorligand complexes. Druggable Protein Protein Interaction Assessment System (Dr. PIAS) () is a database of druggable PPIs predicted by a machine learning method. This database lists druggable interactions predicted from over 83 thousand PPIs in human, mouse and rat but they are not associated with specific compounds. We developed ProteinDrug Interaction Database (PDID) that complements existing repositories and addresses the lack of access to a comprehensive set of putative proteindrug interactions. Based on close to 1.1 million of all-atom predictions over the entire structural human proteome (10 thousand structures for over 3700 proteins), PDID provides access to all putative targets (between 4444 and 7184, depending on the prediction method used) of several dozens of popular drugs. Unique features of our database are: @BULLET It incorporates accurate predictions generated by three methods, ILbind (), SMAP () and eFindSite (), which are complementary and independent of docking that was used in the BioDrugScreen database @BULLET It uniformly covers the entire structural human proteome @BULLET It includes molecular-level information on localization of the putative binding sites in the structures of the corresponding protein targets @BULLET It includes comprehensive annotations of known drug targets that are linked to their sources: DrugBank, BindingDB and PDB The methods that we use were shown empirically to provide high-quality predictions of drug targets () and their results were already successfully used to predict novel off-targets. Examples include applications to find new off-targets of estrogen receptor modulators (), cholesteryl ester transfer protein inhibitors (), comtan (), inhibitors of Trypanosoma brucei RNA editing ligase 1 (), nelfinavir (), raloxifene () and cyclosporine A ().
Methods
DatasetsWe collected the structural human proteome from PDB by removing low resolution structures (>3 A  ) and followingwe kept proteins for which sequences were mapped to human proteins in Ensembl (). More specifically, structures of chains with at least 90% sequence identity quantified using BLAST () with default parameters to any human protein from 68th release of Ensembl were selected. As a result, we include total of 9652 human and human-like high resolution structures that correspond to 3746 unique human proteins; the structures are listed at http://biomine-ws.ece.ualberta.ca/PDID/ files/list_proteome.txt. Protein chains that correspond to PDB structures were mapped to) to facilitate mapping of proteins between PDID, PDB, DrugBank and BindingDB.The database includes drugs which were solved structurally in complex with at least one protein; this is necessary to predict targets. There are 355 such drugs in PDB which we extracted with PDBsum (). The current release 1.1 includes 51 drugs, compared with the release 1.0 that had 26 drugs. These compounds are listed inand include popular antibiotics, anti-inflammatory, antiviral and anticancers agents, immunosuppressants and drugs for the treatment of osteoporosis, diabetes, heart attack, hypertension, edema, angina, glaucoma and other diseases. The currently included compounds comprehensively sample the structural drug space; we clustered structures of the 355 drugs using their
Putative proteindrug interactionsPrediction of binding sites from protein structures for a given ligand (drug) are done by searching for sites that are similar to the known sites of this ligand, which are extracted from the structure(s) of the proteindrug complex(es) or by docking the ligand to all binding sites. There are three classes of prediction methods that implement different trade-offs between accuracy and computational cost. These methods are based on searching for the similar sites using a reduced representation of protein structure or complete all-atom structure of protein, and by docking the all-atom structure of ligand into the allatom structure of the target proteins. The fastest class of methods utilizes the reduced representation, usually in a form of a numeric vector that summarizes geometry and physicochemical properties of binding sites. Representative examples of such methods that find similar binding sites are PatchSurfer () and method by Tomii's group (). The latter algorithm was recently used to create the PoSSuM database () that includes 49 million pairs of similar binding sites computed from the known binding sites of 194 drug-like molecules over all protein structures from PDB. Given the large number of these putative sites it is likely that many of them are false positives and would have to be further screened via a more advanced method. The second class of methods that is characterized by a lower throughput performs docking of a given compounds into protein structures to find which proteins harbor binding sites that are complementary to the given ligand. An example platform that utilizes such type of docking to find targets of a given ligand is INVDOCK (). Given the relatively high computational cost of docking, we highlight the availability of the BioDrugScreen database (). This database stores results of docking with AutoDock and scores these putative interactions based on several scoring functions, such as AutoDock, GoldScore, X-Score, ChemScore, PMF and DFIRE. This docking-based database covers about 1600 drug-like molecules and 2000 cavities on the surfaces of close to 1600 human proteins. However, these results are limited to interactions that are localized in pockets/cavities on the protein surface rather than exploring the whole surface. This is motivated by prohibitively high computational costs of searching the entire surface. BioDrugScreen uses Relibase algorithm () to identify pockets of interest, while INVDOCK uses an older algorithm by. Our database takes advantage of the third class of methods that are complementary to docking. These methods are not constrained to surface pockets and produce accurate predictions of the protein drug binding at the molecular level. They implement inverse ligand binding where structure(s) of known proteindrug complex(es), called template(s), is used to predict other protein targets together with the corresponding binding sites for the same drug. There are two ways to find novel binding sites based on similarity to known binding sites, one based on the similarity of the corresponding protein fold and another based on similarity of binding pockets. The first approach is implemented by the eFindSite method () and the other approach by the SMAP algorithm (). The eFindSite predictor is an improved version of FINDSITE method () that uses meta-threading with eThread () and the Affinity Propagation clustering algorithm () to optimize selection of the ligand-bound templates for a given query structure. It was empirically shown to outperform FINDSITE and several geometrical methods for detection of pockets (). SMAP is based on a sequence order independent profileprofile alignment (SOIPPA) which finds evolutionary and functional relationships across the space of protein structures (). SMAP utilizes a shape descriptor to characterize the structure of the protein template and the SOIPPA algorithm to detect and align similar pockets between the query and template proteins. We also include results from a novel meta-method ILbind (), which is a machine learningbased consensus of 15 support vector machines that combines prediction scores generated by SMAP and FINDSITE. Details concerning how predictions are performed with SMAP, FINDSITE and ILbind are given in. Our recent article shows that ILbind, SMAP and FINDSITE accurately predict targets even when the corresponding structure of the query protein and the template(s) are substantially different, i.e. they are from different Structural Classification of Proteins (SCOP) folds. The corresponding average (over three tested ligands) areas under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUCs) equal 0.727, 0.693 and 0.687 for ILbind, SMAP and FINDSITE, respectively (). These results justify our use of the three predictors on the proteome scale. The PDID database provides access to precomputed results of computationally expensive all-atom predictions by eFindSite and SMAP. Their average runtime for a single protein structure and a given drug is about 30 min on a single processor; the runtime of ILbind is negligible since it is based a consensus of results generated by the two predictors. This high computational cost makes ad hoc predictions for a given user query (a given drug or a given protein) computationally impractical.
Results
Assessment of predictive qualityWe assessed predictive performance of ILbind, SMAP and eFindSite on a set of 25 representative drugs that are included in PDID. These compounds were selected from 25 clusters of chemically similar drug structures (one compound from each cluster) that were generated from the 355 drugs that can be found in complex with proteins in PDB. The evaluation follows the protocol from (). Briefly, native targets of the 25 drugs were collected from PDB, BindingDB and DrugBank, and we compare predictions from the three methods on the structural human proteome against these native targets. We clustered proteins in the structural human proteome at 90% identity using BLASTCLUST and evaluated the results on the corresponding clusters, i.e. a given cluster is considered to be a native target of given drug (predicted to bind the drug) if at least one protein in this cluster shares at least 90% identity with a native target of that drug (at least one protein in this cluster is predicted to bind that drug). The clustering assures that the evaluation is not biased toward targets that are overrepresented with many structures of similar folds. Empirical results demonstrate that the three methods are characterized by high predictive quality. The average AUCs over the 25 drugs of eFindSite, SMAP and ILbind equal 0.630, 0.740 and 0.761, respectively (). Although ILbind outperforms the other two methods, which is expected from this meta-method and consistent with results in, different methods perform better for different ligands. More specifically, eFindSite provides the highest AUC for 5 drugs, SMAP for 6 drugs and ILbind for the remaining 14 drugs.gives average true positive rates (fractions of correctly predicted native targets) in the function of the fraction of predicted protein targets sorted in the descending order by the propensities for the interaction generated by each of the three predictors. It shows that 40% of the native targets (true positive rate  0.4) are found in the top 4% of predictions from ILbind and SMAP and in top 14% of predictions from eFindSite. We note that predictive performance varies between compounds and primarily depends on their size. Higher AUCs are characteristic for medium sized drugs (with molecular weight between 200 and 400 g/mol) and lower AUCs for either small (below 200 g/mol) or large (over 400 g/mol) drugs. To compare, the average AUCs for the small/medium/large drugs for eFindSite, SMAP and ILbind are 0.56/ 0.68/0.58, 0.7/0.83/0.58 and 0.7/0.86/0.59, respectively. Example small and large compounds for which predictive quality is relatively low are salicyclic acid (138.1 g/mol; average AUC over the three methods of 0.50), isoflurane (184.5 g/mol; 0.60), suramin (1297.3 g/mol; 0.55) and cyanocobalamin (1355.4 g/mol; 0.57).
Database contents and availabilityPDID is freely available at http://biomine.ece.ualberta.ca/PDID/. The backend is implemented with the relational MS MySQL database and webpages use PHP script. Protein targets are linked to PDB, UniProt, BindingDB and DrugBank. Drugs are linked to the corresponding records in PDB, BindingDB and DrugBank. Protein and drugs are linked with each other through their known and putative interactions. The interactions are defined at molecular level, i.e. coordinates of the location of the drug in the protein structure file are included. Besides displaying this information in the browser window, PDID allows to download the source files with the sequence and structure of the target proteins. We also offer download of the parsable raw source datasets in text format under the Section 2.1 on the main page. They include the current version of the structuralILbind SMAP eFINDSITE. Number of native and putative targets for the considered 51 drugs. The native targets are based on annotations from PDB, DrugBank and BindingDB. The predictions were generated by ILbind, SMAP and eFindSite. The drugs, which are shown on the x-axis, are sorted by their corresponding number of targets in the descending order and separately for each of the four annotations Database of molecular-level proteindrug interactionshuman proteome (IDs of all considered protein structures), list of drugs and predicted targets for each drug together with scores from each of the three prediction methods and the corresponding coordinates of the putative binding sites. The current version of PDID includes results of about 1.1 million predictions of targets over the 10 thousand structures and 51 drugs with the corresponding 5172, 7184 and 4444 putative targets generated by ILbind, SMAP and eFindSite. It also includes 730 known targets of the 51 drugs mapped from and linked to the corresponding records in DrugBank, BindingDB and PDB.shows the number of native and putative targets for each drug. The median number of putative proteindrug interactions equals 23, 30 and 31 for SMAP, eFindSite and ILbind, respectively, compared with the median of eight based on the known interactions collected from DrugBank, BindingDB and PDB. The database will be updated semiannually by adding additional drugs and proteins. The initial version 1.0 that included 26 drugs was released in October 2014 and the current version 1.1 in April 2015. This schedule is consistent with other related resources, e.g. scPDB is updated annually, ChEMBL is updated twice a year and DrugBank was recently updated in April 2015 (version 4.2), May 2014 (version 4.1) and December 2013 (version 4.0).
0.45
User interfaceThe main page includes overview of the contents of the database, access to three available search types (by drug name, by ID of the protein target and by sequence of the protein target), links to the source datasets and related resources and date of the last update. It also includes link to the 'About' page that explains contents of the database and introduces related methods and the 'Help & Tutorial' page that explains the interface of the main page and the three types of output pages that correspond to the three search types. The search by drug name returns a table with details of known and putative targets including links to the corresponding records in PDB, DrugBank and BindingDB, links to files with structure and sequence of each target and propensities for binding outputted by ILbind, SMAP and eFindSite (). Targets are sorted by the number of methods that predict them as binding (propensities shown in green font indicate prediction of binding) and by the scores generated by the most accurate ILbind when the number is the same. Detailed description of the formatting and contents of this output page can be found at http://biomine-ws.ece.ualberta.ca/ PDID/help.html#drug_page. Each target protein is available as a link that leads to a webpage with the summary of results for this target. The search by protein ID returns a webpage that maps this ID into corresponding UniProt protein (quality of mapping is annotated using sequence similarity), gives links to the sequence and structure files, provides customizable visualization of the structure together with the localization of the putative (red dots) and known (blue sticks) ligands, and a table that summarizes information about drugs that are known and predicted to bind this protein (). This information includes color-coded scores generated by each methods that generated prediction and the corresponding predicted location of the drug in the protein structure. We use JSmol () to visualize structures and BLAST to compute sequence similarity. Detailed description of this webpage is available at http:// biomine-ws.ece.ualberta.ca/PDID/help.html# prot_page. The search based on protein sequence invokes BLAST that compares the input chain with the target sequences included in the databases. The most similar target is selected given that its similarity quantified with the e-value is better than a user-defined cutoff; default e-value cutoff equals 0.001. The resulting webpage displays the alignment of the query and target proteins and the summary of results for the aligned target protein; the format of the summary is the same as for the query based on the protein ID.
DiscussionNumerous drugs are highly promiscuous and we do not know many of their targets. PDID database addresses this issue by providing access to a complete set of putative proteindrug interactions and a set of known proteindrug interactions in the structural human proteome. Our database includes data that otherwise would be accessible only to individuals and research groups with significant computational expertise and resources. The putative interactions were generated by three accurate predictors, ILbind, SMAP and eFindSite, that were shown to produce results that led to finding new drug targets () and which complement the existing BioDrugScreen database that relies on docking. The databasealso integrates annotations of known protein targets collected across DrugBank, BindingDB and PDB, links proteins to the corresponding records in UniProt and provides coordinates of the location of binding sites in the structures of the putative drug targets. PDID can be used to systematically catalog proteindrug interactions and to facilitate various studies related to polypharmacology of drugs (), such as explaining side effects caused by interactions with off-targets and for the drug repurposing. Relevant recent examples include use of predictions with ILbind to find three novel off-targets of cyclosporine A that explain nephrotoxicity associated with use of this immunosuppressant (). Another example involves repurposing of raloxifene, which is used for prevention and treatment of osteoporosis, as a potential compound to treat Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections based on predictions with the SMAP method ().
C.Wang et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
