Emerging evidence has revealed phased siRNAs (phasiRNAs) as important endogenous regulators in plants. However, the integrated prediction tools for phasiRNAs are still limited. In this article, we introduce a stand-alone package PhaseTank for systematically characterizing phasiRNAs and their regulatory networks. (i) It can identify phasiRNAs/tasiRNAs functional cascades (miRNA/phasiRNA!PHAS loci!phasiRNA!target) with high sensitivity and specificity. (ii) By one command analysis, it generates comprehensive annotation and quantification of the predicted PHAS genes from any given sequences. (iii) PhaseTank has no restriction with regards to prior information of sequence homology of unrestricted organism origins. Availability and implementation: PhaseTank is a free and open-source tool. The package is available at http://phasetank.source
INTRODUCTIONSecondary phased siRNAs (phasiRNAs) play crucial roles in post-transcriptional regulatory networks in plants (). Well-characterized trans-acting siRNAs, as a special subgroup of phasiRNAs, are initiated by miRNA-mediated cleavage and converted to dsRNA, yielding siRNAs in a 21-nt phase (). Currently, eight TAS loci have been identified in Arabidopsis, and TAS3 is experimentally validated to suppress the juvenileto-adult transition (). Moreover, phasiRNAmediated regulation of NB-LRR encoding disease-resistance proteins appears to be widespread in dicots (). However, the significance and broad roles of phasiRNAs remain unclear in plants (). Next-generation sequencing technology provides a powerful tool for genome-wide screening of phasiRNAs (), and several methods were proposed correspondingly (). However, no methods could systematically identify phasiRNAs and their regulatory cascades, and none reports the detailed annotation and quantification of candidate PHAS loci (). In this study, we present a novel tool PhaseTank to identify PHAS loci, which contains our new sights and also incorporates the advantages of the previous methods. We propose that the relative small RNAs production (RSRP) of PHAS loci is higher than that of the transcripts processed by random cleavage, inasmuch as the PHAS loci should generate considerable phasiRNAs to maintain their biological functions (). In our method, the phased ratio, abundance and number of a phasiRNA cluster are considered as three main contributors to score a candidate PHAS loci. Additionally, PhaseTank could detect both triggered miRNAs and phasiRNA targets for predicted PHAS loci. Therefore, PhaseTank employs a new filter and scoring system to perform de novo prediction of PHAS loci and their regulatory cascades on a genome-wide scale.
APPROACH
Computing RSRPThe RSRP of a sequence is calculated as the following steps. First, we calculate the small RNAs production of sequence i (SRP i ) using Equation (1).where A i is the abundance of mapped reads onto sequence i, and L i is the length of the sequence i. Second, RSRP i is computed as Equation (2):where N is the total number of the sequences.
Definition of siRNA and phasiRNA clustersThe siRNA cluster is referred to the genomic region that contains at least four sRNA hits with a maximum separation distance of 100-nt (Supplementary) (). Similarly, we define phasiRNA cluster as a specific region that contains at least four phased reads with a maximum separation distance of 84-nt. To set the phasiRNA cluster, every position in a given sequence is successively assigned as a '21-bin cycle' () (Supplementary). We then search for the most *To whom correspondence should be addressed. abundant bin and the 21-nt reads mapped to this bin. These reads are used to search phasiRNA clusters.
Computing phased scorePhased score is the core indicator in PhaseTank, and it consists of three main factors, namely, phased ratio, number and abundance. Larger phased score of a sequence indicates higher possibility that it will be a true PHAS gene. Specifically, in a phasiRNA cluster, phased ratio is the abundance of the highest abundant bin_x divided by the total abundance (). Phase drift for 1 $ 2 position(s) is considered if the second abundant bin is bin_y (y = x AE 1 or 2). Phased number is the distinct number of 21-nt phased reads, and the abundance of these reads represents phased abundance. The phased score for each phasiRNA cluster is calculated as Equation (3):
P Score=P Ratio  P Number  ln P Abundance 3where P is the abbreviation of 'phased'.
Searching triggered miRNAsMiRNA-directed TAS loci cleavage often occurs at 911nt positions from the 5 0 terminal (). According to the prediction results of CleaveLand4 (), one miRNA is defined as a phase-trigger, if its cleavage site occurs almost at the phased positions (one position shift).
WORKFLOW AND IMPLEMENTATIONThe workflow of PhaseTank is illustrated in Supplementary. First, the reads are mapped to the references using bowtie (). Then PhaseTank excises siRNA clusters based on the mapping information and keeps the clusters with top 5% RSRP value. For these clusters, PhaseTank searches the most abundant bin as phased sites. The phasiRNA clusters are excised accordingly from these sites and then processed into the filtering system. The phased score of the filtered clusters are then computed as Equation (3). By setting advanced options, PhaseTank can predict miRNA-mediated cleavage and phasiRNA targets using CleaveLand4 (). Finally, the phasiRNA cascades of each predicted PHAS gene are reported in a text file. PhaseTank is written in Perl (5.8 or later versions), and has been tested on Ubuntu 12.04 and Fedora 17. To run it, users should properly install the software, such as bowtie (), samtools (), RNAplex (), Math::CDF and R (see http://phasetank. sourceforge.net/).. Consequently, the RSRP values of the known 22 PHAS loci ranked top 1539 of the 41 391 transcripts. Herein PhaseTank processes clusters with the top 5% RSRP value for further prediction. We found that 22 PHAS genes reported by previous studies () were supported by the reads libraries (Supplementary). PhaseTank was then performed in Arabidopsis, with 21 and 18 PHAS genes being detected using genome and cDNA data, respectively, including all eight known TAS loci (Supplementary Tables S6 and S7). To estimate the sensitivity, PhaseTank was compared with the recent published software ShortStack () in different tissues using cDNA sequences of Arabidopsis. Evidently, the average sensitivity of PhaseTank (77.90%) was significantly higher than that of ShortStack (26.92%) (and Supplementary). Meanwhile, the sensitivity of PhaseTank reached 95.45% with the use of genome sequence, whereas that of ShortStack was only 54.54% (,, Supplementary Tables S6 and S9). Moreover, we selected 210 other annotated ncRNAs as true negatives to assess the specificity of the two programs (Supplementary). Among the ncRNAs, 2 and 17 were predicted as PHAS genes by PhaseTank and ShortStack, respectively, with corresponding 99.04% and 91.04% specificity (and Supplementary). The comparisons of other characteristics of both tools are listed in. Moreover, PhaseTank also identified a rarely reported miR393b triggered cascades () ().We further tested PhaseTank in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) using the genome data as well. Among the 19 reported tomato PHAS genes (), PhaseTank was able to detect 13 of them (Supplementary). Furthermore, PhaseTank also discovered 10 miRNA-initiated cascades in tomato (Supplementary
RESULTS
The RSRP values of the Arabidopsis transcripts are shown in Supplementary
CONCLUSIONIn conclusion, our results demonstrate that PhaseTank is an effective and highly applicable tool for comprehensive annotation and quantification of regulatory cascades involved in phasiRNA pathways. Therefore, PhaseTank would help to elucidate the function and evolution of this special class of small RNAs in land plants.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
PhaseTank to identify phasiRNAs & their cascades at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Q.Guo et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
