Finding related conformations in the Protein Data Bank is essential in many areas of bioscience. To assist this task, we designed a dihedral angle database for searching protein segment homologs. The search engine relies on encoding of the protein coordinates into text characters representing amino acid sequence, ' and dihedral angles. The search engine is advantageous owing to its high speed and interactive nature and is expected to assist scientists in discovering conformation homologs and evolutionary kinship. The search engine is fast, with query times lasting a few seconds, and freely available at http://
INTRODUCTIONOver the past years, structural data in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) has grown exponentially. At the present time, $92 000 structures are available in the PDB (). The data abundance makes it difficult to navigate the information, particularly when one tries to retrieve segment motifs (). To find segment motifs in the PDB structures, several computational engines have been designed. One such engine is SPASM, which finds spatial motifs consisting of arbitrary main-chain and side-chain conformation in a database of protein structures (). An additional search engine named Fragment Finder was designed to identify similar structural motifs based on backbone dihedral angles (). Another engine, PAST, is based on translationand rotation-invariant representation of protein backbone-dihedral angles (). Both PAST and Fragment Finder suffer from dihedral angle discretization of 5 , which coarse grains the results, and preclude amino acid sequence, which prevents a comprehensive search. Also noteworthy is the Dali Server, which enables the user to browse for homologs in Cartesian space (). None of these engines allows a combined search using amino acid sequence and dihedral angles in a rapid manner.Here we describe an online search engine that rapidly finds protein segments based on amino acid sequence and ' and dihedral angles. The search engine, named Protein Homology through Dihedral Angle Constraints (PHI-DAC), is advantageous owing to its speed, generality and simplicity. It is expected to be helpful to the scientific community by easing the identification of conformation homologs and distilling useful information from the PDB.
RESULTSPHI-DAC database. In, an example entry of the PHIDAC database is shown. The entry is composed of four pipe delimited fields. The first and second fields contain the PDB identification (ID) and the amino acid sequence, respectively. Chain IDs are referenced to the DSSP files, and cysteines are in lowercase letters. Duplicate lowercase letters form disulfide bridges, 'a' with 'a', 'b' with 'b', etc. Exclamation points denote a chain break or a new polypeptide chain. The third and fourth fields contain the ' and dihedral angles encoded in double characters. The first character represents units of 10 (A = 0, B = 10. .. S = 180, and a = 0, b = 10. . .) and the second character represents units of 1. Thus, 'A0' is 0 , 'A1' is +1 , 'A2' is +2 , 'S0' is +180 (or 180 ), 'a1' is 1 (or 359 ), *To whom correspondence should be addressed. and so on. This protein backbone representation is concise and accurate. The database is available for download. Querying PHI-DAC. To perform a search for similar protein backbone conformations in the PDB, the web interface offers the following search parameters: PDB ID, chain, first and last residue and tolerance. The tolerance is a range of neighboring dihedral angle intervals in 1 increments. The dihedral angle discretization of 1 is superior to Fragment Finder and PAST and allows for more accurate results. The tolerance is limited to AE30 , so as to provide meaningful spatial superposition. A screenshot of the query interface is shown in. Supplementary Table S1 summarizes the run times and the work range of the server in terms of peptide length, complexity of fold and dihedral angle deviation. Note that the bottleneck of the server is the dihedral angle deviation. Interpreting the results. Following a query submission, the result table should be loaded automatically within few seconds. A screenshot of the result table of the example query is shown in. The result page contains the PDB ID, chain, position and the amino acid sequence. The PDB IDs are hyperlinked to the respective PDB file. The results are classified according to the dihedral angle root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) between the query segment and the result segment (low to high). Example queries. Two example queries are readily accessible on the Web site. In the first example query the coordinates of a small bent helix in PDB ID 9XIM (residues 121127) are used. Searching with the ' and dihedral angles by using a tolerance of AE3 and without conserving the amino acid sequence leads to 14 matching segments belonging to 14 different PDB entries. In the second example query, the coordinates of the-hairpin segment 710 of chain A of PDB ID 1L4W is used. Querying with the ' and dihedral angles by using a tolerance of AE8 and without conserving the amino acid sequence leads to 13 matching segments belonging to 13 different PDB entries. Local versus global homology. PHI-DAC is based on local dihedral angle homology and is not designed to detect global spatial similarities. As such, PHI-DAC does not detect similarity between large SCOP or CATH folds with perfect superimposition in the core and major differences in the loops. For spatial superimposition, SCOP, CATH and Dali should be used.
CONCLUSIONOur method of encoding the backbone ' and dihedral angles into text characters has proven to be a fast solution for answering queries about local structural similarities in the PDB. Compared with SPASM, PHI-DAC shows similar results, while being much faster and addressing a different question compared with Dali. Therefore, compared with Dali, we consider PHI-DAC to be a valuable tool for the fast detection of protein segments based on dihedral angle conservation.. The PHI-DAC search engine. The search engine finds protein segment homologs based on ' and dihedral angles and amino acid sequence. (A) Search parameters include PDB coordinates, PDB and chain ID, as well as residue range. (B) The result page of PHI-DAC lists the segments that matched the query. Shown here is an example query for segment 710 of chain A of PDB ID 1L4W with a torsion angle tolerance of 8. The results are listed in order of the RMSD of dihedral angles between the query and result. Notice sequence identity indicated by pipes
METHODS Protein structure representation. To describe the 3D conformation of a protein we use ' and dihedral angles. These angles have the advantage of being invariant to translation and rotation of the protein structure in a coordinate system. The angles are calculated using DSSP (Kabsch and Sander, 1983) and encoded into a structural alphabet (Levitt, 1992) represented by text characters from 0 to 359. This transforms the information of the 3D backbone conformation from all protein structures contained in the PDB into sequences of text that are easily searchable. Construction of the PHI-DAC database. All PDB files containing protein structure are handled as separate entries and included in PHI-DAC. As of January 2014, a total of $96 000 files describe protein structures. Computation of the PHI-DAC database, given the ' and dihedral angles and amino acid sequences, takes $1 min on a standard PC (2.7 GHz). The size of the database is 174 MB, and it can be held in working memory, making all calculations extremely fast. The search engine is hosted on a 2.7 GHz PC with 2 GB random access memory operating under Linux. Update of the PHI-DAC database is expected monthly.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
PHI-DAC at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
N.Maatuk et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
