Knowledge of pathogen–host protein interactions is required to better understand infection mechanisms. The pathogen– host interaction search tool (PHISTO) is a web-accessible platform that provides relevant information about pathogen–host interactions (PHIs). It enables access to the most up-to-date PHI data for all pathogen types for which experimentally verified protein interactions with human are available. The platform also offers integrated tools for visu-alization of PHI networks, graph–theoretical analysis of targeted human proteins, BLAST search and text mining for detecting missing experimental methods. PHISTO will facilitate PHI studies that provide potential therapeutic targets for infectious diseases.
INTRODUCTIONThe interactions between the proteins of infectious microorganisms, pathogens and their human hosts allow the microorganisms to manipulate human cellular mechanisms to their own advantage, resulting in infection in the host organism. The recent advances in high-throughput protein interaction detection methods have led to the production of large-scale interspecies protein protein interaction (PPI) data of pathogenhuman systems. Currently, there are a number of pathogenhost interaction (PHI) resources that are specific to some pathogens. The only available resource to access all PHI data in a single database () does not offer any additional functionality to analyze PHI networks. We have developed pathogen host interaction search tool (PHISTO) to serve as an up-to-date and functionally enhanced source of PHI data through a userfriendly interface. PHIs in PHISTO are imported from several PPI databases using the PSICQUIC tool (). Text mining is used to label PHIs extracted without any information on interaction detection method. Tools for visualization of small PHI networks and graphtheoretical analysis of targeted human proteins may enable users to gain crucial insights on infection mechanisms. The BLAST interface offers to search for orthologous PHIs for pathogens lacking experimental data.
User interfaceThe functional and easy-to-use Web-based user interface provides various search, browse and data analysis options. The 'Quick Search' option is for performing a query without a specified identifier, whereas the 'Advanced Search' option can be used to search based on any selected subset of identifiers (i.e. taxonomy ID and name of pathogen, Uniprot ID and name of pathogen protein, Uniprot ID and name of human protein, experimental method and literature reference). The 'Browse' option provides users with easy access to the entire PHI data of any specified pathogen within the taxonomical classification. The PHI search results are presented in a clear and consistent IDbased formatted table, which includes information about the eight identifiers mentioned previously. Proteins, pathogens and publications listed in the results are linked to external databases UniProt, NCBI Taxonomy and PubMed, respectively, offering users quick navigation in these informative databases. The search results can be exported to a variety of file formats. The visualization option allows the resulting PHI network to be represented as a bipartite graph. Statistics of search results can be visualized through pie or bar charts, describing the distribution of PHIs over the types, families, species and strains of pathogens. For a protein of interest, one can search for homolog pathogen proteins in PHISTO using the 'BLAST' interface (see Section D in Supplementary Material). Finally, the 'Graph Analysis' interface provides the degree and betweenness centrality distributions of the targeted human proteins compared with all proteins within the human intranetwork (see Section E in Supplementary Material).
ARCHITECTURE PHISTO is designed as a Web-accessible platform with two-tier architecture. The back tier is a MySQL-based database. The front tier is a PHP-and Javascript-based user interface that runs on an Apache Web server. Figure 1 illustrates the architecture of PHISTO. 2.1 Database The PSICQUIC tool is used to extract PHI data from nine databases (see Section A in Supplementary Material). To present protein interaction data in a consistent format, Uniprot IDs and names of interacting proteins, taxonomy IDs and names of pathogens, experimental methods and PubMed IDs of literature references are collected; the data are stored in separate database tables, with one PHI table containing the core data (UniProt IDs, Taxonomy ID, Experimental Method, PubMed ID) and the others being mostly ID-related tables (see Section B in Supplementary Material). Thanks to the implementation of ID-based core data, standardized data formats and relational data tables, the PHISTO database can easily be maintained and enhanced. It is automatically updated by our Java-based offline application on a monthly basis. Currently, PHISTO stores data on 23 661 PHIs between human and 300 pathogen strains (247 viral, 45 bacterial, 3 fungal and 5 protozoan). Among the PHI data extracted from the PPI databases, there were 12 751 PHI data that were not labeled with the experimental methods used to detect these interactions. PHISTO contains a text mining module for experimental method extraction for such data. A dictionary of interaction detection methods is compiled from the PSI-MI ontology. The abstracts of the articles that contain PHIs without experimental method information are obtained from PubMed. An exact string matching-based approach was used to assign 2952 experimental method names to 2109 unique PHIs. The experimental method detection module was evaluated by using the PHIs with experimental method information in PHISTO. The module achieved a promising precision of 74%. The recall and the F-score of the module are 34 and 47%, respectively (see Section C in Supplementary Material). *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
S.DurmusTekirDurmusDurmusTekir et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
