We introduce PHOXTRACK (PHOsphosite-X-TRacing Analysis of Causal Kinases), a user-friendly freely available software tool for analyzing large datasets of post-translational modifications of proteins, such as phosphorylation, which are commonly gained by mass spectrometry detection. In contrast to other currently applied data analysis approaches, PHOXTRACK uses full sets of quantitative proteomics data and applies non-parametric statistics to calculate whether defined kinase-specific sets of phosphosite sequences indicate statistically significant concordant differences between various biological conditions. PHOXTRACK is an efficient tool for extracting post-translational information of comprehensive proteomics datasets to decipher key regulatory proteins and to infer biologically relevant molecular pathways. Availability: PHOXTRACK will be maintained over the next years and is freely available as an online tool for non-commercial use at http:// phoxtrack.molgen.mpg.de. Users will also find a tutorial at this Web site and can additionally give feedback at https://groups.google.com/ d/forum/phoxtrack-discuss.
enzymes inducing post-translational protein modification assists in providing a holistic view of cellular states, and supports in generating unbiased hypotheses for experimental testing. In particular, phosphorylation of proteins plays a pivotal role in the regulation of many cellular signaling and disease processes. Mass spectrometry technologies allow for comprehensive quantification of the proteome (Sauer et al., 2005), including the detection of several 10 000 phosphosite sequences of cellular proteins. However, the current standard data analysis strategies applied for the discovery of important regulatory kinases, such as sequence motif analyses, are insufficient for gaining specific insights (Olsen and Mann, 2013). Moreover, these conventional approaches suffer from severe inefficiencies, as they make use of only a minor fraction of the information contained in large-scale phosphoproteome datasets (see Supplementary Background Information and results in Supplementary Figs S1S4). A major limitation of all current phosphoproteomic data analyses consists in the need of setting a threshold for determining significantly hyper-and hypophosphorylated phosphosite (increased or decreased phosphorylation of a particular amino acid relative to the control experiment). This generally restricts the analyses on only few strongly regulated phosphosite sequence sites and completely ignores the information of the major part of the many thousands of phosphopeptides detected in biological samples (Supplementary Fig. S5). PHOXTRACK (PHOsphosite-X-TRacing Analysis of Causal Kinases) largely overcomes these current limitations of phosphosite sequence data analysis. Notably, PHOXTRACK considers the full set of phosphosite sequences detected by mass spectrometry, resulting in powerful and largely unbiased enrichment of regulated kinases. PHOXTRACK further applies non-parametric KolmogorovSmirnov enrichment statistics (Meierhofer et al., 2013; Subramanian et al., 2005) to calculate whether defined kinase-specific sets of phosphosites indicate statistically significant concordant differences between various biological samples under investigation (Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. S6 and Tutorial). We initially defined experimentally validated kinase-specific phosphosite sets using data from the public databases PhosphoSitePlus (Hornbeck et al., 2012), Swiss-Prot, the Human Protein Reference Database (Keshava Prasad et al., 2009) and Phospho.ELM (Dinkel et al., 2011), containing thousands of substrate sequence/kinase interactions derived from thousands of human and murine studies (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Table S1). Notably, the user can extend the list of kinase-specific phosphosite sets by using alternative databases including disease-and treatment-associated information. We then used the prior defined sets of kinase-specific phosphosites and computed an enrichment score that reflects the degree to which the set of kinase-specific phosphosites is overrepresented at the top or bottom of a ranked list of detected phosphorylation ratios (Fig. 1). As shown in Supplementary Figs S7S10, we successfully benchmarked the results obtained by PHOXTRACK using biological data from technically diverse proteomics studies focusing on cell cycle analysis, chemotherapeutic treatment of embryonic stem cells, and phosphoprofiling of human breast cancer tissues of high-versus low-risk recurrence groups. In all these studies, conventional phosphosite data analysis only roughly hinted to rather broadly defined kinase groups. Notably, PHOXTRACK indicated specifically causal kinases, which could be confirmed by additional experiments including, for example, kinase/kinase substrate immunoblotting, leading to fruitful network analyses and biological interpretation (Supplementary Results). *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
PHOXTRACK at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
