With increasing numbers of eukaryotic genome sequences, phylogenetic profiles of eukaryotic genes are becoming increasingly informative. Here, we introduce a new web-tool Phylopro (http://compsysbio.org/phylopro/), which uses the 120 available eukaryotic genome sequences to visualize the evolutionary trajectories of user-defined subsets of model organism genes. Applied to pathways or complexes, PhyloPro allows the user to rapidly identify core conserved elements of biological processes together with those that may represent lineage-specific innovations. PhyloPro thus provides a valuable resource for the evolutionary and comparative studies of biological systems.
X.Xiong et al.
arthropods, 2 chordates, 7 vertebrates and 24 mammals. The use of Inparanoid readily facilitates the identification of socalled in-paralogs representing lineage-specific gene duplication events. Given a list of query genes from a model species (the 'query' species), for each 'target' species, we define one of five possible homology relationship: no detectable ortholog; 1:1a single query gene has a single ortholog in the target species; 1:Manya single query gene has two or more orthologs in the target species; Many:1a query gene together with at least one additional paralog are orthologs of a single gene in the target species; and Many:Manya query gene together with at least one additional paralog are orthologs of at least two orthologs in the target species genome. The collation of these relationships for each of the 120 target species defines a phylogenetic profile for each query gene which is stored in a local PostgreSQL database (http://www.postgresql.org). PhyloPro is simple to use, and can be completed in five steps: (i) input of query genes; (ii) selection of target species; (iii) data retrieval and clustering; (iv) visualization; and (v) data download. Users begin by entering a list of sequence identifiers. These can include gene symbols (e.g. for worm 'mek-2'), entrez gene identifiers (IDs) (e.g. '171872'), protein IDs (e.g. 'CE25437'), open reading frame (ORF) names (e.g. 'Y54E10BL.6') or other organismspecific terms (e.g. 'WBGENG00003186'). Sequence identifiers can be entered directly into a text box or uploaded as a file. Next, the user selects the target species from a series of nine expandable taxonomy groups highlighted above. Finally, the user is given the option of changing two parameters associated with the clustering algorithm. After reviewing user input and options, the phylogenetic profiles of each query gene is retrieved from the database and clustered using the tool Cluster 3.0 (Eisen et al., 1998). Users are then presented with a visualization of their results which features an interactive heatmap of orthology relationships (Fig. 1). Within the heatmap the order of the 120 eukaryotes is predefined. The heatmap can be downloaded as a Portable Network Graphic (PNG)  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
