Targeted enrichment of conserved and ultraconserved genomic elements allows universal collection of phylogenomic data from hundreds of species at multiple time scales (<5 Ma to > 300 Ma). Prior to downstream inference, data from these types of targeted enrichment studies must undergo preprocessing to assemble contigs from sequence data; identify targeted, enriched loci from the off-target background data; align enriched contigs representing conserved loci to one another; and prepare and manipulate these alignments for subsequent phylogenomic inference. PHYLUCE is an efficient and easy-to-install software package that accomplishes these tasks across hundreds of taxa and thousands of enriched loci. Availability and Implementation: PHYLUCE is written for Python 2.7. PHYLUCE is supported on OSX and Linux (RedHat/CentOS) operating systems. PHYLUCE source code is distributed under a BSD-style license from https://www.github.com/faircloth-lab/phyluce/. PHYLUCE is also available as a package (https://binstar.org/faircloth-lab/phyluce) for the Anaconda Python distribution that installs all dependencies, and users can request a PHYLUCE instance on iPlant Atmosphere (tag: phyluce). The software manual and a tutorial are available from http://phyluce.readthedocs.org/en/latest/ and test data are available from
IntroductionTarget enrichment of conserved and ultraconserved elements (hereafter 'conserved loci') allows universal phylogenomic analyses of nonmodel organisms () at multiple time scales (). The strength of the approach derives from its ability to collect sequence data from thousands of loci across hundreds of species, permitting phylogenetic comparisons across deep phylogenetic breaks such as organismal Classes (>200 300 Ma) and shallower evolutionary divergences such as populations (<0.55 Ma). When the goal of data collection is to infer the evolutionary history of species, the subsequent analytical tasks are generally to:(i) assemble the sequencing reads, which may span tens to hundreds of individuals; (ii) identify putative orthologs among the assembled contigs on a sample-by-sample basis while removing putative paralogs; (iii) easily generate datasets that contain different individuals, individuals included from other experiments or conserved locus data harvested from individual genome sequences; (iv) identify and export sequence data from orthologs across all individuals in the set; (v) align the data and optionally trim resulting alignments in preparation for phylogenetic inference; (vi) compute summary statistics on the aligned data and (vii) perform utility functions on the sequence or alignment data to prepare them for downstream analyses using a variety of phylogenetic inference programs. PHYLUCE (pronounced 'phy-loo-chee') is the first opensource, easy-to-install software package to perform these tasks for target enriched, conserved loci in a computationally efficient manner.
Workflow and featuresThe PHYLUCE workflow (Supplementary) for inferring phylogeny begins with external preparation of sequence reads fromtargeting the same loci, or include identical loci harvested from published genome sequences (e.g. http://github.com/ faircloth-lab/uce-probe-sets). After identifying those individuals and loci in the desired taxon set, users extract the contigs corresponding to non-duplicate conserved loci into a monolithic (all loci for all taxa) FASTA-formatted file using the GET_FASTAS_FROM_MATCH_COUNTS program. This program renames each contig for each species within the taxon set such that the FASTA header for each contig contains information denoting the species in which the conserved locus was detected and the specific conserved locus to which it matched. After creating the monolithic FASTA, users can align the targeted loci with the SEQCAP_ALIGN program, which parallelizes MAFFT () or MUSCLE () alignments across all targeted loci on computers with multiple CPUs. The SEQCAP_ALIGN program also offers the option to trim the resulting alignments for edges that are poorly aligneda suitable choice when the species within the taxon set are closely related (e.g. roughly Order-level or lower taxonomic ranks, <50 Ma). To apply more aggressive alignment trimming when relationships are older (>50 Ma), PHYLUCE provides a similar program that implements parallelized, internal trimming using Gblocks (). PHYLUCE includes several parallelized programs to manipulate the resulting alignments, including the ability to rapidly generate summary statistics across thousands of alignments, explode alignments into their corresponding FASTA sequences, extract taxa from alignments, compute parsimony informative sites within alignments, and convert alignments between common formats, and these programs can also be used with alignments from other data types. After alignment, PHYLUCE users can generate data matrices having varying levels of completeness using the GET_ONLY_LOCI_WITH_MIN_TAXA program. This program screens each locus for taxonomic completeness and filters out loci containing fewer taxa than desired. In this way, users can create 100% complete (all taxa have data for all loci) or incomplete data matrices (some loci have data for a certain percentage of taxa). After filtering loci for taxonomic completeness, PHYLUCE offers several programs to format resulting alignments for analyses in PartitionFinder (), RAxML (), ExaBayes (), GARLI (), or MrBayes (). Programs are also available to assist users with preparing data for and running gene-treebased species tree analyses.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
B.C.Faircloth at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
