Protein interaction network-based pathway analysis (PINBPA) for genome-wide association studies (GWAS) has been developed as a Cytoscape app, to enable analysis of GWAS data in a network fashion. Users can easily import GWAS summary-level data, draw Manhattan plots, define blocks, prioritize genes with random walk with restart, detect enriched subnetworks and test the significance of subnetworks via a user-friendly interface.
INTRODUCTIONGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) continue to be a widely used approach to detect genetic associations with a phenotype of interest in well-defined populations. As ofpublications have reported associations of 413 000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with close to 200 phenotypes in the GWAS catalog (). The successful record of this genomic mapping strategy includes the identification of dozens or even hundreds of susceptibility alleles in common diseases, such as multiple sclerosis (MS), type 1 and type 2 diabetes, lymphomas, leukemias and metabolic disorders. Despite the unquestionable utility of this method, most of the data generated by GWAS are neglected because of the heavy emphasis devoted to eliminate false discoveries (type I error). Typically, a stringent threshold (P-value55  10 8 ) is applied to minimize type I error, thus inevitably increasing the proportion of false-negative results (type II error). Although this is a necessary tactic to effectively evaluate studies testing up to millions of markers individually, a number of methods that analyze groups of markers simultaneously (thus potentially increasing statistical power) have recently emerged (). These approaches, collectively known as pathway analysis, aim at identifying functional relationships among associated signals. Given that susceptibility to complex human diseases is likely a result of genes operating as part of functional modules rather than individual effects (), pathway analysis methods hold promise in discovering additional associations from existing GWAS data. The most recent class of pathway analysis methods is network based, and they largely overcome the assumptions of independence and preselection of reference database that limited its predecessors. Network-based analyses commonly use a scaffold of protein interactions to build connections between gene products, where nodes represent proteins and edges represent physical or functional interactions between pairs of proteins. Rather than focusing on individual markers, network-based analysis methods take into account multiple loci in the context of molecular pathways. Owing to this critical feature, these methods can afford to use sub genome-wide statistical significance and yet increase the power to detect new associations and functional relationships between genes in complex traits. Several network-based methods have been proposed to identify active modules (subnetworks) in a given network, such as DAPPLE (), dmGWAS () and NIMMI (). The original protein interaction network-based pathway analysis (PINBPA) method was first developed in the context of MS research () and most recently used to successfully identify novel associations by the International MS Genetics Consortium (International Multiple Sclerosis Genetics). In this article, we introduce the PINBPA app for Cytoscape ().
IMPLEMENTATION AND FEATURESPINBPA has been implemented as an app for Cytoscape 3.0 and later versions using Java. Additionally, R scripts are called via Rserve inside Cytoscape for plotting. Like many other pathway analysis methods, PINBPA requires gene-level summary statistics (P-values), as those generated by the popular tool VEGAS (). As shown in, the PINBPA app directly reads the VEGAS output as input file (but other formats are also possible), and has six features: (i) generates a gene-wise Manhattan plot of the GWAS; (ii) sorts all genes by their genomic coordinates and defines association blocks at any user-defined threshold (P-value50.05 by default);(iii) annotates the user-selected PPI network with imported genewise GWAS P-values; (iv) generates a subnetwork of only significant genes (first-order networks) exceeding a user-defined threshold, and tests the statistical significance of the sub-networks using random permutations; (v) runs network smoothing (an optional gene prioritization scheme) using a *To whom correspondence should be addressed. random walk with restart algorithm (); and (vi) detects subnetworks enriched in significant genes using either unweighted () or weighted z-scores (). The network z-score is adjusted using 1000 permutations and then a greedy algorithm (Supplementary File) is applied to search for the n optimal subnetworks.
DISCUSSIONPINBPA is the first Cytoscape app designed for network analysis of GWAS data. Through a user-friendly interface, the PINBPA app enables genomic researchers and biologists with no computational expertise to run a powerful and otherwise complex analytical pipeline. PINBPA is flexible in many ways. First, it enables the use of any network as scaffold for subsequent analysis. For example, a user may choose to run PINBPA using a smaller but high confidence PIN, or a larger network, including computationally predicted interactions. Additionally, other networks such as metabolic, gene co-expression or text mining can be used. Second, while direct import from VEGAS is available, any method can be used to convert SNP-level and gene-level Pvalues. Third, the user can select the significance threshold to define association blocks. Although some experimentation may be needed, this significance threshold is typically related to the power of the GWAS in question (the larger the GWAS, the more relaxed the P-value for block definition). Fourth, significant (first-order) networks can be generated at any user-selected statistical threshold. Fifth, an optional network smoothing step allows the user to weight the most significant associations differently. Finally, the size and the significance of enriched networks generated by the greedy algorithm can also be selected, thus providing maximal control over the final output. In summary, the Cytoscape PINBPA app offers a simple interface to perform a complex set of analyses and can be used under a wide variety of scenarios, thus empowering genomic scientists to conduct post-GWAS analysis in a streamlined, rigorous and reproducible fashion.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
PINBPA at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
L.Wang et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
