Motivation: Small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are an abundant class of non-coding RNAs with a wide variety of cellular functions including chemical modification of RNA, telomere maintanance, pre-rRNA processing and regulatory activities in alternative splicing. The main role of box C/D snoRNAs is to determine the targets for 2-O-ribose methylation, which is important for rRNA maturation and splicing regulation of some mRNAs. The targets are still unknown, however, for many 'orphan' snoRNAs. While a fast and efficient target predictor for box H/ACA snoRNAs is available, no comparable tool exists for box C/D snoRNAs, even though they bind to their targets in a much less complex manner. Results: PLEXY is a dynamic programming algorithm that computes thermodynamically optimal interactions of a box C/D snoRNA with a putative target RNA. Implemented as scanner for large input sequences and equipped with filters on the duplex structure, PLEXY is an efficient and reliable tool for the prediction of box C/D snoRNA target sites. Availability: The perl script PLEXY is freely available at
Sequence analysis
ABSTRACTMotivation: Small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are an abundant class of non-coding RNAs with a wide variety of cellular functions including chemical modification of RNA, telomere maintanance, pre-rRNA processing and regulatory activities in alternative splicing. The main role of box C/D snoRNAs is to determine the targets for 2-O-ribose methylation, which is important for rRNA maturation and splicing regulation of some mRNAs. The targets are still unknown, however, for many 'orphan' snoRNAs. While a fast and efficient target predictor for box H/ACA snoRNAs is available, no comparable tool exists for box C/D snoRNAs, even though they bind to their targets in a much less complex manner. Results: PLEXY is a dynamic programming algorithm that computes thermodynamically optimal interactions of a box C/D snoRNA with a putative target RNA. Implemented as scanner for large input sequences and equipped with filters on the duplex structure, PLEXY is an efficient and reliable tool for the prediction of box C/D snoRNA target sites.
INTRODUCTIONBox C/D snoRNAs are mainly involved in 2-O-ribose methylation of specific nucleotides in ribosomal and spliceosomal RNAs (). They are characterized by two sequence motifs, the C-box (RTGATGA) close to the 5-end, the D-box (CTGA) close to the 3-end, and in most cases, an additional C-and D-box. The targeted position is located exactly 5 nt upstream of the 5-end of the D-and/or D-box. It is determined by sequence-specific hybridization (). The base-pairing region has a length of 720 nt and exhibits a simple structure consisting of stacked base pairs and only a few mismatches. In particular, bulges are absent (). Recently, an efficient and reliable tool for predicting the much more complex interactions of box H/ACA snoRNAs with their * To whom correspondence should be addressed. targets has become available (). It is based on the thermodynamic principles of RNA folding. No comparable approach is currently available for the simple box C/D snoRNARNA duplexes. snoTarget (), at present the only computer program devoted to box C/D snoRNA target prediction, employs pattern matching to find candidates, which are then ranked by the cofolding energy of snoRNA and target as computed by RNAcofold (). In contrast, PLEXY directly computes the interaction energies by means of dynamic programming.
RESULTSThe PLEXY Algorithm: PLEXY takes a snoRNA sequence with annotated box-motifs and a list of potential target RNAs as input. First, PLEXY extracts the putative antisense elements (ASEs), which are defined as the 20 nt long segments directly upstream of the D/D-boxes. PLEXY then calls the RNAplex algorithm to compute stable duplexes between the ASE and the putative targets. RNAplex is a fast folding algorithm for unbranched RNA structures that utilizes a linearized energy model to achieve a linear runtime behavior (). In contrast to RNAcofold used in snoTarget, RNAplex neglects the internal structure of the interacting RNA sequences and hence is fast enough for genomewide searches without the need for additional prefiltering steps. The resulting duplexes are then filtered using the rules compiled by:(a) the interaction should be at least 7 nt long,(b) no bulges are allowed,(c) the core duplex region contains at most one mismatch, and(d) the methylated residue forms a WatsonCrick pair. Finally, putative target sites are ranked by their duplex energies (Supplementary Material S2). Runtime: the runtime of PLEXY scales linearly with the length of the target sequence. It scans 10 6 nt of target sequences in 19 s on a 2.66 GHz Intel processor (Q9400). This is only four times slower than the pattern search algorithm employed by snoTarget. Accuracy: to compare the performance of PLEXY and snoTarget, we used a collection of experimentally verified snoRNArRNA interactions of yeast () and human () and used yeast () and human () snoRNAand rRNA sequences. In yeast, PLEXY correctly predicted all 50 target sites, 49 (98%) being ranked first. In contrast, snoTarget recovered only 37 of 50 (74%) of the methylation sites, and only 20 (40%) achieved the top rank. In human, PLEXY found 116 of 118 (98.3%) known rRNA targets, 108 (91.55%) with top rank (Supplementary Material S1). snoTarget retrieved 78.88% of these targets and ranked 55.77% of them at the top. The data are summarized as ROC curves in (). The minimum free energy for the predicted duplexes on the rRNAs averages 20.4 kcal/mol. The energy distribution is shown in.False positive rate: we tested 116 snoRNAs with known targets on rRNAs against a 10 Mb segment of the human genome (chr12:2M12M). A duplex is a false positive hit (FP) if its interaction energy is lower than that of the true interaction. For 24 snoRNAs no FP was found, 39 additional snoRNAs had less than one FP per Mb, and more than 80% (98/116) of the snoRNAs had less than one FP per 100 Kb. The false positive rate depends exponentially on the interaction energy (), hence PLEXY cannot reliably predict the few snoRNArRNA interactions that have very poor interaction energies. Targets in mRNAs: in contrast to the majority of the box C/D snoRNAs, the members of the brain-specific HBII-52 family do not methylate rRNAs or snRNAs but basepair close to an alternative splice junction in the mRNA transcript 5HT-2C, which codes for the serotonin receptor (). A target search in a large dataset of (primary) transcripts expressed in brain (covering about 0.7510 9 nt) returned the known target site with median duplex energy of 29.1 kcal/mol for 41 of the 42 members of the snoRNA family, and revealed a second putative target with a median interaction energy of 29.3 kcal/mol in 37 of the 42 snoRNAs. The second region is located in a large intronic region of the neurexin primary transcript (hg18/chr2:50666208-50666189). The example demonstrates that PLEXY can be employed for essentially transcriptome-wide target searches.
DISCUSSIONRecently, it was discovered that HBII-52 is also processed into shorter RNAs, so-called psnoRNAs (for processed snoRNAs), that appear to be involded in splicing regulation. The psnoRNAs form RNPs distinct from the 'common' snoRNPs. It is not surprising, therefore, that the psnoRNAs-mediated mode of action follows somewhat different interaction rules, although they involve the same regions of the snoRNA. For instance, psnoRNAmRNA duplexes appear to have more mismatches than canonical snoRNArRNA ones (). As soon as these recognition parameters are better understood, they could be easily included in the PLEXY algorithm by simply adding new filtering rules. Finally, we remark that the specificity of PLEXY can be enhanced by considering evolutionary conservation of the target site. This can be achieved most easily by filtering the predicted putative targets by their sequence conservation or by using the ability of RNAplex to compute interactions between multiple sequence alignments. In summary, PLEXY is a computationally efficient tool to predict target sites for box C/D snoRNAs. It is specific enough to reliably identify modification sites on rRNAs and snRNAs. At the same time, it is efficient enough to perform genome-wide searches for potential mRNA targets of orphan snoRNAs.
The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
