Motivation: The completion of 168 genome sequences from a single population of Drosophila melanogaster provides a global view of genomic variation and an understanding of the evolutionary forces shaping the patterns of DNA polymorphism and divergence along the genome. Results: We present the 'Population Drosophila Browser' (PopDrowser), a new genome browser specially designed for the automatic analysis and representation of genetic variation across the D. melanogaster genome sequence. PopDrowser allows estimating and visualizing the values of a number of DNA polymorphism and divergence summary statistics, linkage disequilibrium parameters and several neutrality tests. PopDrowser also allows performing custom analyses on-the-fly using user-selected parameters. Availability: PopDrowser is freely available from http://PopDrowser .
INTRODUCTIONPopulation genetics studies have been so far based on fragmentary and non-random samples of genomes, providing a partial and often biased view of the population genetics processes (). A new dimension to genetic variation studies is provided by the new availability of within-species genomes. Nextgeneration sequencing technologies are making affordable genomewide population genetics data, not only for humans and the main model organisms, but also for most organisms on which research is actively carried out on genetics, ecology or evolution (). Genome browsers are very useful tools to query and visualize disparate annotations at different genomic locations using a web user interface (). A number of web-based genome browsers displaying genetic variation data are already available (). Such browsers, however, are not well suited to deal with population genomics sequence information. For example, HapMap (), the most comprehensive
IMPLEMENTATION
Input dataThe initial input data are a set of 168 aligned intraspecific D. melanogaster sequences from the DGRP project, and also include the genome sequences of Drosophila yakuba and Drosophila simulans, which were used as outgroup species.
Interface and implementationPopDrowser allows reporting precomputed estimates of several DNA variation measures along each chromosome arm through the combined implementation of the programs PDA 2 (), MKT () and VariScan 2 (). The data and summary statistics are graphically displayed along the chromosome arms on a web-based user interface using the Gbrowse software. PopDrowser also includes an innovative capability that allows performing custom analyses on-the-fly. After selecting a chromosome region and a particular track, the user can conduct exhaustive analyses by defining their own custom input parameters. Furthermore, users can choose to either visualize the output of their analyses graphically in the browseras a new trackor toPage: 596 595596
M.Rmia et al.
OutputAlong with reference genome annotations, the genome browser output includes measures of a number of nucleotide summary statistics, such as the levels of nucleotide diversity ( and ), DNA divergence between species (K), different measures of linkage disequilibrium and genome-wide neutrality tests. Such analyses are computed along each chromosome arm in non-overlapping sliding windows of 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 10, 50 and 100 kb. For each gene, the browser also provides a single track including information of the generalized and the integrative McDonaldKreitman tests (accepted for publication) along with minor and derived allele frequency (MAF, DAF) spectrums (). All the tracks included in the PopDrowser are summarized in.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSWe thank Raquel Egea for helping in implementing the MKT software and Albert Vernon Smith from HapMap for his help in the implementation of the pie graph glyph. We also thank Dave Clements, Lincoln Stein and Scott Cain for technical support, and John H. Werren for valuable discussions on the browser. This paper was prepared with full knowledge and support of the DGRP Consortium.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. genome browser of variation data so far, contains information on single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), Copy Number Variations (CNVs) and linkage disequilibrium of human populations. It does not offer, however, genetic variation estimates along slidingwindows or neutrality-based tests. The Drosophila Genetic Reference Panel (DGRP) (T.Mackay et al., accepted for publication) has recently sequenced and analyzed the patterns of genome variation in 168 inbred lines of Drosophila melanogaster from a single population of Raleigh (USA), and conducted a genome-wide association analysis of some phenotypic traits. A major goal of this project is to create a resource of common genetic polymorphism data to aid further population genomics analyses. As a part of this DGRP project, here we present a modified Gbrowse specifically designed for the automatic estimation and representation of population genetic variation in D. melanogaster, the 'Population Drosophila Browser' (PopDrowser). Unlike other population analysis tools (Hutter et al., 2006; Kofler et al., 2011), the PopDrowser is a genome browser, which can be customized to create analogous resources for any other species with within-species polymorphism data.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
