Protein secondary structure and solvent accessibility predictions are a fundamental intermediate step towards protein structure and function prediction. We present new systems for the ab initio prediction of protein secondary structure and solvent accessibility, Porter 4.0 and PaleAle 4.0. Porter 4.0 predicts secondary structure correctly for 82.2% of residues. PaleAle 4.0's accuracy is 80.0% for prediction in two classes with a 25% accessibility threshold. We show that the increasing training set sizes that come with the continuing growth of the Protein Data Bank keep yielding prediction quality improvements and examine the impact of protein resolution on prediction performances. Availability: Porter 4.0 and PaleAle 4.0 are freely available for academic users at http://distillf.ucd.ie/porterpaleale/. Up to 64 kb of input in FASTA format can be processed in a single submission, with predictions now being returned to the user within a single web page and, optionally, a single
INTRODUCTIONAs the Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction enters its third decade of life after CASP10, one-dimensional protein structural features such as secondary structure (SS) and relative solvent accessibility (RSA) still remain a fundamental stage towards structure prediction, as they are indispensable for remote homology detection (), contribute to contact map predictions (), help the selection of local structural fragments for model reconstruction () and, ultimately, when known, considerably reduce the degrees of freedom available to a protein. SS and SA, alongside other structural features, have also proven useful in many other tasks, e.g. the prediction of protein subcellular localization (), intrinsic disorder (), bioactive peptides within proteins () and proteinprotein interactions (). Reflecting the usefulness of SS and RSA, our public predictors of these features, Porter and PaleAle have served a combined 275 000 queries to date from 40 000 distinct users, and Porter's SS predictions are used for fragment selection within the protein structure prediction package Rosetta (). We have trained larger, more expressive ensembles of cascaded bidirectional recurrent neural networks (BRNN) on recent redundancy-reduced subsets of the Protein Data Bank to predict SS and RSA. The new systems, Porter 4.0 and PaleAle 4.0, outperform our older public web servers Porter and PaleAle, with SS now at 482% correct prediction and 2-class (25% threshold) RSA predictions 80% correct. The new systems, Porter 4.0 and PaleAle 4.0, are freely available for academic users through a new public web server.
METHODS AND PERFORMANCESPorter 4.0 and PaleAle 4.0 are based on ensembles of BRNN (). In both servers, we use a cascaded architecture as in () with a first BRNN predicting SS from the primary sequence and multiple sequence alignments (MSA), and a second BRNN filtering the predictions of the first stage. MSA are generated with three rounds of PSIBLAST () against a 90% redundancyreduced UniProt (). The main differences between Porter 4.0 and PaleAle 4.0 and our previous servers Porter and PaleAle are the greatly expanded size of the training sets, the rough doubling of the number of free parameters of the models to accommodate a greater number of examples and a deeper training procedure. The dataset Porter 4.0 and PaleAle 4.0 are trained on is derived from the Protein Data Bank as available on June 23, 2012. We sorted the set by quality (measured as resolution  r_value/20 or fixed at 10 for NMR structures) and redundancy, and reduced it at a 25% sequence identity threshold, resulting in 9152 proteins. We further selected the 7522 proteins with a quality better than 4 (Full_set), but reserved the remaining 1630 proteins of lower quality for testing purposes (LowRes_set). A total of 2128 proteins of Full_set have a quality better than 2.5 (HiRes_set). Porter 4.0 is trained to predict SS in three classes: Helix  H,G,I from DSSP (). PaleAle's improvement is 0.9% over the 2007 version, for a 4-class correct classification of 55.3%, or 80.0% when the 4 classes are recast into 2 with an RSA threshold of 25%. Although PaleAle 4.0 is not optimized for this task, real valued solvent accessibility obtained from its class outputs by simple linear regression yields a mean average error of 0.14. We also evaluated how the quality of a protein structure relates to the servers' accuracy (). Porter 4.0 is only marginally more accurate on the HiRes_set than on the Full_set (82.3% versus 82.2%), whereas PaleAle 4.0 is significantly more accurate (56.8% versus 55.3%). Similarly, when we test the methods on LowRes_set, which contains poor resolution and NMR proteins, PaleAle's performances decrease more markedly from Full_set levels (5.7%) than those of Porter (3.6%). We also trained the full Porter and PaleAle systems on all 9152 proteins (Full_set  LowRes_set). The overall results (not reported) were only marginally different, with a fractional improvement on LowRes_set and a loss of 50.1% on the rest of the set. Finally, we trained Porter and PaleAle only on HiRes_set and tested them on all three sets (). In this case, the performances are significantly lower on all sets for both predictors.The 5-fold cross validation performance of Porter on HiRes_set is 81.3%, which is higher than the 2004 results (79.1%), which were obtained on a similarly sized training set but with older MSA, but lower than what we obtain on Full_set (82.2%), which is larger, but based on the same MSA. This seems to suggest that at least some of the gains of the more recent predictors () may come from training set sizes, rather than from the size of the sequence databases MSA are obtained from.
THE PORTER 4.0 AND PALEALE 4.0 WEB SERVERSPorter 4.0 and PaleAle 4.0 are freely available for academic users as web servers at the address: http://distillf.ucd.ie/porterpaleale/. The servers implement an ensemble of all the models from all folds, that is 5 models by 5 folds or 25 models in total per server. As this effectively means that the servers are trained on 25% more proteins than their benchmark in 5-fold cross validation, their performances are expected to at least match those reported, although this will have to be validated when new independent sets will become available in the future. The interface of the servers requires the user to input the queries in FASTA format and, optionally, an email address. Up to 64 kb of input ($200 average proteins) can be processed in a single submission. Larger predictions can be processed via subsequent submissions of up to 64 kb each. An exemption from the 64 kb limit can be obtained on a one-off basis by email request to the authors. The predictions are returned to the user as a web page and, optionally, via email if an address is provided. Links on the response web page also give access to confidence values for the predictions, and to PaleAle's outputs mapped onto real valued RSA. Depending on the load on the queue, a protein of 300 residues takes as little as 4 min to be processed and a maximal submission of 64 kb as little as 2 h. The sets used for training the servers are available for download on the web server.Note: Performances of Porter and PaleAle on sets of diverse quality. When the training set is Full_set, performances on Full_set and HiRes_set are in 5-fold cross validation, whereas LowRes_set performances are measured as the average obtained by models from all 5-folds of Porter and PaleAle. When the training set is HiRes_set, performances on HiRes_set are in 5-fold cross validation, whereas Full_set and LowRes_set performances are averages from the 5 training folds. See text for more details on how the sets were obtained. Two-class performances in brackets for PaleAle.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Porter, PaleAle 4.0 at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
C.Mirabello and G.Pollastri at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
