Motivation: Protein phosphorylation is a post-translational modification that underlines various aspects of cellular signaling. A key step to reconstructing signaling networks involves identification of the set of all kinases and their substrates. Experimental characterization of kinase substrates is both expensive and time-consuming. To expedite the discovery of novel substrates, computational approaches based on kinase recognition sequence (motifs) from known substrates, protein structure , interaction and co-localization have been proposed. However, rarely do these methods take into account the dynamic responses of signaling cascades measured from in vivo cellular systems. Given that recent advances in mass spectrometry-based technologies make it possible to quantify phosphorylation on a proteome-wide scale, computational approaches that can integrate static features with dynamic phosphoproteome data would greatly facilitate the prediction of biologically relevant kinase-specific substrates. Results: Here, we propose a positive-unlabeled ensemble learning approach that integrates dynamic phosphoproteomics data with static kinase recognition motifs to predict novel substrates for kinases of interest. We extended a positive-unlabeled learning technique for an ensemble model, which significantly improves prediction sensitivity on novel substrates of kinases while retaining high specificity. We evaluated the performance of the proposed model using simulation studies and subsequently applied it to predict novel substrates of key kinases relevant to insulin signaling. Our analyses show that static sequence motifs and dynamic phosphoproteomics data are complementary and that the proposed integrated model performs better than methods relying only on static information for accurate prediction of kinase-specific substrates. Availability and implementation: Executable GUI tool, source code and documentation are freely available at https://github.com
IntroductionPhosphorylation is an essential protein post-translational modification characterized by the precise and reversible addition of a phosphate group, by proteins called 'kinases', to their targets, called 'substrates' (). The signaling networks established by protein phosphorylation govern numerous cellular functions such as metabolic homeostasis, cell proliferation, survival and apoptosis (), and the identification of substrates often reveals new mechanisms by which the cell regulates these processes. The identification of new kinase substrates (i.e. the phosphorylation site on a given protein) is therefore of great biological interest. Experimental validation of kinase substrates is an expensive and time-consuming process and must therefore be prioritized and performed for only a limited number of candidates. To select appropriate candidates for experimental characterization, in silico approaches are widely used to predict candidate substrates of a kinase or family of kinases of interest. To this end, a number of computational approaches have been developed for de novo substrate prediction (). These range from simple motifbased approaches to sophisticated machine learning algorithms. A list of available methods is reviewed and categorized by Trost and Kusalik (2011) according to the techniques employed for substrate prediction. For example, methods based on sequence motif either contain precompiled regular expression patterns () or rely on calculating position-specific scoring matrices (PSSMs) () from known kinase substrates extracted from the literature or in vitro experiments. While motif-based methods are able to sensitively identify substrates that have a similar sequence composition to those used to compile the motif (), they generally extend poorly to more diverse substrates. As increasingly more phosphorylation sites are deposited in public databases such as Phospho.ELM () and PhosphoSitePlus (), machine learning approaches that generalize well to diverse substrates are becoming increasingly necessary. In this category, methods differ in the learning algorithms that have been employed for modeling (), the amount of sequence information utilized () and the integration of additional information such as protein structure (), colocalization () or interaction (). While these 'static' features (e.g. protein sequence, structure, co-localization and interaction) are informative, methods based on 'static' features do not account for the dynamic spatiotemporal kinetics that may help accurately define the architecture of cell signaling networks. Recent advances in liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry has enabled high-throughput protein phosphorylation profiling in time course studies (). Coupled with labeling techniques such as isobaric tagging (e.g. TMT) () or stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (e.g. SILAC) () and increasingly label-free-based approaches (), tens of thousands of phosphorylation sites can be identified and quantified with high precision on a proteome-wide scale (). Computational approaches that integrate static features with dynamic phosphoproteome will enable kinase-specific substrate prediction in the context of dynamic cellular systems. Here, we propose a positive-unlabeled ensemble learning algorithm to integrate kinase recognition motifs with dynamic phosphoproteomics data to predict novel substrates of relevant kinases of interest. Extending on our previous model (), the proposed algorithm addresses several key computational challenges faced in model training when using phosphoproteomics data by using a positive-unlabeled learning technique for an ensemble classification algorithm. First, the class distribution of the phosphoproteomics data is highly imbalanced due to the fact that experimentally verified substrates are sparse, resulting in vastly more negative training instances compared with positive instances. We address this by using repeated sampling from the phosphoproteomics data and creating an ensemble of classifiers each trained on a balanced training subset. Second, the model training requires a set of negative instances to be provided. However, defining a true negative set is difficult because unannotated phosphorylation sites comprise a mix of negative and unidentified positive substrates. To overcome this problem, a positive-unlabeled learning procedure is implemented in the ensemble model for improving prediction sensitivity while retaining specificity by correcting for the prediction bias. We studied the behavior of the proposed positive-unlabeled ensemble approach using simulation on synthetic datasets and subsequently applied it to predict substrates of kinases Akt and mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) using a time-course phosphorylation dataset generated from insulin-stimulated profiling of cultured adipocytes. Our results indicate that the proposed approach is highly accurate, based on an array of evaluation metrics, and is able to take advantage of both static information from amino acid sequences as well as dynamic information from phosphoproteomic data to predict kinase substrates.
MethodsBecause the number of experimentally verified kinase substrates (positive set) are often very small compared with the complete set of phosphorylation sites profiled (unannotated set), our learning model () relies on repeated sampling from the unannotated set and combines each sampling set with the positive set to create balanced subsets (Section 2.2). The base classifiers of support vector machines (SVMs) (Section 2.1) are subsequently trained using these balanced subsets with both static features, extracted from peptide sequences and dynamic features, extracted from phosphoproteomics data (Section 2.4). In addition, since the unannotated set comprises both true negatives and unidentified positives, a positive-unlabeled learning procedure that uses a correction factor estimated from the repartitioned data (SectionPositive-unlabeled ensemble learning for kinase substrate predictioncorrect for prediction bias. These corrected base classifiers are then integrated to form the ensemble of SVMs, and the final predictions are made based on the combined probability from all base classifiers.
Base classifierLet x i i  1; :::; n denote phosphorylation sites and let y i 2 f1; 1g be a binary label indicating whether x i is a substrate (y i  1) of a kinase or not (y i  1). We use SVM, implemented by Chang and Lin (2011), to form the bases of an ensemble classifier. In dual formulation, an SVM is expressed aswhere a i are Lagrange multipliers and x i for which a i > 0 are support vectors. The parameter C controls the fraction of support vectors, and the kernel of the classifier is defined by kx i ; x j . Specifically, we use nonlinear classifiers with radial basis function kernels, which is expressed aswhere r is a parameter that controls the width of the radial basis function. When data are linearly inseparable, using SVMs with nonlinear kernel functions can provide better classification accuracy while also retaining the robustness of linear classifiers on background noise. The default parameters were used in this study where C  1 and r equals to the feature dimension of the data.
Ensemble modelKinase substrate prediction can be formulated as constructing a model f x, such that f x  py  1jx approximates the truth. For most kinases, often there are only a handful of experimentally validated substrates. We denote them as x 2 P, where P is the set of validated substrates and hence positive. After excluding these positive substrates, the number of remaining phosphorylation sites (denoted by set U) profiled from a large-scale phosphoproteomics studies can easily exceed several thousand. This makes the prediction of kinase substrates from phosphoproteomics data an inherent class imbalanced learning problem, because the number of positive instances are significantly outnumbered by the rest of the profiled but as yet unannotated phosphorylation sites (P ( U). Many popular classification algorithms, including SVMs that were used as the base classifiers of the ensemble, are sensitive to the imbalanced class distribution and would perform poorly without correction of the class distribution of the training instances (). An effective approach to address this class imbalance is to create an ensemble classifier by sampling from the original dataset and creating base classifiers, each trained on a balanced subset (). This strategy can be modified for solving the imbalanced class problem in our phosphoproteomics application by randomly sampling from U and combining them with members of P to form balanced subsets U 1 [ P; U 2 [ P; :::; U r [ P, where r is the number of sampling operations performed. These subsets can then be used to train the base classifiers from which the ensemble is obtained for prediction:The above prediction is an estimate of the combined probability p E of a given phosphorylation site x to be a positive substrate of a kinase.
Positive-unlabeled learning in ensembleOne complication in applying the ensemble model described above is that U is an unannotated set that comprises a mixture of unidentified substrates of a given kinase as well as negatives. This is known as the positive-unlabeled learning problem where only a small set of positive instances are known, while the rest of the data contains both positive and negative instances but are unlabeled (). The ensemble model described above makes a naive assumption by treating all members of U (that is, x 6 2 P) as negative instances for sampling and training the base classifiers. The model would therefore predict conservatively and may penalize heavily on novel substrates because they may be selected as negative instances in model training. This is undesirable since our goal is precisely to discover from U the set of novel substrates. It has been shown that by multiplying a correction factor, estimated from a data repartitioned approach, one can correct for the prediction bias on the unannotated set (). Here, we extend this positive-unlabeled learning technique for our ensemble classifier by estimating the correction factors for individual base classifiers and subsequently correcting their prediction bias in ensemble classification. Let s  1 if the instance x is labeled, and s  1 otherwise. Since only experimentally validated substrates are labeled, y  1 is certain when s  1, whereas y could be 1 or 1 when s  1. Therefore, by treating all labeled instances as positive and all unlabeled ones as negative, we are in fact learning gx  ps  1jx and using this as approximation to py  1jx. Elkan andhave mathematically proved that py  1jx  ps  1jx=c, where c  ps  1jy  1 and by reserving a subset of validation data from the training data the value of c can be estimated aswhere P  is a set of labeled instances in the validation dataset and m is the cardinality of P . For our ensemble classifier, we have, for each base classifier, g i x  ps  1jx; U i [ P; i  1; :::; r. Therefore, a correction factor can be estimated by reserving a validation dataset for each base classifier g i x and ensemble model with prediction correction can then be expressed asThe corrected and combined probability p E c is the estimation of x being a positive substrate of a given kinase.
Static and dynamic feature extraction from phosphoproteomics dataWe demonstrate the proposed approach on a previously published phosphoproteomics dataset where insulin stimulation of 3T3-L1 adipocytes was performed to quantify the insulin signaling phosphoproteome in adipocyte cells (). The phosphopeptides were quantified in biological triplicates and included a serum-starved ('basal') control and a time-course of insulin treatment (at 15 s, 30 s, 1 min, 2 min, 5 min, 10 min, 20 min and 60 min), as well as cells treated with or without PI3K/mTOR or Akt inhibitors (LY294002 and MK2206, respectively) applied for 30 min prior to a 20-min insulin treatment. Data were filtered to select phosphorylation sites that are quantified in at least one of the three biological replicates in each time point and the basal condition. This resulted in 12 289 phosphorylation sites. For each kinase of interest, a positive training set of annotated substrates was curated from a combination of PhosphoSitePlus () database and manual extraction from literature. Next, the PSSM was calculated for each kinase of interest using the six amino acids flanking the actual phosphorylation site (total length: 13) of its annotated substrates aswhere l is the number of annotated substrates, j is the sequence window size and k is the set of 20 amino acids. All identified phosphorylation sites are then scored against M k;j to determine their similarity to the annotated substrates. For dynamic features from phosphoproteome profiling, we calculate, for each phosphorylation site, the log 2-fold change at each time point compared with basal control and the log 2-fold change before and after inhibitor treatments. In addition, we extracted several secondary features for each phosphorylation site from its temporal pattern. These include the mathematical mean of the log 2-fold change at each time point compared with basal control, the area under the temporal profile calculated as follows:and the goodness of a polynomial (degree of two) curve fit measured by F-test as follows:where t is the number of time points, y i is the standardized log 2fold change at time point i, ^ y i is the fitted value of y i and e i is the unfitted residuals from the model at time point i.
Performance evaluation and comparisonTo compare the performance of our models and other commonly used kinase-specific substrate prediction tools, we used an array of evaluation metrics including sensitivity (Se), specificity (Sp),where TP, TN, FP and FN denote the number of true positives, true negatives, false positives and false negatives, respectively.Beside using metrics defined above for evaluating a single classification threshold, we also generated Precision/Recall curves to evaluate the performance of the model trained using both motif and phosphoproteomics data and those trained using only motif or phosphoproteomics data across a range of threshold by varying the classification cutoff c as follows:Precisionc  TPc TPc  FPc ; Recallc  TPc TPc  FNc : Methods with predefined prediction thresholds that cannot be adjusted to an arbitrary cutoff are represented as single points in the Precision/Recall comparison plot. In the simulation study, we repeatedly generated 10 simulation datasets and for each dataset we trained and compared the prediction accuracy of a single SVM model, an uncorrected ensemble model and a corrected ensemble model using the evaluation metrics described above. To evaluate the individual contributions of the 'static' motif information and the dynamic phosphoproteome information, we created partial models using either motif or phosphoproteomics data and compared these with the model trained with both using the dynamic phosphoproteomics data. In addition, we also compared the performance of our approach with other commonly used kinase-specific substrate prediction tools including GPS 3.0 (), iGPS 1.0 (), KinasePhos 1.0 (), KinasePhos 2.0 (), NetPhosK 1.0 () and NetworKIN 3.0 (). We used the default/suggested parameters for each prediction tool. Specifically, the prediction specificity of HMM is set to 0.9 for KinasePhos 1.0, the prediction specificity of SVM is set to 0.8 for KinasePhos 2.0, the minimum score of 2.0 and the max difference of 4.0 is set for NetworKIN 3.0, the prediction threshold is set to 0.5 for NetPhosK 1.0, high for GPS 3.0 and high for iGPS 1.0. For calculating sensitivity, the annotated substrates were treated as positive instances, and leave-one-out cross-validation was used for our model evaluation. For calculating specificity, since we do not know the set of true negative phosphorylation sites, we assumed that only a very small fraction of phosphorylation sites in the unlabeled set of U are positive instances with most of them being negative instances. On the basis of this assumption, we randomly sampled five sets of phosphorylation sites from all profiled phosphorylation sites, excluding annotated substrates of Akt and mTOR and evaluated each method on each of the five negative sets. The performance of each method is reported as the mean plus and minus the standard deviation.
Results
Evaluation of positive-unlabeled ensemble learning on synthetic dataWe generated synthetic datasets to analyze the behavior of different classification models in classifying data with highly imbalanced class distribution and with positive and unlabeled instances.shows a typical example where a synthetic dataset is simulated with 10 positive instances (red points) with two features both generated from a Gaussian distribution N 6:5; 1 and 10 500 unlabeled instances, of which 500 are unannotated positive instances (dark blue points) and the remaining 10 000 are negative instances (cyan points) generated from a Gaussian distribution N 4:5; 1. In this example, a single SVM would predict every instance, including the 10 positives, as a negative (purple region in). This is because the negative class is significantly over-represented in the training data.
Positive-unlabeled ensemble learning for kinase substrate predictionIn comparison, an ensemble model without positive-unlabeled learning correction is able to correctly classify 10 positive instances as well as a large proportion of unlabeled positive instances (orange in). By applying positive-unlabeled learning correction for the base classifiers, an ensemble model is able to correctly classify even more unlabeled positive instances (orange in) To verify if corrected ensemble models (by positive-unlabeled learning) perform consistently better than the single SVMs or the uncorrected ensemble models, we repeated the above simulation 10 times, creating 10 synthetic datasets and evaluated each model based on multiple performance metrics. As listed in, single SVMs always predict all instances as negatives. When it comes to ensemble models with and without positive-unlabeled learning correction, corrected ensemble models significantly improve prediction sensitivities compared with uncorrected ensemble models while retaining comparable specificities. The overall performance of corrected ensemble models is also better than uncorrected ensemble models according to F 1 score, GM or MCC.
Application of positive-unlabeled ensemble learning on insulin-activated phosphoproteomeWe demonstrate the application of the proposed method using the mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics data generated from insulin-activated time-series studies of 3T3-L1 adipocyte cells ().
Kinase selection and feature extractionBefore applying the proposed approach for kinase-specific substrate prediction, we need to determine kinases that are of interest and relevant to insulin-activated phosphoproteomics data. Typically, kinases that are activated or inhibited in the context of the experiment performed are of particular interest. Since many substrates of a given kinase have similar temporal kinetics, clustering phosphorylation sites into distinct clusters and testing for enrichment of known substrates of each kinase (obtained from an annotation database such as PhosphoSitePlus) () can facilitate the identification of kinases that are perturbed during the time course and/or by the treatments in the phosphoproteomics experiments. To this end, we filtered the set of all phosphorylation sites by selecting only those that have an associated gene product and are differentially phosphorylated in at least one of the eight time points profiled, as determined using a moderated t-test () (FDR < 0.05). This resulted in 3178 regulated phosphorylation sites. We then applied knowledge-based cluster evaluation (CLUE) () to determine the optimal clustering of the phosphorylation sites and identified kinases whose substrates are enriched within each cluster. Using CLUE, we identified four clusters enriched with known substrates of a set of kinases (). Notably, Akt and mTOR substrates are the most highly enriched () based on Fisher's exact test. We therefore selected Akt and mTOR as kinases of interest for substrate prediction. After selecting Akt and mTOR as kinases of interest, we used a combination of manual curation and database extraction to compile lists of annotated substrates for the Akt and mTOR kinases. We found a total of 22 and 26 substrates for Akt and mTOR, respectively, and used these as positive instances for model training in subsequent analyses (Supplementary). We next constructedPSSMs using sequence recognition sites of the known Akt and mTOR substrates () and generated consensus motifs () for learning. Next, we extracted temporal information for the known Akt and mTOR substrates from the phosphoprotoemics data (d). Boxplots of the log 2-fold change of insulin stimulation versus basal control across the eight time points indicate that Akt substrates responded to insulin activation significantly faster than those of mTOR (). This is confirmed by calculation of the area under the curve (see Section 2.4), where Akt substrates generally have very large values (). This temporal latency is in agreement with the known cellular topology of the insulin signaling network in which Akt is proximal to the insulin receptor and is rapidly activated by multisite phosphorylation (), while mTORC1 is downstream of Akt and relies on the multiple discrete steps including the phosphorylation of TSC2 by Akt, ultimately leading to the activation of the kinase (). Interestingly, the area under the curve values for mTOR substrates appears to be bimodal suggesting a subset of mTOR substrates may respond to insulin activation more slowly than the others (). This is consistent with the enrichment analysis () where mTOR is found to be enriched in both a relatively faster cluster (cluster 3) and a slower cluster (cluster 2).shows the log 2-fold change of phosphorylation level in insulin stimulation with and without prior treatment of inhibitors. The phosphorylation levels of both Akt and mTOR substrates appear to be inhibited by both LY and MK inhibitors although to different degrees.
Determining effective ensemble sizeA key parameter in designing an effective ensemble of classifiers is the number of base classifiers used for creating the final ensemble model ('ensemble size'). We tested a range of ensemble sizes for predicting Akt and mTOR substrates, respectively, and calculated the correlation of prediction scores for all phosphorylation sites. This procedure was repeated 10 times to obtain the variance introduced by using a positive-unlabeled ensemble model with a given ensemble size. As shown in, the correlation from each individual prediction increases with the ensemble size and plateaus at size of around 30. Since ensemble models with smaller size yield more variable predictions while larger size yield more consistent predictions (), we made a conservative decision to use an ensemble size of 50 for subsequent ensemble models.
Predicting Akt-and mTOR-specific substratesAfter extracting learning features and determining the effective ensemble size, we compared the proposed Positive-Unlabeled Ensemble Learning models that use both motif and phosphoproteome data for prediction ('PUEL') with those that use only the motif ('-Motif') or the. Ensemble size estimation. Positive-unlabeled ensemble models with a range of ensemble sizes are tested for predicting Akt and mTOR substrates, respectively. For each ensemble size, 10 ensemble models are created using random sampling and the mean and the standard deviation of the correlation from these 10 predictions is plottedSe (%) Sp (%)'PUEL': prediction using both motif and phosphoproteome for positive-unlabeled ensemble learning; '-Motif': prediction using motif only; '-Phospho': prediction using phosphoproteome only; 'EL': prediction using ensemble learning [as described in] but without positive-unlabeled learning technique. The calculation of each evaluation metrics are described in Section 2.5. Positive-unlabeled ensemble learning for kinase substrate predictionphosphoproteome data ('-Phospho'). As can be seen from, the performance of the models using both types of information performed better in both Akt and mTOR substrate prediction. This is especially evident in the case of mTOR, where the sensitivity of the PUEL is 88.5%, while for the models trained on only motif or phosphoproteome data, this is 80.8%. It is evident that PUEL performs better across the range of classification thresholds for mTOR and Akt, based on Precision/Recall curves (). These results demonstrate the complementary nature of static sequence motifs and dynamic phosphoproteome data in kinase substrate prediction. It is also evident that PUEL outperforms the ensemble model without positive-unlabeled learning ('EL') (), which demonstrates a contribution by positive-unlabeled ensemble learning toward kinase substrate prediction. To assess the performance of our approach in relation to that of other approaches, we evaluated substrate prediction accuracy for Akt and mTOR kinases using six popular kinase substrate prediction tools (). For Akt substrate prediction, our ensemble approach achieved the highest sensitivity and specificity. NetworKIN and NetPhosK 1.0 performed comparably with high specificity but with relatively low sensitivity. Compared with KinasePhos 2.0, KinasePhos 1.0 offers good sensitivity but lower specificity. GPS 3.0 has a perfect prediction sensitivity for Akt substrate prediction. However, this seems to be achieved by sacrificing specificity. iGPS 1.0 improves the specificity compared with GPS 3.0 but at the cost of sensitivity. For mTOR substrate prediction, GPS 3.0 did not perform as well as our approach. Its variant iGPS 1.0 did not predict any tested phosphorylation sites to be a positive substrate of mTOR. The pre-trained models used by KinasePhos 1.0/2.0, NetPhosK 1.0 and NetworKIN 3.0 preclude them from making substrates predictions for mTOR. Overall, the positive-unlabeled ensemble model performed better than other methods in predicting both Akt and mTOR substrates according to the evaluation metrics () as well as the Precision/Recall curves ().shows the prediction scores (z-axis) of Akt and mTOR substrates, respectively, using the positive-unlabeled ensemble model with both motif features and phosphoproteome features. The contribution of motif feature and the phosphoproteome features are plotted on x-axis and y-axis. A complementarity pattern of motif score and phosphoproteome score can be seen in both Akt and mTORities) from the model are plotted on y-axis. Prediction scores using sequence motif only or phosphoproteomic data only are plotted on x-axis and z-axis, respectively. Each point corresponds to a phosphorylation site profiled by the phosphoproteomics experiments and is rainbow colored by the value of prediction score. The larger points highlighted in dark blue (top-right) are the annotated substrates of Akt and mTOR, respectivelyFull model: prediction using both motif and phosphoproteome; Motif: prediction using motif only; Phospho: prediction using phosphoproteome only.predictions. These results argue for the utilization and integration of dynamic features extracted from phosphoproteomics data with traditional motif features.lists the top 20 substrates predicted for Akt and mTOR, with Supplementarycontaining the full list of predictions.
ConclusionIn this study, we developed a positive-unlabeled ensemble learning approach that enables the accurate prediction of kinase-specific substrates by integrating motif information derived from amino acid sequences surrounding the phosphorylation recognition sites with dynamic phosphorylation patterns quantified in large-scale time-series phosphoproteomics studies. We extended the positive-unlabeled learning techniques for ensemble learning and illustrated how such an application can improve the prediction sensitivity while retaining high specificity for kinase-substrate prediction. Finally, we demonstrated the complementary nature of the static features extracted from sequence motif and the dynamic features extracted from phosphoproteomics data. Compared with traditional sequence motif-centric methods, our study suggests an alternative approach for predicting kinase-specific substrates that incorporates and exploits the wealth of physiological information captured by large-scale phosphoproteomics studies. With the recent development of high-throughput methods promising to streamline the generation of large-scale phosphoproteomics data (), we anticipate that the methods described here will become an increasingly valuable approach for enabling prediction of kinase substrates, while preserving the dynamic and cellular context of the biological system being studied.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
P.Yang et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
