PPfold is a multi-threaded implementation of the Pfold algorithm for RNA secondary structure prediction. Here we present a new version of PPfold, which extends the evolutionary analysis with a flexible probabilistic model for incorporating auxiliary data, such as data from structure probing experiments. Our tests show that the accuracy of single-sequence secondary structure prediction using experimental data in PPfold 3.0 is comparable to RNAstructure. Furthermore, alignment structure prediction quality is improved even further by the addition of experimental data. PPfold 3.0 therefore has the potential of producing more accurate predictions than it was previously possible. Availability and implementation: PPfold 3.0 is available as a platform-independent Java application and can be downloaded from
INTRODUCTIONThe Pfold package predicts (non-pseudoknotted) RNA secondary structure by combining a stochastic context-free grammar (SCFG) with an evolutionary model (). PPfold is a recent multi-threaded re-implementation of Pfold (SukosdSuko). The Pfold model has been shown to result in highly accurate predictions when the input alignment is of high quality (). In a different approach, data from high-throughput, quantitative RNA structure probing methods have also recently been used in thermodynamic prediction methods to increase prediction accuracy (). However, phylogenetic and probing data have only been used independently in RNA secondary structure prediction so far. Here, we present PPfold 3.0, which integrates these different sources of information at the level of the model. This is expected to increase prediction accuracy beyond what is possible with either evolutionary information or experimental data alone.
MODELPfold combines two models: (1) a SCFG model M s , which generates the prior probability distribution over secondary structures : The prior probabilities are denoted as PjM s : (2) A phylogenetic model M t , which computes the likelihood of the input alignment D, given the secondary structures. The likelihoods are denoted as PDj, M t : If an additional set of experimentally observed data, H, is available, the posterior probability of a secondary structure isExpanding the expression and removing dependencies,where PDj, M t  are the probabilities obtained from the phylogenetic part of the algorithm, and PjM s  are the prior probabilities from the SCFG calculations. The quantity PHjD,  can be computed for any type of experimental data once a probabilistic model for its structure dependence is obtained. The posterior probability under the combined model can therefore be computed in the existing framework for optimization. In the case of many chemical probing methods, for example Selective 2 0-Hydroxyl Acylation Analyzed by Primer Extension, the data are assumed to be independent of nucleotide identity and sequence position, and data values for nucleotides in the same pair are not correlated. For such data, PHjD,   PHj, which is readily obtained by measuring known structures with the method. Let H i be the observed experimental value for position i, and P s i and P d i, j the likelihoods of the alignment (for single-stranded and base paired columns, respectively) calculated purely on the basis of the phylogenetic model. The combined likelihood of the alignment and data, P 0 s i (single-stranded case for alignment column i) and P 0 d i, j (base paired case for alignment columns i, j), can then be calculated asPPfold 3.0 has been written in Java 6 and consists of a single jar file. In addition to added support for experimental data, PPfold version 3.0 also features an intuitive graphical user interface. An arbitrary number of experimental data tracks can be added to each prediction. The following types of data tracks are currently supported:(1) Probing data can be given in the same format as in RNAstructure (). The distributions PHj must also be given as histograms; a default distribution for SHAPE data is included in the application.(2) 'Hard' constraint data can be specified for a sequence in the alignment in the same format as in mfold ().(3) Advanced data tracks are also supported, where the PH i ji paired and PH i ji unpaired values are precomputed by the user for some positions i of the sequence.
TESTINGWe obtained SHAPE data for the Escherichia coli 16S and 23S rRNAs from the authors of Deigan et al. (2009) (personal communication), removed invalid data points and computed the PHj distribution histograms for paired and unpaired nucleotides at a resolution of 0.01 units. SHAPE data are currently only available for few sequences with known structures, so we used the data for the E. coli 16S rRNA for testing. PPfold 3.0 is designed for structure prediction based on alignments. Nevertheless, the accuracy of single-sequence structure prediction for the E. coli 16S rRNA sequence is greatly improved on the addition of SHAPE data and is comparable to that of RNAstructure (, upper block). We also examined the effect of SHAPE data on the quality of predictions of various alignments: (a) a Clustal W2 sequence alignment of the highly divergent small ribosomal subunit (SSU) sequences from E. coli (accession number K00421) and Encephalitozoon cuniculi (accession number X98467); (b) an R-coffee RNA alignment of the same two sequences; (c) the 'SSU high similarity' alignment from BRaliBase II () and (d) the 'SSU medium similarity' structural alignment from BRaliBase II. SHAPE data improved the quality of structure predictions for all alignments (, lower block). The highest quality predictions can be obtained when a high-quality alignment is combined with experimental data. In these cases, prediction accuracies exceed what has been observed for a single sequence with RNAstructure with additional data, or with PPfold without additional data. However, a single-sequence structure prediction using experimental data is more accurate than a prediction using a low-quality sequence alignment alone or in combination with experimental data. The quality of the input alignment must therefore still be considered when using PPfold 3.0.In conclusion, PPfold 3.0 enables phylogenetic RNA secondary structure prediction in conjunction with experimental data and has the potential of producing highly accurate predictions.PPV: positive predictive value; true positives as a fraction of predicted pairs. Sensitivity is the true positives as a fraction of reference base pairs. True positives are the correctly predicted base pairs. F-measure: the harmonic mean of PPV and sensitivity, and provides a measure for overall accuracy.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Z.S k sd et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
