Motivation: Identifying microRNAs associated with diseases (disease miRNAs) is helpful for exploring the pathogenesis of diseases. Because miRNAs fulfill function via the regulation of their target genes and because the current number of experimentally validated targets is insufficient, some existing methods have inferred potential disease miRNAs based on the predicted targets. It is difficult for these methods to achieve excellent performance due to the high false-positive and false-negative rates for the target prediction results. Alternatively, several methods have constructed a network composed of miRNAs based on their associated diseases and have exploited the information within the network to predict the disease miRNAs. However, these methods have failed to take into account the prior information regarding the network nodes and the respective local topological structures of the different categories of nodes. Therefore, it is essential to develop a method that exploits the more useful information to predict reliable disease miRNA candidates. Results: miRNAs with similar functions are normally associated with similar diseases and vice versa. Therefore, the functional similarity between a pair of miRNAs is calculated based on their associated diseases to construct a miRNA network. We present a new prediction method based on random walk on the network. For the diseases with some known related miRNAs, the network nodes are divided into labeled nodes and unlabeled nodes, and the transition matrices are established for the two categories of nodes. Furthermore, different categories of nodes have different transition weights. In this way, the prior information of nodes can be completely exploited. Simultaneously, the various ranges of topologies around the different categories of nodes are integrated. In addition, how far the walker can go away from the labeled nodes is controlled by restarting the walking. This is helpful for relieving the negative effect of noisy data. For the diseases without any known related miRNAs, we extend the walking on a miRNA-disease bilayer network. During the prediction process, the similarity between diseases, the similarity between miRNAs, the known miRNA-disease associations and the topology information of the bilayer network are exploited. Moreover, the importance of information from different layers of network is considered. Our method achieves superior performance for 18 human diseases with AUC values ranging from 0.786 to 0.945. Moreover, case studies on breast neoplasms, lung neoplasms, prostatic neo-plasms and 32 diseases further confirm the ability of our method to discover potential disease miRNAs.
IntroductionMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that play important roles in gene regulation by targeting mRNAs for cleavage or translational repression (). Recently, accumulating evidence has indicated that miRNA dysregulation is closely related to the development, progression and prognosis of various human diseases (). Therefore, identifying the miRNAs associated with diseases (disease miRNAs) contributes to the exploration of the pathogenesis of diseases. Recently, computational prediction methods have been used to obtain reliable disease miRNA candidates for further experimental studies. Since miRNAs fulfill their functions via the regulation of target mRNAs (target genes) expression, several methods based on the targets have been presented.estimated the similarity between miRNAs by measuring the similarity of their associated target genes. The miRNA network based on targets was combined with a disease phenotype network to infer the correlation scores between miRNAs and diseases. In addition, they improved the score calculation by further integrating the similarities of miRNAs with the phenotype similarities of diseases ().also collected miRNA targets, and measured the function consistence score (FCS) between the target genes and the disease-related genes. However, when calculating the FCS, this method ignored the topological structure that is composed of the targets and disease genes. Moreover, as the current number of targets that have been verified by biological experiments is insufficient, both Jiang and Li obtained the target genes by using target prediction programs, such as TargetScan () and PITA (). Because these programs have high false-positive and false-negative rates (), it is difficult for the methods based on targets to achieve high prediction performance.exploited the functional link between miRNA targets and disease genes in proteinprotein interaction network to identify miRNAdisease associations. This method was also affected by the low accuracy of target prediction. In addition, it ignored the functional similarity between genes. It is well known that miRNAs with similar functions are normally implicated in similar diseases and vice versa (). Chen's method () focused on the phenotype similarity between diseases and the associations between miRNAs and diseases. For a specific miRNA m i , the novel diseases that are similar to the known m i-related diseases were obtained as m i-related candidates. Due to not considering the similarity between miRNAs, this method could not achieve excellent performance. As the functionally related miRNAs tend to be associated with similar diseases, the functional similarity of two miRNAs has been successfully estimated based on the semantic similarities of their associated diseases (). HDMP integrated the functional similarities with the characteristics of miRNAs to predict candidates associated with a given disease (). It only considered the k most similar neighbors of a candidate and ignored the topology formed by the neighbors. To construct a miRNA network derived from miRNA-associated diseases, the functional similarity between any two miRNAs was used as the weight of edge connecting them. By integrating known miRNA-disease associations, the similarity between diseases and the miRNA network, RLSMDA () developed the prediction method based on regularized least squares to uncover potential miRNA candidates for a specific disease. RLSMDA achieved excellent prediction performance not only for the diseases with some related miRNAs but also for the diseases without any known related miRNAs. Unfortunately, it ignored the topology information of the miRNA network. RWRMDA () obtained the putative disease miRNAs that have similar functions to known disease miRNAs via random walk through the miRNA network. However, the network is composed of two categories of nodes. For a specific disease, some nodes are validated by biological experiments to be implicated in the disease, but the other nodes have no evidence to verify their association with the disease. Unfortunately, the prior information regarding the two categories of nodes and their respective local topological structures are not considered. Therefore, we propose a novel prediction method based on random walk, which exploits the characteristics of the nodes and the various ranges of topologies. In addition, we extend the walk on a miRNA-disease bilayer network to predict candidates specially for the diseases without any known related miRNAs.
Methods
Process of predicting disease miRNAsWe model the prediction process as random walk on a miRNA network derived from miRNA-associated diseases. Our method for miRNAs associated with diseases prediction is referred to as MIDP. For a specific disease d with some related miRNAs, a random walker starts at one of known d-related miRNA nodes with equal probability. If a neighbor of the current node is more likely to be associated with d, the walker transmits to it with a greater proportion. After the iterative walking process is converged, the steady-state probability with which the walker stays at a candidate node (possible d-related miRNA) is defined as its relevance score. In this way, the candidates with higher scores are more likely to be associated with d. For the disease d, the known d-related miRNAs, the d-related miRNA candidates and their relationship form a network, which is denoted as a weighted graph G(V, E, W). Each vertex (v 2 V) represents a d-related miRNA or a candidate. Each edge (e 2 E) captures the relationship between the two vertices that are linked by edge e. The weight w of e is set as the functional similarity which quantifies the relationship. A greater w means that the two vertices are more likely to be associated with a group of similar diseases. In the network, the known d-related miRNAs are referred to as the labeled nodes. The remaining miRNAs, which have no evidence to verify that they are associated with d so far, are the unlabeled nodes. Because the unlabeled nodes are probably associated with d, the prediction goal is to rank all the unlabeled nodes and obtain the potential disease miRNAs. In our method, we correlate an unlabeled node u i with a relevance score RScore(u i ). A higher RScore(u i ) represents a more probable association between u i and d.The process of predicting d-related miRNAs by MIDP is illustrated in. First, the functional similarity of any two miRNAs is calculated by measuring the semantic similarities of their associated diseases. The miRNA network derived from miRNAassociated diseases (Mnet) is constructed by defining the functional similarity of two miRNAs as their edge weight. Second, we divide the nodes within Mnet into labeled nodes and unlabeled nodes. Based on the similarity between the nodes and the prior information regarding the nodes, the transition matrix of the labeled nodes (M Q ) and that of the unlabeled nodes (M U ) are created. Third, we construct a novel prediction model based on random walk to estimate the relevance score between each unlabeled node and d. Finally, all the unlabeled nodes are ranked by their scores, and the top ranked nodes are selected as potential candidates.
Construction of MnetAccurate calculation of the functional similarity between miRNAs is the basis for constructing Mnet. It has been observed that miRNAs associated with similar diseases normally have similar functions and vice versa (). Therefore, the functional similarity of two miRNAs is successfully estimated by measuring the semantic similarities of their associated diseases (). For instance, as shown in, miRNA v x is associated with disease d 1 , d 2 , d 3 and d 4 , and miRNA v y is associated with d 1 , d 3 , d 5 , d 6 and d 8 .calculated the semantic similarity between {d 1 , d 2 , d 3 , d 4 } and {d 1 , d 3 , d 5 , d 6 , d 8 } as the similarity of v x and v y , denoted as Sim(v x ,v y ). However, when they calculated the similarity, Wang et al. extracted the disease information associated with the miRNAs from an earlier version of the human miRNA-disease database (HMDD released in). The latest version of HMDD was released in June 2014 (). We recalculated the similarity with the latest data. If the similarity of two miRNAs is greater than 0, an edge is added to link them. Furthermore, the weight of their edge is set as the similarity. Thus, Mnet (denoted as a weighted graph G) is constructed.For a given disease d, the prediction of the d-related miRNAs is modeled as random walk on the weighted graph G. A random walker starts at the labeled nodes and walks around them. Assume the walker stays at vertex v x now. As far as v x is concerned, if a neighbor of v x is more likely to be associated with d, we make the walker transmit to the neighbor with a higher probability. Furthermore, the walker iteratively walks to sufficiently exploit the topological structural information of graph G. After the iterative walking process is converged, the steady-rate probability for a vertex indicates the possibility that the walker will finally stay at the vertex. A greater probability reveals a closer association relationship between the vertex and d. The key to our prediction model is to determine the one-step transition probability of the walker. As far as a vertex (such as v i ) within graph G is concerned, if one of its neighbors (such as v j ) is more likely to be associated with d, we assign v j with higher transition probability (m ij ). Therefore, the transition probability assignment mainly includes two steps. First, we estimate the degree of association (a ij ) between the neighbor v j and d with respect to v i. Second, we make the transition probability m ij proportional to a ij. The detailed probability assignment strategy is illustrated as follows. The association matrix A(a ij ) NN is constructed first. a ij represents the degree of association between vertex v j and d, with respect to v i. A greater a ij means a more probable association between v j and d, and N is the number of vertices within graph G. The elements of matrix A are then classified into the following four cases: 1. Assume Q is a set composed of all the labeled nodes and v i 2 Q. As the neighbors of v i have similar function with v i , they are likely to be associated with a group of similar diseases. Therefore, if v i is associated with disease d, its neighbors are also likely to be associated with d. For instance, as shown in, v 7 is a labeled node (d-related miRNA) and v 1 is one of its neighbors. The higher the functional similarity between v 7 and v 1, the greater the association possibility between v 1 and d. In addition, the association possibility when v 7 is a labeled node, is greater than that when v 7 is an unlabeled node. Therefore, the former and the latter are multiplied by w Q and w U , respectively. w Q 2 (0,1) represents the weight of the association information from the labeled nodes, and w U 2 (0,1) represents that from the unlabeled nodes. Obviously, w Q is greater than w U. Thus, with respect to v 7 , the degree of association between v 1 and d (a 71 ) is set as Sim(v 7 ,v 1 )w Q  0.7w Q. In this way, a 72 , a 74 , a 75 and a 76 are 0.6w Q , 0.7w Q , 0.7w Q and 0.7w Q , respectively. 2. Assume U is a set composed of all the unlabeled nodes (possible d-related miRNAs) and v i 2 U. As v i has similar function with its neighbors, v i and its neighbors tend to be associated with similar diseases. In other words, if v i is likely to be associated with d, its neighbors are also likely to be associated with d. For instance, v 8 is an unlabeled node and it is possibly associated with d. For one thing, the higher the functional similarity between v 8 and its neighbor v 33. If there is no edge between two miRNAs, such as v i and v j , a ij is set as 0. For instance, as v 1 is not connected with v 5 , a 15 is 0. 4. The a value from a miRNA to itself, such as a ii, is set as 0. For instance, a 11 is 0.
labeledWe can construct the association matrix A(a ij ) NN according to the above rules. The formal definition of a ij is as follows,where v i is a vertex and v j is one of its neighbors. Subsequently, assume that the walker stays at vertex v i now. Here, v i might be a labeled node or an unlabeled node. To make the probability of the walker reaching each its neighbors proportional to the degree of association between the neighbor and d, we must construct the transition matrix M(m ij ) NN. Matrix A is row-normalized by the following equation to obtain the one-step transition probability matrix M(m ij ) NN .m ij represents the transition probability from v i to v j. Therefore, the higher the degree of association between a neighbor of v i and d, the greater the transition probability from v i to the neighbor. For example, v 3 , v 4 , v 7 and v 8 are the neighbors of v 6. As v 6 is an unlabeled node, and when only considering v 6 , the association degree between its neighbors and d are 0.6w U , 0.6w U , 0.7w U and 0.8w U , respectively. The transition probabilities are 0.222, 0.222, 0.259 and 0.296 after row-normalization. However, after the rows of A are normalized, the weights (w Q and w U ) used to differentiate the association information from the labeled nodes and the unlabeled nodes are lost. For example, when normalizing the 6th row, the process of transforming a 63 into m 63 is as follows.:6 0:6  0:6  0:7  0:8  0:222No matter what the value of w U is, its values in both the numerator and the denominator can be removed. Therefore, the effect of w U is lost. In addition, when normalizing the 5th row, the process of transforming a 53 into m 53 is as follows.m 53  0:6w Q 0:8w Q  0:6w Q  0:6w Q  0:7w Q  0:6 0:8  0:6  0:6  0:7  0:222In this way, the effect of w Q is also lost. As a result, the influence of the prior information as to whether a vertex is associated with d, is ignored. To solve this problem, we separate matrix M into two matrices, M Q and M U. M Q represents the transition matrix of the labeled nodes and M U represents that of the unlabeled nodes. All the rows of the labeled nodes in M Q are consistent with the corresponding rows in M. The remaining rows of M Q are set as 0. In M U , all the rows of unlabeled nodes are consistent with the corresponding rows in M. The remaining rows are set as 0.
Establishing MIDP prediction modelBased on the transition matrices M Q and M U , we can further establish the prediction model of MIDP as follows.First, S(t  1) is a probability vector that indicates the walker arrives at the ith vertex with the probability S i (t  1) at time t  1. Similarly, S(t) demonstrates the probability of arriving at each vertex at time t. For a given disease d, since the vertices near the labeled nodes are more likely to be associated with d than those near the unlabeled nodes, a walker starts from a labeled node. S(0) is the initial probability vector that indicates the walker starts walking from one of the labeled nodes with equal probability at time 0. The ith element of S(0), S i (0), is set as follows.S i 0  1=jQj if v i 2 Q 0 otherwise (Second, to exploit the prior information, the labeled nodes and the unlabeled nodes are assigned different weights, r Q (0 < r Q < 1) and r U (0 < r U < 1). Furthermore, r Q is greater than r U. Actually, r Q and r U have same functions as w Q and w U. They are used to tune the weights of the association information from the labeled nodes and the unlabeled nodes. The ultimate goal is to make the transition probability proportional to the degree of association between each neighboring vertex and d. For instance, the actual transition probability from labeled node v 5 to v 3 is r Q m 53 , and that from unlabeled node v 6 to v 3 is r U m 63. The former is higher than the latter when both m 53 in M Q and m 63 in M U are 0.222. In addition, r Q and r U also affect how far the walker can go away from the labeled nodes and the unlabeled nodes. This means that the greater the r Q (r U ), the wider the range of topology around the labeled nodes (unlabeled nodes) involved in the walking process. For instance, when considering (r Q  0.4, r U  0.1) and (r Q  0.8, r U  0.2), the proportion of r Q :r U for both is 4:1. However, for the latter, the walker can go farther from the labeled nodes (and unlabeled nodes) than the former. Third, if the walker locates a labeled node, it will return to the starting vertices (labeled nodes) with the probability p Q (1  r Q ) at time t  1 and restart walking. p Q is the sum of the probability that the walker arrives at each labeled node at time t. This can be defined as,In the same way, if the walker locates an unlabeled node, it will go back to the starting vertices with the probability p U (1  r U ) in the next time. p U represents the sum of the probability that the walker arrives each unlabeled node at time t, which equals 1  p Q. X is a vector defining the nodes that are chose by the walker to go back and restart walking. Since the walker restarts from one of the labeled nodes, X equals S(0). The advantage of restarting walking is to control the overall degree to which the walker can go far from the labeled nodes. According to the above formula, the walker restarts walking with the probability p QThe closer to 0 the probability is, the more nodes around the labeled nodes the walker can reach. If the probability is too small, the walker goes too far away from the labeled nodes, which results in the inclusion of noisy data. It is not helpful for improving the prediction performance. If the probability is too great, there is not enough data to accurately estimate the relevance score. Therefore, it is essential to select suitable values for r Q and r U. In our experiments, r Q ranges from 0.9 to 0.1, and for a specific r Q , r U (r U < r Q ) ranges from (r Q  0.1) to 0.1. For instance, if r Q is 0.5, r U is 0.4, 0.3, 0.2 or 0.1. Our prediction model achieves the best performance when r Q  0.4 and r U  0.1. The walker starts from the labeled nodes and begins to walk iteratively. The iterative process stops when the convergence condition is satisfied. The convergence condition means that the L 1-norm between the two consecutive vectors, S(t) and S(t  1), is less than 10 10. The steady-state probability with which the walker stays at an unlabeled node, is defined as its relevance score. All the unlabeled nodes are ranked by their scores. A higher score indicates a more probable association between an unlabeled node and the given disease d. The algorithm for predicting d-related miRNAs by MIDP is demonstrated in.
Prediction based on the bilayer networkFor the diseases with some known related miRNAs, cross-validation (Section 3.3) demonstrates the superior performance of MIDP. However, for the diseases without any known related miRNAs, almost all the previous methods and MIDP could not be applied to them. To provide the potential miRNA candidates for them, we further propose an extension method based on MIDP, referred to as MIDPE. MIDPE is also motivated by the observation that miRNAs with similar functions tend to be associated with similar diseases and vice versa. Besides Mnet, a network composed of diseases is exploited to construct a miRNA-disease bilayer network. Given a specific disease d without known related miRNAs, the walker starts from the node d and walks on the bilayer network. If a disease node (d i ) and the node d are more possibly related with similar miRNAs, or a neighbor (m j ) of a miRNA node is more likely to associate with d, the walker transmits to d i or m j with greater possibility. After the walking process is converged, the greater probability the walker arriving at a miRNA node indicates the closer association between the miRNA and d.
Construction of bilayer network and its association matrixThe miRNA-disease bilayer network is composed of the miRNA network derived from the miRNA-associated diseases (Mnet), the disease network (Dnet), and the edges between two networks. If a miRNA has been verified to associate with a disease, an edge is added to connect them. In Dnet, each node d i represents a disease. If the similarity between two nodes d i and d j is more than 0, an edge is added to connect the two nodes. The weight of the edge between d i and d j is set as the similarity between them. The disease similarity was calculated in the same way as the literature (). Wang's method represented a disease with a directed acyclic graph (DAG), and the DAG contained all the annotation terms relative to the disease. Furthermore, these annotation terms were obtained from the U.S. National Library of Medicine (MeSH, http://www. nlm.nih.gov/mesh). The similarity between diseases was measured based on their DAGs. When constructing the association matrix for the bilayer network, the following three aspects should be considered. 1. The similar diseases are more likely to associate with functionally related miRNAs. For instance, the disease node d 1 inhas no any known associated miRNAs. Since d 1 is similar to d 2 and d 2 has been associated with the miRNA m 6 , d 1 is possibly associated with m 6. Furthermore, the greater similarity between d 1 and d 2 means the more possible association between Prediction of potential disease-associated microRNAsd 1 and m 6. Therefore, assume A DD is the association matrix of Dnet. (a ij ) DD is set as the similarity between diseases d i and d j. 2. The miRNAs with similar functions are more possibly related to a group of similar diseases. Therefore, if there is an edge connecting a disease node and a miRNA node, the walker can jump from Dnet to Mnet along the edge. Through walking on the Mnet, the miRNAs associated with d 1 can be further searched. For example, the walker transmits from d 1 to d 2 and then jumps to m 6. Here, m 6 has been inferred to probably associate with d 1 in the last paragraph. Moreover, m 6 and its neighbors (m 2 and m 4 ) have similar functions. So m 2 and m 4 are also possibly associated with d 1. Therefore, the walker is allowed to jump from Dnet to Mnet. A DM is a matrix indicating the jumping case. If the disease node d i is connected with the miRNA node m j , (a ij ) DM is set as 1. Otherwise, it is set as 0.3. During the process of walking on Mnet, if a neighbor (m 2 or m 4 ) has greater functional similarity with the current node (m 6 ), it has higher possibility to associate with d 1. Therefore, A MM describes the association matrix of Mnet and (a ij ) MM is set as the similarity between m i and m j .At last, assume Mnet consists of N miRNAs and Dnet consists of R diseases, and the association matrix of the bilayer network is A B. As shown in, A B is composed of A MM , 0 (0 2 < NR ), A DM , and A DD .
Establishing MIDPE prediction modelFor a random walk on the bilayer network, the transition matrix M B is defined as follows,where A  MM , A  DM , and A  DD are the matrices obtained by row-normalizing A MM , A DM and A DD respectively. a controls the relative importance of the information from Mnet or Dnet. Based on the transition matrix M B , the prediction model of MIDPE is defined as follows.Pt  1  1  cM T B Pt  cYLet P(t) be the probability distribution that the walker arrives at the N  R nodes of the bilayer network at time t. It is defined as follows.The walker arrives at the ith miRNA node with the probability PM i (t) and arrives at the jth diseases node with PD j (t) at time t. As the walker starts from a specific disease node, such as d i , only the ith element of PD(0) is set as 1 and other elements are 0. Moreover, all the elements of PM(0) are set as 0. Since the walker restarts from the node d i , Y equals P(0). The restart probability c 2 0; 1 controls how far the walker can go away from the starting node. After the walking process is converged, the ith probability element of PM with which the walker stays at m i , is defined as its relevance score. Both a for adjusting the importance of network information and the restart probability c range from 0.1 to 0.9. MIDPE achieved the best prediction performance when a  0.9 and c  0.8. a  0.9 indicates that the information of Mnet accounts for the majority in prediction process. It is consistent with that Mnet plays more important role in the miRNA-disease association prediction ().
Results
Data preparationThe human miRNA-disease database (HMDD) collected the experimentally validated associations between miRNAs and diseases by). For one thing, as done in previous studies (), we merged different miRNA-disease copies that produce the same mature miRNA. For another, there are a few associations with irregular disease names which are not included by the U.S. National Library of Medicine (MeSH, http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh). After merging the redundant data and eliminating the irregular data, the latest version of HMDD (updated in June 2014) contains 5100 associations between 490 miRNAs and 326 diseases.
Evaluation of prediction performanceA specific disease d was used as a query to rank the d-related candidates by their relevance scores. To evaluate the performance of MIDP and other methods, fivefold cross-validation was performed. In the fivefold cross-validation, the labeled nodes were randomly divided into five subsets, four of which were used as known information to predict potential candidates, while the omitted subset was added to the d-related testing dataset as positive samples. The dataset also consisted of all the unlabeled nodes (negative samples). The relevance score of each node in the testing dataset was calculated, and these nodes were ranked by their scores. The higher the positive samples were ranked, the better the performance. If a labeled node has higher score than a given threshold h, it is regarded as a successfully identified positive sample. If an unlabeled node has a score lower than h, it is regarded as a correctly identified negative sample. By varying h, the true positive rate (TPR) and the false positive rate (FPR) were calculated to obtain the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves.TP and TN are the number of positive samples and the number of negative samples that were correctly identified, respectively. FP and FN are the number of positive samples and the number of negative samples that were identified incorrectly. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) was used as the global prediction performance. As the top portion of the prediction results is more important, we measured the AUC within the top 30, 60,. .. , 210 and 240 candidates of the ranking list. In addition, we also reported the recall rate, which measures how many positive samples are successfully identified within the top k. In the latest association data of HMDD, as the majority of the diseases were associated with only a few miRNAs, they were not sufficient to evaluate the performance of the prediction methods. Therefore, we tested 15 diseases associated with at least 80 miRNAs.
Comparison with other methodsRWRMDA (), HDMP (), RLSMDA (), Shi's method (), and Chen's method () are the-state-of-art methods. According to the literatures, RWRMDA and HDMP have achieved significantly better performance than Li's method () and Jiang's method (). In addition, Shi's method concentrated on the functional links between miRNA targets and disease-related genes in PPI network. It exploited the interactions between disease-related genes, the associations between miRNAs and their targets and the protein interactions, which were completely different from the datasets used in our method (MIDP). Therefore, Shi's method could not be compared with MIDP in a reasonable and fair way. On the basis of this consideration, we compared MIDP with RWRMDA, HDMP, RLSMDA and Chen's method. As RWRMDA, HDMP and RLSMDA were developed based on the association data in the earlier versions of HMDD, we implemented these methods with the latest data. Specially, Chen's method focused on the earlier miRNA-disease associations and the phenotype similarity information between diseases. The disease names in Chen's method came from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database (), while those in the associations of HMDD came from U.S. National Library of Medicine (MeSH, http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh). Therefore, we firstly mapped the disease names contained by HMDD into OMIM disease names, and then updated Chen's method with the latest association data. When analyzing all the methods, MIDP, RWRMDA, HDMP and Chen's method contained parameters that need to be fine-tuned. The parameters r Q and r U of MIDP were chosen from {0.1,0.2,. .. ,0.9}. Furthermore, r Q should be greater than r U. The parameter r of RWRMDA ranged from 0.1 to 0.9. The parameter k of HDMP varied from 1 to 50. The parameter r of Chen's method changed from 0.1 to 0.9. The results of each method that were produced by using the optimum parameters are illustrated inand(r Q  0.4 and r U  0.1 for MIDP, r  0.9 for RWRMDA, k  20 for HDMP, r  0.8 for Chen's method). The detailed parameter tuning for our method (MIDP) is demonstrated in supplementary. As shown in, the average AUC values of MIDP, RWRMDA, HDMP, RLSMDA and Chen's method for all 15 diseases, are 86.2, 79.9, 81.6, 82.6 and 65.2%, respectively. MIDP achieved the best prediction performance, and its average AUC is 6.3, 4.6, 3.6 and 21% higher than other four methods, respectively. Although RWRMDA, HDMP and RLSMDA also obtained high performance, MIDP consistently outperformed them in all measures for the 15 diseases. Chen's method produced inferior result. The possible reason is that Chen's method ignored the similarity information between miRNAs. Furthermore, the method strongly depended on how much of the known disease information related to a given miRNA. Currently, more than 30% of miRNAs are only associated with 12 diseases. It is difficult to infer accurate disease candidates for these miRNAs. The results measured by AUC and recall within the top k candidates are shown inand 6, respectively. MIDP also performed the best for the top k ranking list, and ranked approximately 44% of positive testing samples in the top 30 and 86% in the top 120. HDMP ranked approximately 34% in the top 30 and 82% in the top 120, which is not as high as MIDP but better than RWRMDA. However, in the top 180, top 210 and top 240, HDMP had lower recall values than RWRMDA. Similarly, RLSMDA ranked 32.8% in the top 30, which is lower than HDMP. Nevertheless, for the result from the top 60 to the top 240, RLSMDA achieved higher recall values than HDMP. The possible reason is that HDMP only considered the local information regarding the k most similar neighbors. Therefore, the positive testing samples located in the neighborhood of the labeled nodes could be easily identified, while it was difficult to discover those located far from the labeled nodes. MIDP, RWRMDA, HDMP and RLSMDA worked much better than Chen's method because they exploited multiple kinds of information of Mnet while Chen et al. ignored the information. In addition, a paired t-test was used to measure the statistical significance that MIDP's AUCs about multiple diseases were higher than another method. The P-values are listed in. The results
Prediction of potential disease-associated microRNAsconfirmed that MIDP performed significantly better than the other methods at the significance level 0.05. To estimate the performance of MIDPE for the diseases without any known related miRNAs, we implemented case studies for three diseases including breast neoplasms (BN), colorectual neoplasms (CN) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HC). For a given disease d, we removed all the known associations related to d. This operation ensured that predicting d-related miRNA candidates only exploited the information of other diseases with known related miRNAs and the information of Mnet. All the removed d-rated associations were used as positive samples of the testing dataset. In the previous methods, only RLSMDA can be applied to the diseases without known related miRNAs. Therefore, MIDPE was compared with RLSMDA. For BN, CN and HC, we removed 202 known BN-related miRNA-disease associations, 147 CN-related associations and 214 HC-related associations, respectively. For MIDPE, AUC values corresponding to the 3 diseases are 0.821, 0.829 and 0.804. For RLSMDA, AUC values are 0.803, 0.812 and 0.789 (). MIDPE achieved slightly better performance than RLSMDA. The reason is that MIDPE additionally considered the topology between miRNA nodes in Mnet and that between disease nodes in Dnet, relative to RLSMDA.
Case studies: BN, lung neoplasms, prostatic neoplasms and 32 diseasesTo further demonstrate MIDP's ability for discovering potential disease miRNA candidates, case studies of BN, lung neoplasms and prostatic neoplasms were analyzed. We took the lung neoplasms-related candidates as examples and analyzed the top 50 candidates in detail. First, we used miR2Disease database, which contains manually curated miRNAs that have abnormal regulation in various human diseases (). This database contains 3273 associations between 349 miRNAs and 163 diseases. As shown in, 9 of 50 candidates are included in miR2Disease, which indicates their dysregulation in lung neoplasms. This confirms that they are indeed associated with the disease. Next, the database of differentially expressed miRNAs in human cancers, dbDEMC (), was constructed to provide potential cancer-related miRNAs. With analysis of the microarray datasets, dbDEMC identified 607 miRNAs which were more likely to have different expression levels in 14 types of cancer when compared with normal tissues. 31 of 50 candidates were contained by dbDEMC, indicating that they are potentially upregulated or downregulated in lung cancer (malignant lung neoplasms). In, there are 13 candidates labeled with 'literature' (for details see Supplementary). Several studies confirmed that 8 of 13 miRNAs are significantly upregulated or downregulated in human. The ROC curves for MIDP and other methods for 15 diseases. The value in the bracket is the area under MIDP's ROC curve for the specific disease lung neoplasms versus normal lung tissue. In addition, hsa-mir-708 was found to be associated with poor survival in lung adenocarcinomas of non-smokers (). Hsa-mir-302a was identified to regulate epidermal growth factor receptor which is frequently found to be activated by mutation or amplification in lung cancer (). Furthermore, the down-regulation of hsa-mir-320a contributes to the up-regulation of PFKm in lung cancer (). Hsa-mir-452 was significantly upregulated in current smokers compared with former smokers (). Hsa-mir-122 was upregulated in five of eight lung cancer patients after diagnosis (). The above analysis indicates that these five miRNAs are likely to be associated with lung cancer as well. Finally, we used PhenomiR, which is a systematic and manually curated resource that demonstrates miRNA dysregulation in diseases and biological processes (). It recorded that hsa-mir92b and hsa-mir-449b had abnormal expression in lung cancer. Aside from PhenomiR, GeneCards provides compendium for non-coding RNA genes, including the miRNAs (). The association between hsa-mir-211 and lung cancer has been contained by GeneCards. In addition, it has been reported that miRNAs are often found in genomic clusters (). As the clustered miRNAs are usually transcribed together and coordinately regulated, they are more likely to associate with similar diseases (). Hsa-mir-373 and hsa-mir-372 are clustered within a 10-kb region on chromosome 19, and the latter has been associated with lung cancer (). This shows that the former is likely to participate in the lung cancer-related biological process. In terms of BN, the top 50 candidates are listed in Supplementary Table S2. Two candidates were included by miR2disease. Seven candidates were supported by the literature to have dysregulation in BN, and four additional candidates were also supported by the literature to be related to breast cancer-related proteins or transcription factors. dbDEMC identified 37 candidates as potential upregulated or downregulated miRNAs in breast cancer (malignant BN). PhenomiR reported that 1 candidate had abnormal expression in breast cancer. The genes-to-systems breast cancer database (G2SBC) is usually used for studying breast cancer (). Furthermore, miRNAs execute their functions by regulating target genes. For 4 candidates, G2SBC showed that at least 11 of their top 100 predicted target genes were breast cancer-related genes. In terms of prostatic neoplasms, the top 50 candidates are demonstrated in Supplementary Table S3. Twelve candidates were included by miR2disease. Eight candidates were supported by the literature to be upregulated or downregulated in prostate neoplasms, and five candidates were reported by the literature to have abnormal expression in metastatic prostate cancer xenografts, relative to their non-metastatic counterparts. dbDEMC identified 30 candidates as potential miRNAs which have abnormal expression levels in prostate cancer. PhenomiR reported that one candidate was overexpressed in prostate cancer. Three candidates were also ranked higher by Li's method, RWRMDA, and Jiang's method, which indirectly confirms that they are more likely to be associated with the disease. In addition, as RLSMDA was applied to the 32 diseases without any known related miRNAs, MIDPE also investigated these diseases. In the top 3 potential miRNA candidates predicted by MIDPE, 44 miRNA-disease associations were confirmed by the recent literatures and 3 associations have been included by miR2Disease (See supplementary). In summary, these case studies demonstrate that both MIDP and MIDPE are powerful for discovering potential disease miRNAs.
Predicting novel miRNA-disease associationsAfter the superior performance of MIDP and MIDPE was confirmed by cross-validation and case studies, MIDP and MIDPE were further applied to the diseases with known related miRNAs and those without known related miRNAs, respectively. During the prediction process, all known miRNA-disease associations were utilized to construct the prediction model. All the potential disease miRNA candidates were listed in supplementary table S5. MIDP and MIDPE will be useful in generating reliable candidates for subsequent experimental research.
ConclusionA new method based on random walk (MIDP) was developed to predict potential miRNA candidates for the diseases with knownPrediction of potential disease-associated microRNAsrelated miRNAs. We constructed the miRNA network derived from miRNA-associated diseases to integrate the similarities between nodes, the prior information of nodes, and the local topological structure. Based on the characteristics of the labeled and unlabeled nodes, their transition matrices were established. The transition probability between the nodes was proportional to the similarity between them. The labeled nodes were assigned higher transition weight than the unlabeled nodes, which efficiently exploited the prior information of nodes and the various ranges of topologies. The degree to which the walker could deviate from the labeled nodes was controlled by restarting the walking. This effectively relieved the negative effect of noisy data. In addition, an extension method (MIDPE) was proposed specially for the diseases without any known related miRNAs. The miRNA-disease bilayer network was constructed to integrate the information in miRNA network derived from miRNA-associated diseases (Mnet) and the information in disease network (Dnet). The transition matrix for the bilayer network was constructed according to the association degree between the miRNA node (or the disease node) and a given disease. At the same time, the information in Mnet and that in Dnet were assigned different weights to balance their relative importance. Similarly, the restart probability in the bilayer network controlled how far the walker can go away from the starting node. MIDP was compared with RWRMDA, HDMP, RLSMDA and Chen's method. MIDPE was compared with RLSMDA which was the single method applied to the diseases without known related miRNAs before. The results demonstrated that MIDP and MIDPE have superior prediction performance. The cross-validation and the case studies indicated that MIDP and MIDPE are powerful not only for capturing known disease miRNAs but also for discovering potential candidates. It will be useful for providing reliable candidates for future studies of miRNA involvement in the pathogenesis of diseases.(1) 'literature 1 ' means that there is a literature to support that a miRNA is upregulated or downregulated in human lung neoplasm, as compared with normal lung tissue. (2) 'literature 2 ' represents that a miRNA is related to some important factors affecting the development of lung neoplasms. (3) With analysis of the microarray data sets, a miRNA is considered to potentially have different express levels in lung cancer when compared with normal tissues. This kind of miRNAs is labeled by 'dbDEMC'. (4) 'miR2Disease' means that a miRNA is included in the manually curated miRNA-disease association database, miR2Disease. (5) 'PhenomiR' means a miRNA has dysregulation expression in lung cancer. (6) GeneCards provides comprehensive information on all known human genes, including miRNAs. 'GeneCards' means the database recorded that a miRNA was associated with lung cancer. (7) 'cluster' represents a miRNA and another miRNA are clustered, and the latter was associated with lung neoplasms.
P.Xuan et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
