Motivation: Long-range RNA-RNA interactions (LRIs) play an important role in viral replication, however, only a few of these interactions are known and only for a small number of viral species. Up to now, it has been impossible to screen a full viral genome for LRIs experimentally or in silico. Most known LRIs are cross-reacting structures (pseudoknots) undetectable by most bioinformatical tools. Results: We present LRIscan, a tool for the LRI prediction in full viral genomes based on a multiple genome alignment. We confirmed 14 out of 16 experimentally known and evolutionary conserved LRIs in genome alignments of HCV, Tombusviruses, Flaviviruses and HIV-1. We provide several promising new interactions, which include compensatory mutations and are highly conserved in all considered viral sequences. Furthermore, we provide reactivity plots highlighting the hot spots of predicted LRIs. Availability: Source code and binaries of LRIscan freely available for download at
INTRODUCTIONLong-range RNA-RNA interactions (LRIs) have been marginally reported in various positive strand RNA viruses like Tombusvirus (8 in CIRV and TBSV), Hepacivirus (5 in HCV), Coronavirus (1 in TGEV), Flavivirus (3 in DENV and WNV), Luteovirus (2 in BYDV), Apthovirus (2 in FMDV), Pestivirus (1 in CSFV) and Human immunodeficiency virus (5 in HIV-1) (). According to their definition, a long-range interaction spans distances between a few hundred and several thousands of nucleotides (>26 kb in TGEV). LRIs are often located in loop regions or internal bulges of local RNA structures (known as cis-acting regulatory elements) and therefore build pseudoknot-like structures. Various programs have been developed for general RNA-RNA interaction prediction, which can be classified into five groups (): The first group neglects intra-molecular base-pairs, * to whom correspondence should be addressed based on the hybrids minimum free energy (MFE). Members of this group are RNAduplex and RNAplex () or RNAhybrid (). The second category includes RNAcofold () and PairFold (). These tools concatenate two interacting RNA sequences and calculate the MFE of the joint RNA sequences. The third group considers intra-molecular and inter-molecular RNA-RNA interactions in separated steps, however only one binding site is predicted. Members of this group are IntaRNA () or RNAup (). The fourth group considers more complex RNA-RNA interactions and allows also more than one binding site. This group includes tools like RactIP (), inteRNA () or inRNAs (). The final group contains e.g. PETcofold (), RNAaliduplex (), IRBIS (), ripalign () and simulfold (). These tools consider not only a pair of single sequences, like the tools mentioned above, they use multiple sequence alignments as input. With this comparative method, it is possible to reduce the false-positive rate by incorporating evolutionary conserved information. All of these programs have different properties, unsuitable for viral genomes. For example, RNAaliduplex is unable to predict pseudoknots and neglects intra-molecular RNA foldings. PETcofold considers both, intra-and inter-molecular interactions as well as pseudoknots, but returns per default only a single secondary structure, which makes the detection of multiple functional binding sites impossible. ripalign's running time makes the program not applicable to viral sequences and IRBIS is only applicable for predictions of RNA interactions related to RNA splice sites. Up to now, we are aware of a single program that is designed for LRI prediction, called CovaRNA (). This tool detects long-range nucleotide covariation from multiple sequence alignments of eukaryotic genomes using an index-based algorithm to find clusters of covarying base-pairs. The extended function CovStat determines the statistical significance of observed covariation cluster. CovaRNA has very strict filter criteria and is therefore very conservative in predicting LRIs. For short genomes, such as viral genomes, this leads to almost no predicted interactions. Here, we present LRIscan for detecting long-range RNA-RNA interactions in complete viral genome alignments without prior knowledge. Sparse alignment interaction dotplots in combination
LRIscanPseudocode 1. Algorithm to find seed interactions in a multiple genome alignment. S= 0 for i in 1...n-w if PHI(i) > 0 for j in i+w...n if PHI(j) > 0 and PI(i,j) >= 0 Swhere X is the MFE of the corresponding interaction,  the mean MFE and  the corresponding standard deviation of the z-times randomly swapshuffled alignments. For each consensus base-pair b(A i , A j ) of a given seed (of length |b|), we determine the compensatory score  to find LRIs with a high amount of compensatory mutations coincident with a high amount of compatible base-pairs. We consider 1 nt changes (e.g. AU to GU), which preserve a basepairing, as well as 2 nt changes (e.g. AU to GC) as compensatory mutations. For each consensus base-pair, u is the number of different base-pair types (u  6) and h is the number of compatible base-pairs (h  m). We normalize by the maximum number of different base-pairs over all consensus base-pairs (|b|) for all sequences k included in the LRI (k  m).  = b (u  h) 6  |b|  k (4)
LRI seed extensionFor each LRI seed, we attempt to extend the alignment by 10 bp at the 5' and 3' end. For the extended alignment, the MFE is calculated by RNAalifold, with a hard constraint to build given seed base-pairs and a soft constraint which forces an inter-molecular interaction of the surrounding base-pairs. For the extended alignment a separate z-score and p-value calculation is possible (default off). These scores are independent from seed scores.
Output resultsAll resulting LRIs are presented in a tab-separated file and additionally as HTML table, linking all corresponding figures to allow the user to browse through the output. The interacting alignment positions are calculated back to the original position of each virus isolate to easily assess the interactions.
CovaRNATo compare LRIscan to CovaRNA we converted all alignments to the UCSC MAF format and used CovaRNA with a minimum number of two input sequences, reading out of the MAF input file (-s 2).
DatasetFor HCV, we downloaded 950 genomes from NCBI and the HCV database 1 (v. 2008 (). Sequences which occur in both data sets were considered only once. For Tombusvirus and Flavivirus, we downloaded all genomes listed as complete genomes at NCBI-Genome, resulting in 13 sequences for Tombusvirus and six sequences for Flavivirus (mosquito/vertebrate Flaviviruses). For the 950 HCV sequences, an alignment was generated with MAFFT-auto, v.6.8 () and a phylogenetic tree was built with Geneious, v.6.1 () NeighborJoining method Tamura-Nei (). Based on this tree and the annotations from NCBI and the HCV database the dataset was reduced to two of the longest genomes from each subtype if available, resulting in 106 sequences from 65 subtypes. For Tombusvirus (13 sequences), Flavivirus (6 sequences) and the reduced HCV set (106 sequences), we generated MAFFT-maxiterate 1000-localpair alignments as input for LRIscan. For HIV we downloaded the hand curated compendium alignment from the HIV sequence database 2 choosing all subtypes of the HIV-1 alignment of 2014, resulting in an alignment of 200 sequences. All input alignments can be found at the supplemental page 3 .
Sensitivity and specificityTo calculate the sensitivity and specificity of LRIscan we performed di-nucleotide shuffling of each sample alignment with multiperm () and hid true positive LRIs. We defined all experimentally detected LRIs as true positives, as well as the top LRIs of the original alignment. We applied LRIscan with the same parameters as with the original alignments.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONTo validate our tool, we chose the four positive strand RNA viruses with known LRIs: Hepatitis C virus (HCV), Flavivirus, Tombusvirus and Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The best studied viruses, with highest number of known LRIs, are HCV and Tombusviruses. In HCV, five LRIs are experimentally verified () and another twelve LRIs have been predicted semi-manually in. Currently, eight LRIs in Tombusvirus (), three LRIs in Flaviviruses () and two LRIs in HIV-1 () have been experimentally verified. As input for LRIscan we used alignments of 106 HCV genomes, 13 Tombusvirus genomes, 6 Flavivirus genomes and 200 HIV-1 genomes.
HCVTo determine the LRIs of the HCV alignment, we used LRIscan with default parameters. Due to general assembly problems of the 5'/3' UTR of viral sequences, the HCV alignment consists of only 19 complete sequences. Therefore, we set the minimum number of involved sequences to 17% (18 sequences), resulting in 311 predicted LRIs (74 LRIs with p < 0.05). We plotted all detected LRIs of HCV, passing the p-value threshold, to the corresponding genome alignment position
The Author (2016). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com Bioinformatics Advance Access published June 10, 2016 at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
http://hcv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/NEWALIGN/ align.html
http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/ NEWALIGN/align.html 3 http://www.rna.uni-jena.de/supplements/LRIscan/
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
