Motivation: Protein–RNA interactions play a key role in a number of biological processes, such as protein synthesis, mRNA processing, mRNA assembly, ribosome function and eukaryotic spliceosomes. As a result, a reliable identification of RNA binding site of a protein is important for functional annotation and site-directed mutagenesis. Accumulated data of experimental protein–RNA interactions reveal that a RNA binding residue with different neighbor amino acids often exhibits different preferences for its RNA partners, which in turn can be assessed by the interacting interdependence of the amino acid fragment and RNA nucleotide. Results: In this work, we propose a novel classification method to identify the RNA binding sites in proteins by combining a new interacting feature (interaction propensity) with other sequence-and structure-based features. Specifically, the interaction propensity represents a binding specificity of a protein residue to the interacting RNA nucleotide by considering its two-side neighborhood in a protein residue triplet. The sequence as well as the structure-based features of the residues are combined together to discriminate the interaction propensity of amino acids with RNA. We predict RNA interacting residues in proteins by implementing a well-built random forest classifier. The experiments show that our method is able to detect the annotated protein–RNA interaction sites in a high accuracy. Our method achieves an accuracy of 84.5%, F-measure of 0.85 and AUC of 0.92 prediction of the RNA binding residues for a dataset containing 205 non-homologous RNA binding proteins, and also outperforms several existing RNA binding residue predictors, such as RNABindR, BindN, RNAProB and PPRint, and some alternative machine learning methods, such as support vector machine, naive Bayes and neural network in the comparison study. Furthermore, we provide some biological insights into the roles of sequences and structures in protein–RNA interactions by both evaluating the importance of features for their contributions in predictive accuracy and analyzing the binding patterns of interacting residues. Availability: All the source data and code are available at
INTRODUCTIONRNA undergoes diverse post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression, including regulation of its transportation, localization and decay (). In many cases, such a process occurs through elements on the RNA molecule that interact with hundreds of RNA binding proteins existing in the cell (). Interactions among proteins and RNA molecules play an essential role in a variety of biological activities within a cell, such as the post-transcriptional gene regulation, alternative splicing, translation and infections by RNA viruses (). Therefore, it is important to understand the principle of protein RNA interactions and identify their interaction sites when selecting activators and inhibitors in rational drug design. It is commonly believed that RNA recognition by proteins is primarily mediated by certain classes of RNA binding domains and motifs (). Specifically, the correlated pattern of sequence and structure in a RNA binding protein can be recognized and bound by a specific RNA sequence, and then the resulting proteinRNA complex performs important functions somewhere. In recognition of RNA functional importance in living molecules and close association with protein in its activities, experimental and computational studies of proteinRNA complexes have been substantially increased (). Recently, a variety of approaches have been proposed to study proteinRNA interactions (). Though some improvement has been obtained, the precise mechanisms of the proteinRNA interaction are far from being fully understood. In particular, there is no efficient way to experimentally identify proteinRNA binding sites that play a central role in forming proteinRNA interactions (). Hence, it is strongly demanded to develop a reliable computational method to accurately predict proteinRNA interacting sites by exploring the accumulated data of proteinRNA complexes. Many studies indicate that there is a strong relationship between interaction residues and their compositions in protein RNA complexes (). A number of machine learning techniques have been applied to detect RNA binding residues in protein sequences. For instance, BindN () uses an SVM-based classifier to predict potential RNA or DNA binding residues in proteins by sequence features. RNAProB ()Page: 1617 16161622
Prediction of proteinRNA binding sitesand PPRint () implement promising SVM-based methods based on evolutionary profiles in the identification. RNABindR () generates a naive Bayes classifier to predict RNA binding amino acid residues in proteins.proposed a neural network method for predicting RNA binding sites by using amino acid and secondary structure elements.improved the prediction performance using four sequence properties by a SVM-based classifier (see Supplementary Table S3 for the summary). However, most of the methods have not considered the interaction features underlying the partnership between protein residue and RNA nucleotide in the identification process. Actually, various interaction features extracted from the interacting sites give us valuable information to understand how a protein interacts with a RNA. If integrated together, these features can describe the interacting patterns in a more comprehensive way. On the other hand, for many existing methods such as RNABindR (), although the interface propensity of residue with RNA is designed to describe interactions, it is simply defined as the proportion of a given amino acid in interaction sites divided by the proportion of the residue in the dataset. In this article, by noting that amino acids with different neighbor amino acids or in different local structures often exhibit preferences for their RNA partners (), we design a new feature, i.e. interaction propensity of an amino acid, which considers the neighbors of the amino acid simultaneously instead of examining itself alone, based on the message transforming between a protein residue with its neighbors and the interacting nucleotides of RNA molecule. Moreover, we consider sequence and structure features of a residue which are also the contributors of the RNA binding events (). Clearly, all of those information are indispensable descriptors of the interaction patterns between protein residues and RNA nucleotide from different aspects, and thereby are expected to have strongly representative power as a combined feature when integrated together. In the present work, we propose a novel random forest (RF) method for predicting RNA binding sites in proteins from both sequence and structure features. The RF () is an ensemble classifier with many decision trees, which has many advantages, e.g. producing a highly accurate classifier, handling a very large number of input variables and estimating the importance of variables in determining classification (). We compute the mutual interaction propensity between amino acids and nucleotides by using representative proteinRNA complexes in PDB (). In addition to the interaction propensity feature, several important residue properties have been combined as hybrid features. The cross-validation test has confirmed the effectiveness of our method. The comparison study shows that the accuracy (ACC) of our method is better than previous methods such as RNABindR, BindN and PPRint, and achieves an ACC of 84.5%, F-measure of 0.85 and area under curve (AUC) of 0.92 prediction of the RNA binding residues for a test dataset. Computational experimental results also show that the proposed interaction propensity is a very powerful feature for predicting RNA binding sites in proteins. Moreover, we identified the importance of individual features and their combinations in contributing both the specificity (SP) of proteinRNA binding and the ACC of the prediction, which provides biological insights into the roles of sequences and structures in proteinRNA interactions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
DatasetsThe proteinRNA complexes used in our experiments were downloaded from RsiteDB () which were retrieved from the Nucleic Acid Database (). In total, there are 339 complexes with resolution better than 3 and 1182 proteinRNA chains of these complexes. After removing protein and RNA chains with sequence identity above 25% and 60%, respectively (), we got 205 non-redundant proteinRNA chains in 164 complexes. We used ENTANGLE () to define the interaction sites between protein chain and RNA. ProteinRNA interactions that include hydrogen bonding, electrostatic, hydrophobic and van der Waals interactions () have been considered. Residues in proteinRNA interface were extracted as the interacting residues. We identified the interacting pairs between amino acids in protein chains and their partner nucleotides. Totally, 5261 (9.87%) amino acid residues were defined as the RNA binding sites from the total 53 315 residues, the rest 48 054 (90.13%) amino acids were defined as non-binding protein residues. The RNA binding chains are listed in the Supplementary Materials.
Interaction propensityWe identify and quantify the mutual dependence between the protein residues and RNA nucleotide by calculating a new measure, i.e. interaction propensity. We highlight the important role of the nearest neighbor residues in determining the SP of biochemical features and the preference of interacting with nucleotides for an amino acid residue (). Hence, we define the mutual interaction propensity of a residue triplet and a nucleotide. A triplet is regarded as interacting with a nucleotide when its central residue interacts with the nucleotide. The mutual interaction propensity is defined as follows:where x represents a residue triplet, y represents a nucleotide (i.e. y  {A,G,C,U}).) represents the frequency of x interacting y in the proteinRNA pair (p,r), where N p,r (x,y) is the number of residue triplet x binding to nucleotide y and x,y N p,r (x,y) is the total number of residue triplet and nucleotide pairs in the proteinRNA pair (p,r).represents the frequency of the residue triplet x in protein p, where N p (x) is the number of residue triplet x and x N p (x) is the total number of all residue triplets in the proteinrepresents the frequency of a nucleotide y, where N r (y) is the number of nucleotide y and y N r (y) is the total number of nucleotides in the RNA r. The interaction propensity of a triplet x and a nucleotide y is calculated on all interacting proteinRNA pairs in the dataset.
Descriptors for amino acid residuesGiven the dataset, we identify the binding SP between all the existing triplets and four RNA nucleotides. A protein sequence of length l residues corresponds to l 2 triplets and every triplet will get its corresponding values of interaction propensity with four types of Page: 1618 16161622
Z.-P.Liu et al.nucleotides individually. Thus, each residue of l 2 centers in the triplets is described by a 4D vector. In addition to the identified mutual interaction propensity between amino acid triplets and nucleotides, we also encode other properties of amino acids to describe their RNA binding SP. Each amino acid residue in the residue neighbor profile is characterized by six descriptors including physicochemical characteristics, hydrophobic index, relative accessible surface area, secondary structure, sequence conservation score and side-chain environment. The following list is the details of these descriptors for amino acid residues. @BULLET Physicochemical characteristics: the physicochemical features of an amino acid residue are described by three values: number of atoms, number of electrostatic charge and number of potential hydrogen bonds (). These values are only related to the type of amino acid and do not contain any structural information of the amino acid residue.@BULLET Hydrophobicity: the hydrophobicity of an amino acid residue is described by the hydrophobic index designed in Sweet and Eisenberg (1983).@BULLET Relative accessible surface area: the accessible surface area of an amino acid is calculated by DSSP program (). Then we calculate the property by dividing the accessible surface area with the accessible surface area of fully exposed amino acid. The accessible surface areas of the fully exposed amino acids are based on Rost and Sander (1994). @BULLET Secondary structure: the secondary structure of an amino acid residue is also calculated by DSSP (). It is divided into three states: helix, sheet and coil. DSSP secondary structure types I, G and H are considered as helix; types E and B are considered as sheet; types T, S and blank are considered as coil. We use (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0) and (0, 0, 1) to represent the candidate residue that belongs to three types of secondary structures, respectively.@BULLET Conservation score: the values of sequence conservation for amino acid residues are obtained by PSI-BLAST () search of the protein chain sequence in the Uniprot database (). The round of iteration is set to 3. The result of the PSI-BLAST search is a positionspecific scoring matrix (PSSM). We extract the diagonal value of each residue as the value of its sequence conservation.@BULLET Side-chain environment: pKa value of an amino acid side chain is an important factor in determining environmental characteristics of a protein. The side-chain pKa values are obtained from Nelson and Cox (2004) representing protein side-chain environmental properties and are widely used ().
Encoding schemeIn this study, we employ the sliding window technique to encode the amino acid residues of proteins. We use the windows of odd number of residues with size s in the encoding scheme. Whether a residue belongs to the RNA binding class or not is determined by the middle residue (itself) and its neighbor s1 residue profile. The feature vector representing the residue in the window is encoded by joining the properties of the s residues. As a result a single candidate, residue is represented in a feature vector of s7 descriptors with s15 feature elements. We tested various window sizes and choose the best one, i.e. s = 5 (). When we evaluate the importance of these features by choosing a proper combination of descriptors, the number of elements in the feature vector is changed correspondingly.
RF for training and predictionWe formulate the RNA binding residue as a binary classification problem, where a residue is labeled with 1 if it is a RNA binding site or 0 otherwise. RF is a classification algorithm combining ensemble tree-structured classifiers (), which is often used when we have a very large training dataset and a very large number of input features. A typical RF model is made up hundreds of decision trees, and the major votes will determine the final prediction. The RF algorithm is implemented by the R randomForest package (), where we use the default parameters of the package in this article. The prediction is evaluated by the 5-fold cross-validation. The whole dataset was randomly partitioned into five groups with approximately equal size. To ensure that the training process is completely independent of the test data, the classifier is trained on the four groups and tested on the remaining group and each of them is chosen for assessment one by one. The predictive results are evaluated by different measures, i.e. sensitivity (SN), SP, ACC, F-measure and Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC). Mathematically, they are defined by the following equations:where TP, FN, FP, and TN are the numbers of true positive, false negative, false positive and true negative residues in the prediction, respectively. SN and SP are also used to plot the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves and AUC is also calculated. F-measure is the harmonic mean of SN and SP. Usually the best F-measure point is chosen as the cutoff for SN and SP in ROC curves. MCC value ranges between 1 (all predictions are correct) and 1 (none are correct).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Prediction performance of RF methodThe overall performance of our prediction method was evaluated by 5-fold cross-validation experiments as described in Section 2. To identify the SP and SN, we use the ROC curve as shown into present their interrelationship. With an input window of 5 amino acids, our RF-based classifier achieves an ACC of 84.5%, F-measure of 0.85 and AUC of 0.92. The maximum F-measure point is also shown in, which refers to the cutoff point for the best SP and SN of the prediction performance. The detailed measures are listed in.also summarizes the predictive performance using various input window sizes from 1 to 13, i.e. the sliding window length in the coding scheme. The maximum F-measure point is also chosen as the cutoff of SP and SN in every window size.Page: 1619 16161622The performance of F-measure and AUC is slightly declined when we increase the window size. The best performance was obtained with the window size of 5 residues. The test provided evidences for the effectiveness of our method to predict the RNA interface residues in proteins. Figures 2a and b show an example of the predicted interface residues with RNA in protein 1R3E:A.presents the actual interface residues of the protein structure in red.uses a different coloring scheme to illustrate the prediction performance on individual residues.gives a part of the predicted versus the actual binding residues (structure is shown in the box panel). Most of the actual interface residues (ACC of 85.57%) are well identified in the protein, and the prediction details are shown in Supplementary Materials.
Prediction of proteinRNA binding sites
Comparison with other methodsIn this work, we proposed a novel RF-based method to predict the binding residues in proteins by using the combined features. By considering the two-side information in the interacting partners of amino acids and nucleotides, we show that the proposed interaction propensity feature is able to represent the binding SP of the residues in proteins. The sequence features as well as the structure features of the residues can discriminate the propensity of amino acids to interact with RNA when combined together. The superior performance of the prediction in cross-validation experiments confirms the effectiveness of our method. In this subsection, we further validate our method by comparing our method with other existing methods. In recent years, several methods have been proposed to predict RNA binding residues in proteins, such as RNABindR (), BindN (), RNAProB () and PPRint (). For comparison, we tested the prediction performances of these methods. In the 205 protein chains, we constructed a training dataset by randomly selecting 105 protein chains as well as a testing dataset of the rest 100 chains. We trained the RF classifier by using the training dataset and validated the prediction in the testing dataset to compare the performance of the methods. The tradeoff threshold between SN and SP of our method was set to be RF voting score that gave the best performance.shows the ROC curve of the results. The predictions in the testing 100 protein chains by other methods were carried out by using their default parameters. The results are shown in. RNABindR is a Bayesian classifier for RNA binding sites in proteins. BindN, RNAProB and PPRint are predictors of proteinRNA binding residues based on SVMs. RNABindR was implemented in three different options, i.e. 'optimal prediction (opt)', 'high sensitivity (sn)'and 'high specificity (sp)' prediction. Similarly, BindN was tested with two options of 'expected sensitivity of 80% (sn)' and 'expected specificity of 80% (sp)'. RNABindR and BindN with high SP are obtained at the expense of SN, and vice versa. Clearly, our method consistently outperforms the existing methods in terms of these measures. Since some prediction scores of the compared methods are not available, their ROC curves cannot be drawn. To remove the possible biases in the comparison, we also compared the underlying machine learning algorithms in these predictors. We implemented several different algorithms, i.e. support vector machine (SVM), naive Bayes (NB) and neural network (NN), using the same procedure as our RF-based method.shows the ROC curves of different classifiers in the testing dataset. The performance details are given in. In, AUC of RF-, SVM-, NN-and NBbased predictors are 0.912, 0.801, 0.782 and 0.713, respectively. Our RF-based method clearly outperformed other classifiers. As to the different datasets, we also tested our methods in several benchmarks. In RNA binding protein datasets RB86 (), RB107 (), RB109 () and RB149 (), our method can achieve the AUC of 0.884, 0.885, 0.884 and 0.858, respectively, which also demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. We also carried out more comparison with RNAProB (). The details of these results can be found in the Supplementary Materials.
Evaluation of feature importanceWe combined various features of the residues in addition to the mutual interaction propensity to represent the specific interaction properties of protein residues with RNA nucleotides. Seven descriptors were contained in a hybrid feature vector. To verify their effects on the prediction of binding sites, we tested the performance of the selected features of these descriptors.presents the results of prediction performance of the 5-fold crossvalidation by subtracting one of the descriptors individually in the scoring scheme. After subtracting each descriptor in describing these Page: 1620 16161622residues, we found that the ACC of prediction was declined than that of using all descriptors. For instance, when we deleted the interaction propensity, ACC, F-measure and AUC of the prediction became 75.8%, 0.751 and 0.828 comparing to 84.5%, 0.859 and 0.923 with all descriptors, respectively. From Table 3, we can also identify the importance of these features for the prediction and the contribution of these propertiesPage: 1621 16161622encoded in the feature vector, respectively. The mutual interaction propensity of the residues and its nucleotide partners can provide more confidence of the binding events, and actually has increased the prediction performance significantly (10%).presents the mutual interaction propensity value between the triplets and nucleotides for protein 1R3E:A. The selected red box corresponds to the binding sites shown in. For comparison,gives the interface propensity information of different amino acid types (upper panel) and the corresponding interface propensity value of the residues in protein 1R3E:A. Similarly, the box corresponds to the zoomed sites shown in. The interface propensity () of each amino acid type shown in the upper panel was defined as the ratio of the percentage of one type residue in the interfaces in the percentage of the type residue in our entire dataset. Fromand e, we found that more specific information on the interacting sites in the protein were extracted by interaction propensity between residues of protein and RNA. When we use the interface propensity instead of the mutual interaction propensity in the prediction, our method only achieved the ACC of 73.5%, F-measure of 0.748 and AUC of 0.827. If we only use the interface propensity as the descriptor in the encoding scheme, we got the prediction of ACC of 65.3%, F-measure of 0.650 and AUC of 0.710 (compare to ACC of 80.8, F-measure of 0.831 and AUC of 0.906 when only using interaction propensity in feature vector). Clearly, the prediction performance was highly improved when we developed the mutual interaction propensity as the descriptor of the RNA binding information. We also tested the prediction performances by alternative definition of mutual interaction propensity. The details of these results are shown in the Supplementary Materials. We also tested the prediction performance of our model with different combinations of features, which can be found in Supplementary Materials. Some of the descriptors, i.e. 'Accessible surface' and 'Secondary structure', can be calculated only after the protein structure information is available. If we category them into structure descriptors and the others are sequence descriptors,features based only on sequence (without 'Structure features'), our RF-based method can achieve a predictive ACC of 81.4%, Fmeasure of 0.832 and AUC value of 0.905. In contrast, the method without 'Sequence features' achieves an ACC of 82.6%, F-measure of 0.847 and AUC of 0.917. The results indicate that the combination of all these descriptors, i.e. interaction propensity, sequence features and structure features has more representative power so that more information can be extracted by the predictor for better differentiating proteinRNA binding residues from non-binding ones.
Z.-P.Liu et al.
Prediction of proteinRNA binding sites
Patterns of RNA binding sitesWe predicted the RNA binding residues in proteins from integrated features underlying the residues. The results have already shown the importance of residue properties in the identification of binding SP. The test also indicated that the combination of the descriptors can achieve better prediction performance. All these evidences demonstrate that the combined features capture the specificities of RNA binding sites, i.e. they indicate the signatures of the potential places where the binding events take place. As to the individual features of these binding sites, we can compare them with that of non-binding sites to detect their SP.shows the statistics of encoded mutual interaction propensity of different residues to the four RNA nucleotides in their feature vectors individually. 'Binding' represents the actual interface residues with RNA. 'Non-binding' is those residues that are not the interacting residues. When we randomly sample the same size residues as interface residues, the mutual interaction propensity statistics is shown in 'Random' panel. 'shows the values of all residue in the dataset. We found that the values of mutual interaction propensity between actual binding residues and four type of nucleotides are higher than that of the non-binding ones, same-size random sampling residues and all the residues in the dataset, respectively. Also it is interesting to point out that we can see fromthat the residues interacting U are harder to predict than A, C and G based on mutual interaction propensity.
Page: 1622 16161622
Z.-P.Liu et al.When we mine the common features of these binding residues, we can identify the particular features of these residues with their prioritization contacting with RNA. These features can be used to construct the markers for discriminating RNA binding sites from non-binding ones. Structure motifs of binding RNA in the proteins would be important in the drug design (). Here, we learned these features and predicted the RNA binding residues in proteins by RF classifiers. The results demonstrate that our method can identify the potential binding motifs in proteins. These features can also be used to identify the functional structure motifs, such as the functional motif () shown in. In the future, we will analyze these detailed features by relating them with the specific local structures in proteins. These identified candidate RNA binding motifs also provide fundamental structure patterns for binding RNA. Our method can be further extended to these interesting and intriguing research topics in the future.
CONCLUSIONKnowledge regarding how proteins interact with each other and with other molecules is essential in the understanding of cellular processes (). Here, we proposed a novel method to predict RNA binding residues in proteins using a RF-based method by the integrated features. We encoded the residue features into a vector so as to represent the SP of binding features of residues in proteins. Our method is mainly based on the mutual interaction propensity defined between the interacting residues of protein and RNA. In addition, we also combined various sequenceand structure-derived features together to represent the interaction propensity of the amino acid and its partner nucleotides. The learning and validation processes in the proteinRNA complexes confirm the effectiveness of our method. The comparison with existing methods and other classifiers further show the advantages of the proposed method. The importance and contribution of these features were also evaluated. The identified binding features underlying the protein will have implications of proteinRNA binding. In the same manner, our method can be extended to identify the structure motifs in the RNA binding proteins as well as the RNA binding SP in protein structures in future.
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
