Motivation: Leucine-rich nuclear export signals (NESs) are short amino acid motifs that mediate binding of cargo proteins to the nuclear export receptor CRM1, and thus contribute to regulate the localization and function of many cellular proteins. Computational prediction of NES motifs is of great interest, but remains a significant challenge. Results: We have developed a novel approach for amino acid motif searching that can be used for NES prediction. This approach, termed Wregex (weighted regular expression), combines regular expressions with a position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM), and has been implemented in a web-based, freely available, software tool. By making use of a PSSM, Wregex provides a score to prioritize candidates for experimental testing. Key features of Wregex include its flexibility, which makes it useful for searching other types of protein motifs, and its fast execution time, which makes it suitable for large-scale analysis. In comparative tests with previously available prediction tools, Wregex is shown to offer a good rate of true-positive motifs, while keeping a smaller number of potential candidates. Availability: Wregex is free, open-source software available from
INTRODUCTIONComputational prediction of protein features is being increasingly applied to investigate several aspects of protein function and regulation, such as proteinprotein interactions (), post-translational modifications () and subcellular localization (). In eukaryotic cells, dynamic transport between the nucleus and the cytoplasm is an important regulatory mechanism for many cellular proteins. Active nuclear import and export is carried out by soluble receptors termed importins and exportins, respectively, which escort their cargo proteins through the nuclear pore complex (Gorlich). Importins and exportins recognize and bind specific amino acid motifs in their cargo proteins, which function as nuclear localization signals (NLSs) or nuclear export signals (NESs). One of the best-studied types of nuclear transport signal is the leucine-rich NES that mediates binding of cargo proteins to the nuclear export receptor CRM1 (). A leucine-rich NESs typically consists of a short stretch of amino acids containing several hydrophobic residues (not necessarily leucine) with a characteristic pattern. Initial studies of a limited number of NESs () led to propose a consensus NES pattern, with four conserved hydrophobic residues represented by  14  separated by a variable number of intervening residues (represented by X). This consensus pattern has been progressively expanded and refined through the analysis of a larger number of experimentally confirmed NESs (). These studies, mostly based on sequence alignment, suggested that residues at positions other than the conserved  14 may also contribute to NES activity. For example, acidic residues Glu, Asp were found to be overrepresented in functional NESs (). Further insight into NES features has been recently obtained through structural analyses of the CRM1NES-binding interface (). The crystal structures of CRM1NES complexes showed that NESs fit into a rigid hydrophobic groove on the surface of the receptor, and that a fifth hydrophobic residue  0  in the NES, amino-terminal to  1 , may increase the affinity of the NES/CRM1 interaction (). These structural analyses also revealed that acidic residues in certain positions may contribute to NES affinity by interacting with a basic surface flanking CRM1 hydrophobic groove (), thus providing a biological explanation to the previously noted overrepresentation of acidic amino acids in NESs. Altogether, these previous studies have unveiled the remarkable complexity of the CRM1-dependent NES. In addition to the complex nature of the signal, the identification of physiologically relevant NESs is further hampered by the fact that amino acid motifs that conform to the NES pattern may be found in hydrophobic protein cores, where they would be unavailable for CRM1 binding. A valid strategy for NES identification may begin by mapping amino acid segments with CRM1-dependent export activity (active NES motifs) in the protein of interest. If the 3D structure of the protein is known, the solvent accessibility of these motifs may then be evaluated and finally, their physiological relevance can be validated by mutagenesis. In the first step of this strategy, the use of efficient computer-based NES prediction tools may play an important role. Several NES-prediction tools have been developed to date. These include programs that apply regular expressions derived from the NES consensus pattern, such as ELM () as well as machine-learning-based programs, such as NetNES () and NESsential (). We have recently compared the performance of ELM and NetNES using these programs to predict candidate NES motifs in human deubiquitinases (DUBs) (). The more recent NESsential program was not available at the time this comparison was carried out. Predicted candidates were subsequently tested using an in vivo nuclear export assay (). In our hands, the ability of ELM to identify amino acid motifs with nuclear export activity was superior to that of NetNES, although the estimated positive predictive value (26.6% for NetNES and 38.0% for ELM) was relatively low for both programs (). We have devised and tested a novel approach, termed weighted regular expressions (Wregex) that can be applied to the prediction of functional amino acid motifs, including NESs. Wregex combines the use of a regular expression with a position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM). In the case of NES prediction, the PSSM takes into account the potential contribution of each NES residue (not those at the conserved hydrophobic positions) to NES activity. In this study, we submit Wregex to a series of comparisons with NESsential and ELM, and progressively optimize its regular expression and training PSSM. The features of Wregex in comparison to these existing tools, as well as the potential application of Wregex to the identification of other functional motifs in proteins besides NESs are discussed. We have implemented Wregex as a web interface accessible to any researcher.
METHODS
Wregexin the context of protein and motif searching toolssummarizes the approaches used by different protein-and motifsearching tools. Tools based on sequence similarity like BLAST () and FASTA () use a substitution matrix for scoring alignments and allow specifying a sequence gap penalty. These tools are more indicated for comparing the similarity between proteins rather than for motif searching. PSI-BLAST () uses an initial proteinprotein BLAST to derive a PSSM, which is then used for further database search in an iterative manner updating the PSSM in each iteration. Rather than detecting specific protein motifs, the aim of PSI-BLAST is to detect distant relationships between proteins. PHIBLAST () uses both a protein sequence and a PROSITE () regular expression as input. The regular expression is used to search the database for proteins that are subsequently aligned with the input protein sequence using BLAST to obtain a score, which is computed using a substitution matrix like BLOSUM-62 instead of a PSSM. Another motif-searching approach consists on machine learning using a training set of sequences. The most commonly used algorithms in this approach are hidden Markov model (HMM) and support vector machine (SVM). The NES prediction tool NetNES () belongs to this category, and uses a combination of both neural networks and HMM. A more recent NES prediction program, NESsential (), uses SVM models trained with sequence derived meta-features, and a pre-filter consisting on the pattern   X 23   X  : This tool will be further discussed below. ScanProsite () allows to scan the PROSITE database () using either patterns (regular expressions) or profiles (tables of position-specific amino acid weights and gap costs), but it does not allow to combine both a regular expression and a weight matrix. Finally ELM () is a database of eukaryotic linear motifs described as regular expressions, including the 'TRG_NES_CRM1_1' that allows prediction of CRM1-dependent NES motifs. The novel motif-searching tool presented in this article, Wregex, combines both a regular expression and a PSSM.
Algorithm implementationWregex uses three type of inputs:(1) Regular expression (mandatory). Defines the sequence patterns and spacings allowed. This expression allows the use of '(brackets)' to define the groups of amino acids that will be weighted together later.(2) PSSM (optional). Defines the weight of each possible amino acid for each of the groups marked between '(brackets)' in the regular expression. These weights are interpreted as the base 10 logarithm of the amino acid probability. If no PSSM is provided, score of output candidates will not be available.(3) Fasta database (mandatory). The protein sequence database used for searching protein motifs using the regular expression and the PSSM (if provided).summarizes how Wregex uses these inputs for searching candidates. Only amino acid sequences matching the regular expression will be subsequently processed. This selection represents a first filter for candidate motifs. Next, each of the candidate sequences is subdivided into smaller amino acid groups according to the regular expression, and a score is computed using the PSSM values for each group position. A threshold (arbitrarily selected by the user) can be applied to these scores, thus introducing a second filter for candidate NES-motif selection. Equation(1) is used for computing the score of a motif match; where G is the number of groups in the regular expression, J g is the length of the group number g, P g is the column g of the PSSM matrix, p ajg, g is the. Wregex, a novel tool for amino acid motif searching. Different approaches for protein and motif searching and selected software tools related to each approach are shown. Unlike previous tools, Wregex combines regular expressions with a PSSM. Asterisks indicate tools specific for NES prediction PSSM value in column g for the amino acid in the position j within the group g, and len is the length of the sequence matched by the regular expression.In this equation the group position-specific PSSM value is used as the score of each amino acid of the match. In order to assign all positions the same importance, the score is normalized by the maximum PSSM value of the corresponding group position by subtracting maxP g : Since we are considering variable length matches, sum must be normalized by the match length len. Finally the logarithm is translated into linear scale resulting in a score ranging from 0 to 1, and then multiplied by 100 to obtain a score ranging from 0 to 100.illustrates how the PSSM is calculated in the case of experimentally validated motifs with activity score. These motifs are first aligned using the groups in the regular expression. In case that different group combinations are possible, all of them are considered and their weight (w), derived from the activity score (s), will be divided by the number of combinations, resulting in the final weight (w 0 ). Next, for each group (g) and amino acid (a) a p a, g value is computed usingEquation (2); where L is the number of training matches and w l 0 is the weight of training match l. In the numerator, the weights w l 0 are only added if the amino acid a is the same as the one in the position j of the current group g for the training match la l, jg :When calculating a PSSM using validated motifs without assay score, the same weight w is ascribed to all sequences. In this case, the p a,g values of the PSSM in Equation (2) represent the probability that amino acid a is present in group number g. When different weight values w are considered (derived from assay score), a similar interpretation can be assumed considering that w represents the number of occurrences of the corresponding training match. These PSSM values are expressed in logarithmic scale to facilitate further operations, and they are rounded to the nearest integer to account for the statistical sample size. The 10 5 value is added to avoid logarithm of 0, thus resulting in a minimum value of 5 for p a, g : This 10 5 term does not affect significantly the remaining non-zero values (at least two orders of magnitude above in our tests) because of the integer rounding.. PSSM calculation using experimentally validated NES motifs with an activity score determined using an export assay. Sequences are first aligned using the groups in the regular expression. The weight of a motif (W) is derived from the assay score (S). If several amino acid combinations in a motif match the regular expression, the final weight (W 0 ) of the motif is calculated by dividing W by the number of combinations. When input motifs lacking an activity score are used for PSSM calculation, the same W value is ascribed to every motif
Web interfaceA web application has been developed using Java 7 and JSF 2.2 running in a servlet 2.5 compliant web container. The training page () allows to define a custom regular expression and upload input motifs as fasta sequences. These motifs can be defined as separate fasta entries, or annotated as position ranges in the fasta header of protein entries using the same format provided by ValidNESs () fasta download. It is also supported to include a motif weight as an additional annotation in the fasta headers by appending '@weight' to the motif position range. Then, a PSSM is computed as described in the previous subsection using those input motifs matched by the regular expression. If several amino acid combinations in a single input motif match the regular expression, the motif weight is divided by the number of combinations. This process can also be tuned by the user by removing undesired combinations. Finally, the PSSM can be downloaded and used later for custom motif searching. The search page () allows to search a fasta file for protein motifs. The motif can be selected from a predefined set or defined by the user as a custom regular expression with an optional PSSM file. If the input fasta file has header annotations with motifs positions, additional information is provided stating whether the resulting candidates match the annotated motifs (e.g. laboratory assay results). By default, if several candidate motifs overlap in the protein sequence, only the one with the highest score or the longest sequence is displayed. This option can be deactivated using the grouping checkbox. In any case, the number of combinations/overlaps is displayed, as it may be of help when selecting candidate motifs for testing.
In vivo nuclear export assayCandidate NESs were tested using an in vivo nuclear export assay (), as previously described (). Briefly, double-stranded DNA fragments encoding the candidate NES and flanking residues were cloned into the pRev(1.4)GFP vector (a gift from Dr Beric Henderson). HeLa cells, growing in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 units/ml penicillin and 100 g/ml streptomycin (all from Invitrogen), were seeded onto sterile glass coverslips in 12-well trays. Cells were transfected, 24 h later, with the pRev(1.4)GFP-based plasmids containing the candidate NESs using XtremeGENE 9 transfection reagent (Roche Diagnostics) following manufacturer's protocol. Using a Zeiss Axioskop fluorescence microscope, the subcellular localization of the fluorescent proteins was determined in at least 200 cells per sample, and the activity of the functional NESs was rated between 1 and 9 using the scoring system originally proposed (). Survivin NES () and the empty pRev(1.4)GFP were used as positive and negative assay controls, respectively. A subset of the candidate NESs were also tested in HEK 293 cells, showing equal activity profiles.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONA prominent feature of Wregex is its flexibility. On one hand, training can be adjusted by defining a 'training regular expression' that matches the input motifs used as training sequences for computing the PSSM. On the other hand, searching can also be adjusted for higher or lower stringency, by modifying the 'searching regular expression' and selecting a PSSM. Different settings at the level of training or searching result in different Wregex configurations. Here, we have tested several configurations of Wregex (Wregex AE, summarized in), in order to carry out a comparison with the previously available NESsential and ELM tools, and in an attempt to obtain an optimal configuration to be used as the 'Recommended' default in the Wregex web interface. The training regular expression is common to all configurations tested here. We have chosen the low stringency regular expression (.{2})()(.{2,3})()({2,3}) ()()()(.{4}) for training, in order to maximize the number of training sequences used in the PSSM. As indicated inand further detailed below, the differences between the various Wregex configurations lie in the training dataset used for computing the PSSM or in the searching regular expression applied.
Comparison Wregex A versus NESsentialNESsential () is the most recently developed NES prediction tool, and it was not tested in our previous comparison of NES predictors (). Thus, we decided to carry out a comparison between Wregex andNESsential. In order for the comparison to be fair, we trained this Wregex configuration (Wregex A) using the same set of 154 experimentally validated NESs used for NESsential training (Horton P. and Fu S.-C., personal communication). The PSSM used for training Wregex A is provided as Supplementary. The searching regular expression applied by Wregex A is the following pattern derived from the 'TRG_NES_CRM1_1' ELM entry: (.{0,1})()(.{2,3})()({2,3}) ()()()(.{0,3}). Wregex A and NESsential were executed against a target set of proteins consisting of 85 deubiquitinases (DUBs) for which experimental information on the presence of functional NES motifs is available. Using a nuclear export assay, 32 active NES motifs and 78 inactive NES-like motifs have been previously identified in this set of proteins (). Furthermore, active NES motifs were ascribed an activity score, ranging from 1 to 9., Wregex A predicted fewer candidate motifs than NESsential (64 versus 826). In order to select a manageable number of candidate motifs to be experimentally tested, a threshold can be arbitrarily defined. As an example, a threshold value of 50 is displayed in. Using this threshold, 42 candidates would be selected using Wregex A and 24 using NESsential. Wregex A candidates would include at least 15 true positive and 15 false positive NES motifs, whereas NESsential candidates would include at least seven true positive and five false positive motifs (). As shown inWregex A (29 versus 22) and, importantly, a much higher number of candidates that would be selected for experimental testing (214 versus 62). From this comparison, we conclude that Wregex offers a good compromise of true positives with a smaller number of candidates in relation to NESsential. Another important difference is the computational resources required by these tools. NESsential took several hours to process the proteins used in, while Wregex finished in a few seconds. This faster execution time would be important for largescale (e.g. proteome wide) analyses.
Comparison Wregex B versus ELMThe best results in our previously reported comparison of NES predictors were provided by ELM (). Wregex can be regarded as an evolution of ELM, the main difference being the training of Wregex with a PSSM, which could help refining the regular expression-based search. In order to compare its performance with that of ELM, we used a second Wregex configuration (Wregex B) that uses the ELM-derived expression described above, and is trained with a PSSM (Supplementary) computed using the experimentally validated NES motifs from the ValidNESs database () and our previous DUB study (). We used ELM and Wregex B to predict candidate NES motifs in a set of 21 arbitrarily selected proteins (ASPs) mostly related to chromatin modification processes (Supplementary). Both tools use essentially the same regular expression, but Wregex allows further selection of candidates by applying the PSSM and the score filter. Thus, ELM predicted 21 candidates, and Wregex, at a score threshold of 50, predicted 16 candidates. These candidate NES motifs were subsequently tested using a nuclear export assay (two motifs could not be analyzed due to cloning problems), and the results are summarized inand shown in detail in Supplementary Table S7. These results indicate that Wregex B, at a threshold value of 50, identifies the same number of true positive NES motifs as ELM (7), while decreasing the number of false positives from 12 to 8, suggesting that the Wregex approach is a valid strategy for NES prediction. NES prediction with Wregex can potentially be further improved by computing the PSSM with a larger number of experimentally validated sequences, or by adjusting the stringency of the searching regular expression. In this regard, we found that using a more permissive regular expression led to the prediction of three true positive NES motifs (WRE16, WRE19, WRE26 in Supplementary) that were subsequently experimentally validated in the export assay. Based on this observation, we propose a new searching regular expression (.{0,1}) () (.{2,3})()({2,3})() ()() (.{0,3}), which allows serine before  1 and alanine in  1 : This new regular expression is termed WRE, and has been used in the rest of Wregex configurations tested in this report (Wregex CE).
PSSM computation using export assay activity score: Wregex C versus Wregex DIn order to gauge the effect of including the activity score for PSSM computation two new Wregex configurations (Wregex C and Wregex D) were evaluated (). Both configurations were trained with the same set of active NES motifs that have been validated using the export assay and therefore, have been assigned an activity score. The activity score of each motif was taken into account to compute the PSSM in Wregex D (Supplementary), but not in Wregex C (Supplementary). As shown inand, Wregex D predicted a lower number of candidates than Wregex C (57 versus 83), but the number of true positives was also lower(22 versus 30). Thus, computation of the PSSM using the activity score leads to a more restrictive prediction, but does not appear to increase the proportion of true positive candidates. Therefore, we favor the option of computing the PSSM without taking into account the export assay activity scores. This would allow including a larger number of experimentally validated NES motifs (i.e. those not having an activity score) for PSSM computation.
Recommended configuration for searching NES motifs: Wregex EBased on the results of the comparisons described above, we recommend a Wregex configuration for NES motif searching (Wregex E) that uses the WRE regular expression and a PSSM (Supplementary) computed using the experimentally validated NES motifs reported in ValidNESs (
CONCLUSIONWe have developed and tested a novel approach for motif searching consisting on the combination of both a regular expression and a PSSM. This approach, termed 'Wregex', can be regarded as an evolution of the Eukaryote Linear Motif (ELM) resource (). Importantly, the introduction of a PSSM provides a score that may help prioritizing candidates for experimental testing. Our initial motivation to develop Wregex was the prediction of NES motifs. In this regard, Wregex compares well with the most recently developed NES predictor, NESsential (), being faster, and offering a better compromise between the number of potential candidates to test and the number of true positives. Although we have focused here on NES motif searching, Wregex is a generic tool that can be used for searching other functional protein motifs. Thanks to the novel use of groups in the regular expression, the PSSM can be computed based on patterns rather than on strict positions. As a consequence, there is no need to make use of the artificial concept of alignment gaps, which has no utility when considering the physical conformation of the protein motif. Wregex also offers the possibility of considering input motif weight when building the PSSM. This is useful when the motif has a quantifiable activity rather than a yes/no effect. If this is the case, scores derived from an activity assay can be used for building the PSSM. Another important feature of Wregex is its fast execution, which make this tool useful for large-scale database search.. Results of NES prediction using Wregex E. Graphs show the score assigned by Wregex E to each predicted NES motif versus the activity score experimentally assigned to each motif using a nuclear export assay. Green circles to the right and the left of the threshold indicate true positives and true negatives, respectively. Red circles to the right and the left of the threshold indicate false positives and false negatives, respectively. Black circles represent NT candidates
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Prediction of nuclear export signals using Wregex at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
G.Prieto et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
