Motivation: The folding free energy is an important characteristic of proteins stability and is directly related to protein's wild-type function. The changes of protein's stability due to naturally occurring mutations, missense mutations, are typically causing diseases. Single point mutations made in vitro are frequently used to assess the contribution of given amino acid to the stability of the protein. In both cases, it is desirable to predict the change of the folding free energy upon single point mutations in order to either provide insights of the molecular mechanism of the change or to design new experimental studies. Results: We report an approach that predicts the free energy change upon single point mutation by utilizing the 3D structure of the wild-type protein. It is based on variation of the molecular mechanics Generalized Born (MMGB) method, scaled with optimized parameters (sMMGB) and utilizing specific model of unfolded state. The corresponding mutations are built in silico and the predictions are tested against large dataset of 1109 mutations with experimentally measured changes of the folding free energy. Benchmarking resulted in root mean square deviation = 1.78 kcal/mol and slope of the linear regression fit between the experimental data and the calculations was 1.04. The sMMGB is compared with other leading methods of predicting folding free energy changes upon single mutations and results discussed with respect to various parameters. Availability: All the pdb files we used in this article can be downloaded from
INTRODUCTIONProtein folding free energy is an important characteristic directly related to protein stability. Some proteins are very stable, while others unfold under very small perturbation of the native conditions. In both cases, not all amino acids contribute equally to the protein stability and interactions, some of them being crucial and frequently termed 'hot spots' () while others contributing very little to the folding free * To whom correspondence should be addressed. energy. However, the contribution of a given amino acid to protein stability cannot be easily predicted, even if the 3D structure of the corresponding protein is available. Therefore, developing methods to improve predictions of hot spots and even more to assess the contribution of a given amino acid to the folding or binding free energy is of great importance (). Accurate predictions [see Khan and Vihinen (2010) for comparison of different methods] will be beneficial for understanding the role of individual amino acids on protein stability and to rationalize the effects of non-synonymous single nucleoside polymorphism () and missense mutations on the protein fold (). Of particular interest is predicting the effects caused by diseasecausing missense mutations since the function of protein can be affected in a variety of ways (). Among them, the most common effect is changing protein stability, i.e. destabilizing or stabilizing the wild-type protein fold (), in addition to altering the macromolecular interactions (), hydrogen bond network () and many other effects (). However, the predictions about the changes of the folding energy should not only indicate if they favor the stability or not, but also the predicted absolute magnitude should be accurate as well to allow to distinguish between disease-causing and harmless mutations. Because of this significance, efforts were devoted to develop methods and approaches to evaluate the stability changes upon amino acid substitutions, but despite of the efforts, accurate calculations of folding free energy are still a challenge (). Currently, there are several distinctive approaches that were developed to predict the protein stability changes due to mutations. They can be classified into four categories: (i) first principle methods, which calculate the folding free energy changes based on detailed atomic models () and may be quite computationally expensive and may not be applicable in cases of large set of mutations (). (ii) Methods using statistical potentials (), which were successfully used to
Protein folding free energyestimate the change of protein stability upon the mutations (). (iii) Methods utilizing empirical potential combining both physical force fields and free parameters fitted with the experimental data (). (iv) Machine learning methods, generating predictions based on learned relations delivered from the training set (). The approaches, utilizing physics-based energies to calculate the folding free energy or its change upon mutation(s), have to address the issue of how to model the unfolded state as well. This is non-trivial task, since the unfolded state, perhaps, has different characteristics for each particular protein and may differ depending on the experimental conditions (for example, thermal unfolding versus urea unfolding). Over the years, various approaches were reported in the literature, some of them starting from the original X-ray structure and modeling unfolding by either increasing van der Waals radii of the atom () or the temperature above the normal (). Others, starting from extended amino acid chain and modeling unfolded as a Gaussian chain () or quasi-random distribution of amino acids (). In terms of assessing the difference between unfolded state energy of wild type (WT) and mutant protein, alternative approaches assumed either no interactions in unfolded state () or interactions limited within a short segment of residues centered at the site of mutation (). All the above-mentioned methods have advantages and disadvantages with respect to the computational time and the applicability to full-scale energy calculations. Typically, a modeling utilizing all-atoms energy calculations is accomplished using a particular force field and plausible concern could be to what extent it can be applied in conjunction with the another force field. In the past, we were attempting to address such a question in terms of electrostatic component proteinprotein binding energy () and effect of single point mutations on protein stability and interactions (). In our hands, the trend of the results was generally similar among different force fields, but individual cases were frequently strongly force field dependent. Such an observation motivated us to suggest averaging over the results obtained with different force fields (), an approach that we apply in this study as well. In the past years, several prominent methods and web servers for predicting free folding energy changes upon mutations have immerged. One of them is Eris (), developed by Dokholyan and coworkers, which utilizes Medusa force field (). It was tested against 595 mutants with experimentally available data and the resulting root mean square deviation (RMSD) was reported as 2.4 kcal/mol. Recently, Zhou and Zhou constructed a residues specific all-atom potential of mean force from 1011 protein structures and used it to calculate the folding free energy change for 895 mutants (). The benchmarking resulted in RMSD of 1.52 kcal/mol. The FoldX is perhaps the most popular web server () for predicting folding free energy changes. It was developed by Serrano and coworkers. FoldX is based on empirical potential function and was tested against 667 mutants (). From machine learning algorithms, the most prominent is I-Mutant (version 2.0), developed by Casadio and coworkers. It was benchmarked against 2087 data points (). In this work, we apply molecular mechanics Generalized Born (MMGB) approach to estimate the folding free energy of the WT and the mutants in conjunction with a specific model of the unfolded state. Since it is established in the literature () that MMGB/PB approaches tend to overestimate the free energy changes, we scale down the originally predicted changes by a linear function and optimize the weights against experimental data points of 662 mutants. To reduce the sensitivity of the results with respect to the particular choice of force field, the calculations are done with three force field parameters (Charmm, Amber and OPLS) and then results averaged. Then the optimized weights were used to carry a blind test against 447 experimentally determined folding free energy changes resulting in RMSD of 1.78 kcal/mol. The slope of the corresponding fitting line was 1.0382 with the correlation coefficient of 0.3 and the SD was 0.54 kcal/mol.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental datasetThe experimental dataset was derived from the ProTherm website (Thermodynamic Database for Proteins and Mutants: http://gibk26.bio .kyutech.ac.jp/jouhou/Protherm/protherm_search.html) (). The ProTherm database provides information of various experimental conditions including pH of the experiment. For the purpose of this study, we choose the experimental pH to be between 6 and 8, assuming that at such pH the ionizable residues will have default charged states. No pKa calculations were performed to either explore experiments done at low/high pH or to adjust charges of amino acids with pKa shifted away from the standard values. This was done to avoid the effect of plausible errors in assigning charges of titratable groups. In addition, only cases of single mutations were collected resulting in 2395 experimentally determined changes of the folding free energy (G). During the initial screening of the data, it was noticed that for some mutations the change of the folding free energy was reported by either different sources or different experimental methods [for example, the change of the folding free energy for the mutant C112S in azurin from Pseudomonas aeruginosa (the pdb ID: 5AZU) () has reported 15 times and the G values range from 4.4 kcal/mol to 0.24 kcal/mol at pH of 7.5]. In all such cases, including cases with available data for different pH (6 < pH < 8) and temperature, we took the average value, since there is no indication which data point is the most reliable. The ProTherm database provides the Protein Data Base (PDB) identifiers for the corresponding 3D structures of the proteins for which experimental G were collected in the database. These structures are the core of our approach. However, frequently the 3D structures in PDB have missing atoms, residues or entire structural segment. In order to carry our analysis, we need polypeptide chain not to have missing atoms, residues and gaps. To fix such structural defects, we used Profix software, developed by Barry Honig lab (see next section for details). During this procedure, some structures with unusual numbering or long missing segments failed to be fixed properly. They were deleted from the initial dataset. In addition, our protocol requires the wild-type structure and the structure of the corresponding in silico built mutant to be energy minimized with TINKER () (see next section for details). It was noticed that several proteins failed to be minimized because TINKER generated identical hydrogen coordinates [for example, maltodextrin/maltose-binding protein, pdb ID: 3MBP () and barnase, pdb ID: 1BNI (. The proteins corresponding Page: 666 664671
Z.Zhang et al.
Fixing structural defects and in silico mutant generationThe PDB files were downloaded from the Protein Data Bank (). However, it was found that frequently the corresponding structures had either missing atoms or residues. Thus, the first task was to generate in silico these missing atoms back to the protein according to the protein sequence record located at the top of each pdb file. It was done by 'Profix', a program in Jackal package (http://wiki.c2b2 .columbia.edu/honiglab_public/index.php/Software:Jackal), which can be downloaded from Barry Honig's Lab, Columbia University. The parameters that were used in our approach are Amber force field in conjunction with the option of fixing the structural defect using heavy atoms representation (no hydrogens). The hydrogen will be added later with 'pdbxyz' module in the TINKER package (). All the mutants were made by the program SCAP () in Jackal package as well. SCAP-generated mutations were done with both Amber and Charmm force field using the option 'heavy atom modeling'. No significant differences were found for the predictions made with Amber and Charmm force fields, but this dual option was used in cases where SCAP failed to generate mutant side chain with Amber/Charmm force field and vice versa.
Folding free energy calculationThe folding free energy changes upon single point mutations were calculated as described in our previous works (). Here for consistency we briefly outline this approach (). The folded state is considered to be represented by the energy minimized structure, either the WT or in silico-generated mutant. The unfolded state is considered to be represented by two structural elements: (i) a structural segment of length 'x' (x = 3, 5, 7, 9, 13, ) centered at the mutation site and (ii) rest of the protein. Assuming that the residue at the site of mutation does not interact with the rest of protein, this approach will result in identical energies of unfolded state 'b' of WT and mutant protein, i.e. the unfolded state that excludes the structural segment of length 'x'. Technically, it was done by energy minimizing all WT and mutants proteins using the program 'minimize' in TINKER package () using the Limited Memory BFGS Quasi-Newton Optimization algorithm and we set the final RMS gradient (G-RMS) 0.01 per atom. The solvent was modeled using the Still Generalized Born model and the protein internal dielectric constant was set as 1.0. In this work, all the protein structures were minimized with three force field parameters, such as Amber98 (), Charmm27 () and OPLS (). After a successful minimization, a length of 'x' residues segments (x = odd numbers like 3, 5, 7, 9, 13, , for example x = 3 means three residue segments) at the center of the mutation site is extracted from the minimized structures (both WT protein and the mutants). After this step, all minimized structures (the entire protein and 'x' residue segment) were subjected to 'analyze' module in TINKER package for calculating the potential energy, and then the results were averaged among the three force field parameters to test the sensitivity of the results. The folding free energy of both the WT protein and the mutants is calculated as:where G(folded) is the total potential energy of the folded state and the G(unfolded) is the total potential energy of the unfolded state. The free energy, G(unfolded), of unfolded state, is split into two terms, G 0 (unfolded) and G x (unfolded), as discussed above and in our previous works (). G x (unfolded) is the free energy of the unfolded state of 'x' residue segments at the center of mutation site, whereas G 0 (unfolded) is the free energy of the unfolded state of the rest of protein (). Under our assumption, the G 0 (unfolded) is identical for WT and mutants and cancels out in Equation (2) and therefore does not need to be calculated. The folding free energy change due to a mutation is calculated with the following equation:where G(folding_mutation) represents the folding free energy change due to a mutation; G(folding_WT) and G(folding_Mutant) are folding free energy of the WT protein and the mutant, respectively. The G(folding_mutation) are calculated with the three force field parameters mentioned above and then results averaged:3 (3)where G(folding_mutation_Amber), G(folding_mutation_ Charmm) and G(folding_mutation_OPLS) are the folding free energy change due to a single mutation calculated with the force field parameters Amber98, Charmm27 and OPLS, respectively. Here four assumptions were made: (i) we assume that missense mutation affects only a small region surrounding the mutation sites, which is described by 'x' residue segments part, and cause negligible effect to the rest of the protein, hence G 0 (unfolded) will be the same for WT protein and the mutants and will cancel in Equation (2); (ii) the entropy in the WT and mutant proteins are considered to be very similar, therefore it will cancel out in Equation (2) as well. The applicability of this assumption will be discussed later in this article; (iii) the non-polar term of the solvation energy is not taken into account due to its relatively small contribution to the energy and the fact that the accessible surface area of the WT and the mutant protein are very similar (single point mutation); (iv) the approach is based on singlepoint calculations where the folded and unfolded states are represented by a structure instead of ensemble of structures. This assumes that the potential wells do not change upon the mutation.
Obtaining the fitting weightsThe above-described approach is essentially a simplified version of the MMGB method () with a specific model of unfolded state (). It is recognized that MMGB method tends to overestimate Page: 667 664671
Protein folding free energythe magnitude of the predicted free energy changes (compared with the experimental data) and because of that the predicted G may have to be scaled to match the experimentally determined changes of the folding free energy. Here we carry the following optimization procedure to minimize the RMSD between the scaled calculated results and the experimental data. The calculated G cal are scaled by a linear function with two adjustable parameters 'a' and 'b' and the resulting scaled G (sG) is: sG cal = aG cal +b.The RMSD is calculated by Equation (4b) below using the scaled G (sG):where 'n' is theFor the purpose of this work, the database of experimentally determined G is split into two parts: training (60%) and test (40%) sets. The training set was used to find the optimal values of the parameters 'a' and 'b', whereas the test set was used for benchmarking. The selection of the sets was done by ranking the wild-type protein PDB ID based on alphabet and chose the first 37 wild-type protein with 405 mutants as the part of the training database. The next protein in the dataset with respect to the alphabetical order is the staphylococcal nuclease (PDB ID: 1STN) () which has 537 mutants, almost half of the whole database. In our analysis, we refer to the mutations as mutation involving charged residue (for example, A  E), mutations do not involving charged residue (for example, A  L), mutations preserving the charge (for example, E  D) and mutations reversing the charge (for example, E  K). Since mutations in the 1STN represent such a significant fraction of the entire dataset, the cases for the training set were selected to have proportional presentation for the above-mentioned classes. Thus, there are 171 1STN mutations involving charged residue (for example, 1STN_E57G) and half of them, 85, were selected for the training set. There are 342 1STN mutations not involving charged group and half of them, 172, were included in the training dataset. The total number of mutations from 1STN protein that was included in the training set is 172+85 = 257, resulting in 662 cases in the final training set. Note that rare mutations in the 1STN protein, as two charges shift like 1STN_K28E and zero charge shifts like 1STN_E43D were not included in the training set, but included in the benchmarking set. In addition, the training and benchmarking sets were shuffled to test the sensitivity of the method (Supplementary).
RESULTS
Obtaining the optimal values of the parameters 'a' and 'b' using the training setThe changes of the folding free energy, G, were calculated as described in Section 2 [] for the mutants in the training set. The length of the segment 'x' was fixed to be equal to three (x = 3). The effect of different lengths is discussed latter in this article. Using Equations (7) and(8) with 662 training data points to minimize the RMSD, one obtains the following values for the adjustable parameters: 'a' = 0.093 and 'b' =1.088. Using these values, sG is calculated with Equation (4a) (Supplementary) and plotted against the experimental data of the training set (). The slope of the fitting line is 1.0026, and the correlation coefficient R = 0.28. The corresponding SD is 0.51 kcal/mol and RMSD between G exp and sG cal is 1.79 kcal/mol. While the correlation coefficient is not impressive, mostly due to several outliers at the top of the figure, the corresponding RMSD is very good. Another indication of the success of the approach is that the slope of the fitting line is practically one and the free coefficient is practically zero and this was achieved without enforcing such conditions in the optimization procedure.
Blind test using the obtained optimal values for 'a' and 'b' parametersThe blind test was done on the rest 40% of the data points (447 mutants) using the optimal parameters obtained above. Detailed results are provided in Supplementary Table S3.shows the correlation of experimental G (G exp ) and scaled calculated G (sG cal ) for the blind test. The slope of the fitting line is 1.0868 and the free coefficient is practically zero. The corresponding correlation coefficient R is 0.34, the resulting SD is 0.58 kcal/mol and the RMSD between G exp and sG cal is 1.76 kcal/mol. These results are very similar to the results obtained with the training set indicating the training was successful. The low correlation coefficient is due to the outliers on the right-hand side of the graph, wrongly predicted due to structural defects or deficiencies of our protocol.
Testing the method against the entire datasetTo further test the protocol and to demonstrate that the results are independent of the specific choice of the training and testing datasets, we benchmark the scaled G, sG, against all experimental values collected for our work (). The results are fitted with
Z.Zhang et al.a straight line with slope practically one and zero free coefficient, again demonstrating the validity of the proposed method. The corresponding SD is 0.54 kcal/mol and the RMSD between G exp and sG cal for the entire 1109 mutants is 1.78 kcal/mol. To address the sensitivity of the results with respect to the choice of the training and benchmarking sets, the entire dataset was reshuffled and randomly split into two equal parts and then the above procedure was repeated. The results (Supplementarya,b) show that the protocol is not sensitive to the selection of the training set.
Finding the optimal length of the segment 'x'The results above were obtained using a fixed length of three for the segment 'x'. However, different lengths may generate better results. To test the effect of the segment 'x' length on the performance of our method, the calculations, including finding the optimal parameters 'a' and 'b' were repeated with x = 3, 5, 7, 9, 11 and 13. The results are shown in Supplementary. The results shown in Supplementaryandindicate that sG calculated with different length of segment 'x' are practically the same. The calculations were repeated against the test dataset and entire dataset and the corresponding parameters are provided inas well. One can see that the slopes of the fitting lines, the RMSDs and R values are practically unchanged as 'x' takes different lengths. More details are provided in the Supplementary: Supplementary(a) for the Training Database, Supplementary Table S4 (b) for the Blind Test and Supplementary(c) for the Entire Dataset. The parameters shown inindicate the similarity of sG cal calculated with different length of segment 'x'. However, a slight tendency is observed such that with the increase of the segment length, the RMSD tend to increase and the correlation coefficient to decrease. The optimal value is x = 3.
Comparison with other existing methodsTo the best of our knowledge, currently three methods dominate the field of predicting folding free energy change upon single point mutations: Eris (), FoldX () and I-Mutant 2.0 (). It is desirable to compare our method against these leading solutions in order to assess the performance. Below we outline the results obtained with each of the above-mentioned solutions on our dataset. Before presenting the results, it should be pointed out that the predictions with Eris were done with fixed backbone without pre-relaxation. Eris failed to generate results involving Cys, andtherefore these cases were omitted from our analysis. With respect to FoldX and I-Mutant 2.0 generated predictions, we used the default parameters for the temperature and pH, namely T = 298K and pH = 7.0. The details of calculated results with Eris, FoldX and I-Mutant 2.0 are shown in Supplementary Table S5: Supplementary(a) for the Training Database, Supplementary(b) for the Blind Test and Supplementary(c) for the Entire Dataset. The linear regressions of G exp versus G cal were performed and the comparison of these three methods is shown inalone with our method. The receiver-operating characteristic curve was also calculated following the methodology described by Khan and Vihinen (2010) and results are shown in Supplementary Figure S2 and. Comparing with results reported in Khan and Vihinen (2010), one can see that sMMGB slightly underperforms at very low false positives (FPR < 0.1), but outperforms servers listed in the same reference at FPR >0.1.provides interesting trends of the performance of the methods. With respect to the mean value, all methods predict mean G of similar magnitude. The mean value is negative indicating that all methods, including ours, tend to overpredict the destabilizing effect of mutations. In terms of the correlation coefficient, the best performer is the I-Mutant; however, all four methods result in poor correlation coefficient. The RMSD is an important characteristic of the predictions and our method together with I-Mutant outperforms the others. Similarly, the SD of our protocol is much smaller than other methods, including I-Mutant, indicating that our predictions are less scattered. Lastly, the slope of the fitting line is the best for our method, almost equal to one, whereas all other methods give much worst coefficients. Similar observations were made by excluding the data points used to train I-Mutant (Supplementary).
DISCUSSION
Analysis of scaled calculated sG calSummarizing the results of sMMGB predictions benchmarked against various datasets (), one can see that there is not much difference of the corresponding RMSDs, mean and SD of Page: 669 664671the corresponding distributions. The correlation coefficient in all cases is not impressive, but has a slight tendency to get better in the blind test, compared with the training dataset. However, the effect is small. The low correlation coefficient is due to relatively small fraction of outliers, which we choose not to remove from our analysis. In summary, the results indicate that the choice of the optimal value for the adjustable parameters 'a' and 'b' is not dataset specific and results in performance almost identical across different datasets. In addition, the optimal value for the 'b' parameter is small, about a unity, indicating that there is no significant constant shift in our predictions. The fact that the optimal adjustable parameter 'a' is close to 1/10 reflects the trend that standard MMGB approach overpredicts the energy changes by factor of 10.
Protein folding free energy
Analysis of the performance of the sMMGB approach with respect to assumptions takenThe model of unfolded state in our approach assumes that the 'x' residue segments have the same conformation in folded and in unfolded states. Obviously, this is a simplification that does not necessary should hold for all cases. In addition, the probability of having different conformations in folded and in unfolded states should increase with the length of the segment 'x'. In another words, large 'x' should make this assumption less valid. Indeed,shows that the results correspond to such an expectation. With increase of the residue segment 'x' length, the correlation coefficient decreases from 0.34 (x = 3) to 0.25 (x = 13). Therefore, the optimal length is recommended to be x = 3. Another hypothesis which the sMMGB implies is to assume the entropy of the WT protein is very similar to that of the mutant. Thus, the entropy terms would cancel out in Equation (2). While it is beyond the scope of the present work to investigate the role of conformational ensembles of folded and unfolded states on the output of the predicted sG cal on such large set of mutations, here will present an analysis based on the side chain entropy estimation using side chain length as measure of the side chain entropy. Ala and Gly are two amino acids having much shorter/smaller side chains comparing to rest of the amino acids. Assuming that the entropy of an amino acid can be estimated from the degree of freedom of its side chain, the Ala and Gly residues should have much less entropy than the other types amino acids and substitution to another type of residues should involve change of the entropy. To probe the effect, we select mutations involving Ala/Gly from the entire dataset (termed 'Entropy test data set'), and then use Equation (2) and the empirical parameters 'a = 0.093' and 'b =1.088' to obtain sG cal. The data are shown intogether with the parameters of the linear fit. Additional parameters are shown in Supplementary Table S8. The slope is 1.0531 and the correlation R is 0.35. The SD is 0.56 kcal/mol and RMSD is obtained as 1.6 kcal/mol.Comparing these values with previously obtained (), we see that they are very similar, i.e. the slope is quite close to unity, and RMSD is quite small. The absence of significant difference between cases involving short and long side chains indicates that side chain entropy is not a dominant factor for the sMMGB analysis.
Effect of different force field parametersThe sMMGB predictions were made with three force field parameters: Amber98 (), Charmm27 () and Oplsaa (), to minimize the 3D structures of both WT proteins and the mutants and to obtain the corresponding molecular mechanics and solvation energies. The resulting energy changes per mutation were found to differ among the force fields, which confirm our previous observation made for proteinprotein interactions () and protein stability (). In some exceptional cases, the predicted sG cal was found to vary >30 kcal/mol across different force fields. For global comparison, Supplementaryshows sG cal calculated with different force field parameters and the trend of prediction is quite similar, but there are some outliers which are not associated with the same mutation for each force field parameters. The fact that the calculations with different force field parameters started with identical 3D structures (of the WT and the mutant), but generated different predictions indicate how sensitive the results are with respect to the choice of the force field [detailed results are provided in Supplementary Table S9: Supplementary(a) for the Training Database, Supplementary(b) for the Blind Test and Supplementary(c) for the Entire. Overall, the best results in terms of RMSD (between G exp versus calculated G cal ) were obtained with AMBER force field parameters (RMSD = 7.97 kcal/mol), while the worst performance was obtained with OPLS force field parameters resulting in RMSD = 8.18 kcal/mol. Such a sensitivity of the results with the respect to the force field parameters was our motivation for averaging the results across different force fields. Indeed, the averaged G cal perform much better, resulting in RMSD = 5.53 kcal/mol. These RMSDs are taken without scaling of G, i.e. prior to performing the optimization. After scaling, the corresponding RMSD were RMSD AMBER = 1.80 kcal/mol, RMSD OPLS = 1.81 kcal/mol and RMSD AVE = 1.78 kcal/mol. During the time the article was under review, new experimental data was added to ProTherm database and we used these new entries to perform an additional test the results of which are presented in Supplementary Tables S10 and S11. Page: 670 664671
Z.Zhang et al.Additional test was done using an optimized linear combination of the results obtained with each force field parameters, but the performance was found to be worse (Supplementary Table S12 a, b).
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
