Motivation: Protein–DNA interactions often take part in various crucial processes, which are essential for cellular function. The identification of DNA-binding sites in proteins is important for understanding the molecular mechanisms of protein–DNA interaction. Thus, we have developed an improved method to predict DNA-binding sites by integrating structural alignment algorithm and support vector machine–based methods. Results: Evaluated on a new non-redundant protein set with 224 chains, the method has 80.7% sensitivity and 82.9% specificity in the 5-fold cross-validation test. In addition, it predicts DNA-binding sites with 85.1% sensitivity and 85.3% specificity when tested on a dataset with 62 protein–DNA complexes. Compared with a recently published method, BindNþ, our method predicts DNA-binding sites with a 7% better area under the receiver operating characteristic curve value when tested on the same dataset. Many important problems in cell biology require the dense non-linear interactions between functional modules be considered. Thus, our prediction method will be useful in detecting such complex interactions.
INTRODUCTIONProteinDNA interactions play essential roles in a variety of vital biological processes, such as DNA replication, transcription, packaging (). For example, the interactions between DNA and transcription factors are important for modulating the process of gene replication and transcription (). The interactions of DNA and histones are involved in chromosome packaging in the cell nucleus (). Moreover,have shown that mutations of DNA-binding residues, such as those on the tumor repressor protein P53, may predispose individuals to cancer. Thus, the accurate identification of DNA-binding sites in proteins is not only important for understanding the mechanisms of these biological processes but also helpful for annotating the function of proteins. ProteinDNA interaction sites can be detected by using biochemical techniques, such as DNase I foot-printing (), Gel retardation () in vivo foot-printing () in vitro binding assay () and methylation (). However, traditional biochemical methods are time-consuming and laborious to carry out for the rapidly increasing number of proteinDNA complexes. Therefore, developing an objective and effective computational approach to precisely predict DNA-binding sites would be necessary. Several computational methods have been developed to identify DNA-binding sites in proteins based mainly on protein sequence or protein structure. The sequence-based method can be further divided into two classes. The first class is based on the following: side chain pKa value, hydrophobicity index and molecular mass of the amino acid residues and DNA-binding residues predicted by support vector machine (SVM) () and random forests classifier (). The second class uses evolutionary and other sequence information to identify DNA-binding sites in proteins (). Structure-based methods are further classified into a structural alignment-based method and a structural alignment-free method. For the structural alignment-based method, the DNA-binding sites are recognized from a structural alignment between the query sequence and a template known to bind DNA (). In the structural alignment-free method, DNA-binding sites are predicted using electrostatic potentials and the shape of the molecular surface (). With the rapid increase in the number of high-quality protein structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB), developing new and efficient techniques for predicting DNA-binding sites using geometric structures has become feasible. In this article, we introduce a two-stage machine-learning strategy to predict DNA-binding sites. In the first stage, DNA-binding sites are predicted by a structural alignment algorithm using the geometric structure. In the second stage, DNA-binding sites are predicted by SVM using evolutionary information, torsion angles ('present in the backbone structure and solvent accessibility. The final results are obtained by a consensus of SVM predictions and geometric structure-based predictions. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Dataset preparationIn this study, two datasets, PDNA-62 and PDNA-224, were used to evaluate the performance of our method. A summary of these datasets are shown as follows: PDNA-62: This is a non-redundant database of representative proteinDNA complexes from the PDB (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/), which was constructed by Ahmad and Sarai (2005) and used by several other studies (). The sequence identity in the dataset was 25% and the resolution of the structures was 2.5 A  or better. Based on the cutoff distance of 3.5 A  , the PDNA-62 dataset contained 1215 DNA-binding residues and 6948 non-binding residues (). PDNA-224: In addition to the latest PDB (released by January 25, 2011), a new DNA-binding protein dataset was constructed from 978 proteinDNA complexes in this work. The 978 proteinDNA complexes were determined by radiographic crystallography with a resolution better than 3.0 A . Redundancy among the amino acid sequences was removed using the PISCES software () with a threshold of 25% set for sequence identity. Any proteins homologous to those in the PDNA-62 were also removed by the PISCES software. Finally, 224 non-redundant protein chains containing 57 348 amino acids were obtained. According to an identical criterion suggested in previous studies, a residue is regarded as interacting with DNA if the distance between an atom of the residue and an atom of base is 53.5 A  (). Using this criterion, 3778 interacting residues and 53 570 non-interacting residues were projected to be present in the PDNA-224 dataset. The PDNA-224 dataset and the binding sites information are listed in the Supplementary Data S1.
Methods for predictionOur method consisted of a SVM predictor and a geometric structure-based predictor. For the SVM predictor, a SVM decision value (sdv) for each site in a protein is obtained by SVM using the evolutionary information, solvent accessible surface area and the protein backbone structure (PBS). For the geometric structure-based predictor, another geometric decision value (gdv) for each protein site is obtained by the structural alignment method using the geometric structure information. The final result for each site is obtained by combining the two decision values of SVM-based predictor and geometric structure-based predictor. The whole prediction procedure is illustrated in.
SVM-based predictorOwing to the fact that the DNA-binding site is determined not only by the central residue, but also by other residues present in its neighboring sites, a sliding window with K residues is selected to represent the information of the central site. The information of each residue in the sliding window is constructed using evolutionary information, the torsion angles (', ) in the PBS and the solvent accessible surface (). These features and the encoding scheme are described in Part 1 of the Supplementary Data S2. Then, the encoded features are selected as the input parameters of the SVM, which is a popular machine-learning approach mainly used in pattern recognition and orientation (). In this work, the publicly available LibSVM software (version 3.0) was used (http://www. csie.nut.edu.tw/$cjlin/libsvm) (). The SVM outputs (SVM decision value) have been converted into conditional probabilities using a sigmoid function. The probability interpretation of sdv(x) is used for evaluating the performance of the SVM predictor. The sigmoid function is defined as follows:PY  1jx  1=1  expA  sdvx  B 1 where x is the SVM input of each feature for position x, sdv(x) denotes the decision value of the test feature for position x, P(Y  1jx) is the probability of DNA-binding prediction, and A and B are the slope and offset, respectively, to be learned by a 3-fold cross-validation method suggested in Platt (2000) (see Part 2 in Supplementary Data S2 for more details) from the training set for the sigmoid function. Empirically, one could use A  2.0, B  0.5 for DNA-binding prediction. To combine linearly the scores of SVM predictions with the scores of geometric structure-based predictions (see section 2.5 for more detail), we converted conditional probabilities back to SVM decision value by, sdvx  fln1  P=P  Bg=A 2 where sdv(x) is the decision value of the test feature for position x, P is the conditional probability for DNA-binding and A and B are the same as used in the sigmoid function. Equation(2) is an inverse of Equation (1).
Geometric structure-based predictorsGenerally speaking, if a protein has a geometric structure similar to a DNA-binding protein, the probability that this protein is also DNA-binding protein is much higher. In our study, we use a structural alignment method (see Section 2.5 for more details) to detect structural similarities between a query protein and a template known to bind DNA. The quality of the structural alignment method is determined by an interface alignment score (IAS), which provides a quantitative measure of the similarity between two proteinDNA complexes in the geometry. Therefore, for a complex in the test set, a proteinDNA complex in the training set with the highest IAS is kept, including the PDB code and the DNA-binding information. This information is used to calculate the decision values for all matched residues of the target chain according to the following strategies: If the matched residue in the detected chain is a DNA-binding site, a positive amino acidamino acid similarity score is assigned to the site in the target chain. On the other hand, if the matched residue in the detected chain is a non-DNAbinding site, a zero score is assigned to the site in the target chain.
Structural alignment method for detecting structural similarityAccording to the local coordinate systems, the vector (O *) connecting the nucleotideamino acid pair (base to amino acid) is determined as set out in. The magnitude of the O * vector for all nucleotideamino acid pairs is calculated in our datasets. As in the previous study (), a pair is regarded as 'contacting' if it had a O * vector whose magnitude was 516 A . Therefore, this value is chosen as the distance cutoff used to define an 'interfacial' amino acidnucleotide pair when determining amino acidamino acid similarity scores. Step 2: Calculating amino acidnucleotide geometric similarity score Based on the coordinate system, the indices i and c are introduced to represent an amino acid and nucleotide subunit, and m and n for the other, respectively. By comparing the geometric similarity between two amino acidnucleotide subunits ic and mn, the geometric parameters such as the rotation angle and the distance displacement are obtained. The rotation angle is in the form ofS2 for more details). Therefore, the constant coefficients used here are 25.0 (A d ) and 0.5 (B d ) for s d {(i,c)(m,n)}, 5.0 (A ) and 2.6 (B ) for s {(i,c)(m,n)} and 0.45 (A ) and 25.0 (B ) for s {(i,c)(m,n)}. The final stage in this step is to calculate the amino acid nucleotide geometric similarity score; the amino acidnucleotide geometric similarity score can be written in the form, sfi, cm, ng  ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi s d fi, cm, ng s a fi, cm, ng s fi, cm, ng gdvx, m  0 if the matched residue in the alignment chain is a nonDNA  binding Sfx, mg if the matched residue in the alignment chain is a DNA  bindingwhere S {x,m} is the average amino acidamino acid similarity score for position x and gdv(x,m) is the gdv for position x.
The combination of the decision values from the SVM and geometry-based predictorTo predict the DNA-binding sites accurately, we used a novel scheme by combining the SVM decision value with the gdv. The scheme is based on the expected value in probability theory; suppose a random variable X can take value x 1 with probability p 1 , value x 2 with probability p 2 , and so on, up to value x k with probability p k. Then the expectation of this random variable X is defined as follows,comx  1:0  p  sdvx  p  gdvx x  1, 2:::L 11 where sdv(x) is the SVM decision value for the position x, gdv(x) is the gdv for the position x, com(x) is the combined decision value for the position x, L is the length of the protein sequence and p is the proportion factor, p  0.45 is used by learning the method from the training set (See Part 4 in Supplementary Data S2 for more details). Then, the com(x) elements are normalized to fall with the range of O $1 by the sigmoid function, which is analogous to equation (1) as shown below, pcomY  1jx  1=1  expA  comx  B 12 where com(x) denotes the combined decision value for the position x, pcom(Y  1jx) is the probability interpretation of the com(x), and A and B are the slope and offset, respectively. In this article, we use A  6.0, B  0.2 for the final prediction. The final prediction result is obtained using the probability interpretation of the com(x). Given a protein sequence X with l residues, we obtain an l-dimensional feature vector [pcom(1), pcom(2),.. Then, we use a threshold 0 to integrate the vector into a non-linear discriminant function. The threshold 0 gives the decision for sample X. As pcom(x)4 0 , the sample X is classified into the positive group, or into the negative group as pcom(x) 0. Empirically, one could use 0  0.52 for DNA-binding prediction (See Part 5 in Supplementary Data S2 for more details).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONIn predicting DNA-binding sites, the 5-fold cross-validation test is often used to examine the effectiveness of a predictor (). The performance of our predictor was also assessed by the 5-fold cross-validation test. During this test, a dataset is randomly divided into five non-overlapping sets, four of which are used for training the predictor and the accuracy of the predictor is assessed on the remaining sets. This process is repeated five times. The predictive capability of our method was evaluated by the sensitivity (Sn), specificity (Sp), Matthew's correlation coefficient (MCC), overall prediction accuracy (Acc), strength (Str) and false-positive rate (FPR):To further evaluate the capability of using our method on an unbalanced dataset, the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (), one of the most robust approaches for classifier evaluation, was also used. It is obtained by plotting the true-positive rate (sensitivity) on the y-axis against the FPR (1-specificity) on the x-axis. The area under the ROC curve (AUROC) () can be used as a reliable measure for the prediction performance. The maximum value of AUROC (1) denotes a perfect prediction. A random guess receives an AUROC value close to 0.5.
Effect of the sliding window size in the construction of the SVM input vectorsTo obtain the best performance for predicting DNA-binding sites, the sliding window size is optimized with respect to the overall accuracy, MCC and Strength values. The optimized sliding window size is obtained by testing the performance of different sliding window sizes from 3 to 21 with the default parameters c, g and weight in SVM.shows the results of different sliding window sizes on the dataset PDNA-62. It was found that a sliding window of 11 amino acids achieves the best predicting performance. Therefore, the optimized sliding window size was set to 11 in this study.shows the predicted results for the PDNA-62 dataset with various combinations of features. We show that the lowest overall prediction accuracy is 62.6% when only using the PBS as the input parameter. By using the PSSM profiles as the input vector, the accuracy of the SVM classifier is significantly improved up to 79.4%. However, the prediction performance slightly increases when the PSSM profiles were combined with PBS or normalized solvent accessible surface area (NSASA) are used as the input vectors. The best results (Acc of 83.6%, MCC of 0.50 and Strength of 82.2%) were obtained when all the. The test results for the PDNA-62 dataset with respect to different window sizes based on the 5-fold cross-validation test
The predicted results on the PDNA-62 datasetMCCfeatures, including PSSM profiles, PBS and NSASA were combined. Therefore, in our work, the SVM-based prediction model was constructed by combining all the features. By integrating SVM with geometric structure-based predictor, we obtained a final ROC curve for the final prediction shown in. It is clear that the AUROC values in our predictions are $510% higher than those obtained in other studies. The best values for Acc, MCC, strength and AUROC were 85.5%, 0.55, 85.3% and 0.926, respectively, in our study.
The predicted results on the new PDNA-224 datasetTo further evaluate the performance of our method in predicting DNA-binding sites, we applied it to a new dataset PDNA-224 generated in this work. The test results of the SVM models using various features are listed in. Our results show that the prediction performance increases significantly while using the PSSM profiles as the parameter of the SVM model. When the PSSM profile was combined with one or more additional features as input vectors, the performances were slightly improved. The best performance was achieved with an MCC of 0.35, overall accuracy of 81.8% and strength of 79.2% (with a sensitivity of 76.1% and specificity of 82.2%) by combining the PSSM profiles, PBS and NSASA. In addition, the ROC curves of predicting DNA-binding sites for the PDNA-224 dataset () was obtained by combining the SVM predictor using different parameters with the geometric structure-based predictor. The AUROC values show that the combined results are better than the results of the SVM models using various features. The best AUROC value was 0.898 in the 5-fold cross-validation test.
Comparison with other computational methodsDNA-binding sites have been predicted successfully using predictors, such as Dps-pred (), Dbs-pssm (), BindN (), Dp-bind (), DP-Bind (), BindN-RF () and BindN (). When we compared our method with prior methods using the common dataset, PDNA-62, we obtained the results shown in. Overall, the best results of our prediction were 85.2% (85.2% sensitivity and 85.3% specificity). The results show that our predictor has a considerably higher sensitivity of 85.2% compared with 40.3% from a previous study (). Both the sensitivity and specificity of our predictor were also better than those of other predictors shown in
False-positive sites predicted with high confidenceTo further illustrate the predictive capability of our predictor, our results for the common PDNA-62 dataset were compared with those of the PDB. The results show that 197 residues that do not bind to DNA in the PDB annotation are predicted as DNA-binding sites with 490% confidence. However, based on deep and comprehensive analyses, the 197 residues can be classified into five groups. We used the pdb_idchain_letter (e.g. 1B3TA) to name the protein chains. In the first group, we found 27 false-positive residues with other related functions. Some of the residues are proteinprotein interaction sites (Ala46 in 1A02J, Gly82 in 1B3TA, Asp50 in 1CF7A, Gln18 in 1FJLA, Glu128 in 1GDTA, Lys22 in 1HWTD, Gln44 in 1HWTD, His 32 in 1IHFB, Leu37 in 1IHFB, Cys93 in 1MNMA, Val63 in 1PYIA, Asn117 in 1TSRA, Thr118 in 1TSRA, Gln28 in 1YRNA), while others represent water-binding sites (Val99 in 1A02N, Gly158 in 1A74A, Thr9 in 1BHMA, Ala40 in 1CDWA, Trp65 in 1FJLA, Glu30 in 1HCQA, Met 42 in 1HCQA, Leu83 in 1IGNA, Glu101 in 1IGNA, Tyr57 in 1PUEE, Thr30 in 1TSRA). Moreover, Ser49 in 1DP7P is a ligand-binding site and Cys125 in 1A74A is a Zn-binding site. Although these predicted residues are not DNA-binding sites, they do interact functionally with other residues or small molecules. The results seem to indicate that our method is helpful for predicting other functional sites. The second group contains 21 false-positive residues. Our results show that these residues (Lys42, Phe63, Leu76, Asp77, Lys102 and His113 in 1UBDC) have higher amino acidamino acid similarity scores with actual DNA-binding residues based on the structural alignment method. Because of structural relatedness to actual DNA binding residues, these false-positives may indeed bind to DNA. In the third group, seven sites (Gly158 in 1GDTA, Arg10 in 1PERL, Thr27 in 1PERL, Lys23 in 1SRSA, Gly36 in 1SRSA, Arg17 in 1YSAC and Ser19 in 1YSAC) are neither functional nor geometrically similar. But the sequences of 1GDTA, 1PERL, 1SRSA, 1YSAC are exactly the same as 1GDTB, 1PERR, 1SRSB, 1YSAD. And Gly158 in 1GDTB, Arg10 in 1PERR, Thr27 in 1PERR, Lys23 in 1SRSB, Gly36 in 1SRSB, Arg17 in 1YSAD and Ser19 in 1YSAD have been verified in actual DNA-binding experiments (). Therefore, the results show that our method can detect true DNA-binding sites.The fourth group has 110 mis-predicted residues that are located in DNA-binding regions (DBRs). A DBR is an independently folded protein region that contains at least one motif that recognizes double-or single-stranded DNA. From the predicted results, it is obvious that some demonstrated binding regions are in reasonable agreement with experimental data (see Supplementary Data S3 for more details). For example, in 1A02F, we observe that Arg7, Asn10, Lys11, Ala13, Lys16, Ser17, Arg18, Arg21 form a DBR. The results indicate that our method predicts DNA-binding with greater accuracy and will be of help to biologists. Besides the four groups mentioned above, only 32 residues in the fifth group were incorrectly predicted by our method.
Effectof the beginning or the end of-helices and b-strandsFrom an analysis on the false-negatives sites with 510% confidence level, we find it difficult to predict DNA-binding sites when these sites are located in the beginning or the end of-helices and-strands. For example, Lys17, Thr130 in 1B3TA are DNA-binding residues according to experimental data. But these are mis-predicted in this article. From the spatial structure of 1B3TA (), we find Lys17 is located in the beginning of-helices and Thr130 is located in the end of-strands. As alluded to earlier, residues of this nature are difficult to predict, as they occur in the beginning or end of-helices and-strands that are usually distorted randomly ().
CONCLUSIONSThe following conclusions can be drawn from this work:(1) Based on SVM and geometric structure-based algorithms, a novel computational method for predicting DNAbinding sites in proteins is proposed in this work. Overall, method when applied to the common dataset PDNA-62 shows better predictive capability when compared with other methods using the 5-fold cross-validation test.(2) Our method performs equally well and can detect novel DNA-binding proteins when tested on a new DNAbinding protein dataset generated in this study.(3) Our method has a better predictive value especially with false-positive sites located in a DBR and can indeed show that these residues have other functions unrelated to DNA binding.(4) From an analysis on the false-negatives sites with 510% confidence level, it is difficult to predict some binding residues that are located in the beginning or end of-helices or-strands.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSWe wish to express our gratitude to executive editor and three anonymous reviewers whose constructive comments were very helpful in strengthening the presentation of this article. We thank Dr. Guoli Wang of the Fox Chase Cancer Centre, Philadelphia, PA, for his help in the use of the PISCES software. We would like to thank Zixuan Yuan for her help in language correction of the manuscript.. The spatial structure of 1B3TA, Lys17 is located in the beginning of-helices, and Thr130 is located in the end of-strands
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Structural similarities between two proteinDNA complexes were calculated using the structural alignment method described in a previous study (Siggers et al., 2005). Step 1: Construct coordinate system Based on this method, local coordinate systems are constructed on both the amino acid residue and the nucleic acid (see Fig. 2A). Fig. 1. Overall framework of DNA-binding sites prediction
PreDNA: accurate prediction of DNA-binding sites in proteins at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
p 6 where s d {(i,c)(m,n)}, s {(i,c)(m,n)} and s {(i,c)(m,n)} are the transformed geometric parameters. Step 3: Calculating amino acidamino acid similarity score The amino acidamino acid similarity score S {i,m} is the average of the geometric similarity scores for all successful matches, Sfi, mg  X c, n s successful fi, cm, ng=N 7 where N is the number of all successful matches. Step 4: Calculating the ProteinDNA interface alignment score Based on an amino acidamino acid similarity matrix with elements S {i,m}, the proteinDNA IAS is determined by summing the S {i,m} scores over all aligned residues, IAS  X Sfi, mg  8 where S {i,m} is the amino acidamino acid similarity score, and IAS is the ProteinDNA IAS. Therefore, for a test instance, a complex in the training set with the highest IAS is kept, including the PDB code and the DNA-binding information. The amino acidamino acid similarity score is used to calculate the gdv for all matched residues of the test instance. However, there are two important differences in the usefulness of the amino acidamino acid similarity score: (i) In our study, the amino acidamino acid similarity scores are converted into the average amino acidamino acid similarity score using the normalized function suggested in a previous study (Chang and Lin, 2011) in order that the average amino acidamino acid similarity score remains the same as the decision value derived from SVM predictions. (ii) Not all the amino acidamino acid similarity scores are used in our study. The amino acidamino acid similarity scores in which the matched residues in the detected chain are non-DNAbinding sites are not included in this study. The remaining amino acidamino acid similarity scores are regarded as the gdv. The scheme is defined as follows:
T.Li et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
