Motivation: Protein residue–residue contact prediction can be useful in predicting protein 3D structures. Current algorithms for such a purpose leave room for improvement. Results: We develop ProC_S3, a set of Random Forest algorithm-based models, for predicting residue–residue contact maps. The models are constructed based on a collection of 1490 non– redundant, high-resolution protein structures using >1280 sequence-based features. A new amino acid residue contact propensity matrix and a new set of seven amino acid groups based on contact preference are developed and used in ProC_S3. ProC_S3 delivers a 3-fold cross-validated accuracy of 26.9% with coverage of 4.7% for top L/5 predictions (L is the number of residues in a protein) of long-range contacts (sequence separation ≥ 24). Further benchmark tests deliver an accuracy of 29.7% and coverage of 5.6% for an independent set of 329 proteins. In the recently completed Ninth Community Wide Experiment on the Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction (CASP9), ProC_S3 is ranked as No. 1, No. 3, and No. 2 accuracies in the top L/5, L/10 and best 5 predictions of long-range contacts, respectively, among 18 automatic prediction servers.
INTRODUCTIONKnowing pair-wise protein residueresidue (RR) contacts can be helpful in predicting 3D protein structures, because the contact information can be used to reduce the conformational phase space, while improving the minimum of the landscape funnel of the overall energy function (). In addition, the contacts have been used to construct a scoring function for protein model selection (). Currently, there are two kinds of approaches for RR contact predictions: template-based threading and sequence-based machine learning approaches. Although template-based approaches can be more accurate than sequence-based ones if proper templates are available, they are less useful in ab initio structure predictions for proteins not having known-structure homologs as templates (). In this work, we focus on developing sequence-based algorithms for RR contact predictions. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.Numerous sequence-based methods have been developed using machine learning algorithms such as artificial neural networks (ANNs) (), support vector machines (SVMs) (), Hidden Markov Models (HMM) (), Genetic Algorithm (GA) (), etc. The mean accuracy achieved by state-of-the-art RR predictors is often in the range of 2030%, suggesting that it remains in need of improvement. Nevertheless, some of these methods have already been put into practical use. For example, recentlyachieved significant performance improvement of their I-TASSER server by adding a sequence-based contact prediction module based on SVMSEQ (). As results, the average TM-score of the I-TASSER models on the hard targets of the Ninth Community Wide Experiment on the Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction (CASP9) was improved by as much as 4.6%. In several cases, the TM-scores of I-TASSER models were improved by >30%, essentially converting 'non-foldable' targets to 'foldable' ones. A general procedure of developing sequence-based RR contact predictors includes several steps: (i) constructing a non-redundant and comprehensive protein structure set; (ii) calculating protein and residue properties that may be relevant to contact; (iii) training a model based on a machine learning algorithm and (iv) evaluating the performance of the predictive model. Therefore, improvement can be achieved in one or any combinations of the first three steps: a better representative dataset, properties more relevant to the RR contacts and a more robust machine learning algorithm. In this work, we attempt to improve prediction accuracy in all three steps. We develop statistical models for predicting RR contact maps based on the Random Forest (RF) algorithm (). The training dataset consists of 1490 non-redundant protein structures. We use a set of 1287 sequence-based features that can be roughly grouped into four categories: local window features, residue pair features, separation segment features and whole protein information. In addition to features commonly used in these types of models, we introduce a new contact propensity matrix based on a large-scale statistical analysis. We also develop a new set of seven amino acid groups using a clustering technique. To the best of our knowledge, ProC_S3 is the first RR predictor based on the RF algorithm (). RF is an ensemble approach that combines many classifiers to achieve a robust classifier. RF has been applied in broad classification tasks and has demonstrated good performance (). It is particularly suitable in classifying high-dimensional and noisy data. One of its advantageous features is that it can handle a mixture of categorical and continuous predictors. In addition, RF models do not require a time-consuming optimization process and make predictions considerably faster than many other algorithms such as SVM.
METHODS
DatasetsWe use several datasets in this study to build and test the predictive models. The first dataset D1490 was selected from all X-ray determined protein 3D structures in PDB database (downloaded in). The data selection criteria were as follows: resolution  2.0 , R-factor <0.25 and number of residues ranging between 50 and 400. Membrane proteins [determined by SCOP (and broken chains, defined as the distance between the two C atoms in residues that occur next to one another in the PDB files >4.2 , were excluded (). Sequence redundancy was reduced by BLASTClust () with the threshold set to 25% identity. Finally, a total of 1490 protein chains were acquired, including 460 851 contact pairs and 19 511 597 noncontact pairs (positive cases: 2.3%). We also collected a set of protein structures released during January 2009January 2010. The structures were then filtered using the same criteria as described above. There are 329 structures in the dataset (D329) with sequence identity 25% or less to each other in the dataset as well as to any sequence in D1490. D329 is used as an independent dataset for testing purposes. We evaluate the predictive models on the 121 CASP8 target proteins. Since many of these proteins are homologous to those in the training dataset, we identify 16 proteins with no >25% identity to D1490.
Definition of RR contactA residue pair is defined as contact (positive) or non-contact (negative) according to whether their C atoms (C for glycine) are within a distance of 8 , or not. All contacts are grouped into short-, medium-and long-range categories by sequence separation using the three separation ranges: 611, 1223 and  24. Such criteria have been used in CASP7 to CASP9 and have been adopted by most of recent predictors.
A novel contact propensity matrixIt is well-known that the contact propensity between different pairs of amino acid residues may vary significantly. Consequently, several contact preference matrixes have been developed, including Levitt's contact potential (), Jernigan's pair wise potential () and Braun's pair wise potential (). With the rapid growth of protein structures in public databases, we feel it is necessary to develop a new matrix since all three of these matrices were developed using limited numbers of protein structures. In addition, all three existing methods do not consider the relative positions of the residues. The new matrix was obtained from statistical analyses of a set of 585 non-redundant high-resolution protein structures ( 2.0 ), a subset of the structures in a training dataset collected by Punta and Rost (2005) without structures having broken sequences. We first calculate the percentages of contacts of all 20*20 pairs using the formula of (N con (i,j)/(N con (i,j)+N non-con (i,j)), where N con (i,j) and N non-con (i,j) are the number of contacted and non-contacted residue pairs of i and j, defined in the previous section. The numbers are then normalized to the proportion of the largest one (in bold) ().
The seven amino acid groupsWe use a hierarchical clustering algorithm to cluster residues according to their contact preference (). Based on the clustering results, we divide the 20 amino acids into seven groups: weak hydrophobic residues (Ala and Met), hydrophobic residues (Val, Ile and Leu), aromatic residues (Phe, Tyr and Trp), positively charged residues (Arg and Lys), negatively charged residues (, cysteine and all other residues (Gly, Ser, Asn, His,Pro, Thr and Gln). Therefore, this classification is largely consistent to the physicochemical properties of the amino acids.
Protein RR contact prediction
Feature constructionWe assemble a set of 1282 features for short and medium RR contact predictions, and 1287 features for long-range RR contact predictions. These features can be roughly grouped into four categories:
Local window features (810 + 4)Local window features are created using a 15-residue sliding window centered at each residue in a residue pair. The bulk of the features in this category are generated from the position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM) of the sequence, determined using PSIBLAST () against a non-redundant sequence database, which are filtered by 90% sequence identity threshold (NR90). For each residue in the local window pair, we use 22 numeric features extracted from PSSM including the log-odds frequency of 20 types of residues, the gap and the residue information score of each position. Other features include three mutually exclusive binary coding features (helix: 100, sheet: 010, coil: 001), four secondary structure predicted by PSIPRED () and two binary coding features (exposed: 10, buried: 01, using 25% relative accessible area as threshold) for solvent accessibility predicted by SSpro (). Overall, there are 810 (21527) features for each residue pair. We also use the averages of maximum accessible surface areas () and the isoelectric points of the amino acids in two local windows (four features).
Residue pair features (49 + 4 + 4 + 4)The first set of residue pair features are constructed using the seven amino acid groups described in the previous section. The combination of the categories of residue i and j produce 49 (77) binary coding features with only one element matching the type assigned to 1 and all others to 0. Correlated mutation information of two residues under consideration is encoded in four features. The joint entropy and mutual information of residues i and j are estimated from PSSM using p kl logp kl and), where p k and p l are the probability of residue type k and l appear in position i and j. In addition, the cosine (of the two positions are calculated (). Four position-independent contact preference features represented by a 20*20 matrix are also used, including Levitt's contact potential (), Jernigan's pair wise potential (), Braun's pair wise potential () and the one introduced in this work as described in the previous section. In addition, the maximum accessible surface area and the isoelectric point of the amino acids for residue i and j are considered.67,  68). For a residue pair i and j, the distribution of secondary structure and solvent accessibility for the residues in the segment between i and j is recorded by the four-order of weighted mean, which is defined as
Separationwhere n is equal to 0, 1, 2 and 3; K is one of the three secondary structure classes (helix, strand or coil) or the two solvent accessibility classes (exposed or buried).  m (K) is a sigma function which equals to 1 when residue m is in K class and 0 when not. A total of 20 (45) features are obtained in this group. In addition, we use 343 (777) features to record the occurrence of all types of tripeptides in the separation segment, using the seven groups as described above. Twelve features of the central residue in the separation segment are also generated, including the secondary structure (three features), solvent accessibility (two features) and residue category (seven features). The maximum accessible surface area and the isoelectric point of the amino acids in the separation segment are the remaining two features in this group.
Whole protein information (4 + 20)Whole protein information includes lengths classified in four bins ( 50, 51100, 101150 and >150) and the composition of 20 types of residues.
Random ForestWe use the R implementation of the RF algorithm v4.5 in the study (). The training and final predictive models include 500 decision trees. We also test models with 1000 trees, but no significant improvement is observed. We use the proportion of the positive decisions of these 500 trees as the predicted probability score of a pair of residues.
Cross-validation and the final modelsWe randomly split all proteins in D1490 into three portions and use a standard 3-fold cross-validation to estimate the performance of the models. We divide residue pairs to short-, medium-and long-range groups, which correspond to the sequence separations equal to 6-11, 12-23, and  24, respectively. Each sample has a vector of 1282 (for short-and medium-range) or 1287 (for long-range) features and a label (contact or non-contact) based on the structure of the protein. Since there are many more negative samples than positive ones, we use all positive samples and randomly select the same or double number of negative samples in the training set to balance the data. However, all negative samples are used in testing. After the cross-validation, we build the final models of ProC_S3 using all the positive samples and randomly selected double number of negative pairs for short-, medium-and long-range predictions, respectively.
Performance assessmentWe use the accuracy (Acc) and the coverage (Cov) to evaluate the top L/5 and L predicted positives (contact residues) ranked by probability scores ofPage: 3382 33793384
Y.Li et al.the predictors, where L is the total number of residues in the target proteins, the Acc is defined as the number of correctly predicted residue pairs divided by the total number of predictions, and the Cov is the number of correctly predicted residue pairs divided by the total number of existing contact residue pairs of a given protein in the corresponding range. We also provide Xd used by the assessors for the performance assessment in CASP9 (). Xd is defined as:Here Pp i and Pa i are the percentages of predicted contact pairs with a distance of).
RESULTS
Cross-validation on dataset D1490In the 3-fold cross-validation, we test two different ways to construct training datasets. In the first approach, we randomly select equal number of negative samples as the positives, while in the other approach double the number of negative samples are used. We calculate the accuracies and the coverage of both approaches (). It can be seen that the latter model achieves modestly better prediction performance and the improvement of the model using more negative samples is more pronounced for long-range, rather than short-range contact predictions. However, attempting to use more negative samples (5:1) does not result in further improvement (data not shown). Therefore, in the final model we use all contact pairs from D1490 and randomly select double the number of negative samples to construct the final models of PROC_S3. These models are then used to make predictions for further assessments and in the production server.
Benchmark tests on dataset D329The results of the models on D329 proteins are summarized in. The performance of the models on this dataset is largely consistent to the results in cross-validation, confirming cross-validation is a suitable method for evaluating performance. The accuracy of the top L/5 long-range predictions is close to 30%, suggesting the models have reached the level for practical applications (). We analyze the distribution of the true predictions for the top L and L/5 predictions (). Overall, more true predictions are associated with shorterseparations. The accuracy of predictions in shorter separations is usually higher than that in longer separations. We also manually check the predictions and find that most of the true predictions often form a few clusters. Such a trend was also observed in other predictors (). Interestingly, a significant number of false positives are close to the true contacts. We analyze the predictions of a typical protein 3FWZA to illustrate the overall trend in Supplementary.
Benchmark tests on CASP8 targetsThe benchmark test on the 121 CASP8 targets and a subset of 16 proteins distinct from training proteins are analyzed and summarized in. The accuracies of the top L/5 of long-range predictions are above the level of 30%.
Performance in CASP9We present here the relevant results extracted from the evaluation report of RR predictions by CASP9 assessors and original analysis results used to generate the report, kindly provided by Dr. Bohdan Monastyrskyy (). The analysis is performed on the 28 domains characterized as FM (free modeling)
Protein RR contact predictionand TBM/FM (Template-based modeling/free modeling). Only long-range RR contacts (i.e. separation  24) are considered. Among 25 groups submitted predictions for the evaluated domains, 18 are classified as automatic servers and the remaining 7 are human experts. Since human predictors had extra time and were allowed to have expert manual intervention, they are excluded from the following comparison.provides the performance of these 18 servers in top L/5 predictions using accuracy, coverage and Xd as performance metrics. PROC_S3 is ranked as No. 1 in accuracy and Xd, and No. 3 in coverage. Similar results are also found in top L/10 and best five predictions (Supplementary Tables S1 and S2). Since the official assessment focuses primarily on domains rather than proteins, not all groups submitted a sufficient number of predictions for all domains. Therefore, the performance represented by average accuracy, coverage and Xd is not strictly comparable across different groups. A head-to-head comparison between groups may represent a better choice. We calculate the ratios of win/lose, defined as the fraction of common targets for which the group designated with the row label out-or under-performed the otherThe rows are sorted by accuracy. Xd: as defined in main text. designated with the column label according to the accuracy of the L/5 predictions, between seven top CASP9 servers including ProC_S3 and its previous version ProC_S1 (). In this comparison, ProC_S3 is still ranked as one of the top servers, only second to MULTICOM-CLUSTER (win/lose = 0.818). It is noteworthy that MULTICOM-CLUSTER is inferior to ProC_S1, a replaced version of ProC_S3 in this comparison (win/lose = 0.61), which in turn performs worse than ProC_S3 (win/lose = 0.6). Therefore, the head-to-head comparison has its drawback.
Improvement from previous modelsTwo of our RF-based servers, namely ProC_S1 and ProC_S3, participated in CASP9. The ProC_S1 server participated (named RR_Fang_1) in CASP8 and was ranked as one of the top servers. Tables 67 and Supplementary S1S2 clearly show that there is consistent improvement between these two versions. The accuracies improved by 5.912.5% and the win/lose ratio of ProC_S3 versus ProC_S1 is 1.67. ProC_S3 is a newer version with a number of updates over ProC_S1. First, we create a bigger training dataset with 1490 non-redundant protein structures, which is much bigger than the one with 585 proteins used to develop ProC_S1. Second, we adopt a number of new features including: (i) the average of maximum accessible surface areas and isoelectric points of the amino acids in two local windows (four features); (ii) f-mean of the between segment (20 features) and (iii) features of the central residue of the segment (seven features).
Advantages of RFIn the early stage of the project, we tested the SVM and RF algorithms. We eventually abandoned SVM after we found that the performance of optimized models using either algorithm was very similar, but it took much more time to train a large SVM model than a RF model based on the same training dataset. It is absolutely necessary to optimize a few parameters for a SVM model while using the default values of the RF parameters often result in near-optimal performance. Moreover, the predicting time for a RF model is significantly shorter than a corresponding SVM model. For example, in a comparative test of a SVM model using the RBF kernel and a RF model with 1000 trees, it took the RF model just 81 s to complete the prediction of long-range contacts of a protein with 150 amino acid residues while the SVM model took 1299 s in the same computer. In addition, the importance available in RF provides a convenient and often good approach to feature selection.
Y.Li et al.
CONCLUSIONIn this work, we develop ProC_S3, a RR contact map predictor based on the RF algorithm. Cross-validation and independent tests demonstrate that the new predictor achieves consistent improvement over its replaced version ProC_S1. In addition, ProC_S3 is ranked as one of the top automatic RR prediction servers participated in CASP9. Work is progressing on using feature selection to find features important to protein RR contacts. Preliminary results are encouraging. A model using top 600 features, ranked by the mean decrease in accuracy measure of RF, achieved an accuracy of 29.9% for top L/5 predictions on D329, a slight improvement to the 29.7% accuracy of the model using all features (Supplementary). Although the improvement is minimal, it proves that it is feasible to use feature selection to identify features important to protein residue contacts. More important, it may help in better understanding the biophysics behind the problem. Currently, we are evaluating several other feature selection approaches. New models will be participating in the upcoming CASP10 experiment in 2012.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
