Motivation: The concept of pleiotropy was proposed a century ago, though up to now there have been insufficient efforts to design robust statistics and software aimed at visualizing and evaluating pleiotropy at a regional level. The Pleiotropic Region Identification Method (PRIMe) was developed to evaluate potentially pleiotropic loci based upon data from multiple genome-wide association studies (GWAS). Methods: We first provide a software tool to systematically identify and characterize genomic regions where low association P-values are observed with multiple traits. We use the term Pleiotropy Index to denote the number of traits with low association P-values at a particular genomic region. For GWAS assumed to be uncorrelated, we adopted the binomial distribution to approximate the statistical significance of the Pleiotropy Index. For GWAS conducted on traits with known correlation coefficients, simulations are performed to derive the statistical distribution of the Pleiotropy Index under the null hypothesis of no genotype–phenotype association. For six hematologic and three blood pressure traits where full GWAS results were available from the Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology (CHARGE) Consortium, we estimated the trait correlations and applied the simulation approach to examine genomic regions with statistical evidence of pleiotropy. We then applied the approximation approach to explore GWAS summarized in the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) GWAS Catalog. Results: By simulation, we identified pleiotropic regions including SH2B3 and BRAP (12q24.12) for hematologic and blood pressure traits. By approximation, we confirmed the genome-wide significant pleiotropy of these two regions based on the GWAS Catalog data, together with an exploration on other regions which highlights the FTO, GCKR and ABO regions. Availability and Implementation: The Perl and R scripts are available at http://www.framinghamheartstudy.org/research/gwas_ pleiotropictool.html.
INTRODUCTIONPleiotropy describes the effect of a single genetic region on multiple phenotypic traits. The concept of pleiotropy was first defined a century ago as one mutation resulting in multiple distinct phenotypes (). Among the proposed mechanisms, the genetic region may encode a product that is used by multiple cell types, or it may have a signaling function affecting multiple targets, or the traits under study may themselves be highly interrelated at a physiological level (). Pleiotropic genes have been shown in other species to affect environmental adaptation and tend to reside in central node positions in proteinprotein interaction networks (). The identification and characterization of pleiotropic genes and regions offers a unique window into the complexities of biological molecular interaction networks, and may potentially indicate evidence for epistasis (). The presence and impact of pleiotropy in genome data for normal human characteristics and human disease traits merits further investigation, but thus far the efforts at statistical development are insufficient. Methods and software for analyzing multivariate phenotypes have been proposed (). However, the available methods, such as those by, all require use of individual-level phenotype data and thus cannot be used to study pleiotropy using only existing summarized genome-wide association studies (GWAS) results. The method ofcan be used on existing summarized GWAS results; however this method only considers single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) level but not region-level pleiotropy. A novel analytic approach was recently demonstrated to examine pleiotropic genes in psychiatric phenotypes (). The current abundance of GWAS results provides an unprecedented opportunity to fully examine this phenomenon in a systematic manner. We previously analyzed results across 118 GWAS articles published from 2005 through 2008, creating a comprehensive database of 56 411 SNP-phenotype associations at a significance level of 0.001 (). This study highlighted potential pleiotropic regions, presenting the 61 densest regions of associations from 118 GWAS. Polymorphisms associated with multiple traits in genes including APOE and the MHC region were identified, as well as novel candidates (PIGU, RAPGEF1, COL4A1/2 and OAS1) that were subsequently replicated in otherPage: 1202 12011206
J.Huang et al.studies (Johnson and O'). Another resource for the collection of significant GWAS associations is the National Human Genome Research Institute's Catalog of Published Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS Catalog), which is regularly updated. A summary of results from 151 (of 237) published GWAS through December 2008 described 531 replicated SNP-trait associations and highlighted 18 regions of association with two or more traits (). Since that time GWAS have continued to be published at a rapid pace, as of October 16, 2010, including 584 GWAS and 4054 SNP-trait associations reported in the GWAS Catalog. Other repositories of GWAS-related data exist such as the database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGAP) but thus far these have not been widely applied to address hypotheses relating to pleiotropy (). We developed the Pleiotropic Region Identification Method (PRIMe) and applied it to cardiovascular-related traits from the Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology (CHARGE) Consortium (). We provide an initial example involving six hematologic traits (hemoglobin concentration, hematocrit, mean corpuscular hemoglobin, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, mean corpuscular volume and red blood cell count) and three blood pressure traits (systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure and hypertension) used in two independent GWAS meta-analysis reports from the CHARGE Consortium (). We further evaluated an approximation approach to estimate the statistical distribution of the Pleiotropy Index for uncorrelated traits, using data reported in the publicly accessible GWAS Catalog.
METHODS
PRIMe visualizationWe implemented the PRIMe tool to systematically identify and characterize regions across multiple GWAS/traits. Here we use the terms 'GWAS' and 'trait' interchangeably when one GWAS reports association results for one phenotypic trait. However, the CHARGE datasets we used for pleiotropic analysis include two overall GWAS studies with a total of nine traits. The PRIMe visualization method defines a genomic region of interest out of the whole genome as follows: let P S denote the threshold for association significance of SNPs, which can be user defined. Let r denote the correlation coefficient between an SNP pair, measured as the square root of the linkage disequilibrium (LD) measure of r 2. PRIMe iteratively finds SNPs with the lowest association P-value among all traits as the driver, and SNPs whose r 2 with the driver is above the user-specified threshold (0.8 by default) as passengers. In order to define distinct regions out of a genome with extensive LD patterns, once a SNP is designated as a passenger, it will not be considered again as a new driver or passenger. After completion of this iterative process, regions are defined by one driver and zero or more passengers.
Statistical evaluationTo follow-up regions identified by the PRIMe visualization tool, we conducted statistical evaluation for scenarios ranging from uncorrelated to highly correlated traits. We use the term Pleiotropy Index to denote the number of traits with low association P-values at a particular genomic region. We estimated the statistical distribution of the Pleiotropy Index under the null hypothesis of no genotypephenotype association for any of the traits. Let P T denote the probability of the reaching a certain Pleiotropy Index value in a genomic region. Since the calculation of P T depends on the particular LD pattern of a genomic region, which varies substantially across the genome, the same Pleiotropy Index value at different genomic regions would yielddifferent P T , and thus are not comparable. Therefore, we do not attempt to address the probability of attaining a Pleiotropy Index for any region across the genome per se. Instead, we assume that a region of interest has been identified through basic PRIMe queries or other means, and the main objective is to evaluate statistical significance for that particular region. We evaluated the simulated or approximated P T value against the genome-wide significance threshold of 510 8 to assess pleiotropy ().
For uncorrelated traits: the binomial approximationWhen GWAS are conducted across different cohorts with non-overlapping samples, they can be assumed to be uncorrelated, under the assumption that there is no genotypephenotype association for each individual GWAS. The number of independent SNPs within a genomic region could also be derived using the pairwise tagging approach (by default, r 2 threshold of 0.8) (). For K uncorrelated traits and M independent SNPs, the statistical distribution of the Pleiotropy Index can be mathematically derived as follows. In a region with M independent SNPs, the number of SNPs with association P-values below P S follows a binomial distribution B(n, p), with n equal to M and p equal to P S. Therefore, the probability that at least one out of M SNPs with association P-value below P S is equal to 1(1P S ) M because (1P S ) M is the probability that none of the SNPs have a P-value below the threshold. For K uncorrelated traits each with M SNPs in the region, the number of traits with at least one SNP below P S also follows a binomial distribution B(n, p), this time with n equal to K and p equal to 1(1P S ) M. Therefore, for uncorrelated traits and independent SNPs, P T can be approximated from a simple binomial approach.
For correlated traits: the multivariate simulationIn the backdrop of deep phenotyping and large consortia, GWAS scans could be correlated due to both overlapping samples and similar phenotypic measurements. We estimated the overall trait correlation by calculating the correlation of z-statistics (/SE) for all common SNPs (e.g. 2.5 million SNPs based on HapMap2 imputation) in a number of GWAS from consortia (, Supplementary Tables S1 and S2). For K correlated traits in a region of M SNPs with known LD, the test statistics (z) of each SNP for each trait follows approximately a multivariate normal distribution (). The probability that a trait indexed by k has at least one SNP with a P-value below the threshold of P S is equivalent to the probability that the maximum of the absolute value of z k1 , z k2 , ... z kM statistics is greater than z s (the z-value corresponding to the P S /2 two-sided threshold). Theoretically, this probability can be derived from a multiple dimension integral of the multivariate normal density function of the z-statistics. However, this multiple dimension integral is challenging to evaluate numerically when the number of SNPs is large. Moreover, using the multivariate normalPage: 1203 12011206approximation from one GWAS to derive the null distribution of the Pleiotropy Index would require taking the correlation among the GWAS into consideration. Therefore, we take a simulation approach to evaluate the distribution of the Pleiotropy Index. We simulate the test statistics for all traits and all SNPs simultaneously, and to do so we use the fact that the correlation matrix between all K  M test statistics is the (kronecker) product of the M dimensional correlation matrix between SNPs (r) and the K dimensional correlation matrix of the traits analyzed () ().shows adjacent regions within the 12q24 region, which were highlighted by PRIMe for association with blood pressure and hematologic traits in the CHARGE Consortium. In, the SNP in blue is designated as the driver SNP due to its lowest association P-value among all traits. The driver SNP can also be associated with other traits (shown in blue with less significant P-values). The SNPs shown in bright red are designated as passengers. The SNPs shown in weaker red are those whose r 2 with the driver SNP do not reach the user-specified threshold (0.8 by default).shows the trait correlation matrix for nine hematologic and blood pressure traits from the CHARGE Consortium data. Correlation coefficients for these nine traits range widely from 0 to 0.88. To further illustrate the cause and extent of trait correlation, we calculated the pairwise correlation for two other publically available sets of data: the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC) and Global Lipids, as shown in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2 respectively (). The latter two datasets are used only as references on trait correlation and not for pleiotropy analysis. We recommend that users of PRIMe consider any pair of traits with correlations <0.1 as largely uncorrelated. For the nine hematologic and blood pressure traits, the two regions shown in(referred to as the SH2B3 region and BRAP region hereafter) have the highest Pleiotropy Index of 4 among all identified regions with a Pleiotropy Index 2. For these nine traits in the SH2B3 region, we performed 200 million simulations, and found only one instance where four of the nine traits all had at least one SNP with simulated association P-value (derived from the z-statistic) less than the pre-specified threshold of 110 5. Therefore, we conclude that for these nine traits and the SH2B3 region, based on a P S of 110 5 , the simulated P T value for the Pleiotropy Index of 4 is equal to 1/(210 8 ) = 5.010 9 (Supplementary, left panel). Similarly, for these nine traits and using GWAS results from the BRAP region to estimate the SNP correlation, we performed 210 8 simulations and found six instances where four of the nine traits all had at least one SNP with simulated association P-value below the threshold. Therefore, the simulated P T value for the Pleiotropy Index of 4 is equal to 6/(210 8 ) = 3.010 8 for the BRAP region (Supplementary, right panel). Although the Pleiotropy Index is the same (i.e. 4), for both regions (out of a total of nine traits analyzed), the simulated P T for the BRAP region is less significant than that for the SH2B3 region, because the former resides in a longer haplotype block and, therefore, has a higher probability of observing more traits associated with SNPs in the region by chance. We conclude there is evidence that the proposed pleiotropy for these two regions is significant, because P T is estimated to be < 5.010 8. The SH2B3 region was recently associated in a single report with platelet count, coronary artery disease, type 1 diabetes and celiac disease validating its likely pleiotropic effects (). In this region, the SNP rs3185404 is non-synonymous and predicted to disrupt protein function. Furthermore, SH2B3 is an important signaling protein and thus it is likely to affect cellular functions in a variety of human tissues ().
PRIMe for Genomewide Pleiotropy
RESULTS
PRIMe visualization
For correlated traits: the multivariate simulation
For uncorrelated traits: the binomial approximationWe applied the PRIMe tool to the largest GWAS repository publicly available, the GWAS Catalog. For the same SH2B3 and BRAP regions, Pleiotropy Indices of nine were observed for both regions (Supplementary Figures S2 and S3, respectively). There are no fullscale genome-wide z statistics to calculate trait correlations. Instead, we assume traits are not correlated for the 584 GWAS reported as of October 16, 2010. Given the independent number of SNPs (4 for the SH2B3 region and 11 for the BRAP region), the calculated P T is equal to 5.2410 21 and 4.5310 17 , respectively, based on the binomial approximation approach described above. Therefore, both regions are also deemed to demonstrate significant pleiotropy based on the GWAS Catalog data. A systematic analysis of data in the entire GWAS Catalog found that a total of 57 regions have a Pleiotropy Index of 5. The top regions include the FTO gene andPage: 1204 12011206
J.Huang et al.(b)
PRIMe for Genomewide Pleiotropythe GCKR region (Supplementary Figures S4 and S5), both with a Pleiotropy Index of 18, while the well-known pleiotropic ABO region has a Pleiotropy Index of 9 (Supplementary).
DISCUSSIONPRIMe does not rely on prespecified methods for genomic region grouping such as gene boundaries or physical position bins. Instead, association P-values for individual SNPs and LD between SNPs are used to define genomic regions where multiple traits show significant association with SNPs. Since pairwise LD (r) among SNPs is a key determinant of the width of a region; we used PLINK to precalculate LD based on the HapMap II + III samples from the CEU (Utah residents with ancestry from northern and western Europe) and TSI (Toscans in Italy) populations (). We did not use the LD data downloadable from HapMap website, because it calculates LD only for SNPs up to 250 kb apart (). To capture long-range haplotype blocks, we include LD for SNPs up to 1500 kb apart. Of note, the LD threshold chosen by investigators will not only affect the physical boundaries of a putative pleiotropic region, but also the statistical significance of the estimated P T. For the SH2B3 and BRAP regions, if a LD threshold of r 2  0.5 rather than 0.8 is used, only one large region instead of two separate ones will be identified. This change of LD threshold will further complicate the choice of 510 8 as the threshold for evaluating genome-wide significance, since the total number of independent regions across the genome would be different when 'high LD' is defined as r 2  0.5 instead of 0.8. Furthermore, with a P S threshold of 110 3 instead of 110 5 prespecified, the same SH2B3 region is noted with a Pleiotropy Index of 6 but the simulated P T would not have reached a genome-wide significant threshold. From a statistical testing perspective, higher values of Pleiotropy Index under less stringent P S thresholds tend to result in a less significant P T. On the other hand, a highly stringent P S threshold will pose technical challenges for simulation. We performed 200 million simulations (i.e. 10/(510 8 )) in an attempt to simulate the distribution for P S up to 510 8. However, as Supplementaryshows, despite the high number of simulations, we still did not observe a Pleiotropy Index > 2 when P S thresholds of 110 7 and 510 8 were used. Therefore, an exact P T could not be specified other than P T < 1/(210 8 ) = 510 9. We suggest a P S of 110 5 , which corresponds to the significance threshold currently used by the GWAS Catalog. Currently the direction of association effect is not considered for computing the Pleiotropy Index. Studies have suggested there may be biologically plausible mechanisms for different effect directions even among closely related phenotypes (). For the approximation approach, we make the assumption that traits are not correlated. When traits studied in separate GWAS scans are not truly uncorrelated, the distribution of the Pleiotropy Index deviates from the binomial distribution, with higher proportions of correlated traits leading to greater deviations. As the correlation coefficient increases, the expected Pleiotropy Index increases and therefore is more likely (at any given significant P T ) to achieve larger values of the Pleiotropy Index (see Supplementary). For the two CHARGE GWAS, five common cohorts contributed to a total of six cohorts for both GWAS, with the degree of sample overlap for these two GWAS being 80%. However, a high degree of sample overlap alone does not imply that there will be high correlation for quantitative traits [e.g. 0.00 between mean corpuscular hemoglobin and systolic blood pressure for the CHARGE traits (), and 0.08 between HDL and LDL for the Global Lipids traits (Supplementary)]. For dichotomous traits illustrated by the WTCCC data, the use of a common control dataset generates an explicit overlap of phenotypic measurement, therefore leading to some degree of correlation among GWAS results for the seven traits (from 0.29 to 0.43, Supplementary). The highest correlation of 0.43 between type 1 diabetes and rheumatoid arthritis could also indicate common pathways for auto-immune diseases (Supplementary). For both quantitative and qualitative traits, under the null hypothesis of no genotypephenotype association for each individual GWAS, even identically ascertained phenotypes will not yield trait correlation given no sample overlap. The finding of the FTO region highlights how care must be taken in interpretation of conclusions on pleiotropy, since the commonly associated traits for the FTO region include many weight-related measures or for type 2 diabetes. Although a few of the association signals in the GCKR region are for similar serum lipids and glucose measures as well, there are distinct traits such as hematologic traits, serum uric acid and C-reactive protein. The significant test statistic in the case of FTO may be flagging either pleiotropy or further independent replication for adiposity traits, while the case of GCKR may reflect classic pleiotropy. For similar but not identical traits, suspected pleiotropy could be due to independent effects or through a chain of mediation. The identification of mediation can still provide useful biological information. A recent study on the genetics of FTO provides the first direct evidence that increased FTO expression causes obesity in mice. Mice with increased FTO expression on a high-fat diet develop glucose intolerance. The causal mechanism of FTO on human phenotypes warrants further gene expression profiling studies (). The null hypothesis of no genotypephenotype association for each individual GWAS has been used as a basis for our simulation and approximation approaches, which could be invalid when traits with strong association with particular genomic regions have been well established and extensively replicated. Deriving the distribution under the alternative will depend on many variables (number of associated loci, strength of association with each trait, etc.) and could require a markedly different approach. We compared the power between our method and that of Ferreira and Purcell (2009), and found that their method is slightly more powerful under scenarios with various association P-value thresholds and type I error. However, our tool and method can be rapidly applied to summary GWAS results, together with other features including visualization. In summary, we have developed a computational tool and statistical method to systematically identify, characterize and evaluate pleiotropic regions. PRIMe can be downloaded and run on local machines without uploading potentially sensitive GWAS data to public servers. The scripts are designed in a user friendly manner so that all customizable parameters can be specified in an interface script, which calls subsequent scripts that require no user manipulation. The availability of PRIMe may encourage sharing of more detailed GWAS data in a secure manner within collaborating groups in order to conduct discovery of potential pleiotropic regions. We anticipate that fine-mapping and re-sequencing will enable a Page: 1206 12011206
J.Huang et al.higher resolution view of pleiotropy, and further refine whether the same or distinct alleles in targeted regions contribute to multiple traits (). We have recently used PRIMe to help prioritize the selection of regions for sequencing in following up GWAS, gaining more potential return for smaller resource investments by focusing on regions with evidence for multiple traits. The value of this approach would be greatly improved by broader sharing of complete GWAS results among members of the scientific community with appropriate safeguards (), and the improvements in resources with more dense maps of SNPs provided by the 1000 Genomes and other sequencing projects that are underway. This new approach, together with efforts that pull together GWAS data into publicly accessible centralized repositories, is well suited to propel the study of the genetic architecture of complex diseases beyond individual investigators or individual datasets (; Johnson and O').
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
