PRINCIPLE is a Java application implemented as a Cytoscape plug-in, based on a previously published algorithm, PRINCE. Given a query disease, it prioritizes disease-related genes based on their closeness in a protein–protein interaction network to genes causing phenotypically similar disorders to the query disease. Availability: Implemented in Java, PRINCIPLE runs over Cytoscape 2.7 or newer versions. Binaries, default input files and documentation are freely available at
INTRODUCTIONAssociating diseases with their causal genes is a fundamental challenge in medical research with applications to diagnosis and therapy. Recently, we introduced a novel method for prioritizing candidate disease-causing genes, named PRINCE (PRIoritizatioN and Complex Elucidation) (). PRINCE is motivated by the observation that genes causing similar diseases often lie close to one another in a proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network (). Given a query disease, PRINCE: (i) identifies a set of phenotypically similar diseases (van); (ii) retrieves the known causal genes of these diseases to form a ranked prior vector Y based on their similarity to the query and (iii) propagates the scores of the prior set of genes over a human PPI network to provide association scores for all genes. The final score assigned to each protein in the network combines the prior information with a network-based component. The latter ensures that the resulting scores are smooth over the network. Formally, the score F(v) of a node v with a set of network neighbors N(v) is:Where w is a normalized matrix representing the weighted PPI network and Y (v) is the prior weight of the node. Here  is parameter * To whom correspondence should be addressed. weighting the relative importance of the prior-based versus the network-based components of the score. PRINCE leverages on a comprehensive set of weighted PPIs compiled from multiple sources (), the disease disease similarity measures computed by van, and on the diseasegene associations presented in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) knowledgebase (). Here we introduce PRINCIPLE (PRINCe ImPLEmentation) a Cytoscape plug-in () implementation of the PRINCE algorithm. Given a query disease, it provides a list of top ranking genes associated with it and an additional visualization of the subnetworks formed by these top ranking genes and their direct interacting neighbors.
FUNCTIONALITY AND IMPLEMENTATIONThe PRINCIPLE plug-in works in a clientserver architecture, where a prior set of causal genes is propagated over the human PPI network, compiled from;, residing on a designated server. The PRINCIPLE plug-in includes three sections, represented in three tabs: (i) specifying the input files; (ii) specifying three tunable parameters that govern the algorithm scores and output size (see below); and (iii) specifying an optional output file listing the resulting network nodes. In the input files section, the query disease is selected from a sorted list of OMIM diseases (either by name or MIM code). A textual search for the query disease is also available. Three additional inputs are required: (i) OMIM phenotypic diseasedisease similarity; (ii) a map file between MIM codes and disease names; and (iii) associations between diseases (MIM codes) and genes (Entrez IDs). While any user defined diseasedisease similarities are applicable, the binaries page provides default choices for all. The default input files are described in the documentation page and include: (i) the phenotypic diseasedisease similarity of, which was also used in; (ii) a disease names file corresponding to the similarity file entries (supplied by default with the plug-in); and (iii) a default set of diseasegene associations, extracted from GeneCards (), used also by. The PRINCIPLE plug-in provides three tunable parameters:(i) the weighting parameter  (see Formula 1, with a default value of  = 0.9); (ii) k  (, the number of top ranked genes to return (default 10); and (iii) t  (, the number of iterations performed by the algorithm. The score F(v) can be analyticallysolved, but for efficiency we compute it using an iterative procedure (). Typically, the algorithm shows fast convergence, achieving optimal results after 10 iterations (). The results are displayed as the k top priority genes and their direct PPI neighbors, using a color scale signifying relative scores. An optional output file can be specified, listing the gene scores.shows a typical output for querying Diabetes mellitus, non-insulin-dependent (NIDDM) (MIM 125853) with the default parameters ( = 0.9, k = 10 and t = 10). The red circles are the top scoring proteins and their immediate PPI neighbors. These top 10 genes are listed inalong with references to articles studying their connection to Diabetes mellitus. Right clicking on a node enables retrieving additional information on the protein from multiple data sources.
A.Gottlieb et al.
USAGE EXAMPLE
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
