Motivation: The expression of tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs) in the thymus is required to ensure efficient negative selection of potentially auto-reactive T lymphocytes and avoid autoimmune disease. This promiscuous expression is under the control of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE), a transcription factor expressed in medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs). Tissue-specific alternative splicing may also produce TRAs but the extent to which splice isoforms that are restricted to specific tissues are expressed in mTECs is yet to be investigated. Results: We reanalyzed microarray and RNA-Seq datasets from mouse mTECs and other epithelial and non-epithelial cell types and found that the diversity of splice isoforms in mTECs was greater than in any of the other cell types or tissues studied. We identified tissue-specific isoforms from a panel of mouse tissues and found several examples of such isoforms that are expressed in mTECs. The number of isoforms with restricted expression found in mTECs was significantly higher than for comparable cell types. Furthermore, we found evidence that AIRE influences the increased splicing diversity observed in mTECs as the genes for which tissue restricted isoforms are produced in mTECs were significantly more likely than other genes to be differentially spliced between AIRE knockout and wild-type samples. Our results suggest that developing T lymphocytes are exposed to diverse tissue-restricted splice isoforms in the thymus and that AIRE has a direct or indirect role in this process, representing a novel aspect of its role in the maintenance of immune self-tolerance.
IntroductionT lymphocytes are cells of the adaptive immune system that are capable of recognizing and binding foreign peptides presented on the surface of other cells by major histocompatibility (MHC) class molecules. Recognition is mediated by the T cell receptor (TCR), a surface bound receptor, generated by a stochastic process of generearrangement during T cell development in the thymus. This somatic rearrangement results in a diverse repertoire of T cells, each expressing a single TCR that is capable of recognizing a limited set of peptide-MHC complexes. However, given the stochastic process by which these TCRs are generated, the possibility arises that a TCR may show an affinity for self-peptide-MHC complexes, leading to an autoimmune response. To avoid this, T cells undergo a process of selection in the thymus, whereby the developing T cell is exposed to a range of self-peptide-MHC complexes. This process, referred to as negative selection, results in the deletion from the T cell repertoire of cells with high affinity for self-peptide-MHC complexes (). The range of self-peptides to which the developing T cells are exposed includes a number of peptides that are normally only expressed in specific tissues outside the thymus. This ectopic expression of tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs), which helps to preventathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), an autoimmune disease which affects multiple endocrine organs (). Although AIRE has been shown to increase the level of spliced versus un-spliced mRNAs (), little is known about the impact of AIRE on alternative splicing, and the extent to which it can cause expression of alternative splice isoforms, resulting in isoform-specific TRA expression in the thymus. Previous work has shown that AIRE interacts with a number of proteins involved in pre-mRNA processing and spliceosome binding (), including splicing factors such as SC35, an SR protein involved in transcriptional elongation through the recruitment of the positive transcription elongation factor b (p-TEFb;), and in the commitment of pre-mRNAs to the splicing pathway (). AIRE can also interact directly with p-TEFb (). A mutation in the transcription activation domain (TAD) of AIRE, found in APECED patients, can prevent this interaction, leading to a decrease in the level of spliced versus un-spliced mRNAs (). In order to ensure efficient negative selection, a diverse range of peptides needs to be presented in the thymus to developing T cells. This includes peptides that are introduced by alternative splicing (), specifically TRAs resulting from tissuespecific alternative splicing. To investigate the diversity of alternative splicing in the thymus, we calculated splicing entropy () using existing RNA-Seq data from mTECs and compared it with the splicing entropy of other tissues. Entropy can be considered as a measure of uncertainty, and splicing entropy reflects the diversity of observed splice isoforms in a given sample. We also compared mRNA splicing between wild-type and knock-out mTECs. Finally, we investigated the ectopic expression of tissue-specific splice isoforms in mTECs. We suggest that AIRE plays a role in promiscuous splicing in mTECs, resulting in the expression of TRAs in the thymus for the purpose of negative selection of T cells. This is likely to contribute to the role of AIRE in inducing tolerance to self-antigens.
Methods
Splicing entropySplicing entropy is a measure of the diversity of observed transcript isoforms in a given sample.used splicing entropy to measure splicing disorder using isoform expression values obtained from expressed sequence tag (EST) data. Here, we used isoform expression values calculated using RNA-Seq data. Splicing entropy was calculated for each gene G, aswhere g is the number of isoforms that make up G, and P i is the proportion that each isoform i contributes to the overall expression of G. We calculated this for each sample independently and summarized each sample using the median splicing entropy value obtained.
Microarray data analysisAffymetrix MoGene 1.0 ST microarray data from AIRE wild-type and knock-out mTECs, generated by, was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession GSE33878. This microarray platform contains probesets targeting individual exons, allowing for exon level splicing analysis. Detected above background (DABG) probabilities and exon level expression estimates were calculated with Affymetrix Power Tools using the probe logarithmic intensity error (PLIER) algorithm with GC background correction. Unexpressed genes were removed from the dataset. A gene was considered expressed if over 50% of its probesets could be detected with a DABG P-value < 0.05 in over 50% of all samples. Genes with single probesets were discarded. We applied the alternative splicing robust prediction based on entropy method (ARH) (), to detect differences in splicing between experimental conditions.
RNA-Seq data analysisWe downloaded RNA-Seq data generated by St-Pierre et al. (2013; GEO accession GSE44945). This data consisted of paired-end sequences from mTECs as well as from cortical thymic epithelial cells (cTECs) and skin epithelial cells (sECs). Raw reads were processed using Trimmomatic v0.30 () to remove lowquality sequences. These were then mapped to the mouse genome (mm9) with TopHat v1.4.1 () using default parameters and RefSeq transcript expression levels were calculated with Cufflinks v1.3.0 () using the following parameters (multi-read-correct min-isoform-fraction 0). Genes with only one annotated isoform were discarded from further analysis. Splicing entropy was then calculated for each gene. Bootstrap analysis of the splicing entropy distribution was conducted in R v3.0.1. To compare splicing entropy across different tissues, we used the mouse 9-tissue dataset generated by Merkin et al. (2012; GEO accession GSE41637). These RNA-Seq datasets contain reads of varying lengths. For comparability across experiments, all reads were trimmed to a maximum length of 50 bp before mapping to the mouse genome with TopHat using the following parameters (mateinner-dist 200 mate-std-dev 30). RefSeq transcript abundances were calculated with Cufflinks and splicing entropy was then calculated for each gene.
Tissue-specific alternative splicingWe used the nine-tissue dataset fromto identify tissue-specific splice isoforms. An isoform I, of a gene G, was considered to be specific to a tissue, if the proportion of transcripts from G corresponding to I was significantly >0.1 in all replicates of that tissue and in no replicate of any other tissue. Expression of an isoform, as a proportion of gene expression, was considered to be significantly greater if the lower bound of the 95% confidence interval for the isoform proportion exceeded 0.1. In order to avoid including tissue-specific genes, we considered only genes with fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads (FPKM) >0.5 in more than one of the tissues examined.
Results and discussion
Splicing entropy in mTECs compared with other cell typesThe thymic epithelium creates a specialized environment that supports the development and maturation of T lymphocytes. This process involves interactions of developing lymphocytes with epithelial cells in the medulla and cortex of the thymus, called mTECs and cTECs, respectively. These cell types arise from a common bi-potent progenitor cell (), but assume distinct roles in T cellPromiscuous splicing in mTECsdevelopment (). At a mature stage of development, mTECs express AIRE, a transcription factor that induces TRA expression in the thymic medulla (). We hypothesized that there may exist a mechanism to express tissue-restricted splice isoforms in mTECs, to ensure negative selection of T cells that react to TRAs resulting from tissue-specific splicing. A prediction of this hypothesis is that thymic epithelial cells should express a diverse set of splice isoforms, including isoforms that are normally restricted to specific tissues. To investigate this prediction we calculated splicing entropy based on previously published RNA-Seq data () from mouse mTECs, cTECs and sECs, the latter being an example of a non-thymic epithelial cell type. Only genes that were expressed in all three celltypes and for which more than one annotated isoform was available were considered for the calculation of splicing entropy. We found that the median splicing entropy across genes was higher in the mTEC than in the cTEC and sEC samples (P  1  10  36 , P  6  10 56 , respectively, Wilcoxon signed-rank test;and B). It should be noted that just one sample was available per cell type and the statistical significance reported here reflects consistency in the differences in splicing diversity across genes, rather than replication in multiple samples. Interestingly, the difference in splicing entropy was more apparent for AIRE-induced genes [as identified by] than for AIRE-independent genes (Supplementary), which is suggestive of a role for AIRE in the diverse splicing output of mTECs. We next compared thymic epithelial cells to a range of nonepithelial cell types using data from nine mouse tissues from. This dataset contains RNA-Seq samples from brain, colon, heart, kidney, liver, lung, skeletal muscle (SkM), spleen and testes. For each tissue, three samples (denoted mouse A, B and C) were available, with the exception of heart for which only two samples were available. Each sample originates from a different mouse strain (DBA/2J, C57BL/6 and CD1 for samples A, B and C, respectively). Differences in alternative splicing have been observed across mouse strains (), which may contribute to some of the differences in splicing entropy observed across samples from the same tissue. The median (across genes) of the splicing entropy in mTECs was higher than for any of the tissues examined and for all samples, except for one of the mouse brain samples (Mouse_B_Brain) the difference was highly statistically significant (P < 0.0001 for all pair-wise comparisons, other than Mouse_ B_Brain for which P  0.19; Wilcoxon signed-rank test;). Although based on a single available sample of mTECs these results suggest that mTECs express a wider range of isoforms compared with other cell types. This is consistent with the proposal that tissuerestricted splice isoforms are produced in the thymus and presented to T cells for the purpose of negative selection. The absence of aparticular isoform gives rise to the potential for T cells capable of directing auotimmity towards that isoform to escape the thymus, causing autoimmunity.
AIRE plays a role in alternative splicing in mTECsTo measure directly the impact of AIRE on alternative splicing, we applied the ARH method () to AIRE knock-out and wild-type mTECS, using microarray data obtained from. These data were generated using the Affymetrix MoGene 1.0 ST array platform, which contains probesets targeting individual exons. Genes that were either not expressed or to which only one probeset was mapped were removed prior to calculation of ARH values. We found that 4572 genes show differences in alternative splicing between AIRE knock-out and wild-type mTECs with an ARH P value < 0.05 (Supplementary). Interestingly, this list of genes was significantly enriched for genes with tissue-restricted isoforms that are expressed in mTECs (P  0.01, from logistic regression, with gene expression level and the number of expressed isoforms as covariates). We also counted the number of exons detected in each sample. An exon was considered detected if it was assigned a DABG P-value < 0.05. The mean number of exons detected per expressed gene was significantly higher for the wild-type samples than for the AIRE knock-out samples (P  0.04, two sided t-test;). Together, these results show that AIRE influences alternative splicing in mTECs, increasing the number of exons detected in AIRE wild-type compared with knock-out, consistent with a role for AIRE in the diverse splicing output of mTECs. Although AIRE has previously been shown to increase the level of spliced versus un-spliced mRNAs (), a role for AIRE in alternative splicing has not been established. Here we show that AIRE plays a role in alternative splicing and increases the inclusion of exons, and therefore isoforms containing these exons and this is likely to be an aspect of the role of AIRE in negative selection.
Ectopic expression of tissue-specific isoforms in mTECsGiven that alternative splicing can give rise to tissue-specific isoforms (), we asked if ectopic expression of tissue-specific isoforms could be detected in mTECs. We identified a set of 339 tissue-specific isoforms using the nine mouse tissue dataset (for the list of all detected TS isoforms). Of these, 72 were also expressed in mTECs, compared to 26 in cTECs and 21 in sECs (P  2  10 7 and P  3  10 9 , respectively, for the comparison of the proportion of tissue-specific isoforms expressed in mTECs to the proportions in cTECs and sECs, respectively; two-proportion z-test;; see Supplementary Table S4S6 for TS isoforms detected in mTECs, cTECs and sECs, respectively). We found that 50 tissue-specific isoforms were expressed in the mTEC sample and not in either of the cTEC or sEC samples. These represented tissue-specific splice isoforms from eight of the nine tissues examined. This is compared with three tissues represented in all tissue-specific isoforms detected in sECs (). We found that the range of tissue-specific isoforms expressed in mTECs represents almost all of the tissues studied. This is consistent with previous findings that mTECs express a diverse range of tissue-restricted genes which represent most tissues of the body (). The tissue-specific isoforms that were found in mTECs and not in cTECs or sECs included the long form of the gene Oxr1 (), which is known to undergo brain-specific alternative splicing (). The Oxr1 gene was expressed across all samples () but the long form of Oxr1, NM_001130166, was expressed only in brain and in mTECs (and Supplementary). We also found that mTECs express a tissue-specific splice isoform of sperm associated antigen 16 (Spag16). An alternative splice isoform of Spag16 has been identified as a B cell autoimmune target in multiple sclerosis (). It has been found that isoform-specific regions of autoantigens that undergo alternative splicing often encode MHC class I and II restricted epitopes (), and therefore Spag16 may also represent a T cell target in autoimmune disease. The ectopic expression of tissue-specific isoforms is likely to contribute to negative selection, by providing an additional source of TRAs in the thymus. The importance of TRAs for this purpose is well established; however, previous studies have focused on TRAs derived from tissuerestricted genes (). Promiscuous splicing may be an important factor in establishing T cell tolerance to tissuespecific isoforms. Experimental validation would be required to formally show that T cells which are specific to isoform-specific peptides do escape the thymus and cause autoimmunity in the absence of AIRE and confirm our conclusion that AIRE introduces isoformspecific TRAs for the purpose of negative selection.
ConclusionIt is well established that AIRE induces the expression of tissue restricted genes in the thymus. Here, we show that AIRE also influences alternative splicing in mTECs, increasing the number of exons detectable per gene and allowing antigens on these exons to be produced. mTECs express a range of tissue-specific splice isoforms and knock-out of AIRE affects splicing of the genes for which tissuerestricted splice isoforms are found in mTECs. We suggest that promiscuous splicing in mTECs is under the control of AIRE, and that aby tissue-specific splice isoforms found in mTECs only (i.e. found in mTECs but not in cTECs or sECs), the second column includes all 21 tissue-specific isoforms found in sECs, whether or not they are expressed in mTECs or cTECs breakdown in this mechanism would result in the absence of isoform-specific TRAs in the thymus, allowing T cells capable of directing autoimmunity towards tissue-specific isoforms to escape the thymus and contribute to autoimmine disease.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
P.Keane et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
