Motivation: Models of molecular evolution aim at describing the evolutionary processes at the molecular level. However, current models rarely incorporate information from protein structure. Conversely, structure-based models of protein evolution have not been commonly applied to simulate sequence evolution in a phylogenetic framework, and they often ignore relevant evolutionary processes such as recom-bination. A simulation evolutionary framework that integrates substitution models that account for protein structure stability should be able to generate more realistic in silico evolved proteins for a variety of purposes. Results: We developed a method to simulate protein evolution that combines models of protein folding stability, such that the fitness depends on the stability of the native state both with respect to unfolding and misfolding, with phylogenetic histories that can be either specified by the user or simulated with the coalescent under complex evolutionary scenarios, including recombination, demographics and migration. We have implemented this framework in a computer program called ProteinEvolver. Remarkably, comparing these models with empirical amino acid replacement models, we found that the former produce amino acid distributions closer to distributions observed in real protein families, and proteins that are predicted to be more stable. Therefore, we conclude that evolutionary models that consider protein stability and realistic evolutionary histories constitute a better approximation of the real evolutionary process. Availability: ProteinEvolver is written in C, can run in parallel and is freely available from
INTRODUCTIONThe simulation of molecular evolution is commonly used to mimic real world processes, allowing the study of complex systems that are analytically intractable or to understand the mechanisms by which an evolutionary process is modified (). A key mechanism in the simulation of molecular sequences is the substitution or replacement process. Markov substitution/replacement models are commonly used in population genetics and molecular evolution to mimic evolutionary processes at the molecular level (seeLi and). Nevertheless, most substitution models assume that sites evolve independently, and they cannot incorporate information on the structural and functional role of amino acids within proteins, which is determined by the interactions of different sites. It is known that these interactions may lead to non-independent evolution, as the evolutionary rate at a site is influenced by substitutions at neighboring sites (e.g., and references therein). Moreover, the conformational diversity of proteins may also influence their molecular evolution (). Models of evolution that incorporate structure are therefore of increasing importance (). Recently, structurally constrained models of protein evolution have been introduced to represent folding stability of a target structure as a proxy for fitness (reviewed in). These models have been studied assuming a neutral fitness landscape (e.g.,b) and as a function of population size (e.g.). However, these models have been seldom used to obtain evolutionary insights from real data, probably because of the lack of widely available and easy-to-use software. Furthermore, proteins simulated under a given substitution process might be unrealistic if common evolutionary processes are ignored. For example, recombination constitutes a fundamental evolutionary force at the molecular level () that can affect the estimation of different evolutionary parameters, like molecular adaptation (by increasing the number of false positively selected sites) (), substitution rate (lack of molecular clock) () or ancestral states (). Similarly, population genetics processes such as demographic changes, population structure and migration may influence evolutionary histories. For example, branches are short when the population size undergoes a bottleneck (e.g.), and deme sizes in structured populations may influence the topology of genealogical trees, as lineages are assumed to be in the same deme to coalesce (e.g. Neuhauser and Tavare,Tavare, 2001). These aspects could influence the number of substitutions and evolutionary trajectories generated in the simulations, which consequently influence the simulated data (). In our view, it is important that a simulation framework allows reproducing and *To whom correspondence should be addressed. testing these evolutionary features to be able to address wider biological questions. In this study, we have implemented structurally constrained substitution models (hereafter, SCS models) that allow for sitedependent substitutions, under neutral and non-neutral fitness landscapes that depend on protein stability, in the freely available computer program ProteinEvolver, which is able to simulate the evolution of proteins and protein-coding genes along evolutionary histories such as phylogenetic trees or ancestral recombinant graphs (ARGs). These phylogenetic histories can be specified by the user or simulated through the coalescent with recombination, demographics and migration (see the reviews,). Recently, Grahnen and Liberles introduced the computer program CASS that simulates protein sequence evolution under selection to fold into a specific conformation (). Our program differs from CASS in two main aspects: the representation of the protein structure, which influences the way in which we treat misfolding stability, and the possibility to represent a broad variety of demographic and evolutionary scenarios (for instance, varying recombination rates and mutation). Grahnen and Liberles adopt explicit side chain representation, and we also adopt contact matrices, which are less precise but allow a statistical mechanical treatment of the ensemble of misfolded conformations that is computationally affordable (and actually very fast with our approximation) (e.g.). Misfolding stability is important because, if only the unfolded state is considered, selection tends to artificially favor very hydrophobic sequences. Therefore, the structural approach taken by the two programs is complementary, and each of them may be suited to address different kinds of biological questions. Through extensive simulations, we compared the SCS models with commonly used empirical amino acid substitution models using as a benchmark 10 well-known protein families. We found that sequences simulated under our SCS models produce amino acid distributions closer to the observed ones. Furthermore, the folding stability of the native state, assessed by building structural models by homology and predicting their stability with a method different from the one adopted in the simulations, is significantly larger for proteins simulated under the SCS model. We conclude that substitution models that incorporate protein structure information are better approximations to the real evolutionary process and may provide more meaningful evolutionary inferences than site-independent substitution models.
METHODS AND ALGORITHMSWe simulate protein evolution in two main steps. First, the genealogy is either specified by the user or it is simulated using the coalescent optionally modified with recombination, migration and demographics. Second, protein-coding genes and protein sequences are evolved along this genealogy under a given substitution or replacement model.
Simulation of genealogiesGenealogies are simulated according to the standard coalescent process () modified with recombination (), demographics and migration (). Recombination can be either homogeneous or heterogeneous (recombination hotspots and coldspots) across the sequence following the algorithm developed by. Note that the simulation of recombination events leads to reticulate nodes and, consequently, to an ARG (). Demographics include growth rate and demographic periods by following the algorithms implemented in). Gene flow among subpopulations can be specified under island, stepping-stone or continent island migration models (e.g.). In addition, longitudinal samples or population/species trees, among other capabilities, can also be specified (see Supplementary).
Evolution of proteins along phylogeniesAfter the phylogenetic history has been specified, a protein structure and a sequence are assigned to the root (the most recent common ancestor or grand most recent common ancestor in case of recombination). Then, the protein is evolved along the phylogeny going forward in time from the root to the tips (see) according to the SCS model, generating a protein for all internal and terminal nodes in the phylogeny. Overall, for a given branch, the SCS models perform five steps.(i) The number of mutations or substitutions is computed considering the branch length (number of expected substitutions without considering structural constraints) and the length of the protein (number of amino acids). (ii) A mutation is introduced according to the instantaneous rate matrix (the relative rates of change can be used to determine mutational sites).(iii) The folding free energy of the mutated protein structure is computed.(iv) The selective effect of the mutation is evaluated; it will be accepted or rejected depending on the fixation probability associated with the change of fitness (see next section).(v) If the mutation is rejected, the process goes to step (ii) and a new mutation is introduced. If the mutation is accepted, then the mutation is fixed and it becomes a substitution.The five-step process is repeated until the number of mutations or substitutions (i) is completed. In this way, fixed mutations (substitutions) result in differences among proteins from different evolutionary lineages.
Substitution models basedon the stability of the protein structure 2.2.1.1 Evaluation of the structural stability of mutated proteins. We evaluate the folding stability of a given mutated protein taking into account the stability against unfolding and against misfolding. Initially, we estimate the stability of the mutated sequence folded into the target structure at the simulation temperature using a contact-based free energy function. The contact matrix C ij takes the value 1 if residues i and j are 'close' (54.5 A  ) in space and 0 otherwise. This matrix has been shown sufficient to accurately reconstruct the 3D structure of the protein (). We assume that the free energy of a protein with sequence A folded into the contact matrix C is given by the sum of its pairwise contact interactions:where U(a,b) is the contact interaction matrix that expresses the free energy gained when amino acids a and b are brought into contact determined by. For proteins that fold with two-state thermodynamics, i.e. for which only the native structure and the unfolded structure are thermodynamically important, stability against unfolding is defined as the free energy difference between the folded and the unfolded states, estimated as G$E(A,Cnat)sL. Here Cnat is the native structure, L is the protein length, s is an entropic parameter and sL is the free energy of the unfolded state for proteins with two-state thermodynamics. We use s  0.074, a value that was determined fitting the above equation to a set of 20 experimentally measured unfolding free energies, yielding a correlation coefficient r  0.92. The correlation coefficient between the predicted and the observed stability effect of mutations is larger than 0.8 using only two fit parameters, which is comparable with the state-of-the-art atomistic methods such as Fold-X (). Stability against unfolding is, however, not sufficient to characterize protein stability. We also have to check the stability against compact, incorrectly folded conformations of low energy that can act as kinetic traps in the folding process and, in many cases, result in pathological aggregations. Stability against misfolding is achieved by natural proteins by increasing the energy of key contacts that are frequently found in alternative structures, which is termed negative design () to distinguish it from the positive design that favors protein stability by strengthening native interactions. Therefore, stability against misfolding may be influenced by mutations at positions that are distant in the native structure. Stability against misfolded structures is difficult to estimate, and most models of protein evolution do not consider it despite its importance being increasingly recognized (). Here we do consider the set of alternative compact matrices of L residues that can be obtained from non-redundant structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). This procedure, called threading, guarantees that the contact matrices fulfill physical constraints on chain connectivity, atomic repulsion and hydrogen bonding (secondary structure), which are not enforced in the contact energy function. The free energy of this misfolded ensemble is often estimated with the Random Energy Model]: G misfold % hEA, Ci  2 2k B T  k B Ts c L 2 where5E(A,C)4is the mean and 2 is the variance of the energy of alternative compact structures (). This formula holds for temperatures above the freezing temperature at which the entropy of the misfolding ensemble vanishes. At lower temperatures, the free energy maintains the same frozen value (). A recent study showed that the third moment of the energy cannot be neglected (), so that the free energy of the misfolded ensemble can be computed as,
3where we denote with U ij  U(A i ,A j ) the contact free energy between residues i and j, and with 5C ij 4 the contact-specific mean value of the contact between the pair of residues i and j in a large set of compact protein structures of the same length L as the target structure. In the present work, we have reduced considerably the computation time approximating the above free energy () with one that only depends on pairs of residues,The quantities A 1 , A 2 , A 3 , B 1 ij , B 2 ij and B 3 ij only depend on the set of alternative contact matrices and on protein length L, and they are pre-computed before the simulation starts. In this way, we can evaluate how the misfolded free energy changes on mutation performing only order L operations for computing UA i  b, A j   UA i  a, A j  when the residue at the mutated site i changes from amino acid a to b. Thus, the stability of the native state is finally evaluated as the difference in free energy between the native, the unfolded and the misfolded states, G  EA, C nat   G misfold  k B Ts u L. The statistical properties of alternative contact matrices are computed from a large set of protein structures, distributed with the ProteinEvolver package, that can be modified by the user. Supplementaryshows the histogram of the lengths of the alternative structures. Note that, even if the two configurational entropies per residue S u (unfolded ensemble) and S c (misfolded ensemble) act additively, the free energy may not simply depend on their sum, as it is only S c that determines the freezing temperature of the misfolded ensemble.
Relationship between protein stability and fitnessOnce we have defined protein stability, for modeling protein evolution we still have to define how protein stability influences fitness. Our program provides two alternatives. The simplest possibility is a neutral fitness landscape where the fitness is a binary variable and all proteins with stability above a given threshold, i.e. G5G thr are considered viable and equally fit, whereas all proteins below threshold are considered lethal and therefore discarded. We choose as threshold the folding free energy of the protein sequence A 0 in the PDB G thr  GA 0 , C nat . This choice implies that the neutral SCS model is not sensitive to variations of the entropy parameters and it is little sensitive to variations in temperature. Alternatively, we can consider a non-neutral scenario in which the probability of mutations being fixed depends on population size. In this case, there will be segregating variation in a population. Here, the fitness landscape is modeled in such a way that fitness is an increasing function of stability, and in particular, it is proportional to the fraction of protein that is in the native state (),Note that the fitness landscape can be reduced to the neutral landscape in the low temperature limit, as in this limit, the fitness tends to 1 if G50 and to zero if G40. This is a neutral landscape with G thr  0. We then assume that the mutation rate is small, and we model selection through the Moran's birthdeath process (), which yields the fixation probability,where f i is the fitness of the wild type, f j is the fitness of the mutant, N is the effective population size and a  2 or 1 for a haploid or diploid population, respectively. Given the probability of fixation, the succession of mutant fixations can be depicted as a Markov process, in which the genotype of the evolving lineage moves from one sequence to another one according to the mutation and fixation probabilities. Both the neutral and nonneutral scenarios are formally equivalent to a Monte Carlo process in statistical mechanics, as discussed by. The main difference between them is that in the neutral case, evolved proteins attain the minimum stability compatible with viability (which in this case is a parameter of the model), as discussed by, whereas in the nonneutral scenario stability increases with population size, and it also depends, in a non-trivial way, on the statistical properties of the mutation process (). Therefore, neutral simulations depend on fewer parameters and they are more robust, whereas non-neutral ones allow exploration of more biological questions.
Simulationof the SCS model along an ancestral recombination graph SCS models are site-dependent, so the simulation across an ARG is not straightforward, as recombination events put together in the same sequence sites that have been evolving independently along different lineages. To evolve the protein as a whole across the ARG, we adapted the algorithm developed by Arenas and Posada (2010a) to evolve codons 'broken' by recombination (see). The protein evolution occurs from the ancestral to the descendant nodes (see). However, if the evolutionary process reaches a recombinant node (, nodes in gray), a protein is assigned to such a node (, step 3), but at this point the evolutionary process continues along another path (, step 4) because its parental recombinant node remains empty (without an assigned protein). This is forced to occur because in the parental recombinant node, there is no information about the protein, as the evolutionary process did not reach it yet. Later, the evolutionary process reaches the parental recombinant node (, step 5) and, at this point, there are entire proteins assigned to both recombinant nodes. Therefore, now there is a combination of the material according to the recombination breakpoint. This combination results in a new protein (, step 6) that continues the evolutionary process along its descendant branch.
FIT OF THE SCS MODELS TO REAL PROTEIN FAMILIESWe studied 10 protein families to compare the performances of the integrated SCS models versus the empirical amino acid substitution models. Also, we estimated the temperature and entropic parameters that best reproduce the observed data. We randomly selected 10 different protein families () from the Pfam database (http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/) subject to two requirements: the Pfam seed alignment must possess at least 10 proteins and at least one representative structure included in the PDB (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/). For each protein family, we downloaded the seed alignment and its phylogenetic tree from the Pfam database, and chose a representative structure from the PDB. Amino acid positions not included in the protein structure were trimmed from the alignment. The empirical amino acid replacement model that best fit each alignment was estimated with ProtTest () (see).. An example of protein evolution along the ARG. White and gray circles correspond to coalescence and recombination parental nodes, respectively. (1) Starting from the grand most recent common ancestor, the protein is evolved along branches according to the SCS substitution model and the branch lengths. (3) The process encounters a recombinant node, and because its parental node has not been assigned to a protein yet, the evolutionary process continues toward other direction (4). (5) Later, the process encounters the parental recombinant node, and because the other parental has already been assigned to a protein, (6) it combines the two proteins according to the recombination breakpoint. realizations under the neutral SCS model and the fitness SCS model using the representative PDB structure. For both neutral and fitness SCS models, we explored 27 combinations of the thermodynamic parameters temperature (T  1.75, 1.50 and 1.30), configurational entropy per unfolded residue (s u  0.025, 0.05 and 0.075) and configurational entropy per misfolded residue (s c  0.025, 0.05 and 0.075), performing 11 000 simulations. For the fitness SCS model, we assumed an effective population size N  100 (). Note that all substitution models simulated an overall similar number of substitution events (Supplementary) because they were applied along the same branch lengths.
Analysis of amino acid distributions and inferences of optimal thermodynamic conditionsWe compared the simulated amino acid distributions with those observed in the original datasets measuring their Kullback Leibler divergence at each site i:where a is any of the 20 amino acids. We compute the weightedKL, i with weights w i proportional to the number of aligned residues (excluding gaps) in column i of the alignment and summing up to 1. The smaller the quantity D KL , the closer the observed and simulated distributions are. Remarkably, we found that sequences simulated under the neutral SCS model are always closer to the observed distribution than sequences simulated under the empirical substitution model (seeand Supplementary). Varying the temperature or the configurational entropy parameters did not affect the divergence of the neutral SCS simulations, as it could be expected because the difference between the estimated G and the neutral threshold G thr is independent of the entropic parameter and it depends only weakly on temperature.On the other hand, the divergence of the fitness SCS model clearly depended on the particular thermodynamic parameters (seeand Supplementary). The average agreement between predicted and observed site-specific amino acid distributions in the fitness SCS model reached a minimum for the combination of entropic and temperature parameters (see Supplementary, minimum in the left plot), where its value was similar to the one produced by the neutral model that used as threshold the free energy of the sequence in the PDB (Supplementary, right). These optimal thermodynamic parameters were achieved for T(s u s C )  0.16. Interestingly, for some protein families, the fitness SCS model with optimal parameters was significantly less divergent from the observed distribution than the neutral SCS model (see). However, for some protein families the fitness SCS model with the 'worst' parameter values had a similar divergence from the observed sequences as the empirical substitution models. These findings indicate that the neutral SCS model is more robust, and suggest that it should be used by default, whereas the fitness SCS model may be used for refinement with well-calibrated thermodynamic parameters, as shown in Supplementary(left). Comparisons between real sequence families, SCS simulations and simulations based on empirical amino acid substitution models are shown as sequence logos in Supplementary.
Structural assessment of the simulated proteins with respect to the real proteinsWe also assessed how much a simulated protein sequence fits a representative protein structure of its family by using homology modeling techniques (). For each protein family, 200 sequences simulated under the neutral SCS model and under the best-fit empirical site-independent substitution model were modeled using the Modeller software (). For each simulated sequence, 20 structural models were generated, and they were assessed through their discrete optimized protein energy (DOPE) score (), an effective energy function designed for selecting the best model built by Modeller. Note that this energetic score isNote: For each family, the table indicates the Pfam code, sample size, UniProt entry for a protein sequence with a PDB structure, the PDB code, number of amino acids and the empirical amino acid substitution model that better fits the dataset [G indicates variable substitution rate across sites according to a gamma distribution, I indicates a proportion of invariable sites and F indicates amino acid frequencies]. independent from the one used in the SCS models. Then, we selected the sequence-structure pair with the lowest DOPE energy, whose sequence identity with the template is reported in Supplementary Table S3. We computed the DOPE energies for the experimentally known sequence-structure pair and for the best structural models of proteins simulated with the neutral SCS model and the best-fit empirical substitution model. Clearly, proteins simulated with the SCS model resulted in better sequencestructure pairs than proteins simulated with the empirical amino acid substitution model (seeand Supplementary). This result is not surprising, as we observed that the DOPE score was correlated with the contact energy of the native structure for proteins simulated under the SCS model. However, the two empirical energy functions were derived under different assumptions; therefore, the DOPE score may be regarded as another confirmation of the quality of our models. Of course it is expected that models based on substitution matrices, which do not take into account the structure, produce proteins that are less stable than proteins simulated under SCS conditions. Nevertheless, the explicit proof of this expectation is a necessary test to assess the necessity of SCS approaches.
SOFTWARE IMPLEMENTATIONWe implemented the algorithms described above in the program ProteinEvolver. The full list of capabilities of ProteinEvolver is shown in Supplementary Table S1. ProteinEvolver is written in C; it can be run in parallel using MPI and it is freely available under the GNU GPL license from http://code.google.com/p/proteine volver/. The package includes executables, source code, a detailed documentation and several practical examples (including the files and settings to mimic the evolution of the real proteins described and analyzed in the previous section).
DISCUSSIONDuring protein evolution, interactions within the protein structure lead to correlated evolution, as the rate at which a siteLeibler distance to the real protein alignments of the simulated alignments by the neutral and fitness SCS models with respect to the empirical amino acid substitution model. The 'y' axis indicates decline of the distance of the neutral and fitness (best and worst conditions) SCS models with respect to the distance of the empirical model. Note that the neutral SCS model was overall more robust than the fitness SCS model under different thermodynamic conditions (see Supplementaryand B). On the other hand, the fitness SCS model under the best conditions (see Supplementary Figs S2A, B and S3, left) could improve the neutral model in half of protein families; however, the worst conditions may lead to results without any improvement respect to the empirical model. Dope energy computed in the simulated proteins under the empirical and the neutral SCS substitution models and in the native protein, for the protein family 'phototactive yellow proteins'. Note that the dope energy is unnormalized with respect to the protein size, and therefore scores from different proteins cannot be compared directly experiences change is influenced by replacements at neighboring sites. To adequately model these correlations, we developed the simulation framework ProteinEvolver that integrates structurebased models of protein evolution and evolutionary histories that can be simulated under diverse evolutionary scenarios such as recombination (including hotspots and coldspots), migration and demographics. Importantly, our SCS models consider both the stability against unfolding and the stability against misfolding, which is difficult to estimate, as it requires the use of a set of alternative conformations, and it is frequently neglected in simulations of protein evolution despite the importance of negative design. Moreover, our approximation of the free energy of the misfolded state () allows us to estimate the effect of each mutation on both unfolding and misfolding performing a number of computations that grow only linearly with the number of amino acids. As a consequence, these models can be applied along long phylogenetic histories. The recently developed CASS tool (Grahnen and Liberles, 2012) can simulate protein sequence evolution accounting for selection to fold into a specific conformation. CASS is based on an explicit side chain representation of the protein, which can make it more accurate than our contact matrix-based method (although it is known that contact matrices allow reconstruction of all atom coordinates with precision), and with treatment of the misfolded ensemble, which is important to avoid bias toward hydrophobic sequences that are often unrealistically favored by energy functions. However, additional considerations in the latter might avoid this effect. An important characteristic of CASS, not included in our program, is that it allows selecting for structures that bind a target molecule, therefore allowing investigation of an important aspect of protein function [which is, nevertheless, intimately related with structural stability (e.g.. Another important feature of our framework, which is not present in the CASS approach, is that it allows modeling evolutionary mechanisms other than point mutations, such as recombination, which has been shown to be a key element in protein engineering () and could affect structural constraints (). For example,have shown that recombination may influence structural divergence. In addition, we can simulate molecular evolution in population genetics scenarios, including demographics, population structure and migration, which allows us to address a wide range of biological problems by investigating how these evolutionary scenarios influence the properties of the evolved sequences by altering the underlying genealogies and the properties of the substitution process, which in non-neutral fitness landscapes strongly depend on population size. On the other hand, including or ignoring structural considerations can affect population genetic inferences (i.e. inferences on recombination, demographics or migration). We assessed the performance of the SCS models versus more traditional empirical replacement matrices. For all 10 protein families studied and tested combinations of temperature and configurational entropy parameters, the neutral SCS model always simulated sequences with amino acid frequencies closer to the observed ones than the best-fit empirical amino acid replacement model. On the other hand, the fitness SCS model may outperform the neutral model under optimal thermodynamic parameters, but it is very sensitive to the correct choice of parameters. Consequently, we recommend the use of the neutral SCS substitution model by default because it is more robust, whereas the fitness SCS model should be only used with the default thermodynamic parameters, in which case it may simulate more realistic proteins for some protein families. This difference stems from the fact that the non-neutral model optimizes protein stability when the population size is large, and it may bias the evolutionary process if the thermodynamic model is not reliable. On the other hand, we think that this dependence on parameters is reassuring, as it shows that the agreement between observed and simulated distributions that ProteinEvolver achieves is not a trivial result. The benefits of using the SCS substitution models instead of the empirical substitution models were also observed by evaluating the adequacy between the simulated sequence and its best homology model with the DOPE energy. In particular, we found that the DOPE energy from proteins simulated by the SCS neutral model was always more negative (more stable 3D proteins) than proteins simulated under the empirical substitution model, although, not surprisingly, less negative than the energy of the experimentally observed sequence-structure pair. These findings were expected because the empirical models consider independent sites, and therefore they are unable to account for physical interactions that promote stability (e.g.). Nevertheless, they constitute a minimal test that indicates the consistency of SCS models and confirms the limitation of empirical substitution matrices. The consideration of structural information should result in more sensitive and more accurate representations of molecular evolution than those based on sequence data alone (). Our structure-based models could help for a more realistic benchmarking of methods trying to take into account site dependency induced by protein structure (e.g.) and the important influences of the unfolded and misfolded configurations on the protein stability (). At the population level, the framework may help, e.g. (i) to evaluate the range of proteins that one may expect to observe in different populations (where these populations can change their sizes with time and can exchange migration), (ii) to validate analytical frameworks (e.g. methods for the inference of ARGs, ancestral protein reconstruction, recombination breakpoints and recombination rates, from proteins or protein-coding genes while accounting for structural constrains) or even (iii) to infer evolutionary parameters of interest and carry out model choice in an approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) approach (); e.g. estimate recombination rates or select among different demographic and migration models from protein data while accounting for structural information. At the molecular level, the framework may help, for example, to study the influence of recombination events on the structure-based stability of the resulting proteins or to perform structurally constrained substitution model choice by using ABC.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Protein evolution along phylogenetic histories at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
M.Arenas et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
