Motivation: Experimental reproducibility is fundamental to the progress of science. Irreproducible research decreases the efficiency of basic biological research and drug discovery and impedes experimental data reuse. A major contributing factor to irreproducibility is difficulty in interpreting complex experimental methodologies and designs from written text and in assessing variations among different experiments. Current bioinformatics initiatives either are focused on computational research reproducibility (i.e. data analysis) or laboratory information management systems. Here, we present a software tool, ProtocolNavigator, which addresses the largely overlooked challenges of interpretation and assessment. It provides a biologist-friendly open-source emulation-based tool for designing, documenting and reproducing biological experiments. Availability and implementation: ProtocolNavigator was implemented in Python 2.7, using the wx module to build the graphical user interface. It is a platform-independent software and freely available from http://protocolnavigator.org/index.html under the GPL v2 license.
CASE STUDY3.1 Measurement of nanoparticle redistribution in a proliferating tumour population-establishing the principle of a 'conserved signal'The researchers' goal is to establish the appropriate experimental designs to determine how a biophotonics signal from the nanoparticles is diluted over time as a tumour population proliferates. Two alternate protocols were designed using ProtocolNavigator and discussed among the interdisciplinary research team. In design terms, the first approach () achieves a time course for the tumour cultures achieved by seeding the cells at staggered time points (on sequential days), and labelling each population with nanoparticles 24 h post seeding. Thus, all the samples are delivered on the same day for final measurement using a flow cytometer. The second approach () uses a continuous sampling approach, where cells are seeded identically in different vessels at the single time point and the cultures are labelled and processed for measurement using flow cytometry on five subsequent days. In both cases, the cell culture is sampled after 2, 3, 4 and 5 days of growth and, in both cases, the biologist is able to adequately monitor the growth parameters of the cultures as well as the attenuation of nanoparticle signals (fluorescence per cell). The staggered approach is classically used when the perturbing agent to be added is a small molecule or 'drug', where uptake by the cell is assumed to be invariant each time. It might also be preferred if it is important for data acquisition to occur on the same day for convenience or to ensure control of instrument performance. However, from a nanoparticle perspective there is a fundamental flaw in the staggered design: the uptake of 'particulates' by cell is innately variable (), and as a result, the effective cellular labelling is not uniform. This presents unpredictability of the initial nanoparticle uptake per cell, and thus the starting signal, leading to a misinterpretation of the consequential signal processing and implementation of the 'conserved signal' principle. Thus, a continuous sampling approach () was chosen, so that the computational researchers could apply this signal conservation principle. The experiment was conducted following the designed protocol, the resulting flow cytometry data (FCS files) was linked to the map, and the map and data were shared with the computational members of the team for successful analysis. This experience confirmed that for the computational researchers to easily interpret and use these experiment-derived data, visual perception and understanding of the experimental design and provenance information was critical. For example, understanding the crucial differences between the arrowmarked datasets (derived after 3 days of nanoparticle labelling in both experimental designs) was more apparent with visual representation compared with only a narrative text-based description of the experimental metadata.
CONCLUSIONAlthough ProtocolNavigator has been primarily developed for basic cell-based research, new instruments or materials can be added as per prospective users' demand. Importantly, the emulation-based documentation and automatic design depiction concept introduced here is applicable across many research environments where practice, design and interdisciplinary communication are serious concerns (e.g. clinical trials or animal studies). By linking practice variation with experimental data, ProtocolNavigator not only introduces an intuitive mechanism for identifying key factors for reproducibility but also the foundation to convey best practices in quantitative terms.Here, cells were seeded in all eight vessels at time 0 h and then labelled with nanoparticles (four vessels; 23.59 h later) again with corresponding unlabelled control (four vessels). Thereafter, data acquisition was performed on vessels (one from fluorescently labelled and one from control) 48, 72, 96 and 120 h post seeding. For both scenarios 'A' and 'B', eight flow cytometer FCS files were acquired of cells exposed to nanoparticles and control for varying numbers of days. Experiments are available in Supplementary Information for download and navigation through ProtocolNavigator
BACKGROUND Reproducibility is a fundamental tenet for all scientific endeavour that ensures the credibility of findings. It is particularly important for data serving as the basis for the development of therapeutics, an extremely costly process. Recent studies show an alarming increase of irreproducible biological research (Begley and Ellis, 2012) and decrease of biological data reuse (Editorial, 2011). Prominent reproducibility initiatives in bioinformatics are focused either on Taverna-like (Wolstencroft et al., 2013) 'data analysis' centric computational research or laboratory information management systems like 'data curation-management' infrastructures (Rocca-Serra et al., 2010). Much less emphasis has been given to facilitating the capture, interpretation and identification of methodology variation of biological research (Editorial, 2013). For 'long tail' biologists (Wallis et al., 2013), where the majority of biological experiments are undertaken, the practice variation (how individual researchers have executed the method) among experimentalists remains idiosyncratic and changes frequently. In the absence of a well-structured methodology or standard operating procedure, the design of an experiment is crucial for interpretation and identification of variability. Therefore, illustrating the design in an understandable and flexible manner is critical when addressing the challenges of reproducibility (Millard et al., 2011). However, the experimental design is an abstract representation of the strategies undertaken, and at present, is conveyed by written narratives or interpersonal conversations. Both these approaches are unreliable, as they depend on a shared language, overlapping experiences and alignment of mental models (Eriksson and Webster, 2008). 2 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Addressing these challenges, here we introduce ProtocolNavigator. Centred on cell biology research, this software provides an interactive environment where experimentalists can emulate their laboratory practice on a virtual laboratory bench. As a result of 'acting out' the experiment, the design of the experiment is automatically depicted onto a canvas as a map with action icons and tracks for navigation. It is thus more readily adopted than software designed to simply capture metadata, which requires filling in forms or building workflows, and yet provides no immediate understanding about the experimental design and sample handling processes. ProtocolNavigator consists of three panels with linked functionality and display. Using the Inventory panel, the user creates an 'inventory' of instances with detailed descriptions of items such as instrumentation, materials and reagents. Importantly, this inventory can be reused, adapted and shared. Using the Bench panel (similar to a laboratory workbench), the previously created instances from the inventory are applied to different experimental samples at certain time points. The time-integrated action-based documentation approach in ProtocolNavigator is unique in enabling researchers to capture their real-life laboratory practice (e.g. temporal variation of activity). The Map panel automatically depicts the practice map or design of the experiment, with spatiotemporally linked set of branches and activity icons for retrieving both action details and experiment-derived data. The linking of laboratory practice with actual experimental *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
ProtocolNavigator at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
