We present an improved version of our Protein Peeling web server dedicated to the analysis of protein structure architecture through the identification of protein units produced by an iterative splitting algorithm. New features include identification of structural domains, detection of unstructured terminal elements and evaluation of the stability of protein unit structures. Availability: The website is free and open to all users with no login requirements at http://www.dsimb.inserm.fr/dsimb-tools/
INTRODUCTIONAnalyzing the architecture and organization of protein structures is essential for understanding protein flexibility, folding, functions and interactions. We previously proposed an innovative representation of protein architecture that gives a detailed description of protein structure anatomy. Proteins are split into sets of compact subregions, called protein units (PUs). A PU corresponds to one sequence fragment characterized by a high number of intra-PU contacts and a low number of inter-PU contacts. Contact probabilities between residues are computed as distances between C atoms using a logistic function. Using this contact probability matrix and an optimization procedure based on Matthews's correlation coefficient (MCC) between submatrices, the algorithm defines optimal cutting points that separate the region examined into two or three PUs. This methodology is called Protein Peeling (PP) (). The process is iterated until the compactness of the PUs reaches a given limit. An index assesses the compactness quality and relative independence of each PU. PUs bridge the representation and description gap between secondary structures and structural domains. PP is a useful tool for better understanding and analyzing the organization of protein structures. The PP 2 web server () has been developed to accommodate advanced parameters. Here, we present a new version of our PP web server that offers substantial improvements and new features: recognition of unstructured N-or C-terminal segments, a novel scoring function for PU characterization and identification of structural domains. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
METHODS
Unstructured extremity recognitionUnstructured N-or C-terminal segments can be problematic for protein analysis or molecular simulation. Using PP, this type of segment was observed in half of the protein structures found in Protein Data Bank (). We thus included a new assignment method in the web server. A PU is considered unstructured if it is isolated at the first cutting event and never thereafter.
Energy calculationPUs show a wide range of shapes and many differences in the type or density of internal contacts. These characteristics are related to internal energy. To evaluate stability and contact energy, we implemented the DOPE statistical potential () to compute the pseudo-energy of PUs. This value gives an approximation of the internal energy of PUs and insight on the structural significance of observed PUs.
Structural domain identificationOne major potential for the PP web server was the possibility to use the PP method to identify protein domains. We, therefore, developed a new algorithm called domain reconstruction (DR). The identification process includes two steps: (i) PUs are isolated using the basic PP top-down induction approach and (ii) PUs obtained at the final level of PP are assembled using the DR algorithm with a bottom-up strategy, similar to hierarchical agglomerative clustering, as follows. Starting from the final PU set, the algorithm combines each, unique PU to another PU at each recursive step. Thus, PUs are gradually merged at each step, forming many possible domain delineations. The best merging events are chosen among all the possible events according to the contact ratio (CR) criterion, derived from the Protein Domain Parser method (). This criterion is based on contact probability matrix computed in PP and helps estimate the quality of merging events. The CR criterion measured for PUs i and j iswhere cp(i, j) is contact probability between PU i and PU j , S(i) and S(j) are the length of PU i and PU j. Finally, c(ij) and S(ij) are, respectively, the contact probability and the size of the whole domain formed by merging PU i and PU j. The  value is 0.43 as in the PDP method. High CR values indicate a high number of contacts between PU i and PU j ; consequently, theses PUs are good candidates for merging them into one domain. During the process, a second measure, the average contact probability density (CPD), also used in other method (), is computed to estimate the quality of newly formed domains. The assembly routine is reiterated and the number of domains gradually decreases until all PUs are merged into a unique domain corresponding to the whole protein. After producing different levels of potential domain delineation, a postprocessing step is launched to examine and choose the best domaindelineations. First, domain partitions at each level are sorted according to the mean CPD of domain delineation. Second, starting from the highest level, i.e. the full protein, each level is examined and accepted or not, according to a criterion that combines both the minimum CPD measured between domains and the maximum CR measured among all domains. Domains with a size of less than 30 are discarded. The criterion combining CR and CPD and the domain size threshold were optimized in a leave-one-out experiment on a published benchmark dataset of protein domains (). This experiment led to 82% of similar domain delineations, based on the same performance measurement method as. It has been demonstrated that human expert and automatic methods often show discrepancies in the number and minimal size of domains, presence or absence of fragments within domains and domain boundaries (). Results of different human expert may even disagree, leading to unclear and sometimes ambiguous principles of domain partitioning. To overcome the difficulties raised by these studies, our DR algorithm can propose alternative domain partitions. Thus, different levels of partitioning and consequently different sizes and complexities of the resulting domains are produced by the DR algorithm. This results in broader and more flexible definition of structural domains (see). Considering alternative domain delineations increases the rate of agreement onbenchmark dataset to 95% for an average of five alternative propositions and to 98% for 15 alternative propositions.
SERVERGiven the 3D coordinates of a protein, the server is able to identify PUs, domain delineations, and, if they exist, unstructured extremities. The server also provides some analysis on isolated PUs.
InputPP 3D only accepts protein structure in PDB file format (). The file is checked (to verify consistency of the format), cleaned (alternative positions are removed and non-standard residues are renamed) and renumbered. In multi-protein chain files, only the first chain is treated. Various parameters can be adjusted, such as parameters that direct cutting, those used for calculating the contact probability map and that only regular secondary structures should be taken into account.
Output and graphicsMany graphics and raw output files are available through the web server at the end of process. The graphical results include the contact probability map, different representations of protein structures in which PUs or domains can be easily identified by color, and representations of primary structure, in which PUs and domains are colored and clearly delimited.
The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
