Statistical validation of peptide assignments from a large-scale shotgun proteomics experiment is a critical step, and various methods for evaluating significance based on decoy database search are in practice. False discovery rate (FDR) estimation of peptide assignments assesses global significance and corrects for multiple comparisons. Various approaches have been proposed for FDR estimation but unavailability of standard tools or libraries leads to development of many in-house scripts followed by manual steps that are error-prone and low-throughput. The ProteoStats library provides an open-source framework for developers with many FDR estimation and visualization features for several popular search algorithms. It also provides accurate q-values, which can be easily integrated in any proteomics pipeline to provide automated, accurate, high-throughput statistical validation and minimize manual errors. Availability: https://sourceforge.net/projects/mssuite/files/ProteoStats/.
INTRODUCTIONHigh-throughout shotgun proteomics generates millions of spectra that are assigned to peptides by database searching in an automated manner. A scoring function is used to calculate the level of similarity found between the experimental spectrum and the theoretical spectrum from a peptide. This quantitative value, known as the score, may be a probability, an expectation value or a simple score. Owing to random matching of peaks in a peptide spectral match (PSM), there is a fuzzy boundary between true and false matches leading to sensitivity versus specificity trade-off at any chosen threshold score. Conventional metrics like P-value/E-value are intended for significance assessment of a single hit (or PSM) but are not suitable for global significance assessment in large-scale datasets. A multiple testing correction procedure known as false discovery rate (FDR) is applied to the results for controlling the false positives globally. Target-decoy (TD) search-based FDR estimation is used as a standard method for global significance assessment (). Several challenges can arise in (i) dealing with multiple nonstandard file formats, (ii) presence of correct peptides in decoy results, which should be removed prior to FDR calculation and (iii) q-value calculation. Leucine/Isoleucine cannot be distinguished by collision-induced dissociation, resulting in identical scores for both target and decoy peptides. Such peptides need to be removed from decoy hits. This is a non-trivial exercise if carried out manually but critical for accurate estimation of FDR because even one such peptide may penalize hundreds of matches in target database. The calculation can be tedious for large datasets and numerous files. FDR estimation has recently been a major field of research in statistical proteomics, and several methods and their refined variants have been proposed. Unfortunately, not as many tools are available as there are FDR estimation methods. Most methods involve custom in-house scripts that may not implement all nuances of the algorithm and thus lack provenance. Custom pipelines only include the most popular methods like concatenated () or separate () methods, even though the refined methods improve the results. FDRAnalysis () provides FDR for three algorithms but only provides FDR for concatenated search. The barrier to their widespread adoption is the lack of software. This may also lead to different implementations of same method, code duplication and a considerable waste of research effort.
DESCRIPTION OF PROTEOSTATSTo address the issues mentioned earlier, we have developed an open-source cross-platform scripting library, ProteoStats, which uses several FDR estimation procedures. The library is written in Perl and can be easily interfaced with other pipelines. The library also provides a simple programming interface for visualizing these results and quality control of PSMs. ProteoStats supports OMSSA (), MassWiz (), Mascot (), X!Tandem (), Sequest (), MyriMatch () and Comet (), besides the generic PepXML and text file formats (Concatenated searches: The spectra are searched in a single concatenated database formed by combining the target and decoy proteins. The target and decoy candidate peptides compete against each other. Each spectrum will be assigned either a target or a decoy peptide as the best hit.The two approaches are different only in the context of TD competition, which can be held a posteriori (). Because it is easy to perform the TD competition even after a separate search, ProteoStats library requires results from separate search irrespective of the FDR method a user wants to select. The ProteoStats library supports many formulations on FDR:Concatenated FDR () Separate FDR () FDR with percentage of incorrect target correction (Refined FDR on separate method ()Refined method on concatenated FDR (The ProteoStats library estimates FDR using the desired method in a series of steps that involve (i) native result file reading and conversion to text format, (ii) removing decoy peptides identical to target peptides, (iii) preparing target and decoy score arrays, (iv) estimating false positives based on FDR method, (v) iteratively calculating FDR for every decoy score as threshold and (vi) calculating q-values and writing output to a file. For visual analysis, receiver-operating characteristic curves (ROC) and various types of scatter plots and histograms can be plotted from FDR files (see Supplementary Data). The output is formatted in an easy to manipulate CSV/text file for further processing using any scripting language making subsequent analysis hassle-free. For charts, Excel spreadsheets can be created. These files can be easily imported into R environment for further data visualization/post-processing. The test datasets, sample input and expected outputs with ROC curves are provided along with a comparative table for various FDR methods across search engines (Supplementary Data). ProteoStats library has been extensively used in) and integrated multi-algorithmic analysis on plasma (). The FlexiFDR method () was also developed on top of the core framework of this library.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CONCLUSION Proteostats is a highly versatile, platform independent, opensource, extensible and easy-to-use framework for FDR estimation and statistical control of results from shotgun proteomics database search. Apart from providing an assorted list of different FDR estimation procedures, it also provides single PSM metric-like q-values, and visualization features like ROC, histogram, Venn diagram and scatterplot for data quality assessment and comparative analysis.
A.K.Yadav et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
