Motivation: Subcellular localization of proteins is one of the most significant characteristics of living cells. Prediction of protein subcellular locations is crucial to the understanding of various protein functions. Therefore, an accurate, computationally efficient and reliable prediction system is required. Results: In this article, the predictions of various Support Vector Machine (SVM) models have been combined through majority voting. The proposed ensemble SVM-SubLoc has achieved the highest success rates of 99.7% using hybrid features of Haralick textures and local binary patterns (HarLBP), 99.4% using hybrid features of Haralick textures and Local Ternary Patterns (HarLTP). In addition, SVM-SubLoc has yielded 99.0% accuracy using only local ternary patterns (LTPs) based features. The dimensionality of HarLBP feature vector is 581 compared with 78 and 52 for HarLTP and LTPs, respectively. Hence, SVM-SubLoc in conjunction with LTPs is fast, sufficiently accurate and simple predictive system. The proposed SVM-SubLoc approach thus provides superior prediction performance using the reduced feature space compared with existing approaches. Availability: A web server accompanying the proposed prediction scheme is available at http://111.68.99.218/ SVM-SubLoc
INTRODUCTIONComprehension of the functions of proteins is of prime importance in the field of biological sciences (). One of the significant characteristics of proteins is its subcellular localization that reveals precious information regarding the working of proteins (). Determining protein subcellular locations is significant to the understanding of various protein functions. For instance, during the drug discovery process, precise knowledge of the subcellular localization of proteins can be useful for the identification of drugs. In addition, the effectiveness of drugs can be estimated by knowing the exact locations of proteins before and after using the drugs (). Fluorescence microscopy is frequently used to determine subcellular localization of proteins in cells. Images of protein * To whom correspondence should be addressed. locations are normally analyzed in traditional ways, which are time consuming and prone to errors (). Automated approaches are thus required for the classification of such images. These methods need to be computationally efficient and accurate. Fortunately, considerable progress is made in recent years for the development of computational methods that can automatically determine the subcellular protein locations from fluorescence microscopy images (). Murphy et al. have developed subcellular location feature (SLF) sets and trained a back propagation neural network (BPNN) to test the performance of these features using 2D HeLa dataset (). Boland and Murphy have tested the performance of Haralick textures, Zernike moments, SLF1 and different combination of these three by employing the BPNNs ().have trained BPNN using enhanced feature sets consisting of Haralick textures, Zernike moments and morphological features.have employed Support Vector Machine (SVM) using various feature extraction strategies including threshold adjacency statistics (TASs), Zernike moments as well as a hybrid of TASs and Haralick textures.have developed automated classification system for protein subcellular location images in multiresolution subspaces. They have employed ANN at different decomposition levels to obtain the classification results, which are then combined through weight assignment.have utilized random subspace of LevenbergMarquardt neural networks and AdaBoost learning algorithm. In addition, they have employed the fusion between these two ensemble classifiers, while different local and global descriptors have been implemented as feature sets. Recently,have employed a random subspace of LevenbergMarquardt neural networks using optimized sets of various feature extraction strategies including Wavelet features, Haralick textures, local binary patterns (LBPs), local ternary patterns (LTPs) and TASs for 2D HeLa and LOCATE mouse protein datasets. The models proposed by different researchers have still margin in improving the prediction accuracy and reducing the dimensionality of the feature space. The aim of this study is to develop an accurate and simple system compared with the existing approaches. We thus develop both individual and hybrid feature based classification approaches for the prediction of protein subcellular localization.In the proposed approach, we employ Haralick textures, Zernike moments, LBPs, LTPs and TASs based feature extraction strategies. Different hybrid feature sets are formed by concatenating these features. The performance of various kernels of SVM has been investigated using these features. To enhance the performance of the proposed model, the success rates of different SVMs have been combined through majority voting. Discrete Wavelet Transforms is used for the extraction of Haralick textures and Zernike moments only. For this purpose, we have decomposed the image upto four levels so that the best decomposition level could be detected. Then, we have used statistical measures to acquire Haralick textures and Zernike moments from each decomposed image. Rest of the article is organized as follows: Datasets and different feature extraction strategies are described in Section 2. The proposed approach is presented in Section 3. Results and discussions are elaborated in Section 4. Conclusions are drawn at the end.
METHODS
DatasetsThree datasets have been used to evaluate the performance of our proposed scheme including 2D HeLa, LOCATE Endogenous and LOCATE Transfected datasets. The 2D HeLa dataset contains 862 single-cell images, each of size 382382, distributed in 10 classes (). LOCATE Endogenous and LOCATE Transfected datasets contain 502 and 553 images, respectively. Each image is of size 768512, having up to 13 cells. LOCATE Endogenous and LOCATE Transfected images are distributed in 10 and 11 classes, respectively () Classes and images per each class of 2D HeLa and LOCATE datasets are provided in Supplementary Tables S12 and S13, respectively.
Feature extraction strategiesIn this work, we have employed various texture based feature extraction strategies such as Haralick textures, Zernike moments, LBPs, LTPs and TASs. We describe these feature extraction strategies as follows.
Haralick texture featuresHaralick features are texture based statistical measures utilized by a number of researchers for classification (). A Spatial Gray Level Dependence Matrix (SGLD) of size N N is first obtained for an image with N gray levels at certain angle  (i.e. 0 @BULLET , 45 @BULLET , 90 @BULLET and 135 @BULLET ) at some distance d where d is measured in terms of pixel distance. In this work, d is set to one. Then, 13 statistical measures are calculated from SGLD matrix, namely energy, correlation, inertia, entropy, inverse difference moment, sum average, sum variance, sum entropy, difference average, difference variance, difference entropy and two information measures of correlation. In this work, features along horizontal and vertical directions are combined by averaging. Similarly, features along diagonal and off-diagonal directions are also combined by averaging. As a result, we have obtained a total of 26 features for each image without Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT ). With DWT, the number of images at each decomposition level varies as well as the dimension of feature space as shown in.
Zernike moment-based featuresA set of complex polynomials, which form a complete orthogonal set over the interior of the unit circle, provides the basis to compute Zernike moments. Zernike moments do not bear redundant information between the moments because Zernike polynomials are orthogonal to each other. They are computationally inexpensive compared with other texture based features (). Zernike moments of an image can be calculated using Equation (1) ().where I(x,y) represents the pixel intensity at position (x,y),x 2 +y 2  1,0  l  n,nl is even. V * nl indicates complex conjugate of the Zernike polynomialof degree n and angular dependence l. Its value can be computed as follows:where 0  l  n,nl is even and In this work, we have obtained Zernike moments of order 12 as used by;. These features are extracted in spatial and transform domains. We have employed DWT for the transformation, which decomposes each image into four subimages. We have computed features at each decomposition level separately. Due to the varying number of images at each decomposition level, dimensions of feature vectors also vary as shown in.
Local Binary PatternsLBPs is a texture-based feature extraction strategy for gray level patterns in an image, proposed by. LBPs operator evaluates the binary differences between the gray value of the central pixel c and the gray values of P pixels in the neighborhood on a circle of radius R around c. (). The procedure of obtaining LBPs code is depicted inshows the value of each pixel p after applying the threshold. The LBPs code is generated according to Equation (3):Page: 93 9197Where g c and g p represent the gray-level values of central and neighboring pixels, respectively. LBPs are computed using uniform (u2), rotation invariant (ri) and uniform rotation invariant (riu2) mappings on three different configurations: (R = 1, N = 8), (R = 2, N = 16) and (R = 3, N = 24) where R and N indicate radius and neighborhood, respectively.
Protein subcellular localization using spatial and transform domain features
Local Ternary Patterns LTPsis based on the generalization of LBPs (). In LTPs, the difference between a central pixel c and its neighbor u is based upon a ternary value according to a threshold  as given by Equation (4).To reduce computational complexity, the ternary pattern is split into two binary patterns according to its positive and negative components, as shown in. The histograms computed from the component binary patterns are concatenated to obtain the feature vector for the ternary pattern (). LTPs are also computed using uniform (u2), rotation invariant (ri) and uniform rotation invariant (riu2) mappings on three different configurations i.e.) where R and N indicate value of radius and number of neighborhood pixels, respectively.
Threshold Adjacency Statistics TASsbased features are computationally inexpensive and efficient metric for classifying subcellular localization images (). TASs features are computed from three 9-bin histograms, obtained from three different binary images, generated using three different thresholds (). These features are calculated as follows. First, a threshold is applied to the image to produce a binary image. Then, nine statistics are computed from that binary image as shown in. The first statistic is the number of white pixels that have no white neighbors, the second statistic is the number of white pixels that have exactly one white neighbor and the third statistic is the number of white pixels that have exactly two white neighbors. This process is repeated up to eight white neighboring pixels for 8-bit gray scale image. Two other sets of TASs are calculated in similar fashion. Each set of TAS is computed for binary images with pixel intensities in the range of  to 255,  to 255 and + to 255Highest values obtained are represented in bold.
Fig. 4. Framework of the proposed SVM-SubLoc.where  is the average pixel intensity and  is the user defined threshold. The value of threshold  should not be <30 since less values are considered as background intensities (). We have observed the best results when  = 140 as shown in.
Hybrid featuresA hybrid feature model is produced by combining different individual features to enhance the discrimination power of the feature space. The hybrid features include ZHar (Zernike + Haralick), HarLBP (Haralick + LBPs), HarLTP (Haralick + LTPs) and HarTAS (Haralick + TASs). Only ZHar hybrid features are formed both in spatial and transform domains.
SVMSVM is a popular machine learning technique used in the field of pattern recognition and classification. The theoretical detail of SVM is available in the machine learning literature (). It was developed for binary classification problems. However, to employ SVM for multiclassification problems, a straightforward approach is to reduce the multiclassification to a series of binary classifications through one-versus-rest mechanism. For a k-class classification problem, k SVMs are built where the ith SVM is trained on every instance in the ith class with positive labels and all other instances with negative labels. In this study, we have used four different kernels; linear (lin), polynomial (poly) of degree 2, Radial Basis Function (RBF) and sigmoid (sig).
The proposed SVM-SubLoc approachThe framework of our proposed approach is shown in.
M.Tahir et al.performance of various SVMs has been evaluated using these features. The predictions of these SVMs have been combined through majority voting to improve the performance of the proposed model. In case of a tie among the individual classifiers' voting, preference is given to the classifier with the highest performance.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONSThe Jackknife test is the most accurate and significantly efficient method for measuring the performance of algorithms (). We have applied 5fold cross-validation to explore the performance of the proposed approach. In case of 2D HeLa, due to the slight imbalance, the input data is stratified before applying the cross-validation. The analysis of the results for 2D HeLa dataset is presented in Section 3.1. The features that performed well on 2D HeLa have also been tested on LOCATE Endogenous and Transfected datasets. In Section 3.2, only the best results on the two LOCATE datasets have been reported. However, detailed analysis using LTPs, HarLBP and HarLTP is provided in the Supplementary Material. We have used Accuracy, F-score, MCC and Q-statistic as performance measures.
Performance analysis for 2D HeLa datasetWe have computed the aforementioned measures using individual and hybrid features for 2D HeLa dataset. In this section, first, we discuss the performance of SVM-SubLoc using individual feature sets on 2D HeLa dataset. Afterwards, the performance of SVMSubLoc will be reported for hybrid feature sets.
Performance of SVM-SubLoc using individual feature setsIn this section, we discuss our findings about the performance of SVM-SubLoc using individual features constructed in Section 2.2.shows the performance of SVM-SubLoc using Haralick textures with/without DWT. Here, L and D represent the decomposition level and dimension of the feature vector, respectively. The individual RBF-SVM has achieved the highest success rates at all decomposition levels. Particularly, its highest accuracy 84.1% is observed at second decomposition level. Further, the SVMSubLoc has brought a significant improvement in the prediction of subcellular protein locations for 2D HeLa dataset. SVM-SubLoc has achieved the highest accuracy 93.2%, which is 9.1% higher than that of RBF-SVM. This shows that second level is the best decomposition level for this dataset. This is because at lower decomposition levels some valuable hidden information is lost. However, at higher decomposition levels, we obtained redundant information, which degraded the performance of the classifiers. The highest MCC value at second level shows that the prediction is quite encouraging. Similarly, the highest F-score value at this level indicates the best accuracy at this level. On the other hand, the highest diversity is obtained at first decomposition level with the Q value of 0.18.
Performance of SVM-SubLoc using Haralick texture features
Performance of SVM-SubLoc using Zernike moment-based featuresThe predictions of SVM-SubLoc using Zernike moments are reported inlevel, the highest yielded accuracy is 46.5%, which indicates poor feature extraction at that level. Among the base classifiers, sig-SVM has shown poor performance; only the accuracy of RBF-SVM is improved with the increase in the decomposition levels. We achieved the highest accuracy 67.8% at fourth level. Though, SVM-SubLoc has yielded the best accuracy 58.5% at second level due to the maximum diversity at this level as indicated by the Q value of 0.01. However, prediction quality and accuracy of the test are not reasonably good as shown by the MCC and F-score values at second decomposition level.demonstrates the predictions of SVM-SubLoc using TASs for gray images without DWT. In individual base classifiers, RBFSVM has achieved the highest accuracy of 81.0% compared with other SVMs. The success rate of SVM-SubLoc is 91.6%, which is 10.6% higher than that of RBF-SVM. The increased ensemble accuracy shows the significance of the ensemble classifier. MCC value of 0.69 shows good quality of the prediction, whereas F-score value of 0.70 indicates fine accuracy of the performed test. The Q value of 0.31 reveals that results have 69% diversity. It has been analyzed during the experiments that TASs have produced the most significant results for  = 140. The discriminating capability of these features at this threshold is enhanced. The results achieved at other threshold values are presented in Supplementary Table S1 for comparison.
Performance of SVM-SubLoc using TASs
Performance of SVM-SubLoc using LBPsThe predicted outcomes of SVM-SubLoc using LBPs are presented in. Here, m represents mapping. In individual base learners, RBF-SVM has achieved the highest accuracy of 88.0% using riu2 LBPs for R = 3 and N = 24. However, SVM-SubLoc has yielded the highest accuracy of 95.5% using u2 LBPs for R = 3 and N = 24. The performance accuracy of SVM-SubLoc is 7.5% higher than that of RBF-SVM, which highlights the significance of the proposed ensemble technique. The maximum diversity of SVM-SubLoc has been observed when the features are extracted on the circle of radius 3 as is evident from Q value of 0.25. The best values of MCC (=0.81) and F-score (=0.82) are also obtained using u2 LBPs.
Performance of SVM-SubLoc using LTPsIn Table 5, the success rates of SVM-SubLoc using LTPs are shown for gray images without DWT. There is an additional parameter  used by LTPs, which defines the threshold. In individual classifiers, poly-SVM has achieved the highest accuracy 94.4% for R = 3, N = 24, and  = 80 using riu2 LTPs. The highest accuracy of 99.0% achieved by SVM-SubLoc is 4.6% higher than that of poly-SVM. It has been investigated that LTPs have more discriminative capabilityPage: 95 9197compared with other feature sets. As is evident from the Q value of 0.15, we observed the maximum diversity using riu2 LTPs for R = 3 and N = 24 and that is the main reason why the ensemble accuracy is high. An MCC value of 0.95 and F-score value of 0.95 also indicate that discrimination power of riu2 LTPs is better. It is evident fromthat threshold values vary at R = 1 and R = 2,3. At smaller circles, the small value of  performs well. However, at larger circles, the value of  should be greater.
Protein subcellular localization using spatial and transform domain features
Performance of SVM-SubLoc using hybrid feature setsIn this section, we discuss our findings regarding SVM-SubLoc using hybrid feature sets as given in Section 2.2.6.
Performance of SVM-SubLoc using ZHarIn Table 6, we present the predicted accuracies of SVM-SubLoc using the hybrid of Zernike and Haralick texture features with/without DWT. In individual classifiers, we have found the best performance of 80.8% for RBF-SVM. The highest accuracy 93.2% obtained by SVM-SubLoc is 12.4% higher than that of RBF-SVM. The second decomposition level has been found to be the best level for discriminating subcellular location images. However, most diverse results are obtained at first level as indicated by Q value of 0.12. Highest values of MCC 0.73 and F-score 0.74 are also achieved at second level, which show that both quality of prediction and accuracy of the test are best at this level. The individual classifiers using these hybrid features do not produce better results compared with using their individual constituents. However, SVM-SubLoc has yielded the same accuracy as yielded by the ensemble using Haralick textures.
Performance of SVM-SubLoc using HarTASThe success rates of SVM-SubLoc using HarTAS have been given isresults at other threshold values are presented in Supplementary Table S2.
Performance of SVM-SubLoc using HarLBPThe results of SVM-SubLoc using hybrid feature set of HarLBP are shown in. In individual classifiers, RBF-SVM has achieved the highest accuracy of 94.4% for R = 3 and N = 24. The obtained accuracy is 18.0% higher than the highest accuracy using Haralick textures (at 0th level) as given inand 6.4% higher than the highest accuracy using LBPs as shown inusing the same kernel. The SVM-SubLoc has yielded 99.7% accuracy, which is 5.3% higher than that of RBF-SVM. It has been observed that u2 LBPs, computed on a larger circle and concatenated with Haralick textures, gives more discrimination power to the classifier. MCC and F-score values of 0.98 each indicate that both the quality of prediction and accuracy of test are admirable when Halick textures are concatenated with u2 LBPs for R = 3 and N = 24. However, diverse results are obtained when Haralick textures are concatenated with u2 LBPs on circles of radius 1 and 2 as indicated by Q value of 0.14.
Performance of SVM-SubLoc using HarLTPThe predictions of SVM-SubLoc using HarLTP have been presented in. In individual classifiers, poly-SVM has yielded the highest accuracy of 94.7% using the hybrid of Haralick textures and u2 LTPs for R = 2, N = 16 and  = 80. The ensemble SVM-SubLoc has achieved the highest accuracy of 99.4% using the hybrid of Haralick textures and riu2 LTPs for R = 3, N = 24 and  = 80. The ensemble has yielded 4.7% higher accuracy than that of poly-SVM. MCC and F-score have yielded the highest values for the hybrid of Haralick and riu2 LTPs for R = 3, N = 24 and  = 80. It means that prediction quality and test accuracy are promising. Maximum diversity is achieved using HarLTP as shown by Q value of 0.05.
Performance analysis for LOCATE datasetsIn this section,
Comparison with existing approachesIn Table 11, we have carried out a performance comparative analysis of the proposed SVM-SubLoc approach with previously well-known approaches for 2D HeLa and the two LOCATE datasets. The accuracy of 95.4% is obtained by the proposed approach for 2D HeLa dataset in (). Nanni and Lumini have reported accuracies of 94.2, 98.4 and 96.5% for the 2D HeLa, LOCATE Endogenous and Transfected datasets, respectively (). In an another paper,have reported the highest accuracy 97.5% for 2D HeLa dataset.have also reported 95.8% accuracy for 2D HeLa dataset, 99.5% for LOCATE Endogenous and 97.0% accuracy for LOCATE Transfected dataset. On the other hand, our proposed SVMSubLoc approach has yielded 99.7% accuracy using HarLBP for 2D HeLa dataset that is 2.20% higher than the highest accuracy reported in. In addition, using HarLBP our approach has yielded the accuracy of 99.8% for LOCATE Endogenous dataset, which is 0.3% higher than the highest accuracy obtained by. Similarly, using HarLTP, our approach achieved 98.7% accuracy for LOCATE Transfected dataset that is 1.7% higher than that of the proposed technique byThe performance of SVM-SubLoc approach is enhanced due to the two level ensembles; one is at the features level and the other is at the classifiers decision level. At features level, we have constructed the hybrid features by concatenating different individual feature sets. These features have improved the discrimination power of the features. At the classifiers decision level, we have combined the predictions of the utilized SVMs through the majority-voting scheme.
CONCLUSIONSWe have presented a simple, accurate and effective prediction model for protein subcellular location images from 2D HeLa and the two LOCATE datasets. The proposed SVM-SubLoc approach is reliable and computationally efficient. We have utilized both spatial and transform domain features. It has been shown that the performance of SVM-SubLoc is better compared with the individual classifiers using the hybrid features particularly HarLBP and HarLTP in spatial domain. The prediction accuracy has reached to 99.7% using HarLBP with features of 581 dimensions. On the other hand, the accuracy is 99.4% using HarLTP but the dimensionality of the feature space is reduced to 78 only, which is an effective reduction. These features are computationally more reasonable in terms of cost along with better discrimination capability compared with other texture based feature extraction strategies. In individual features, LTPs outperforms both hybrid and other individual features in terms of dimensionality of the feature space that is only 52. Even though the accuracy is 99.0%, which is a little less than that of HarLBP, it is preferable to use LTPs because of less computational cost. Additionally, these three feature sets have also performed well for the two LOCATE datasets. The hybrid features have brought a significant improvement in performance. This is due to the fact that the discrimination powers of both the feature spaces are utilized by SVM-SubLoc. The comparative analysis highlights the improved performance of our proposed SVM-SubLoc approach in terms of both increased accuracy and reduced dimensionality of the feature space over existing well-known approaches.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
