The reduced amino acids perform powerful ability for both simplifying protein complexity and identifying functional conserved regions. However, dealing with different protein problems may need different kinds of cluster methods. Encouraged by the success of pseudo-amino acid composition (PseAAC) algorithm, we developed a freely available web server, called PseKRAAC (The pseudo K-tuple reduced amino acids composition). By implementing reduced amino acid alphabets, the protein complexity can be significantly simplified, which leads to decrease chance of overfitting, lower computational handicap, and reduce information redundancy. PseKRAAC delivers more capability for protein research by incorporating three crucial parameters that describes protein composition. Users can easily generate many different modes of PseKRAAC tailored to their needs by selecting various reduced amino acids alphabets and other characteristic parameters. It is anticipated that the PseKRAAC web server will become a very useful tool in computational proteomics and protein sequence analysis.
IntroductionWith the emergence of big data in the post-genomic age, an enormous amount of data had been generated, which requires efficient computational methods for rapid and effective identification of biological features contained in sequences(). Even more so in the study of proteomics, because of the structure of protein exhibits more complexity when compared to nucleotide, due to the possible 20 amino acid peptides to the 4 nucleic bases. Therefore, the complexity and information content are expanded exponentially when polypeptides are formed. Also, protein sequence vary widely in length, which poses additional difficulty for incorporating the sequence-order information consistently in both dataset construction and algorithm formulation. To overcome these obstacles, the pseudo-amino acid composition (PseAAC) algorithm was proposed in the year 2001(). This concept has been widely utilized in nearly all areas of computational proteomics, and was selected as one of the key topics in " Molecular Science for Drug Development and Biomedicine " (). Encouraged by the success of this idea, various approaches similar to PseAAC had been simulated to deal with problems in protein and protein-related systems, including three powerful software programs for generating different modes of PseAAC: PseAAC-Builder(), propy() and Pse-in-One(). When dealing with extremely large dimensions can potentially cause overfitting or high-dimension disaster (), restrict by computation handicap, and increase information redundancy, which results in bad prediction accuracy. To solve this problem, we present a convenient approaches based on the idea of pseudo reduced amino acid composition (PseRAAC), and provide a flexible and user-friendly web server for pseudo K-tuple reduced amino acids composition (PseKRAAC) (http://bigdata.imu.edu.cn/ psekraac), where users can easily generate many different modes of PseKRAAC tailored to their needs by selecting various reduced amino acids alphabets and other characteristic parameters. types of reduced amino acid alphabets were proposed to generate various different modes of PseRAAC()().
Reduced amino acid compositionThe proposed server can generate two different types of PseKRAAC for protein sequences analysis: I. g-gap and II. -correlation PseKRAAC(). Suppose a protein sequence P with L amino acid residues as follows,=  where R1 represents the amino acid residue at the sequence position 1, R2 represents the amino acid residue at position 2 and so on. For each K-tuple of reduced amino acid cluster (RAAC), the feature vector of the protein sequence contains RAAC K dimensions.
I. g-gap PseKRAACThe g-gap PseKRAAC is used to represent a protein sequence with a vector containing RAAC K components, where g represents the gap between each Ktuple peptides(). A g-gap of n reflects the sequence-order information for all dipeptides with the starting residues separated by n residues. Supplementaryshows the schematic drawing of g-gap definition of dipeptide (K=2).
II. -correlation PseKRAACThe -correlation PseKRAAC, also called parallel correlation PseKRAAC, is used to represent a protein sequence with a vector containing RAAC K components, where  is an integer that represents the correlation tier, and is less than L  K. The n th-tier correlation factor (=n) reflects the sequence-order correlation between n th most nearest residue. Supplementaryshows the schematic drawing of -correlation definition of dipeptide (K=2).
Server descriptionA step-by-step server guide on how to use PseKRAAC can refer to the Supplementary Data. Compared to the original Chou's PseAAC server, PseKRAAC server offers following important improvements and advantages: First, by implementing the concept of reduced amino acid alphabet for amino acid clustering, the complexity of protein composition is significantly simplified, which leads to decrease chance of overfitting, lower computational handicap, and reduce information redundancy. Also, PseKRAAC delivers more capability for protein research by incorporating three crucial parameters that describes protein composition: K-tuple peptide functionality for K up to 3, -correlation PseKRAAC, and g-gap PseKRAAC for protein characterization. Users can increase the  value in PseAAC webserver to cover more global sequence-pattern effects or increase the K value to count more local sequence-pattern effects. Finally, PseKRAAC provides easier application for inputting sequences by accepting protein sequences in FASTA format via directly enter into the input text box or upload it as a FASTA file. The server is also capable of outputting result files in LIBSVM, CSV and FASTA format for further analysis. When uploading FASTA outputting files to other PseAAC webservers, the user can easily generating more various modes of PseAAC().
Reduced amino acids alphabets Based on physicochemical features or evolutionary relationships, amino acids residues can be clustered into groups because they serve similar structural or functional roles in proteins(Wang and Wang, 1999). The reduced amino acids not only simplify the complexity of the protein system, but also improve the ability in finding structurally conserved regions and the structural similarity of entire proteins(Peterson, et al., 2009). In recent years, the alphabet reduction techniques play high potential roles for enhancing the power in dealing with protein sequence analysis(Supplementary Data)(Feng, et al., 2013; Liu, et al., 2015; Liu, et al., 2014). Therefore, it is reasonable to use the reduced amino acids alphabets to formulate PseKRAAC for protein sequences. Here, 16 Associate Editor: Dr. John Hancock  The Author (2016). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com Bioinformatics Advance Access published August 26, 2016 at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
