Motivation: Figures and tables in biomedical literature record vast amounts of important experiment results. In scientific papers, for example, quantitative trait locus (QTL) information is usually presented in tables. However, most of the popular text-mining methods focus on extracting knowledge from unstructured free text. As far as we know, there are no published works on mining tables in biomedical literature. In this article, we propose a method to extract QTL information from tables and plain text found in literature. Heterogeneous and complex tables were converted into a structured database, combined with information extracted from plain text. Our method could greatly reduce labor burdens involved with database curation. Results: We applied our method on a soybean QTL database curation, from which 2278 records were extracted from 228 papers with a precision rate of 96.9% and a recall rate of 83.3%, F value for the method is 89.6%.
IntroductionA quantitative trait locus (QTL) is a region of DNA that is associated with a particular phenotypic trait, and is important information for breeding and gene cloning. QTL studies have a long and rich history; a large number of articles recording the experiment results of QTL mapping have been published in recent years. To allow researchers to query QTL information easily, several databases have been developed by manually curating the information scattered in the literature (). However, manual curation is labor-intensive work, and it is impossible to remain current with the rapidly increasing numbers of articles; consequently, automatic methods are necessary for QTL database development. Unlike other experiment results, such as genome and molecular data, QTL information is usually presented in tables, especially in scientific papers. It is difficult to extract such information using traditional text-mining methods that focus on mining knowledge in unstructured plain text. Although, knowledge hidden in tables and figures has received increasing attention (), as far as we know there are only a few works on web table mining () and no published work on mining tables in biomedical literature. In this article, we present a pipeline for automatically mining QTL information from scientific literature. A flowchart of this process is shown in. We started the process by locating QTL tables in articles; the tables were then converted into twodimensional QTL databases. The Natural Language Process method was used to extract information that was not presented in tables, including captions, footnotes and full text. Lastly, contentverification and duplication checks were performed on the outputs of previous steps. We applied this pipeline for soybean QTL database curation with a precision rate of 96.9% and F value of 89.6%; this software can also be used to construct QTL databases for other species.
Methods
Document retrievalDocument retrieval is always the first step in database curation. Curators rely on search engines such as PubMed and Google to filter related articles. However, results from search engines contain noise and greatly decrease text-mining performance. We manually selected articles containing soybean QTL information from the results returned by search engines.
Table miningScientific articles are usually distributed in PDF format and are not suitable for text-mining tasks, so we first converted the PDF files into HTML format. Contents between the HTML tags <Table> and <\Table> were then selected to reconstruct ain the first row were directed and mapped to the predefined database fields. For a complex table in which headers spanned multiple rows and columns, header identification became challenging. For example, complex headers may indicate that the table has more than one value associated with a field of one record. Such a table can be looked at as a fusion of several simple tables, so we divided one record in the table into several separate records. There were also many other cases and because of this we made 5 rules based on 128 articles containing soybean QTL information. Those rules cover 94% QTL tables. Entities in the table were mapped to corresponding predefined database fields according to the columns in which they were located. Values of entities were checked to determine if they were in the range of fields.
Text information extractionOne table does not contain all the QTL information for one record, since information such as trait and population types are located in the caption, the legend, or other areas of the paper. Three kinds of methods were used to extract information from plain text. First, we scanned the table's caption and legend using a vocabulary dictionary, selecting sentences containing words describing plant traits and analysis methods. A simple template analysis was then applied to these sentences to extract information expressed in frequently used syntax patterns. Advanced templates based on a deep dependency tree () were used to find information that was not expressed in regular syntax patterns.
Correction and normalizationThere are inevitably some mistakes and duplicate records caused by the file-format conversion or text-mining process. Corrections were performed on the table and text-mining results from three areas.(i) Abbreviation mapping: authors used some abbreviations in tables or full texts; we scanned the entire paper to find the full names associate with the abbreviations. (ii) Validation check: records with empty trait values or invalid markers were deleted from the final results. We also checked the validation of records by prior knowledge, such as correspondence between markers and linkage groups. (iii) Duplication check: records with the same values in the marker, trait, year, location, parents and method were considered the same records.
ResultsWe applied this pipeline for soybean QTL database construction, from which 2278 records were automatically extracted from 228 papers. The precision rate of the mining results was 96.9%. Compared with the records in the SoyBase QTL database (), we collected more records from the literature. We also tested our pipeline on the literature listed on the SoyBase website, which was used for manual curation, with a recall rate up to 79.7%. This method is also suitable for development of comprehensive QTL databases for a wide range of species.
FundingThis research was funded by 'Hundred Talents Program' of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and Postdoctoral Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province (LBH-Z13018). Conflict of Interest: none declared.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
J.Peng et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
