Rapid identification of non-human sequences (RINS) is an intersection-based pathogen detection workflow that utilizes a user-provided custom reference genome set for identification of non-human sequences in deep sequencing datasets. In <2 h, RINS correctly identified the known virus in the dataset SRR73726 and is compatible with any computer capable of running the prerequisite alignment and assembly programs. RINS accurately identifies sequencing reads from intact or mutated non-human genomes in a dataset and robustly generates contigs with these non-human sequences (Supplementary Material).
Identification of non-human sequencesstring of characters, eliminating repeat regions. These repeats are frequently found in both humans and microbes, making organismal origin difficult to pinpoint. This complexity ratio was optimized to minimize loss of non-human reads while further filtering the data for potentially confounding repetitive sequences. The filtered reads are then mapped against the human genome using Bowtie () (RINS Step 3), and after this intersection, reads that mapped to the human genome are removed from the read set. Remaining reads, with their mate pairs (if the dataset is paired end) are assembled into contigs with the de novo assembler Trinity () (RINS Step 4). Using a local version of BLAST to classify contigs (RINS Step 5), those contigs with minimal homology to human sequences are then extended by mapping the original read set back to the contig. The process of identifying mate pairs and assembling the contig is repeated as before. This method of extension allows for reads that are part of the contig but were eliminated by other filtration methods to be reincorporated into the contig to increase the sensitivity and specificity of the results. RINS will then output a tab-delimited text file detailing the candidate contigs that have been generated, presented with the number of supporting reads and a BLAST e-value. Parameters used here are modifiable by the user if desired. Sensitivity of RINS was evaluated with a randomly mutated test set of viral genomes, which served as a stringent measuring system. In this test set, mutations occurred randomly throughout the genome without any conserved regions that are often found in nature. With this test set, it was shown that using the 25 mer reads promotes identification of mutated non-human genomes (Supplementary). Specifically, at mutation rates >25%, mapping to the custom reference with these shorter read segments is significantly better at identifying genomes than with the full length reads (Supplementary). This indicates known pathogens are identified with confidence, and genomes with >50% homology to the reference genomes can be extracted from the data using RINS. A positive control was used to test RINS accuracy and speed (Supplementary). Sequencing data from the CA-HPV-10 prostate cancer cell line (SRR073726) () was analyzed with RINS and accurately retrieved only HPV serotype 18 (the transforming virus) with a 570 bp contig (Supplementary Tables S1 and S2). RINS took <2 h to perform this analysis on a dual core machine with 8 GB of RAM and a 2.93 GHz processor. Accuracy of RINS was further tested in RNA sequencing data from Szary syndrome, SRA046736 (where a contig with homology to vector constructs and HIV was generated (Supplementary). Using PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing (data not shown), the existence of this laboratory contaminant in the cDNA of the relevant sample was confirmed. Comparisons of RINS to the pathogen discovery algorithm PathSeq show similar performance, with better speed and lower cost for RINS. PathSeq sensitivity and specificity are derived from statistics presented by the authors in their work using an analogous test set of randomly mutated viral genomes. The sensitivity of PathSeq was 99.22% at a mutation rate of 0%, and drops to 0% at a mutation rate of 50% (, Table S3 and). RINS has a similar sensitivity of 99.78% based upon test set read recovery at a mutation rate of 0%. The RINS sensitivity drops to 0% at any mutation rate >50%, though at 50% there is a minimal sensitivity of 0.51% (Supplementary). Specificity for the test set is 100% for PathSeq. RINS also has no false positives for the test set and no false positives were identified from the CA-HPV
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
data or the Sezary syndrome data, giving RINS a specificity of 100%. The additional rigor of PathSeq would confidently allow identification of novel pathogens, though the ability of RINS to identify reads with up to 50% divergence from the reference genome suggests this could also be feasible with RINS if the novel pathogen has at least 50% homology to one or more of the custom reference genomes. PathSeq requires 13 h of cloud computing time and costs to process 10 million reads, whereas RINS takes <2 h for the 13 million reads in SRR073726. Importantly, RINS scales up well and is able to complete the six high-throughput datasets from SRA046736 with an average read depth of 112 million reads in <4 h each at no additional cost beyond access to a computer. The lower cost and faster speed are significant for accessibility to researchers interested in either hypothesis driven queries of datasets or queries of many different datasets in a reasonable timeframe. RINS is optimized for mate-paired high-throughput sequencing data with reads at least 36 bp and up to 500 bp, and can be run on sequencing data from any species. Non-paired end sequencing data can also be used, though contig generation and extension will be less robust. As the read length and number of reads increases, the computational time required to complete RINS will increase as Blat and Trinity processing speeds will decrease. Included in the online package are 32 102 viral genomes of all classes curated by GenBank (Benson et al., 2008) and the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV), retrieved through the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Also provided are all scripts to run the processes, with options for user control of all default parameters. The user must provide other open source softwares referenced above.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
