Motivation: The search for causative genetic variants in rare diseases of presumed monogenic inheritance has been boosted by the implementation of whole exome (WES) and whole genome (WGS) sequencing. In many cases, WGS seems to be superior to WES, but the analysis and visual-ization of the vast amounts of data is demanding. Results: To aid this challenge, we have developed a new tool—RareVariantVis—for analysis of genome sequence data (including non-coding regions) for both germ line and somatic variants. It visualizes variants along their respective chromosomes, providing information about exact chromosomal position, zygosity and frequency, with point-and-click information regarding dbSNP IDs, gene association and variant inheritance. Rare variants as well as de novo variants can be flagged in different colors. We show the performance of the RareVariantVis tool in the Genome in a Bottle WGS data set.
Materials and methodsThe Ashkenazim Trio WGS samples (), sequenced with the Complete Genomics technology, was used in design of the RareVariantVis tool. This data set is publically available through the Personal Genome Project and the Genome in a Bottle project. Detailed description of original data is available at http://sites.stan ford.edu/abms/content/giab-reference-materials-and-data, together with raw files in vcf and fastq formats. In our study, these data are limited to chromosome 21 from mother, father and affected son to satisfy Bioconductor limits for test data size and for simplicity. All necessary vcf file operations were performed using vcftools (). Details of the data preparation for the RareVariantVis tool are provided in package vignette. The RareVariantVis package is implemented in R and in part based on the following existing methods: package VariantAnnotation () and package googleVis (). The variant annotation package is used for data import, including vcf file reading. The googleVis package is used for dynamic visualization of rare variants (JavaScript d3 library).
ResultsThe main functionalities of the RareVariantVis package are variant filtering and visualization of rare variants and regions of homozygosity (for overview, see Supplementary). A unique option in RareVariantVis, as compared to other genome visualization tools, is presentation of rare variants (and clusters of them) characteristic for a particular sample. The chromosomeVis (for a single sample), trioVis (for trio samples) and multipleVis (for multiple samples) functions filter all variants within the sequence of a given chromosome and keep non-synonymous coding ones as default. In addition, filters for dbSNP frequency (default value: <0.01) and sequencing coverage (default threshold for read depth: >10) are applied. Variants that pass these filters are considered rare non-synonymous coding variants. In addition, users can filter variants by adding their own list of variant positions to be excluded. The chromosomeVis function provides a visualization of all variants along a particular chromosome, with the corresponding frequency of the alternative allele, indicated as small blue dots (). This allele frequency can be computed as the ratio of the number of alternative variant reads to all reads in a particular genomic position. Allelic frequency is expected at 0,5 for heterozygous variants and 1 for homozygous, however due to sequencing errors, copy number variation and odd coverage, the calculated frequency values in practice vary from 0 to 1. The rare, non-synonymous coding variants that remain after the filtering procedure (see above) are highlighted as green dots, in the example including four that are present in a homozygous state. As shown in, the tool also includes visualization of the average frequency of the alternative allele of many nearby variants, displayed as a moving average of a set frame length (default value: 2000 variants). This function can rapidly indicate possible homozygosity regions (cut-off value: 0.75), which is often useful information in the genetic screening of diseases with presumed autosomal recessive inheritance, especially if the region also contains rare variants., as displayed in Supplementary. The package may also point at regions with potential false positives that occur mainly due to technical challenges, which can be observed as a clustering of numerous rare, non-synonymous variants in about the same chromosomal position. In, there are three such regions around positions 11, 15 and 46 Mb, including two regions in the centromere area that are prone to technical mapping artifacts, since centromeres consist of long tandem repeat stretches (). The various RareVariantVis functions are also applicable in somatic alterations, for example in analysis of cancer genomes, where information about zygosity is essential. The trioVis function is particularly implemented for discovery of de novo variants in trio samples, and can also be useful in autosomal recessive and dominant cases (Supplementary Figs. S2 and S3). The visualization is dynamic, so that pointing at the variants will lead to display of an instant text box with information about the gene, position and inheritance (i.e. whether the variant has been inherited from mother, father or both of parents). The user may also mark and zoom on variants of interest. Potential de novo variants are flagged and visualized in red
Introduction Human whole genome sequencing (WGS) is expected to become the standard sequencing method for screening and diagnostic examination of many rare diseases and syndromes with heterogenic or unknown etiology of presumed monogenic inheritance. This standardization is driven by the decreasing cost of WGS, more uniform coverage of the exome in WGS data as compared to whole exome sequencing (WES) data, and a need for better analysis and understanding of non-coding regions in the genome (Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study, 2015; Lelieveld et al., 2015). The analysis of human WGS data is challenging because of the data size (i.e. 80 GB of compressed raw data and 1020 GB of variants/annotated data for a 30 genome), technical errors, alignment issues in tandem repeat regions or around centromeres (Szalkowski and V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 1 Bioinformatics, 2016, 13 doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw359 Advance Access Publication Date: 10 June 2016 Applications Note Bioinformatics Advance Access published June 26, 2016 at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
