Motivation: Measuring the effects of base mutations is a powerful tool for functional and evolutionary analyses of RNA structures. To date, only a few methods have been developed for systematically computing the thermodynamic changes of RNA secondary structures in response to base mutations. Results: We have developed algorithms for computing the changes of the ensemble free energy, mean energy and the thermodynamic entropy of RNA secondary structures for exhaustive patterns of single and double mutations. The computational complexities are O(NW 2) (where N is sequence length and W is maximal base pair span) for single mutations and O(N 2 W 2) for double mutations with large constant factors. We show that the changes are relatively insensitive to GC composition and the maximal span constraint. The mean free energy changes are bounded ∼7−9 kcal/mol and depend only weakly on position if sequence lengths are sufficiently large. For tRNA sequences, the most stabilizing mutations come from the change of the 5-most base of the anticodon loop. We also show that most of the base changes in the acceptor stem destabilize the structures, indicating that the nucleotide sequence in the acceptor stem is highly optimized for secondary structure stability. We investigate the 22 tRNA genes in the human mitochondrial genome and show that non-pathogenic polymorphisms tend to cause smaller changes in thermodynamic variables than generic mutations, suggesting that a mutation which largely increases thermodynamic variables has higher possibility to be a pathogenic or lethal mutation. Availability and implementation: The C++ source code of the Rchange software is available at http://www.ncrna.org/software/ rchange/
INTRODUCTIONMeasuring the effects of base mutations has long been a standard method for studying relationships between structural RNAs and their biological functions. Molecular biologists mutate some nucleotides of the RNAs of interest in order to alter the structures, and draw various conclusions by observing whether the mutations * To whom correspondence should be addressed. disrupt biological functions [see, for example, (. Observing mutation patterns in genome evolution has also been important for detecting evolutionarily conserved functional RNAs and evolutionarily conserved structural RNAs show special types of mutation patterns that preserve their secondary structures. Several studies have used such patterns as a major feature for finding novel structural RNAs from multiply aligned genomic sequences (). Investigating the structural changes due to base mutations has potentially important applications in genome-wide association studies, where many disease-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are located outside the protein coding regions in the human genome (). It is possible that part of the disease associations of these SNPs can be explained by altered structures of the non-coding RNAs that are transcribed around those regions. Despite the widespread use of mutational analyses and the potential relevance to human diseases, very few studies have developed methods for systematically computing the changes in RNA secondary structures in response to base mutations (). In our previous paper, we have developed algorithms for computing the thermodynamic variables for a given sequence (Kiryu and Asai, submitted for publication) [see also the earlier works () which developed algorithms for the mean free energy computation. In this article, we present algorithms for computing the changes in the ensemble free energy, mean free energy and the thermodynamic entropy of secondary structures for all the possible single and double mutations, assuming that the RNA secondary structures follow the Boltzmann distribution P(|x) of the Turner energy model (TEM) ():
H.Kiryu and K.Asaistructures of long RNA sequences () and the base pair predictions between distant nucleotide positions are particularly inaccurate for such long RNAs (), it is natural to restrict the maximal span of the base pairs to a fixed value W. The maximal span constraint avoids predicting large number of spurious base pairs between distant positions while still allowing global structure prediction. When the maximal span constraint is applied, includes only structures containing base pairs of span  W. Using the thermodynamic model, the mean free energy U(x) and the macroscopic entropy S(x) in energy units are defined byHere,) computes the minimum free energies and the structural changes for all the possible single mutations by running the RNAfold program in the Vienna RNA package () for each RNA mutant. RNAmute can also compute k-point mutations that are likely to cause large structural alterations by using the RNAsubopt and RNAfold programs of the Vienna package. The computational complexities are O(N 4 ) for single mutations and O() (C > 0), which is the complexity of RNAsubopt, for k-point mutations. RDMAS () also uses RNAsubopt and RNAfold to predict the most deleterious single mutations that cause large structural changes. They compute suboptimal structures (x * ) within a fixed range of free energy for each of 3N possible single point mutants x * and returns 'deleteriousness'where  MFE (x) is the minimum free energy (MFE) structure of the original sequence x. RDMAS provide a few options for the distance measure d(, * ) including free energy difference |E(,x)E( * ,x * )|, edit distance between secondary structures, and difference between topological indices of secondary structures. The complexity for this procedure is O(Ne CN ). Since both RNAmute and RDMAS use either MFE structures or suboptimal structures of a fixed energy range, they do not take into account all the possible secondary structures. On the other hand, our algorithm exactly sums the contributions from all the possible secondary structures in a polynomial time. RNAmutants (where M(k,x) is the set of all the k-point mutants of sequence x. The complexity for computing the partition functions is O(K 2 N 3 ). While we are generally interested in the individual effects of each mutation x * , k-point partition functions Z k (x) mix up all the contributions of the k-point mutants x * and it is not possible to extract individual partition functions Z(x * ) from Z k (x) with any simple modification to the RNAmutants algorithm. In their paper, the authors used a statistical sampling method that samples mutated sequences x * with structures from the k-point Boltzmann distribution associated with Z k (x). However, the meaning of the sampled sequences is difficult to understand from the statistical physics viewpoint; it is equivalent to a thermodynamic system where time scales of base mutations are as fast as those of RNA folding. Furthermore, sampling methods are very inefficient for long RNA sequences with large structure spaces (). On the other hand our algorithm exhaustively computes the individual partition functions Z(x * ) of all the k = 1,2 points mutants x * . Finally, none of those studies have computed the differences of thermodynamic quantities such as the ensemble free energy, mean free energy and entropy for each individual mutation. In the following sections, we first derive our algorithms for a simple stochastic context-free grammar (SCFG). Next we derive similar algorithms for the more complex case in which the emission probabilities depend on the neighboring bases; this mimics the complexities encountered in the energy model. We then describe how to extend the algorithms in these simple cases to the full energy model. In Section 4, we show the run time and required memory size for several parameter settings. We then investigate basic properties of the thermodynamic changes, such as the dependencies on the sequence lengths and the GC compositions, and the choices of the maximal base pair span. We also investigate the dependencies of the thermodynamic changes on the mutated base positions. Finally, we investigate the characteristics of the thermodynamic changes of the tRNA family.
ALGORITHMS AND IMPLEMENTATION
Simple stochastic context-free grammarThe SCFG model that we consider has a single non-terminal state (S) and five transition rules (P, L, R, B, E).where (a < , a > ) represents a base pair, a represents an unpaired base and represents a null terminal symbol. Although this grammar is an ambiguous grammar, we can still define and compute the partition function Z 0 (x) =  P(x,) and entropy S 0 (x) =  P(|x)logP(|x), where the sum is over all the possible parse trees . If a grammar is unambiguous, then the space of the parse trees has one to one correspondence to the space of the secondarystructures and the corresponding probability distribution is defined over the secondary structure space. Although our implementation 'Rchange' uses an unambiguous grammar called the Rfold grammar (see below and the Supplementary Material), the following algorithm works independently of the ambiguity of grammars. To compute the entropy of a single mutant for this model, we must first compute the partition function of the mutated sequence. If the emission probabilities e P (a < ,a > ), e L (a) and e L (a) are independent of the neighboring bases, as is usually the case, then the partition function can easily be computed. For example, we consider a mutant x * in which the original base x j at position j is replaced with base c * (). To compute the partition function Z(x * ), we sum the probabilities P(x,) over all the parse trees . Each parse tree contains exactly one transition that emits base c * at position j, and we split the parse tree into two parts that are upstream and downstream of the transition. These partial parse trees are independent of the base at j, hence they also appear in the original sequence x. By collecting these partial parse trees and reorganizing the sum using the inside and outside variables, we obtain the formula
Rchange: computing energy changes for RNA secondary structureswhere t(r) represents the transition probability associated with transition rule r, c * represents the mutated base, and (u,v) and (u,v) (u  v) represent the inside and outside variables of the original sequence x (). The computational complexity of this calculation is O(N). Hence, the computation of all the single mutations (O(N)) is dominated by the insideoutside algorithms and the total complexity is O(N 3 ). In our previous paper, we developed a method to calculate the entropy, the mean free energy, and the energy variance of secondary structures by using dynamic programming (DP) algorithms (Kiryu and Asai, submitted for publication). Briefly, we introduced copies of the inside variables,  1 (i,j).for publication)]. In the present case, we compute Z 1 (x * ) for each singlepoint mutant x * by using  1 (i,j) and  1 (i,j) (which are log-score inserted outside variables analogous to  1 (i,j)):where u,v,w {0,1},  0 (i,The entropy of the mutated sequence is given by. Once the partition function Z(x * ) and entropy S(x * ) are known the ensemble free energy F(x * ) and mean free energy U(x * ) can be computed using Equation (1). We next consider the computation of the partition function Z(x * * ) for a double mutant x * * in which bases i and j (i < j) are replaced with c * * and c * , respectively. To compute Z(x * * ), we simply replace the original sequence x with x * and compute the inside and outside variables,  (i,j) and  (i,j), for sequence x * and apply Equation (2) for the partition function of double mutant x * * with the replacements,. We can economize the calculation of  and  by using the fact that parts of the inside and outside variables of sequence x * are the same as the corresponding variables of sequence x. In, the inside and outside variables of x * are the same as those of x in regions (bc) and (a), respectively. Furthermore, it is unnecessary to compute the outside variables of x * in region (b) to compute Z(x * * ) for an arbitrary i (i < j). The computational complexity is O(N 4 ) since we have to apply the outside algorithm [which has complexity O(N 3 )] to 3N single mutations, where N is the input sequence length. Note that there are three possible 1-point mutations for each base. For example, A C, A G and A U are the possible mutations for base A.
H.Kiryu and K.Asai) which depend on pairs of bases (c 1 ,c 2 ) outside of the parsing subsequences.
Emission probabilities dependent on neighboring basesWe now consider the case in which the emission probabilities depend on the neighboring bases:). Although such a model does not belong to the category of generative models, it approximates the essential complexities of the energy model. In such a case, the value of the inside variable (i,j) computed for the original sequence x depends on the bases x i1 and x j+1 , unlike in the previous subsection. Similarly, the outside variable (i,j) depends on x i and x j. We cannot apply Equation (2) since the mutation at position j alters the values of the neighboring inside and outside variables. It is in principle possible to derive a formula similar to Equation (2) that uses only the inside and outside variables which are two bases away from position j and hence are independent of the mutation of the base at j. However, the corresponding formula would be much more complicated since it would include three layers of DP recursions, corresponding to the emissions of bases x j1 , x j and x j+1. Instead, we introduce seven copies of the inside variables), where (c 1 ,c 2 ) represents one of seven types of nucleotide pairs at positions (i1, j +1) that differ by at most one base from the original nucleotide sequence. For example, if (x i1 , x j+1 ) = (A,G) as in, then (c 1 ,c 2 ) is one of the set {) is defined to be the inside variable on the condition that the bases at i1 and j +1 are c 1 and c 2 , respectively. Similarly, we introduce seven copies of the outside variables (i,j,), where (c 1 ,c 2 ) represents one of seven types of nucleotide pairs at positions (i, j) that differ by at most one base from the original bases. Accordingly, (i,j,) is defined to be the outside variable on the condition that the bases at i and j are c 1 and c 2 , respectively. Once these variables are calculated, we can apply Equation 2 by choosing the appropriate (i,j,) depending on the mutated base.) are computed by the usual insideoutside algorithms with special care taken to match the outside nucleotide pairs (c 1 ,c 2 ). For example, the inside algorithm isThe outside algorithm is similar to the inside algorithm and is shown in the Supplementary Material. The computational complexity of the inside outside algorithms is simply seven times larger than that of the usual inside outside algorithms and is given by O(N 3 ).
Application to the energy modelWe use the grammatical formulation called the Rfold model, which was introduced in (), to derive the mean free energy and the entropy differences for TEM. The Rfold model is based on an unambiguous grammar that can generate all the secondary structures without duplication, and its transition rules are capable of accommodating the score system of TEM. The unambiguity of the Rfold grammar is described in detail in the Supplementary Material of the original article and we do not repeat it here (). The model fully uses the advantage provided by the maximal span constraint and computes the insideoutside algorithms in O(NW 2 ) time and O(N +W 2 ) space (where N is sequence length, and W is the maximal span of base pairs). Although the Rfold model is not an SCFG model, it is usually straightforward to derive DP algorithms analogous to those in SCFG models (; Kiryu and Asai, submitted for publication). In the insideoutside algorithms of the Rfold model, the dangle and terminal mismatch energies of TEM () correspond to dependencies on nucleotides outside of the DP cells. Fortunately, these dependencies do not extend >1 base on either side of the current DP cell. Therefore, we only need six additional DP matrices, just as described in the previous section, to accommodate arbitrary single-point mutations of DP cells that are immediately outside of the current cell. To compute the entropy and mean free energy, we double the DP matrices for computing the log-score inserted tree scores. Consequently, the memory size required for the DP matrices in the case of single-point mutations is 14 times as large as that in the usual insideoutside algorithms, although the complexities are the same O(N +W 2 ) (). In the case of doublepoint mutations, we use O(N +LW 2 ) memory (where L is the maximal distance of mutated base pairs) to keep track of the mutant insideoutside variables  , . The computation times are dominated by the bifurcation calculations and there are 73 = 21 times as many of those as there are in the ordinary insideoutside algorithm. The factor of 7 corresponds the number of nucleotide pairs (c 1 ,c 2 ) for computing the insideoutside variables (i,j,), and 3 corresponds to the patterns of bifurcations that mix log-score inserted DP matrices: k  u (i,k) v (k,j), k  u (j,k) v (i,k) andN is sequence length, W is maximal span and L is the maximal distance between two mutated nucleotides. L = 0 indicates that only single mutations are computed. k=kilo. computational complexity is still O(NW 2 ) for single-point mutations, and O(NW 2 L) for double-point mutations. We have described the full algorithm in the Supplementary Material. We have implemented the algorithms in C++ in a software package called 'Rchange'. The source code is freely available from our download site (http://www.ncrna.org/software/rchange/).
Rchange: computing energy changes for RNA secondary structures
DATASET AND DATA PROCESSINGWe measured the run time and memory usage for random RNA sequences. The experiments were performed on a PC with an Intel Quad Core Xeon E5450 3.0 GHz processor and 32 GB of memory. Random RNA sequences of varying lengths and GC compositions were generated using a Ruby script. The tRNA sequences are taken from the Rfam database version 10 (). We used only the manually curated seed alignment of 967 sequences and its accompanying structure annotation. We have obtained non-pathogenic polymorphisms and pathogenic mutations from MITOMAP (). The non-pathogenic polymorphism are considered as mutations from the reference genome, which can be regarded as a collection of dominant alleles (). The background distributions of dF/|F|, dU/|U| and dS/|S| (sample size n = 4142 for each) are defined by the distributions for all the possible single-point mutations in the 22 mitochondrial tRNA genes except the nonpathogenic polymorphisms (n = 238) and the pathogenic mutations (n = 209) of MITOMAP. In our previous work (Kiryu and Asai, submitted for publication), we have shown that the scales of mean energies U(x) are generally about 10 times higher than S(x).are well correlated. Consistently with this finding, we found dF = dU dS and dU are very well correlated. Therefore, we only show the figures for dU in the following section. We have shown the comparison between dF = dU dS and dU in the Supplementary Material.more elaborate optimization to make Rchange a faster program to the future.shows the effects of single-point mutations on the mean free energies U and the entropies S. For each random sequence generated with a specified length and GC composition, we ran Rchange to obtain the differences dU and dS for all the singlepoint mutations and we selected the largest and smallest values from these 3N difference values. We plotted the mean values of these upper and lower bounds for 100 random sequences with the same length and GC composition. The upper bound values indicate the largest energy or entropy increase caused by a single mutation; the lower bound indicates the largest energy or entropy decrease caused by a single mutation. These four figures show that the effect of varying GC compositions or maximal spans W do not have much influence on the differences. The mean free energy change dU (and B) reaches a bound of 79 kcal/mol in magnitude at around N = 200, while the entropy change dS (and D) gradually increases in magnitude as the sequence length increases. Interestingly, the magnitudes of the entropy changes are about half of those of the mean free energies, which is a much higher ratio than the typical ratio (about one-tenth) for the total entropies and mean free energies (Kiryu and Asai, submitted for publication). This indicates that the entropy changes might affect in the in vivo processes of mutations (such as RNA editing) on RNA transcripts. Since the dynamic range of single point mutations are bounded independently of the sequence length, base mutations have considerable impact on the thermodynamics of less stable RNAs. As the thermodynamic variables F, U and S roughly proportional to the sequence length (Kiryu and Asai, submitted for publication), smaller RNAs aremore influenced by the mutations. We have analyzed the effects of single point mutations on other Rfam families such as microRNAs (let-7) and snoRNAs (SNORA1, SNORD73) in the Supplementary Material. We have shown that any mutation to the stems of the stable RNAs (let-7 and SNORA1) generally causes a increase of energies whereas less stable RNAs have a large number of stabilizing mutations, implying selective pressures for the secondary structure stability vary considerably from family to family.shows a ranked list of the mutation patterns that were frequently observed to cause the maximal changes of the thermodynamic values U and S in the random sequences. We computed the mutation patterns that caused the maximal changes of U and S for each sequence, and counted the number of occurrences for 100 random sequences. We ranked the patterns by the enrichmentthe ratio of the frequency of occurrence of pattern c 1  c 2 to a simple background frequency given by {(total count of c 1 in all the sequences)1/4}. The table indicates the maximal increases are achieved by mutating G to the other bases in many cases and the maximal decreases of the thermodynamic values are achieved by mutating a base into G. We have shown nucleotide dependencies and structural preferences of the thermodynamic change distributions in the Supplementary Material.shows the position dependence of dU. For each position of random sequences of lengths 20 (A, C) and 200 (B, D), we obtain the upper and lower bound for energy changes.and B show the mean values of these upper and lower bounds for 10 000 random samples.and D show the standard deviations (SDs) of dU for each position calculated from the 10 000 random sequences. For shorter sequences (A, C), we observe two peaks around positions 5 and 15 which indicate the dominance of single hairpin structures over other structural configurations in short sequences. This position dependence rapidly disappears as sequence length increases, and we find no position dependence except the very small values of dUs at the ends of sequences (B, D).and D show that mean values are  12 kcal/mol whereas the SD is  2 kcal/mol, indicating the strong sequence dependence of the energy changes.shows the position dependence of the upper and lower bounds of the relative changes dU/|U| and dS/S for single-point mutations of tRNA sequences. For each position of each tRNA sequence in the Rfam seed alignment, we calculated the upper bound and bound of dU/|U| and dS/S. The average values of these bounds are plotted for all the seed sequences using the alignment information. We removed alignment columns with many gaps (> 30% of the number of the sequences). The figure shows that mutations in the stem regions can destabilize the structure more than those in non-stem regions. Mutations in the acceptor stem (the closing stem) influence the increase of dU/|U| the most, and a change of >20% of the mean free energy can be produced by only a single mutation. On the other hand, the increase of dS/S is most affected by the T arm (the right most stem aside from the acceptor stem) on average, which might indicate that an increased probability of disruption of the T arm stem may lead to a large fluctuation of these regions, including the variable loop between the anticodon stem and the T arm stem; however, the differences from the peaks of the other stems are small. The plots of the lower bounds show sharp peaks at the unpaired bases that are next to the stem regions, which indicates that changes that extend the stem length stabilize the secondary structure the most. The upper figure shows that the secondary structures are most stabilized by changing the 5 end of the anticodon loop (the loop in the center stem). Thisshows that any changes in the acceptor stem increaseThe position dependence of the upper bound and lower bound of the relative changes dU/|U| and dS/S for single-point mutations of tRNA sequences. We have averaged the upper bounds and the lower bounds over the 967 tRNA sequences using the seed alignment of the Rfam database. The brackets '<' and '>' shown at y = 0.0 represent the common secondary structure of the tRNA sequences. the mean free energy, which indicates that the sequences of the acceptor stem may be strongly optimized for secondary structure stability.shows the position dependence of the upper and lower bounds of the relative changes dU/|U| and dS/S for double-point mutants of tRNA sequences. The upper right triangles show that the largest increases of dU/|U| and dS/S can be obtained by mutating nucleotide pairs that are both located in the stem regions. The destabilizing effects on U are larger if one mutating base is on the acceptor stem than if both nucleotides are on mean free stems, while the influence on entropies S is similar regardless of which stem regions the pairs are located in. The lower bound of dU/|U| (the lower left triangle in) shows that the double mutation of a base at a stem boundary and a base in a loop region can cause >30% decrease of the mean energy. On the other hand, most of the double mutations that include any base in the acceptor stem increase dU. There are no dU > 0 regions (or green regions in the lower left triangles) inside the acceptor stem, even at the intersections of A B. These colored figures show the position dependence of the upper and lower bound of the relative changes dU/|U| (A) and dS/S (B) for double-point mutations of tRNA sequences. For each density plot, the upper right (lower left) triangle shows the density plot of the mean upper (lower) bound of dU/|U| or dS/S for all the non-trivial double-point mutations. We have averaged the upper bounds and the lower bounds over the 967 tRNA sequences using the seed alignment of the Rfam database. The positive and negative changes are displayed using green and magenta colors, respectively. The gray colored background indicates the annotated stem regions of tRNAs. different stem regions in which any double mutations are expected to destabilize both of the stem structures. This indicates that the D arm, anticodon and T arm stems are not very stable compared with the acceptor stem and there are considerable fluctuations in their secondary structures. At present, it is not clear whether this represents biophysical properties of tRNAs or is simply a limitation of TEM.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Comparison of run time and memory usage
Scales of mean free energy and entropy changes
H.Kiryu and K.Asai
Position dependence of mean free energy changes
Effects of single-point mutations on tRNA
Rchange: computing energy changes for RNA secondary structures
Effects of double-point mutations on tRNA
Mutations in human mitochondrial tRNAsThe human mitochondrial genome involves 22 tRNA genes. Mitochondrial DNA is known to have about 10 times higher mutation rate than nuclear DNA, and the mutations in the tRNA genes cause various mitochondrial diseases such as myopathy, deafness and Alzheimer's disease (). We compared the distributions of dF/|F|, dU/|U| and dS/S for non-pathogenic polymorphisms and pathogenic mutations with the background distribution.shows the dS/S distribution for three mutation types. It shows that non-pathogenic polymorphisms are depleted'Lowered' tests whether the dX/|X| distribution has a smaller median and 'Centered' tests whether |dX/X| distribution has a smaller median, than the background distribution
H.Kiryu and K.Asaifrom the large dS/S region and concentrated around dS/S = 0 as compared with the background mutations.shows the P-values that test the biases of the distributions. We do not find any significant bias for the pathogenic mutations. It is reasonable since the seriousness of symptoms vary widely from disease to disease and the carriers of pathogenic mutations are still viable with all their sickness as opposed to the cases of lethal mutations, which may obscure the relationships between the tRNA functions and the pathogenic mutations. On the other hand, the non-pathogenic polymorphisms tend to cause smaller changes, suggesting that a mutation that largely increases either dS/S, dU/|U| or dF/|F| tends to be a pathogenic or lethal mutation. It is interesting that entropy change dS/S has greater significance than the energy changes dU/|U| and dF/|F|, which might indicates that the structural fluctuations are more related to tRNA dysfunction than the energetic instabilities.
CONCLUSIONIn this article, we have developed algorithms for computing changes in the ensemble free energy, mean free energy and the thermodynamic entropy of RNA secondary structures for all possible patterns of single and double mutations. The computational complexities are O(NW 2 ) (where N is sequence length and W is maximal base pair span) for single mutations and O(N 2 W 2 ) for double mutations with relatively large constant factors. We have shown that the changes in the mean free energy and entropy are relatively insensitive to GC composition and the maximal span constraint. The mean energy changes are bounded at 7
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
k  u (k,i) v (k,j) (for u+v  1). Despite this, the
kcal/mol in magnitude and there is only a small position dependence if sequence lengths are sufficiently large. For tRNA sequences, the most stabilizing mutations come from changes of the 5-most base of the anticodon loop. We have also shown that most base changes in the acceptor stem destabilize the structures, indicating that the nucleotide sequence in the acceptor stem is highly optimized for secondary structure stability. We have analyzed the effects of single point mutations on other Rfam families such as microRNAs (let-7) and snoRNAs (SNORA1, SNORD73) in the Supplementary Material, where we have shown that any mutation to the stems of stable RNAs generally causes a increase of energies whereas less stable RNAs have stabilizing mutations in most regions, implying selective pressures for the secondary structure stability vary considerably from family to family. We have investigated human mitochondrial tRNAs and found that non-pathogenic polymorphisms tend to cause smaller changes in thermodynamic variables as compared with a background distribution, suggesting that a mutation which largely increases thermodynamic variables has higher possibility to be a pathogenic or lethal mutation. There are several applications of our algorithms. As described in the Introduction, our algorithms can be directly used in a mutation analysis to design the most stabilizing and destabilizing mutations. They will also be useful for investigating the correlations between the evolutionary variations of RNA genes in genome sequences and the changes in their structures. The algorithms can also be of interest for investigating the disease associations of SNPs located in noncoding RNA genes. Although we only considered mutations within the standard four bases 'ACGU' in this article, similar techniques will be used for the structural analysis of A-to-I RNA editing if there exists a complete set of nearest-neighbor parameters for the inosine residue [see Watkins and SantaLucia (2005) for DNA case].
