Motivation: The ancestor of birds and mammals lived approximately 300 million years ago. Inferring its genome organization is key to understanding the differentiated evolution of these two lineages. However, detecting traces of its chromosomal organization in its extant descendants is difficult due to the accumulation of molecular evolution since birds and mammals lineages diverged. Results: We address several methodological issues for the detection and assembly of ancestral genomic features of ancient vertebrate genomes, which encompass adjacencies, contiguous segments, syntenies and double syntenies in the context of a whole genome duplication. Using generic, but stringent, methods for all these problems, some of them new, we analyze 15 vertebrate genomes, including 12 amniotes and 3 teleost fishes, and infer a high-resolution genome organization of the amniote ancestral genome, composed of 39 ancestral linkage groups at a resolution of 100 kb. We extensively discuss the validity and robustness of the method to variations of data and parameters. We introduce a support value for each of the groups, and show that 36 out of 39 have maximum support. Conclusions: Single methodological principle cannot currently be used to infer the organization of the amniote ancestral genome, and we demonstrate that it is possible to gather several principles into a computational paleogenomics pipeline. This strategy offers a solid methodological base for the reconstruction of ancient vertebrate genomes. Availability: Source code, in C++ and Python, is available at
INTRODUCTIONThe reconstruction of ancestral karyotypes and gene orders from homologies between extant species contributes to understanding the large-scale evolutionary mutations that led to current genomes from their last common ancestor. For example, given ancestral genomes or gene orders, distances and evolutionary scenarios between genomes can be computed along branches of the considered phylogenetic tree () and not only between pairs of extant species. More generally, one can hope to work within an * To whom correspondence should be addressed. 'evolutionary framework combining ancestral and extant genomes in a robust phylogenetic tree' (). The ancestral reconstruction problem has been approached for eukaryotic genomes using cytogenetics techniques pioneered by Dobzhansky and Sturtevant (1938) and recently applied to mammalian genomes (). However, when dealing with older ancestors and larger evolutionary distances, homologies are less visible by cytogenetics methods. It is only with the recent availability of sequenced and assembled genomes that bioinformatics methods can handle the problem of predicting the deep past of metazoan chromosomes [reviews by; Muffato and Roest-Crollius (2008);. These methods address the problem at a higher resolution than cytogenetics techniques, as they require assembled genomes, either fully or at least in large contigs and scaffolds. The results obtained on mammalian genomes, based on genome rearrangement models () or on physical mapping methods (), slowly converge toward the cytogenetics ones (Ferguson). Prospective methods have attempted the reconstruction of more ancient animal proto-genomes: amniotes (), bony fishes (), vertebrates (), chordates () or even eumetazoa (). However, the accuracy of these ad hoc methodologies has not been studied as thoroughly as for more generic methods. The ability of the latter to produce reliable results on mammalian or yeast genomes was evaluated either by comparisons to cytogenetics or manual reconstructions (). The validation of the results is indeed a major issue, since ancient genomes can not be sequenced due to DNA decay. Simulations, although used in a few studies (), face the currently limited understanding of large-scale evolutionary processes such as genome rearrangements and gene losses following a Whole Genome Duplication (WGD). Cytogenetic results or manual reconstructions are not available for very ancient genomes. The goal of the present work is to propose a general methodology for inferring ancestral genome segments and linkage groups, based on several comparative genomics principles grouped into a physical mapping framework. The framework we describe can be applied to any ancestral species following the speciation from the teleostfishes (tetrapods, sarcopterigians, for example), provided sequenced extant genomes from two branches descending from an ancestor are available. We apply it to the ancestral amniote genome. We study the validity and robustness of the method and results, and we argue that it is possible to evaluate an ancestral genome reconstruction based on the careful examination of the underlying principles of the method. These principles are: (i) the detection of ancestral features (adjacencies, collinear or contiguous segments, syntenic groups) based on their conservation in the extant genomes; and (ii) the assembly of such features into ancestral chromosomal segments and linkage groups. Hence, we design the reconstruction process as a pipeline decomposed into several phases, each focused on the detection/assembly of a specific kind of ancestral genomic feature. This requires to define, for each such phase, an appropriate combinatorial representation of the corresponding assembled ancestral features, including PQ-trees to represent contiguous ancestral regions as in; Chauve and;and graphs to represent ancestral linkage groups (ALGs), as in. The final representation of an ancestral genome is a nested combination of such combinatorial objects. We apply this pipeline to reconstruct the amniote ancestral genome at a 100 kb resolution, tailoring the method to account for the phylogeny and presence of a whole genome duplication at the base of the teleost lineage (). We obtain 39 ALGs, covering a significant part of the extant amniote genomes, which is a improvement on the two previous studies of this ancestral genome (). The syntenic associations between extant amniote chromosomes that we predict confirm three associations found in previous studies, but also include two new ones. We discuss the accuracy of the results produced by our method, and the robustness of the method to variations of data and parameters.
METHODSWe give a generic description of the different objects, and call A the ancestral species, identified by an internal node in a species phylogeny, of which we reconstruct the genome. Descendants of A are the ingroup species, and all others are the outgroups. An informative pair of species is composed of two extant species whose evolutionary path in the phylogenetic tree contains A. Ancestral blocks: we use orthologous genomic segments among ingroup genomes to derive ancestral genomic blocks. An ancestral block represents an oriented ancestral genome segment that evolved into a unique genomic segment in each extant genome, with limited internal rearrangements and point mutations, and that was not involved in a large-scale duplication. These ancestral blocks represent the basic bricks of the ancestral genome. They are constructed using Ensembl Compara multiple alignments () as seeds. A block result from joining seeds collinear in all ingroup genomes, if it spans at least min_len = 100 kb in all ingroup genomes (see Supplementary Material).
Contiguousancestral regions: we assemble ancestral blocks into contiguous ancestral regions (CARs) (). CARs are groups of ancestral blocks with partial ordering information. To this aim, we detect conserved contiguity signal in amniote extant genomes: maximum common intervals, conserved adjacencies and adjacencies inferred from reliable rearrangements.
Ancestral synteny graph and ALGs: next, we cluster the CARs by constructing the ancestral synteny graph (ASG). CARs are linked by detecting a significant conserved synteny signal between pairs of blocks, including a double synteny signal when a WGD separates the compared extant species. ALGs are defined as connected components of the ASG, after edges with weaker support have been discarded.
Computing CARsConcepts and methods to construct and represent CARs are extensively described in Chauve and Tannier (2008);, and we review them briefly here. We consider the extremities (head and tail) of the ancestral blocks that we call ancestral markers. Using the extremities of the blocks as markers is necessary to infer the ancestral orientation of each ancestral block. Ancestral contiguous sets: for a given ancestral genome A, an ancestral contiguous set (ACS) is a set of ancestral markers that are believed to be contiguous in A, with no prior information on their order along the ancestral chromosome that contained them. An ACS with two markers is called an adjacency. We consider four types of ACS: @BULLET Block adjacencies, defined as pair of extremities of a same ancestral block. The two markers composing a block adjacency are adjacent in all genomes. @BULLET Supported adjacencies, defined as pairs of markers that are adjacent in both genomes of an informative pair. @BULLET Maximal common intervals between both genomes of an informative pair. A maximal common interval between two genomes is a set of markers that are contiguous in both genomes (possibly with different orders) and is not included into another common interval between the same two genomes. @BULLET Reliable adjacencies, defined as adjacencies that can be inferred from probable genome rearrangements ().
Assembling ACS into CARs:an ordering of all the markers satisfies a given ACS S if the markers of S form a contiguous interval in this ordering. A set of ACS S is said to be in conflict if there is no total ordering of the ancestral markers which satisfies all ACS of S. For example, if x, y and z are ancestral markers and {x,y}, {x,z}, {z,y} are three ACS, then there is no total ordering of x, y and z such that the markers in each of the three pairs are contiguous. If a set of ACS is not in conflict, all the orderings which satisfy them can be represented by a structure called a PQ-tree (), widely used in physical mapping studies. A PQ-tree defines CARs, from which it is possible to order, at least partially, ancestral markers. If a set of ACS is in conflict, then each ACS is weighted according to its conservation in extant genomes (see Supplementary Material), and CARs are obtained from the subset of non-conflicting ACS with the highest summed weight.Page: 2666 26642671
A.Ouangraoua et al.
Regrouping CARs into the ASGThe contiguity condition used to define ACSs and compute CARs is too stringent to define purely syntenic features of an ancestral genome. Indeed, some groups of markers may have been kept syntenic (on the same chromosome) during evolution, but spread out along this chromosome by genome rearrangements. Also, assembly errors, related to contigs ordering for example, can lead to an apparent loss of contiguity between group of syntenic markers. It is then necessary to relax the condition of contiguity in order to detect more subtle homology signal from the comparison of extant genomes composing an informative pair. We describe below two ways to detect such signal. As the ancestral blocks we constructed are limited to the ingroups and we want to detect syntenies common to ingroups and outgroups as well, we use orthologous genes retrieved from Ensembl Compara, seeto detect the syntenic signal.Ancestral synteny: for a given informative pair (A,B) in which no species is involved in a whole genome duplication, a contiguous sets of autosomal markers (CSAM) () is a set O of contiguous genes of A, such that all their orthologs are in a same chromosome in B. The set O of genes is called an ancestral synteny if its conservation in B is statistically significant according to a test described in Durand and Sankoff (2003) (see Supplementary Material for a detailed description of the tests and the controls for multiple testing). To detect CSAMs, we use informative pairs where A is a bird genome and B is a therian genome, or conversely. Double ancestral synteny: for a given informative pairs (A,B) for which a whole genome duplication happened in the lineage of B, we expect to see a set of genes that span one segment in A and their orthologs span two segments in B (). The general principle defining double syntenies is relatively simple, but due to different patterns of genome rearrangements and gene losses following a WGD (), it has been applied with different ad hoc implementations in vertebrates (;), plants () or yeasts (). We are not aware of any formal notion of double synteny. It is a contribution of the present method to propose such
Assembling ancestral syntenies into the ASG: if two blocks b 1 and b 2 arecontained in a same genome segment of an ingroup which is involved either in an ancestral synteny or a double ancestral synteny, then b 1 and b 2 are believed to have been syntenic in the ancestral genome A. Since, each block belongs to a CAR, then we get a set of synteny relationships between CARs. This naturally motivates the representation of a set of ancestral syntenies as a graph, whose vertices are the CARs, and where there is an edge between two vertices C 1 and C 2 if C1 (respectively C 2 ) contains a block b 1 (respectively b 2 ) such that b 1 and b 2 both belong to an ingroup genome segment that is involved in an ancestral or double ancestral synteny. We call this graph the Ancestral Synteny Graph; a connected component of this graph represents a set of CARs that are assumed to belong to a same proto-chromosome, and we call it an ALG (with no additional information on the ordering of the CARs along this proto-chromosome). Due to the relaxed notion of conservation used to define the edges of the ASG (contiguity is enforced in a single genome) and the larger evolutionary distance between ingroups and outgroups, the risk of convergent evolution or inaccurate ancestral syntenies is higher. To account for this issue, edges can be examined individually and filtered, using phylogenetic support, DCS statistical support or alignment quality between blocks for example.
RESULTSWe implemented all the principles described above and analyzed a dataset containing 12 amniote genomes (human, chimpanzee, orangutan, macaca, mouse, rat, dog, cow, horse, opossum, zebra finch, chicken) and 3 teleost fish genomes (tetraodon, stickleback, medaka). The 12 amniote genomes were chosen because they were assembled and present in a multiple alignments of 16 amniote genomes available in the release 58 of the Ensembl database obtained using Pecan (). All data (multiple alignments of amniote genomes, gene contents and gene trees) were downloaded from the Ensembl 58 Compara database (). The phylogeny, including branch lengths, was taken from paleontological data () (). Branch lengths are defined to be the normalized lower bounds of speciation times given by paleontological evidences, in order to avoid any a priori hypotheses i, on rearrangement rates. We computed ancestral blocks with resolution min_len = 100 kb, and we obtained 773 ancestral blocks, together with their orientations in the amniote genomes, resulting in 1546 ancestral markers (two markers per block, one for each extremity).
Amniote contiguous ancestral regions and ALGsWe detected 1861 ACS: 773 block adjacencies, 457 supported adjacencies, 8 reliable adjacencies and 623 maximum common intervals. We discarded 10 of these ACS (2 supported adjacencies,3 reliable adjacencies and 5 maximum common intervals) to obtain a non-conflicting set of ACS that resulted in 164 CARs. The low number of reliable adjacencies, when compared with mammalian studies (), is probably due to the large evolutionary distance between birds and therians and illustrates the less clear rearrangement signal that can be detected at this evolutionary scale. We then computed the CSAMs, the DCSs and the ASG using the gene orthologies from Ensembl 58. We retained only edges of the ASG with a strong phylogenetic support: a pair of ancestral blocks defines an edge between two CARs in the the ASG if and only if both blocks belong to an amniote segment involved in an ancestral synteny or double ancestral synteny, and both blocks are syntenic in genomes of at least three clades of the four amniote clades we considered: birds, opossum, laurasiatheria (cow, horse, dog), euarchontoglire (primates and rodents). This resulted in 39 connected components representing putative amniote linkage groups, partially depicted on(See Supplementary Information for the whole ASG picture). The largest connected components mainly consists of two or three very dense graphs linked through a few number of CARs. A finer analysis of the contribution of each type of signal we considered (adjacencies, common intervals, ancestral syntenies and double syntenies) shows several interesting properties. First CARs are mostly defined by common intervals (common intervals only define 165 CARs). The impact of adjacencies is then more in ordering blocks within CARs. Second, most connected components of the ASG are due to edges induced by CSAMs: discarding the DCS would result in 44 connected components. However, all syntenic associations are due the very few edges (24) edges induced uniquely by DCS. Details are provided in Supplementary Material.Numbers refer to chicken chromosomes, and association between numbers means that segments from these chromosome are assumed to descend from a single ancestral amniote chromosome.
Ancestral genome reconstruction
Structure of the amniote ancestral genomeWe say a region of an extant genome is covered by an amniote ALG if all blocks contained in this region belong to the ALG. The ancestral groups we inferred cover 972 Mb (94%) of the chicken genome and 2540 Mb (83%) of the human genome. In terms of genes, they cover 13996 (91%) of the chicken genes, and 15628 (76%) of the human genes. This coverage of the chicken and human genomes is much higher than what was attained by previous studies () (and Supplemental Material). The study of, while attaining a similar coverage, gives a much more fragmented configuration (606 ancestral segments with >1 gene for the amniote genome) as it uses more genomes, but only adjacencies to infer ancestral features. To push further the comparison with the previous proposals for the ancestral amniote genome (), we use features of the reconstructions called syntenic associations. A syntenic association is the presence in a proto-chromosome (a single component of the ancestral synteny graph), of blocks from two different chromosomes of an amniote extant genome chosen as reference. In, we report all syntenic associations we detected on the chicken genome, as well as the ones reported by two previous studies
RobustnessOur method relies on few parameters. Among them, the ones that define the DCS are optimized to get a maximum coverage of amniote genomes (Supplementary). Their variation is then part of the Page: 2668 26642671construction process, so we did not include them in the robustness analyses. Instead we made the set of sampled species and the resolution parameter min_len (the minimum length of a block) vary. We considered 11 variations of the set of amniote genomes obtained by either retaining all the 12 genomes or discarding 1 of the 10 nonreference genomes (all genomes except human and chicken). Four variations of the set of teleost fish genomes were also considered by either retaining all the three genomes or discarding one of them. The parameter min_len varied from 50 to 500 kb by steps of 50 kb, leading to 10 variations. In total, we performed 11410 = 440 different experiments. The number of ALGs is quite stable: it ranges from 34 to 47, with most situations resulting in 3639 ALGs (Supplementary). Interestingly, Supplementaryshows the stability of the number of CARs, which is much less visible. Again, this shows the interest of the integrative method, since each feature can be unstable while the whole is not (see a discussion on this in the Supplementary Material). We then wanted to know how much these ALGs from different runs looked alike. For this, we randomly selected 100 000 pairs of chicken genes, and filtered those covered by blocks in all 440 experiments. For each such pair of genes, we recorded the number of situations over the 440 ones in which they belong to two different ALGs (). We observe two predominant modes at 0-49 and 400-440. Because of the small probability to randomly select two genes that are in the same ALG, the 0-49 mode is obviously smaller, but this shows a relative constance in the choices to group genome parts or not. Indeed, a perfectly robust method would show only values 0 and 440, whereas a non-robust one would have a dispersed signal. We then evaluated the robustness of the result we present, that is, the ALGs computed with all genomes and a resolution of min_len=100 kb. Again, we sampled a high number of pairs of genes belonging to blocks in all 440 runs. Then for each particular ALG, we recorded the number of runs in which both genes still belong to a same ALG. The results are shown in. In this figure, each column represent the stability of an ALG A. A bold dot marks the mean of the distribution of the number of runs (over 440) in which two genes belonging to A are in a same ALG. Among the 39 ALGs, 33 have a perfect stability, meaning that genes in this ALG are always together than ALG in the other situations, three having a good stability, with a mean close to 1.Three ALGs show a bad stability, with a support between 0.2 and 0.7. This analysis put a doubt in the structure of these three ALGs at the 100 kb resolution. The number of low supported ALGs decreases with the resolution. In Supplementary, the same analysis is reproduced for min_len = 500 kb. All 32 ALGs in this case have a support > 90%, and 30 of them have 100%. This suggests there is a trade-off between the resolution and the support of the results.
A.Ouangraoua et al.
DISCUSSIONWe described a general methodology for inferring ancestral genomes, that relies on a hierarchical process: computing ancestral blocks, computing CARs and computing the ASG and ALGs. We implemented this general approach using stringent methods for each phase, tailored to account for the specificity of the evolution of amniote genomes, and we applied it to infer large ancestral amniote linkage groups at a 100 kb resolution, from whole-genome alignments and gene families. This resulted in the first proposal of an ancestral amniote genome that covers large parts of its extant descendants.proposed significantly more amniote syntenic associations than we do. One explanation is the stringency of the method we use to detect double ancestral syntenies. Indeed, due to the stability of bird genomes and the absence of reptile genomes in the considered dataset, the only syntenic associations that can be detected are supported by double ancestral syntenies. We find that the associations 18-27 and Z-22 are the only ones to be supported by a pair of blocks that belong to more than one DCS. This illustrates the fact that combinatorial traces of synteny conservation at a large evolutionary distance are quite degraded and not widespread, even when several amniote genomes are considered. Even if we cannot definitively argue that the syntenic associations described in the previous ancestral genome proposals are wrong, we believe that they rely on a weaker synteny conservation signal as illustrated by the case of the putative syntenic association 17-Z (see discussion below). We even found no evidence that the medaka genome is as stable as claimed by) (for example,does not show more conserved DCS signal in the medaka than in the two other teleost fishes).We now discuss a few examples of syntenic associations that were reported by both () but not by our method, as they illustrate the interest of methodological discussions to analyze such discrepancies. The association between chicken chromosomes 26 and 32 was out of reach for us as no ancestral block did belong to chicken chromosome 32. The signal we observe for an association between chicken chromosomes 2 and 9 does not support clearly the fact it was present in the amniote ancestor: it can be related to two ancestral blocks, contiguous in all placental mammalian genomes but not in the opossum genome, and that do not belong to a DCS, which indicates more likely an ancestral boreoeutherian feature. Finally, the case of the association 17-Z is interesting. We detect a faint signal for it based on three blocks present on a single DCS in the macaca genome and on the same chromosomes in the human, chimpanzee and orangutan genomes, but which does not satisfy the phylogenetic conservation criterion we use to retain edges of the ASG. There are also two blocks contiguous in all placental mammalians and that also belong to a genome segment that shows a DCS signal that does not satisfy the stringent definition we used. So we leave open the possibility that the association 17-Z is present in the amniote ancestral genome. The signal related to associations 2-9 and 3-14, as well as for associations Z-22 and 1-2, which are specific to our study, is described in Supplementary Material.
Comparison with previous ancestral amniote genomes
Page: 2669 26642671
Ancestral genome reconstruction
Insights on the evolution of bird genomesIt can be remarked inthat the ancestral amniote linkage groups we inferred are remarkably close to the bird chromosomes, and somehow more distant from the mammalian ones. It has already been remarked that bird genomes show an incredibly conserved degree of synteny (). It has been claimed that the avian ancestral karyotype is only one fission away from the chicken one, concerning chicken chromosome 4. Our analysis, that splits chicken chromosome 4 into three ancestral linkage groups, including two small and one large segments (1.7, 5 and 41 Mb, respectively), does not contradict this hypothesis.place the appearance of micro-chromosomes after the divergence with mammals, since no mammal seems to carry some, but the fact that most chicken micro-chromosomes each belong to a single ALG, leaves open the hypothesis of ancestral micro-chromosomes: apart from the 18-27, 21-26 and Z-22 fissions, which concern at least one micro-chromosome each, all micro-chromosomes could be ancestral. Even the groups 18-27 and 21-26 can be considered as ancestral micro-chromosomes.
Methodological issues, accuracy and validationA fundamental question regarding any ancestral genome reconstruction method is its accuracy, and the confidence we may have in the results it produces. As such methods aim at inferring an information that has been lost and cannot be recovered, they cannot be assessed on real data. Validation may be obtained by @BULLET comparing the results to well-established ones, as in mammalian data studied by cytogeneticians (), or yeast data curated by experts (); @BULLET comparing to results obtained, in silico, on synthetic data generated by simulating an evolutionary process; @BULLET studying and validating the underlying principles of the method and their implementation; @BULLET studying the robustness of the choices made by the method to small parameter changes or data perturbations. First, we can remark that, when applied to reconstruct the ancestral boreoeutherian genome, whose structure is widely agreed upon by bioinformaticians and cytogeneticians, the introduction of the ASG does not bring additional information here (i.e. all connected components are single CARs; results not shown). So our method defines this ancestor uniquely in terms of CARs, and obtains results similar to previous reconstructions (). We think that using simulated data is not relevant presently: relevant simulations would require to follow a realistic model of genome structural evolution (here in terms of genome rearrangements), and such a model is currently not available. Crucial elements of this modelfor example, rearrangement rates, ratio of different types of events, distribution of breakpoints along genomes, breakpoints re-use, rearrangement and duplication lengths, fate of duplicated genes following a WGDare still not well understood. Accurate ancestral genomes inferred using model-free methods (methods that do not rely on a genome rearrangement model) will be key to improve our understanding of the evolution of vertebrate genomes and participate to develop better models, that can then be used to refine inference methods and develop realistic simulated datasets. We then propose here to evaluate our results by highlighting important properties of the method itself, that complement the extensive robustness analysis described in the previous section. All ancestral features are supported: if two blocks are found adjacent or syntenic in the ancestor, it is immediately possible to recover the signal that defines this feature (extant or reliable adjacency, genome segment defining a common interval, synteny, double synteny). Hence, every such feature can be assessed individually by looking at the precise genome segments, alignments and genes that support it. Although this is not a validation of the method we propose, this provides the appropriate ground for discussing the results it produces, either in the light of evolutionary arguments (such as possible convergent evolution, for example) or from a data processing point of view (alignment quality, orthology detection, DCS boundaries, to cite a few). This is not the case, for example, of rearrangement techniques (), where an ancestral adjacency can be inferred while never present in the data, its presence being due to a parsimony criterion in a simplified model of evolution. While Page: 2670 26642671
A.Ouangraoua et al.this does not rule out that parsimony methods can provide accurate results, the lack of ways to assess ancestral feature is a problem our method aims at addressing. Optimization is almost absent: any optimization step based on a simplified evolutionary model () or on clustering methods () results in arbitrary and uncontrolled choices, and is subject to the pitfall of the multiplicity of optimal (and slightly suboptimal) solutions (). Here we try to reduce the optimization step as much as possible, by being very stringent on the retrieved signals and thus limiting the conflicts. And indeed we discard only 0.5% of the inferred information to construct the CARs, which is the only optimization step we use. Stringent implementations: we chose to implement each phase in a stringent way, using established comparative genomics concepts. First, we defined ancestral blocks using reference genome alignments from Ensembl that were conserved in all amniote genomes (universal seeds) and then joined seeds into blocks if collinear again in all amniote genomes. Hence, we followed a more conservative approach than in most synteny/orthology blocks models, that allow local rearrangements (). Next, we inferred CARs mostly from sets of blocks that are contiguous in pairs of informative extant genomes: common intervals and conserved adjacencies; the information added from reliable rearrangements had very little impact. It is important to note here that common intervals are associated with an implicit statistical significance. Indeed, as shown in, one can expect to find in a random gene order two common intervals, both of length two. Hence, larger common intervals are statistically significant. Together with the fact that most CARs are defined primarily by common intervals, this shows that the signal defining CARs is significant. Relying on such stringent conserved characters resulted in a set of ACSs that was almost conflict free, which suggests a low rate of false positives. Regarding the edges of the ASG, to reduce the impact of possible false positives, we relied on statistical tests of synteny conservation, and corrected the whole procedure for multiple testing. Moreover, to add one additional layer of safety, we discarded from the ASG all edges that were not supported in extant genomes of at least three of the four main clades we considered. In conclusion, all ancestral features are defined in terms of statistically significant combinatorial structures.
Future researchThe computational reconstruction of ancestral genomes is still a recent research topic, especially when it comes to ancient genomes with faint traces of synteny conservation. We discuss below possible ways to improve the different stages of the method we introduced. Ancestral blocks: our work relies strongly on the set ancestral blocks, that are the basic bricks of the reconstruction process: both CARs and edges of the ASG are defined in terms of these blocks. Hence, their accuracy is central to ensure the accuracy of the inferred ancestral genome, and false positives (i.e. blocks that do not descend from a single ancestral genomic segment) can lead to wrong ALGs or syntenic associations. This calls for new research on orthology blocks, their desirable properties and methods to detect them or assess their accuracy. In particular, the traditional approach that relies on universal, or almost universal, seeds (DNA alignment or orthologous genes) to define such blocks needs to be revisited to cope with the increasing number of sequenced vertebrate genomes, as illustrated recently in Pham and Pevzner (2010).
Doubly conserved syntenies:the present work illustrates the interesting potential of DCS to infer syntenic information from genomes having evolved through a WGD (already noticed by several previous works), but it also shows that the lesser constraints on the detected signal requires great care in using such signal to infer ancestral syntenic features. In particular, it should be remarked that a DCS in an amniote might not represent an ancestral genome segment but the union of several ancestral syntenic genome segments. This is the reason why we chose not to use DCSs as ancestral contiguous sets but as synteny signals only. In our previous study (), using DCSs as ACSs for the amniote ancestor reconstruction led to a high ratio of discarded ACSs (14%), most of the discarded ACSs being linked to DCSs. The problem of detecting high confidence DCS is of importance beyond the case of amniote genomes, as WGD happened in yeasts genome evolution (), or, at a larger scale, in plant genome evolution (, b).
The ASG: the combinatorial propertiesof the ASG deserve deeper investigations. A close look at the graph we obtain for the ancestral amniote genome shows both highly connected sets of CARs, indicating clear groups of syntenic CARs, and weakly connected structures such as bridges, illustrating the faint traces of evolution supporting some syntenic associations. Among the natural questions on the ASG, it remains to see if CARs grouped in dense subgraphs can be ordered. i.e. if they can be arranged in linear structures representing larger ancestral chromosomal segments. This problem could be attacked for example by weighting the edges of the ASG with estimated genomic length representing the distance between blocks along an ancestral chromosome. From a theoretical point of view, this becomes related to the graph bandwidth problem. Amniote genomes evolution: our dataset is unbalanced, with only two birds. It will be interesting to see the additional information that can be obtained from the turkey, lizard and xenopus genomes. Our method can handle genomes in scaffold form, but they were excluded from our study because they were not present in the Ensembl multiple alignments we used to compute ancestral blocks. Our reconstruction of ancestral amniote linkage groups suggests that this branch is slowly evolving in structure since the amniotetherians divergence. To refine this hypothesis, as well as to better understand the structure of amniote breakpoint regions (), we would need to compute genomic distances and evolutionary scenarios along the different lineage. The availability of a high-resolution ancestral amniote genome and of efficient methods for sampling rearrangement scenarios (), adapted to handle fragmented and partially ordered ancestral genomes, should allow such studies.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
a formalization, which can be used widely in any clade of the living world where we know whole genome duplications happened (yeasts or plants). We use a generalization of the gene teams defined in Luc et al. (2003). An -double team is a set O of genes that span one segment S A in A and two segments S 1 B and S 2 B in B, such that, along S A (respectively S 1 B , S 2 B ), there is no gap of size greater than  (respectively ). The set O of genes is called a double conserved synteny (DCS) if its conservations in A and B are statistically significant, and if there is no significantly clustered segment S 3 B in B, disjoint from S 1 B and S 2 B , which has orthologs in S A. This definition relies on two parameters (the gaps parameters  and ) which can vary to include a flexibility to noisy data as well as a high postWDG rearrangement rate in B. We choose the parameters maximizing the coverage of A by DCS (due to forbidding the presence of a segment S 3 B and the use of statistical tests, the coverage can decrease when  increases). With our data, the parameters maximizing the coverage of extant amniote genomes by DCS are  = 1, accounting for possible isolated wrong gene annotation or retro-transpositions for example, and  =, which matches the high rate of rearrangement after the teleost WGD (Hufton and Panopoulou, 2009; Smon and Wolfe, 2007b). Supplementary Figure S3 shows the coverage of the chicken genome by DCS with different values of  and .
