Motivation: Large-scale RNA expression measurements are generating enormous quantities of data. During the last two decades, many methods were developed for extracting insights regarding the interrelationships between genes from such data. The mathematical and computational perspectives that underlie these methods are usually algebraic or probabilistic. Results: Here, we introduce an unexplored geometric view point where expression levels of genes in multiple experiments are interpreted as vectors in a high-dimensional space. Specifically, we find, for the expression profile of each particular gene, its approximation as a linear combination of profiles of a few other genes. This method is inspired by recent developments in the realm of compressed sensing in the machine learning domain. To demonstrate the power of our approach in extracting valuable information from the expression data, we independently applied it to large-scale experiments carried out on the yeast and malaria parasite whole transcriptomes. The parameters extracted from the sparse reconstruction of the expression profiles, when fed to a supervised learning platform, were used to successfully predict the relationships between genes throughout the Gene Ontology hierarchy and protein–protein interaction map. Extensive assessment of the biological results shows high accuracy in both recovering known predictions and in yielding accurate predictions missing from the current databases. We suggest that the geometrical approach presented here is suitable for a broad range of high-dimensional experimental data.
INTRODUCTIONHigh-throughput technologies have come to play a central role in biological and biomedical research in the last decade. Advances in large-scale technologies on a genome-wide scale produce enormous amounts of data (). Yet, a major goal of functional genomics is the quest for a comprehensive description of the functions and interactions of all genes and proteins in a genome. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Data such as large-scale gene expression are usually represented by a matrix, where n genes are examined in d experimental conditions. Here, we view such data as a set of n points (vectors) in d-dimensional space, each of which represents the profile of a given gene over d different experimental conditions. Many known methods that have yielded meaningful biological insights in fact seek geometric or algebraic features of these vectors. For example, analyzing the angles between vectors amounts to a correlation-based analysis. Similarly, the direction in space along which these points are most 'spread out' correspond to singular value decomposition (SVD) () and its principal component analysis implementation (). These are powerful tools in providing biological inference (). In general, methods and disciplines developed toward extracting information from expression data include pairwise properties (e.g. correlation, variance, entropy-based distance) (), clustering (), Bayesian networks (), information theory, ordinary differential equations and other sophisticated distance measures. In this study, we applied a different approach to gene expression data analysis. The geometric principle that underlies it is very natural and different from existing methods, though it is close in spirit, and inspired by recent advances in compressive sensing and sparse signal recovery (). A simple probabilistic consideration implies the following geometric claim: given a set of n randomly chosen points in the d-dimensional space, it is 'very unlikely' that a linear subspace Y exists where more than dim(Y ) points of the chosen points reside 'very close' to Y (see Section 3). In this study, we present a natural, yet unexplored, approach for the seemingly exhausted problem of gene expression analysis. Adopting a sparse signals reconstruction mindset, we recover a support set of genes for each gene in a genome. Geometrically, we uncovered linear subspaces that are overpopulated with expression profiles in the multidimensional space of the experiments set. We could verify the robustness and significance of the sparse reconstructions using measures intrinsic to the method and data. Formally, we are interested in subsets S of our n-point set that (nearly) resides on a subspace of dimension strictly smaller than |S|. Having found such sets, several immediate questions suggest themselves: (i) are these findings robust? (ii) If they are robust, can we directly interpret their biological meaning? (iii) Can such representation uncover meaningful structures? (iv) Does the method generalize? In this article, we answer these questions by considering gene expression alone and testing datasets coming from the transcriptomes of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. A conceptually new method that we call SPARCLE (SPArse ReCovery of Linear combinations of Expression) is introduced. It is inspired by the plausible assumption that expression data, when considered over a broad range of experimental conditions, encodes profound layers of systematic (yet hidden) behaviors. We further confirmed the stability and robustness of SPARCLE results for entire transcriptomes under perturbations to the data. Extracting features from the geometric parameters of SPARCLE's results, and training AdaBoost, a machine learning platform, to exhaustively reveal pairwise associations between gene function [represented by Gene Ontology (GO) annotations and by the proteinprotein interaction (PPI) map] confirmed the principal information encoded by the geometric-based representation. The generality of the method is confirmed by applying it to both the knowledge-rich yeast model and the poorly annotated malaria parasite proteome.
SPARSE REPRESENTATION OF EXPRESSIONWe wish to discover linear dependencies within groups of expression profiles, using full transcriptome mRNA expression measured under a wide range of environmental conditions. Given an objective gene expression profile, one would seek, then, the smallest number of profiles, whose linear span contains the expression profile of the objective gene. Formally, this is expressed as the following problem:Here A  R dn is a matrix of RNA expression levels of n genes (the entire genome excluding the objective gene) measured in d different experiments, b  R d is the vector of expression levels of the objective gene in the d experiments, and x  R n are the n optimization variables, which are n coefficients corresponding to the n genes in the genome. The ||x|| 0 notation stands for the L 0 'norm' of x, which is the number of non-zero entries in x (See example inand B). We should note here that we consider the common situation where n is much larger than d, hence Ax = b is an underdetermined system of linear equations. In its general form, this optimization problem is NP-hard (). Fortunately, theoretical developments in recent years imply that this problem can be efficiently solved in practice, or at least approximated well, in many practical cases. The theory developed around this problem (shows that for generic instances of this problem, the solution of P 0 coincides, at least nearly, with the solution of the following problem:The advantage is that P 1 , where the L 0 'norm' has been replaced by the L 1 norm, can be stated as a linear programming problem and is hence efficiently solvable. In order to apply this method to noisy biological data, we use a relaxed form ofP 1 :). where  is a sufficiently small noise parameter. We use a linear programming solver to solve this optimization problem, for each gene in the dataset as an objective gene in its turn. This is followed by an intrinsic assessment of robustness. We refer to this combined procedure as SPARCLE.
METHODS
DatasetsGene expression measurements were extracted from the GEO database GSE11452 () and consist of a microarray compendium of 170 steady-state chemostat cultures of S.cerevisiae, which encompass 55 unique environmental conditions. The full data consists of 9335 Affymetrix probes, representing the full S.cerevisiae transcriptome. We used a set of 6254 genes, after elimination of most non-coding transcripts including transposons, tRNAs and rRNAs, and selecting one probe for each coding gene. The same filters were applied to GEO database GSE19468 of the malaria parasite P.falciparum. We used a set of 208 microarray experiments that cover 4365 genes from P.falciparum ().
Solving the SPARCLE optimization problemThe expression dataset was divided into two sets of experiments, where one was used for the unsupervised learning of sparse representations, and the other was left aside for a cross-validation test of robustness. The Page: 657 655661
Geometrical analysis of gene expression dataproblem was solved using the matrix A of 85 (experiments) 6254 (genes), for S.cerevisiae, and 104 (experiments) 4365 (genes), for P.falciparum. Repeatedly, each column (85, or 104, coordinate gene expression profile) is chosen as b in (P  ) and is removed (for this single iteration) from the matrix A. The optimization problem was solved as a linear programming problem using Matlab's linprog solver. The noise parameter  in (P  ) was set to 0.5 (Supplementary). The noise was evaluated using the L 1 norm, permitting an efficient linear programming description. Random partitions of the data into learning and test sets (five repetitions) resulted in almost identical outcome, verifying the independence of the results on the specific partitions chosen.
Robustness of expression profile representationsBiological robustness and validity of the solutions were measured by their degree of approximation in the unseen data of experiments. Specifically, we denote by A the unobserved matrix excluding the objective gene, and b as the objective gene's d-dimensional expression profile in the unseen data. The solution of the minimization problem using the first matrix (A) is x * . We then take  =||A x * b || 1 as the degree of approximation on the unseen data. When  is small, the solution may be considered as biologically robust, since the linear combination it describes holds true for a set of biological experiments not utilized by SPARCLE. In order to assess the quality of  , we performed two different tests. In the first one, we chose a random support set for each gene, of the same size as the support chosen by SPARCLE and calculated coefficients for each support member by solving: min x ||Ax b|| 1 where b is the objective gene's profile, and x is a vector of all zeroes but at the support's coordinates. Then, using the solution x, we evaluated  as before; repeating 10 000 times, we estimated the background distribution of the  value, resulting in a P-value for each  value. In the second test, we randomly select d genes, reducing the matrix A to contain only these d genes, which producedAproduced producedA  R dd and solve:
.||Ax|| ||Ax b|| 1 0.5For each gene, we obtained x and calculated  =||A x b || 1. The choice of d genes was done in order to ensure the existence of a feasible solution in the optimization problem (as the biological data is noisy, we assume both matrices A and  have rank d); repeating this process 1000 times allows estimation of the corresponding P-value.
Normalization and setting the noise measureThe raw expression data were normalized in two ways: (i) the expression profile for each gene was divided by its maximal value and (ii) for each experiment/condition, the mean expression value across the entire set of genes was subtracted from each gene. We further added a column (i.e. a new 'gene') with a constant expression value of 1, and gave it a zero weight in the minimization problem; this step permitted the free use of a constant factor in the linear combinations found. We tested several values for the noise factor . Clearly, a larger  yields sparser solutions (as the constraints of the optimization problem are relaxed) but with a less accurate reconstruction of the objective gene. On the other hand, tighter constraints of smaller  values result in overfitting to the noise in the train data. In this article, we describe results obtained using  = 0.5. The  value was selected to be <5% of the mean L 1 norm of the normalized profiles, and such that it will never exceed 20% of any profile's L 1 norm. The assessments and influence on support sizes of using different values of  = 0.25,  = 0.75 are shown in Supplementary.
High-dimensional geometric analysisWe enhanced the mathematical findings of SPARCLE by direct geometric analysis of the raw input data. As mentioned above, we view each expression vector as a point in d-dimensional space. We analyzed the geometric properties of the data by investigating the convex hull of this set of vectors.This information was used to quantify the deviation of the expression vectors of genes from those of others. These quantities were included as features in leveraging the follow-up supervised learning of biological associations between genes.
Measuring GO enrichmentFor a given set of support genes found by SPARCLE to reconstruct an objective gene, GO enrichment was calculated using a hypergeometric test, with the entire set as a background (). Sets were considered enriched with an annotation if the annotation received a P < 0.05, corrected for a false detection rate (FDR) of 5%. Hypergeometric probabilities and FDR were computed directly using Matlab.
Extraction of feature vectorsThe sparse representations found by SPARCLE were condensed into feature vectors for each pair of genes. These vectors contained both individual features of each member of the pair and pairwise features. Importantly, all the features were extracted from the input data (e.g. correlations, high-dimensional geometric analysis), the output solutions of SPARCLE (e.g. support sizes, mutual coefficient values) and their intrinsic assessment values (e.g.  ); no external features were used. These feature vectors were used in a supervised learning platform in order to assess the significance of our results. The following features were extracted from SPARCLE results and the raw data. They comprise a vector with 40 parameters for each pair of genes, which was used for the supervised learning. The features (for a pair of genes i and j) are as follows: (i) coefficient of each gene in the expression profile of the other, as reconstructed by SPARCLE (non-zero if gene i is in the selected support for gene j and vice versa).For each gene, the mean, median and SD of feature (ix) over the entire set. All listed features (i)(x) were used in the supervised learning of shared GO annotations and PPI by the AdaBoost algorithm. To test the principal information from SPARCLE, we separated features (ix), (x) for a direct evaluation of the contribution of features that can be extracted directly from the raw data. We denoted the analysis based on AdaBoost using features (ix), (x) collectively as Correlations+AB (, Figs S3S7).
Prediction of gene associationsThe GO is structured as three directed acyclic graphs (DAG): the cellular component (CC), the biological process (BP) and the molecular function (MF) ontology. Each term, used to annotate genes, resides at a different depth with respect to its root (CC, BP or MF). The deeper the term resides in the graph, the higher its annotation resolution, i.e. it is more specific (as illustrated in Supplementary). In order to label two genes as associated by similar GO terms, one should first choose the resolution of interest. We choose to measure the depth of the term as the length of the shortest path from the root to the term in the DAG. We tested our predictions both at low resolution (close to the root) and at high resolution (deep in the GO structure, i.e. specific annotations). The low-resolution depth was chosen as the lowest level of description where <50% of the gene pairs would be considered as associated with a GO term (depths 5, 2 and 1 for CC, BP and MF, respectively, for the yeast data and depths 3, 1 and 1 for the Page: 658 655661
Y.Prat et al.malaria parasite data). The high-resolution depth was chosen as the highest level of description where at least 1% of the gene pairs would be assigned the same annotation (depths 11, 8 and 7 for the yeast and depths 7, 5 and 5 for CC, BP and MF, respectively for the malaria parasite). In addition to using the depth measure for resolution, we also applied the GO-Slim () set of manually selected GO terms, constructed to eliminate the hierarchical structure of GO.
Interpreting the results of supervised learningWe trained the AdaBoost method () to classify the feature vectors as positive (i.e. same GO annotation) or negative for biological association. The training set included 15 000 randomly selected pairs, half positively and half negatively labeled. The test set contained 200 000 randomly selected pairs that were not used in the training set, again half positively and half negatively labeled. We applied a simple threshold on the AdaBoost raw classification values in order to assign confidence values to its classifications. The confidence level granted a tradeoff between coverage and accuracy. In essence, this requires higher confidence in making any classification at all, hence refusing to classify some of the examples. In order to obtain x% coverage, we ignore all but the x% highest positive classification values and x% lowest negative values.
Comparing predictionsWe compared SPARCLE-based learning by AdaBoost to three other methods of predicting associations among genes. First, we used AdaBoost to learn associations using only correlation-related features. Second, we used the correlation-based transitive shortest path (SPath) evaluation method (). Briefly, an undirected graph is constructed, with genes as nodes and edge weights 1P, where P = the Pearson's correlation between the pair (for P  0.6). A shortest path was then constructed between each pair, and its weight was used as an estimator for a distance between the genes. Lastly, we used the absolute value of the Pearson's correlation between genes as a measure of their association, applying a confidence level.
Inspection SPARCLE-based predictionsWe chose to manually test the possibility that the false predictions are due to incomplete labeling of gene products by GO annotations. To this end, we sampled a set of 10 predicted associations (gene pairs) from the yeast data, which were not annotated as being associated (false positives), and compared them with a random sample of 10 pairs predicted as not associated, conforming to GO annotation [true negatives (. This process was done for all three GO subontologies (CC, BP and MF); hence, 60 pairs were manually investigated (Supplementary). For each pair, a shared annotation (if found) was retrieved from a literature-based association protocol (). Further analysis included the use of PPI networks based on the BioGrid () and STRING (von) experimental data servers. When the servers found an association, they also returned a P-value for the connection. The minimal number of intermediate nodes connecting a pair of genes in the network was retrieved using Pathway Palette ().
RESULTSTo demonstrate the utility of SPARCLE on gene expression data, we analyzed two very large experimental datasets: from the yeast S.cerevisiae and from the malaria parasite P.falciparum composed of 170 and 208 experiments and covering 6254 and 4365 genes, respectively. While the SPARCLE methodology is not restricted by the type or source of data, we used mRNA expression measurements from, which constitute a microarray compendium of chemostat cultures of S.cerevisiae that cover 55 unique growth conditions, including nutrient-limiting substrates,growth rate, aeration, pH and temperature. This dataset was divided randomly into two equal-sized sets of d = 85 experiments covering n = 6254 yeast genes. Our matrix has full row rank d = 85 and linear algebra implies that the smallest support (of a solution to P 0 ) will never exceed d. Indeed, the coefficient vectors obtained were considerably sparser with an average support size of 67 (). Thus, our goal of achieving a 'short' compact linear representation is achieved. To ensure robustness, half of the experiments (85) were not used for such representation, and were reserved for the purpose of cross-validation and evaluation. Random partitions of the data into two parts were performed five times with essentially identical results (see Section 3). Following this new geometrical representation of the data and confirming its stability to perturbations (), we turned to extracting valuable biological information for the entire proteomes. The first functional test was based on searching enrichment in GO () annotations. For 10% of the genes, significant enrichment of functional annotation could be found among their set of supporting genes retrieved by SPARCLE. An example is the gene MEP1 () for which many of the support members share annotations (Supplementary). The statistical enrichments of GO annotations for a sample of gene supports are shown (Supplementary). Furthermore, MEP1 is interconnected with several of the support gene products, as reflected by the connected graph of the PPI network (). However, for most genes (90%), an immediate biological interpretation could not be retrieved from the support set. Typically, the objective gene and its support gene products are isolated in a PPI network graph (examples are shown in). As SPARCLE results proved meaningful and robust by the cross-validation test (; Supplementary), we expect the method to capture hidden information. To this end, we used SPARCLE results as input for a machine learning procedure (). Specifically, we trained the AdaBoost framework () to classify whether each pair of genes has a reported PPI or not, using information that is only extracted from the input data itself (i.e. the expression matrix) and the SPARCLE analysis (see Section 3). Together, the results of SPARCLE, with the Page: 659 655661a set of genes and their assigned coefficient. For each pair of genes, a feature vector was constructed from the properties of their representing sets. The feature vector also included another high-dimensional analysis, i.e. distances of each profile from the convex hull of the others. Other features were obtained directly from the input data (see Section 3). Features in the illustration: I, co-occurrence in supports; II, gene i's coefficient in gene j's support; III, gene j's coefficient in gene i's support; IV, Pearson's correlation of the expression profiles. (B) Prediction of PPI, as represented by the STRING database, by supervised learning from SPARCLE results (SPARCLE+AB). Accuracy is traded off with coverage by applying certainty thresholds on the classifier output. Other methods for predicting genes interrelationships are as follows: Pearson's correlation of the expression profiles (Correlations), and a transitive correlations method (SPath, see Section 2). (C) Prediction of associations for the GO Slim annotations, covering CC ontology. For detailed analyses of accuracy coverage tradeoff, see Supplementary(GO slim) and(PPI). input expression data, were condensed into feature vectors for each pair of genes (). We tested whether functional information that is encoded in the yeast PPI map can be successfully recovered. Using a confidence threshold for the classification, accurate performance can be traded off in exchange for providing lower coverage of the data. The results of the supervised learning were exceptionally good (). For 50% coverage of the high-confidence predictions, an accuracy of 78% was reached. Even for 100% coverage, the accuracy reaches 70% (). Recall that the yeast unfiltered PPI map still exhibits a high false positive (FP) rate (). The combined protocol of the unsupervised SPARCLE method and supervised learning platform (based on SPARCLE feature vector,) was then tested for the task of recovering the GO associations between genes, with the three functional branches covering MF, CC and BP (). Specifically, gene pairs were classified as sharing, or not sharing, similar GO annotations. For comparison, we compare the prediction results to other correlation-based methods (and C). While the GO hierarchical database covers different descriptive resolutions (Supplementary), our protocol exhibited accurate predictions at all resolution levels (Supplementary Figs S3S5). For example, with 20% coverage at high GO resolution, the accuracy reached 97.6, 91 and 99% for CC, BP and MF, respectively (SPARCLE+AB;C and Supplementary Figs S3S5). For 100% coverage, we still achieved 6572% accuracy for all ontology branches at low resolution (SPARCLE+AB,C), and 7389% for the more specific terms of the high resolution of GO annotations (SPARCLE+AB; Supplementary Figs S3S5). An additional perspective on the SPARCLE+AB method is retrieved from the tradeoff of sensitivity and 1specificity as presented by the receiver operating characteristic curves. In all tests (for PPI, GO low and high levels and GO Slim), when SPARCLE+AB and Correlation+AB are compared a higher sensitivity is measured for the same specificity (data not shown). Next, we tested whether our inference method 'happens' to do well on the yeast as a model system. Indeed, the yeast genome is extremely rich in annotations and currently 88% of its genes are associated with some informative GO annotation. Similarly, the quality and density of the yeast interactome exceed those of any other model system. We thus repeated the entire protocol for a set of 208 experiments () measuring 4365 P.falciparum genes expression levels, from cells exposed to 30 anti-malaria drugs. Note that only 5% of the malaria genes are reviewed by SwissProt, 65% of the proteins are annotated as 'putative' and only 46% of the genes are associated with some GO annotations (often at a low resolution, Supplementary). The SPARCLE-based protocol again demonstrated high predictive power (F; Supplementary).Finally, we systematically tested the novel knowledge gained from the above-described protocols (Figs 3 and 4; Supplementary Figs S3S5). To this end, we randomly sampled pairs of yeast genes which were annotated as unrelated and yet which we predicted to be related (FP) and, for comparison, pairs of genes which were annotated as unrelated and predicted to be unrelated (TNs). We manually examined each such pair of genes for functional connections. Remarkably, we verified our predictions for interrelations in  80% of all FP samples, yet could only detect relations in about a third of the TN set (Supplementary). While this manual inspection cannot be considered to stand on solid statistical ground, it provides support for the relevance of SPARCLE-based properties, when they are fed into a machine-learning platform to empower functional inference.
A B
Geometrical analysis of gene expression data
A B C
DISCUSSIONThe value of the information retrieved by the SPARCLE approach was demonstrated by using its results as a basis for machine learning classification of gene associations. A systematic and comprehensive evaluation, ranging from PPI networks and going through all resolution levels of the GO annotation database, covering the immensely explored yeast transcriptome and the poorly annotated malaria-parasite genome, revealed the large potential of using such a poorly studied geometric approach to extract principal insights from gene expression data. Many approaches aim to develop a systematic way to unravel hidden structure in data. Most studies that looked for biologicalcoherence in gene expression data applied clustering (at different levels of sophistication), revealing the existence of some hidden 'structure' in the data. In the current research, comparisons to clustering results were not carried out, as our goal here is quite different. The high performance of SPARCLE-based AdaBoost learning should be considered as evidence for the principal information that is embedded in the geometric properties of the data. Therefore, a critical comparison was performed to evaluate the information that is embedded in correlation (a form of geometric representation, see below). We show that the correlation performed very poorly on the malaria data and somewhat better on the yeast data. In addition, by combining the AdaBoost learning protocol with the correlation (Correlation+AB), we isolated the contribution of the AdaBoost learning itself. SPARCLE+AB outperformed these other approaches for the entire range of accuracy and coverage (and 4; Supplementary Figs S3S7). Several aspects of our approach differ from common practices, and should be elaborated. Most of the activity in the machinelearning area can be viewed as a modern-day approach to the classical questions of statistics. The data at hand is considered as being sampled from some distribution and the question is to get as accurate as possible a description of that distribution. Our approach is different. When data items are (or can be naturally viewed as) points in space, it is possible to utilize any 'unexpected' geometric properties that this set of points (corresponding to data items) has. In fact, many successful existing methods in machine learning can be viewed from this perspective. Thus, if S is a generic set of N points in d-dimensional space and if N is subexponential in d, then we do not expect to see any pairs of points (even nearly) in the same direction from the origin. If the set of points that is your dataset violates this statement, you can conclude that it has a geometrically nontrivial structure. This structural property is very likely a reflection of an interesting (albeit not necessarily interpretable) property in the domain from which the dataset came. This is our interpretation of correlation analysis, one of the most reliable workhorses of bioinformatics. Likewise, a generic point set in Euclidean space is not expected to be stretched in any special directions in space. Therefore, if your dataset, viewed geometrically, is stretched in certain directions it tells you something that can often be used to discover interesting phenomena. This is our interpretation of SVD analysis. Correlations and stretch are only two of the numerous properties that one may consider in a point set in Euclidean space. Our work considers another very basic property that we know not to exist in generic sets: (nearly) linearly dependent sets of points of cardinality that is substantially smaller than the dimension of the host space. When such an unexpected property of the dataset is discovered, two questions suggest themselves: (i) is this phenomenon only coincidental? and (ii) how can this geometric property of the data help us learn something about the system which it represents? In this study, we confirm the robustness of this Page: 661 655661
Geometrical analysis of gene expression dataproperty under multiple perturbations (and 2; Supplementary) and the generality for multiple model organisms (and 4; Supplementary Figs S3S7). The SPARCLE-based machine learning analysis is a first step toward a deeper understanding of the underlying complexity of the biological gene associations. In this study, we present a natural, yet unexplored, approach for the seemingly exhausted problem of gene expression analysis. Adopting a sparse signals reconstruction mindset, we recover a support set of genes for each gene in a genome. Geometrically, we uncovered linear subspaces that are overpopulated with expression profiles in the multidimensional space of the experiments set. We could verify the robustness and significance of the sparse reconstructions using measures intrinsic to the method and data. A notable byproduct of the process is the observation that a biological interpretation of the support sets was mostly indirect. This is to be expected, since we only consider the smallest support size for each given vector while often many other representations of the same vector can be found with subdimensional supports. Another offshoot is the partial ability to identify unannotated genes, which somewhat contributed to the high precision in the case of the P.falciparum study. Such genes are mostly evolutionary branch-specific genes, and identifying them from expression data is stimulating in and of itself.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
