Motivation: Chromosome rearrangement events are triggered by atypical breaking and rejoining of DNA molecules, which are observed in many cancer-related diseases. The detection of rearrangement is typically done by using short reads generated by next-generation sequencing (NGS) and combining the reads with knowledge of a reference genome. Because structural variations and genomes differ from one person to another, intermediate comparison via a reference genome may lead to loss of information. Results: In this article, we propose a reference-free method for detecting clusters of breakpoints from the chromosomal rearrangements. This is done by directly comparing a set of NGS normal reads with another set that may be rearranged. Our method SlideSort-BPR (breakpoint reads) is based on a fast algorithm for all-against-all comparisons of short reads and theoretical analyses of the number of neighboring reads. When applied to a dataset with a sequencing depth of 100Â, it finds $88% of the breakpoints correctly with no false-positive reads. Moreover, evaluation on a real prostate cancer dataset shows that the proposed method predicts more fusion transcripts correctly than previous approaches, and yet produces fewer false-positive reads. To our knowledge, this is the first method to detect breakpoint reads without using a reference genome. Availability and implementation: The source code of SlideSort-BPR can be freely downloaded from https://code.
INTRODUCTIONIt has been discovered that cancer cells include chromosomal rearrangements, which are large-scale modifications of the genome, and those modifications are thought to be responsible, at least in part, for the irregular growth of cancer cells. Although it is known that these chromosomal rearrangements often lead to translocations and fusions of genes (), it has not yet been determined how the somatic genome rearrangement works at the molecular level. A unit of the mosaic structure of a rearrangement is called a breakpoint. A breakpoint can be represented as a pair of genomic locations that do not appear in the reference genome but occur in the rearranged genome. Typical rearrangement events generate single breakpoints, including breakage-fusion-bridge cycles, nonhomologous end joining and homologous recombination-based repair (), whereas complex rearrangement events produce multiple breakpoints (). These rearrangements have been suggested to cause little or no loss of genomic material and are likely to produce functional gene fusions (). Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have enabled the analysis of individual genomes at unprecedented depth with low cost (). However, these NGS technologies have created new difficulties in examining cancer genomes to determine the signatures of breakpoint junctions unambiguously at the sequence level (Onishi). To detect large-scale genomic variations, several tools have been developed for detecting chromosomal rearrangements from NGS sequences. These tools include deFuse (), FusionMap () and others () for detecting gene fusions, and BreakDancer (), CREST () and others () for detecting structural variation (SV). The foundation of these methods is locating breakpoints by mapping the NGS reads to a reference genome. The human reference genome, while extraordinarily useful, has inherent shortcomings that may hinder the task of characterizing human cancer because it is still incomplete and, as the 1000 Genomes Project and other studies have revealed, there are significant numbers of genome differences between individuals (). Complexity also emerges from SVs among individuals. SV accounts for a larger fraction of the diversity between persons than any other factor (). This complexity makes it difficult to map short reads to the reference genome, and the resulting mismapped or unmapped reads can lead to loss of important information (). One possible approach for detecting breakpoints from an NGS dataset without knowledge of a reference genome is to use genome assembly first and then compare two assembled genomes to find breakpoints. Many studies, however, have *To whom correspondence should be addressed. suggested difficulties for genome assembly arising from the variability of genomes (), and few attempts have been made to detect breakpoints after assembling short reads. To overcome the aforementioned limitations, we present a new method, SlideSort-BPR (breakpoint reads), which detects chromosomal breakpoints by directly comparing two sets of NGS reads from different kinds of cells without mapping them to a reference genome and without assembling reads. SlideSortBPR determines the reads associated to the breakpoints by finding the groups of reads that are 'unbalanced' between two sets of samples; this determination is based on a probabilistic model of the number of similar reads (neighborhood reads). One might think that finding neighborhood reads by pairwise comparison is computationally too expensive for a large number of NGS reads. However, we have overcome this difficulty by using an efficient algorithm () that can enumerate all similar pairs within a given edit distance in a computational time linear on the number of reads. As a result, SlideSort-BPR can efficiently detect the NGS reads associated with breakpoints between samples from normal cells and samples from cancer cells.
APPROACHGiven two sets of NGS reads (e.g. from normal and cancer cells), our method consists of two main steps. (Seefor an illustration of the overall method.) In the first step, similar reads within a certain edit distance of each read are taken as the neighborhood reads. To avoid the time-consuming process of all-against-all read comparisons, we extended the SlideSort algorithm (), which lists all similar pairs of reads within a given edit distance in a computational time linear on the number of reads. This efficiently finds a given read's neighborhood in terms of edit distance, both within and across the two sets of reads. In the second step, the numbers of neighborhood reads in the two sets of reads are compared. The neighborhood reads of each read have different compositions. If the ratio of the number of neighborhood reads between the two sets is close to zero, we call it an unbalanced (overrepresented) read. Each unbalanced read is expected to include a breakpoint. In addition to the above, we use theoretical analysis of degree distribution to estimate false-and true-positive predictions, which is useful for choosing threshold parameters in our method and for designing experimental settings for sequencing.
METHODS
Neighborhood and degree of a readIn this section, we provide the formal definition of a read's neighborhood; this is the core concept of our approach. For a read r and a set of reads S, we define the neighborhood of r and degree (the number of neighboring reads) of r by N S;d r : = t 2 Sj EditDistr; t d   ; 1 deg S;d r : =jN S;d rj; 2 where EDITDIST gives the edit distance (also called the Levenshtein distance) () between reads r and t, which is defined by the minimum number of single-character edits (insertion, deletion or substitution) required to transform r into t; d is a threshold for the distance; and jN S;d rj denotes the number of reads in N S;d r. In this formulation, r is not necessarily in S.
Criteria for unbalanced readsGiven input from two read sets S and S 0 , we can use the following three conditions to predict highly unbalanced reads in the set S. In the following, we will focus on a read r 2 S (the results also hold for r 2 S 0 ). C1 For a parameter M 4 0, d r ! M where d r : =deg S;d r. This condition means that we discard a read with small degree because it would have many sequencing errors. C2 For a parameter 2 0; 1This condition means that the degree of the target read r in S is larger than the degree of every read in S 0 similar to the read r. That is, the read r is unbalanced (overrepresented). C3 For a parameter 2 0; 1 r ; where r : = max t2N S;d r tThis condition means that not only the target read r but also every neighborhood read (in S) of r should be unbalanced.The value M and in Criterion 1 is important to control true-positive and false-positive predictions. See Section 3.6. The values of and refer to the ratio of the degrees, thus the closer is to 0, the more unbalanced the reads. Note that C2 always holds if C3 holds.
An efficient algorithm for detecting unbalanced readsIn the criteria described in Section 3.2, computing the degree of each read is central to determining whether the neighborhood is unbalanced. To achieve this aim, we constructed an algorithm (Algorithm 1) based on SlideSort () to perform an exhaustive all-pair similarity search for every read occurring in both samples with apredetermined edit distance threshold. When the number of reads is huge, designing an efficient algorithm to satisfy our criteria is not trivial because naive pairwise similarity search is time-consuming. Typically, the running time complexity is O(N 2 ), where N is the total number of reads. SlideSort efficiently reduces the time complexity to linear order by using sorting and a pattern growth algorithm (). Algorithm 1 illustrates our approach. In this pseudocode, the procedure FINDUNBALANCEDREADS finds all the unbalanced reads in S in the following manner. The function CALCDEGREE (defined in Line 15 and used in Lines 5 and 6) computes the degrees of each read within the sets S and S 0. Then, the function FILTERREADS filters reads by using the thresholds M and without loss of prediction sensitivity. Subsequently, the functions COMPUTEALPHA (Line 9) and COMPUTEBETA (Line 10) compute the (r) and (r) values in Criteria C2 and C3 for all r 2 S. These functions use SLIDESORT as their core to perform fast pairwise string comparison given a minimum edit distance (d). SLIDESORT(S, d)). When the number of input reads is huge, it is impossible to store all the information of pairs of reads within a given edit distance, so SLIDESORT is used four times (Lines 5, 6, 9 and 10) in Algorithm 1. After applying the criteria in Section 3.2, Algorithm 1 outputs a list of unbalanced reads (R in Line 11) that are expected to correspond to breakpoints; in this list, there might be several reads corresponding to the same break point (Line 11). A post-processing procedure (the function CONNECTEDCOMPONENT in Line 12) summarizes those reads by clustering them, so that each cluster corresponds to one specific breakpoint. This is done by identifying the shared neighboring reads and forming the connected component. Note that the algorithm is asymmetric (for S and S 0 ). Because, in most cases, we would like to predict unbalanced reads for given S and S 0 , both SlideSort-BPRS; S 0 ; d; M;  and SLIDESORT-BPRS 0 ; S; d; M;  should be executed.Algorithm 1 SLIDESORT-BPRS; S 0 ; d; M;  1: S: target read set; S 0 : control read set; 2: d: edit distance . Define neighborhood 3: M: threshold in C1; : threshold in C2/C3 4: procedure FINDUNBALANCEDREADS(S; S 0 ; d; M; ) 5: deg S calcDegreeS; d 6: deg S 0 calcDegreeS 0 ; d11: R fr 2 ~ Sjr g 12: C connectedComponentR; d 13: return C 14: end procedure 15: function CALCDEGREE(S, d) 16: deg S r 0 for all r 2 S 17: while r; r40: r r for all r 2 S 41: while r; r 0  SlideSortS; d   do 42: if r5r 0  then 43: r r 0  44: end if 45: end while 46: return 47: end function 48: function SLIDESORT(S, d) 49: return r; r 0  2 S  S where EditDistrr; r 0 d Return all pairs oneby-one 50: end function 51: function SLIDESORT(S; S 0 ; d) 52: return r; r 0  2 S  S 0 where EditDistr; r; r 0 d. Return all pairs one-by-one 53: end function 54: function CONNECTEDCOMPONENT(R, d) 55: return a set of connected components in R 56: end function
Splitting long reads into several subreadsIt is difficult to find unbalanced reads for relatively long reads because the degrees of long reads are smaller than those of short reads (cf. Section 3.5). By splitting one read into several (disjoint) reads, however, our method is also applicable to longer reads (e.g. a read of 120 bp). In this case, to use the information of longer reads effectively, we retain the information about the origin of each split read because that information is used in the clustering procedure. Specifically, every pair of subreads that come from the identical read is connected with the edge before we find connected component in CONNECTEDCOMPONENT (the Line 12 in Algorithm 1), which is expected to provide more reliable clusters of breakpoint reads. Note that, for example, the case in which every 120 bp read is split into four subreads (30 bp4) is expected to achieve a similar performance to the case of 30 bp reads with the same coverage depth. This functionality is already implemented in our software, SlideSort-BPR, and is used in our computational experiments (cf. Section 4.1).
Theoretical distribution of degreesHere we describe probabilistic models for the distribution of a read's neighborhood given an edit distance threshold (d), a level of sequencing error (e), coverage depth of reads (c) and length of reads (l); these probabilistic models will be useful for experimental design or determination of thresholds in our algorithm, as described later (cf. Section 3.6). Suppose we have N reads of length l with uniform error rate e randomly sampled from a reference sequence of length L. Let c denote the coverage depth of the reads, so N  l = c  L holds. The neighborhood degree of each read is determined by the edit distance threshold d. With the assumptions that the reads are uniformly sampled and that the reference sequence includes no repeats, the probability p(n) of a degree-n (n = 0,1,  ) read can be computed as follows. If the error rate of each read is equal to 0 (e = 0), then it is easily seen that the probability of degree n is pn; d ! 0; e=0= is the binomial coefficient. That is, the degree has a binomial distribution with parameters = 1+2bd=2c L and N: degree $ B(N,). Because a binomial distribution B(N,) has mean and variance N and N1  , respectively, the mean and variance of this distribution can be analytically computed asMoreover, when N is large, the degree follows a normal distribution with mean and variance 2 : degree $ N(, 2 ). If the error rate is not equal to 0 and d = 0, the distribution can be represented as a mixed distribution with respect to the number of errors in the read:Here, p k is the probability that a read with length l contains k erroneous nucleotidesthe probability that k nucleotides are substituted with the same nucleotides as r because of the error; see Supplementary). The probability p(n + m; d = 0, e = 0) is given by Equation (3). For more general cases, refer to Supplementary Section S1. In these formulations, we assumed that there are no repeated regions in the reference genome from which reads are sampled. The empirical results are generated by first performing single nucleotide shuffling on the Beta Vulgaris BAC sequences followed by simulating reads with sequencing error.illustrates the consistency between the theoretical estimation and the empirical results. We give graphs for coverages ranging from 10 to 200, error rates from 0 to 4% and edit distances from 0 to 4 in Supplementary Figures S2 and S3.
Estimations of false-and true-positive rates with respect to readsFor a positive integer m, we introducewhere p k is defined in Equation (6), and p (k) (n) is defined in Equations (7) and Supplementary Equations (S11) and (S12). These two values are interpreted in the following way. Suppose two read sets S and S 0 are independently sampled from the same reference genome, so ideally there are no unbalanced reads between two datasets. Then, F m is the joint probability that a (target) read r 2 S satisfies Criterion C1 with M = m, and there is no neighborhood of r in the other set S 0. Those reads are likely to be false-positive predictions even if we set very low thresholds (say 0) for in Criteria C2 and C3, and so F m is a rough estimation of the false-positive rate, where false positive indicates the predicted unbalanced read that does not include any breakpoint. (Note that p k  p k 0 is the probability that the degree of r in S is zero, and P n!m p k  p k n is the probability that the degree of r in S 0 is larger than m, leading that r is predicted as an unbalanced read, i.e. false positive.) The actual false-positive rates (false-positive rate with respect to breakpoints) should be lower than F m , because our algorithm incorporates a heuristic method in which we use the information from neighborhood reads to reduce false-positive predictions (see Section 4). T m represents the probability that a read r satisfies Criterion C1, which is considered to be a rough estimation of the true-positive rate with respect to reads (because if r corresponds to a breakpoint, r should satisfy Criteria C2 and C3). Because several reads will overlap with one breakpoint, the true-positive rates with respect to each breakpoint should be larger than T m (see Section 4). It should be emphasized that computing the exact false-and truepositive rates with respect to read and breakpoint is intractable, which is why we have introduced the above rough estimations. Note also that the evaluation of breakpoint detection is usually conducted by using false-and true-positive rates with respect to breakpoints, which we also use in our experiments (cf. Section 3.8).In Supplementary Tables S1 and S2, we summarize F m and T m for every combination of conditions: l=36; 30; e=1; 2; 4; c=50; 100; 150; 200 and d = 0, 2, 4. This will be useful for experimental design or setting the parameter M in the algorithm (see Section 4).
Datasets
Dataset 1: simulated reads and breakpoints The datasets arecreated in the following way. First, we obtained chr22 (50 MB) human genome (hg19; as a normal genome) data from the University of California Santa Cruz genome browser (). Subsequently, we created another rearranged genome by breaking the normal genome into 118 equal-sized regions and rearranging these regions randomly. Both genomes (original and rearranged) are preserved, as they are without repeat masking. In total, there are 236 (118  2) breakpoints to be detected from both normal and rearranged genomes. From both normal and rearranged genomes, we simulated short reads of lengths 30, 60, 120 and 300 bp using the dwgsim tool (http://sourceforge. net/projects/dnaa/). The coverage of these datasets ranged from 50 to 300, with uniform error rates between 0 and 4%. In this dataset, all the differences between the two genomes are derived from the breakpoints only.
Dataset 2: curated rearrangement breakpoints We useddbCRID, which is a database of actual chromosomal rearrangements together with their related diseases (). From 210 inversion events in the database, we obtained only 34 events where the accuracy of the positioning of the chromosome rearrangement was at the nucleotide level (class A); the remaining events, with accuracy at the chromosomal (Class B) or gene level (Class C), were discarded. The reads were simulated in STAMPY () from the real quality score in the SRR987699 dataset, which can be obtained from the National Center for Biotechnology Information Sequence Read Archive (NCBI-SRA) database. For every event, we generated reads of length 120 bp with 100 coverage for the rearranged genomes. The mean error rate of this dataset is 1:83  10 4 (computed from the quality scores).
Dataset 3: real datasetWe also obtained real datasets that have been previously published in. These pairedend RNA-Seq datasets consist of samples from 20 human prostate cancer cases and 10 matched benign/normal cases. The paper also reported 32 gene fusions that are responsible for the cancer. The datasets can be obtained from the NCBI-SRA database with accession number SRP002628. In total, there are 30 libraries with a total size of 17 GB. From these libraries, we chose 10 libraries that contain both normal and cancer samples. The reads were generated using Illumina GAII. Each dataset has a 36 bp read length. In total, there were 344 749 894 reads.
Evaluation methodsIn the evaluation of our procedure for simulated datasets (Dataset 1 and Dataset 2), a read is deemed to be true (correct) if it overlaps with the known (correct) breakpoints. A cluster (cf. C in Algorithm 1) is called a true cluster if at least 90% of the reads in the cluster are true. For Dataset 1, we measured the predictive power of our method by looking at precision and recall. Precision is the fraction of predicted true clusters over all predictions, and recall corresponds to the fraction of breakpoints correctly predicted over all known breakpoints. For the evaluation of curated rearrangement breakpoints obtained from the dbCRID database (i.e. Dataset 2), we also looked at the overlap between the predicted reads and the annotated breakpoints for each event to validate our prediction. However, as the number of clusters we predicted and the known breakpoints were few, we found that evaluation with precision and recall could be misleading. Hence, we present the absolute numbers of predicted clusters and breakpoints instead. Note that in experiments for Datasets 1 and 2, the genomic positions for the breakpoints are already known from the annotations. They are not inferred from our method. By using read simulators, dwgsim and Stampy, we can preserve the genomic positions in the simulated reads. Based on this information, we evaluate the precision and recall. The evaluation is then straightforward. When the predicted reads contain the breakpoint-annotated simulated reads, they are considered as correct reads. For Dataset 3, the junction sequences of the 32 fusion genes responsible for the prostate cancer have been reported (). For this dataset, we evaluated the performance by verifying whether at least 14 bp of junction reads we predicted intersected with the reported junction sequences.shows the results for the simulated dataset, which indicate that for stringent criteria ( 0.1) on a 50 coverage dataset of 120 bp reads with a 4% error rate, the precision and recall were 89 and 57%, respectively. Lower error rates increase the precision. We found that an increase of coverage produced better results. This is because the criteria are more discriminating. When we applied our method to a 150 coverage dataset with 4% error, we obtained values of $100 and 88% for precision andrecall, respectively. For low-and high-coverage cases, recall is not affected by the value of , so our method performed consistently well. We also emphasize that repeats have little impact on our method because, in this experiments, we used chr22 as a reference genome without masking repeats (Section 3.7.1).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Results for a simulated dataset (Dataset 1)
Results for a real dataset (Dataset 3)In applying our method to Dataset 3, we use data for only 10 prostate cancer cases and 10 corresponding matched cases. Inthis experiment, all the neighborhoods are determined using an edit distance of d = 4. For Criterion C1, we use M = 10 because our theoretical analysis indicates that M = 10 provides fewer false-positive findings (see Supplementary), and for C2 and C3, we use = 0.1 as the threshold. We compared our method with other classes of tools for detecting genome rearrangements. The first class is the gene fusion prediction method, which is used by deFuse (), TopHat-Fusion () and FusionMap (). The second class is a general-purpose SV prediction approach, which is used by CREST () and BreakDancer. We apply the default parameters for all methods except for TopHat-Fusion, where we used the  very-sensitive option. BreakDancer and CREST used BWA () as the front-end aligners and were executed with the default parameters.lists the fusion genes predicted by our method and three other fusion-gene prediction methods (BreakDancer, DeFuse and TopHat-Fusion). On this dataset, both FusionMap and CREST produced no predictions. In addition, we also report the total number of predictions given by these methods. The table shows that our method predicted six fusion breakpoints, whereas BreakDancer, DeFuse and TopHat-Fusion predicted two, three and five breakpoints, respectively (Supplementaryshows the predictions common to these methods). Furthermore, our method gave fewer predictions than DeFuse and TopHat-Fusion and, although it gave more predictions than BreakDancer, our method discovers three times as many fusion genes. These results suggest that SlideSort-BPR gives a better trade-off between sensitivity and precision compared with these other methods, even though SlideSort-BPR does not use any knowledge of reference genomes. It should be emphasized that the predictions of SlideSort-BPR might include other differences [e.g. copy number variation (CNV), insertion of novel sequences, some large segmental deletions or insertions in the genome] because our method considers the reads from these regions as having actual differences (i.e. unbalanced reads), whereas the other methods focus on finding only breakpoints. One of the disadvantages of mapping-based methods for fusion detection is the difficulty of mapping (e.g. split-read mapping) when the reference genome and the genome sampled from the read differ significantly. FusionMap and CREST are based on mapping, and this might be one of the reasons that they failed to detect the reported fusion genes. Strictly speaking, the assumption of uniform coverage is not generally satisfied for RNA-seq datasets. Our results, however, suggest that our method is applicable to those datasets from a practical viewpoint.
Computational timeSupplementaryshows running times for SlideSortBPR, DeFuse, CREST, TopHat-Fusion, FusionMap and BreakDancer. In this comparison, we used the dataset with sample ID SRR057649, which is a subset of all the datasets from accession SRP002628 and contains 8 029 570 reads. Our method took $140 min. The three fusion prediction tools (deFuse, TopHat-Fusion and FusionMap) are based on mapping algorithms, and the times shown exclude the indexing step for their mapping tools. Note that our method does not have an indexing procedure.
Several remarks when using SlideSort-BPRIn this study, we assume that every read is uniformly sampled from genomes. However, we carefully handle the stochastic effect in sampling reads. This is addressed in the theoretical part of our study (cf. Section 3.5). In actual cases, however, there exists sequencing depth bias, which might affect the accuracy of our method. We emphasize that biases commonly observed in both cancer and normal read sets is expected to be canceled in the algorithm of SlideSort-BPR. For example, the depth bias by GC contents of genomes and/or sequence specific errors in Illumina sequencers () are observed commonly in the both genomes, which will less affect to our method. Moreover, we experimentally confirmed that slight depth biases between normal and cancer genomes do not affect the results (Supplementary).Our method detects the breakpoints that appear in the sequencing reads. Nonetheless, it does not report the genomic position for a breakpoint, as our method does not use reference genome. Because of this characteristic, our method cannot directly predict SVs. Because of the recent advent of new-generation technologies, such as PacBio RS (http://www.pacificbiosciences.com/), the length of reads is becoming longer, which can address the issue of repetitive region (). Our method can deal with long reads by splitting each read into several subreads (cf. Section 3.4). In our computational experiments, we confirmed that our method achieved enough performance for reads whose length is $300, showing that SlideSort-BPR is more suitable to be applied for reads produced by, for example, Illumina sequencers rather than PacBio RS.
Potential applications and further directionsAlthough we focused on detecting breakpoint reads in this study, the approach proposed in this article will be applicable to other types of difference, such as CNVs () and the insertion of novel virus genomes into human genomes. Moreover, potential applications of our method are not limited to screening the reads from personal genome data. It could also be used in the area of metagenomic analysis to compare several samples (reads) directly. In this case, our method will be useful because only a limited number of reference genomes are available and assembly for metagenomic data is more difficult than usual genome assembly (). To address the issue of longer reads described in Section 4.5, more sophisticated post-processing procedure with using the information of long read would be desirable. In this study, we proposed a simple clustering procedure for reads with the information of long reads. Another possible approach for effectively handling the information of longer read is that we use approximate similarity search to find neighborhood reads, instead of the exact similarity search algorithm used in this study.
CONCLUSIONIn this work, we have presented SlideSort-BPR, a tool for performing direct comparisons of reads from different samples without using a reference genome. To our knowledge, this is the first method for detecting breakpoint reads without using a reference genome, although a paper was recently published that tries to detect mutations by direct comparison of NGS reads (). Computational experiments indicated that our approach is robust to the presence of repeats in the genome and to a wide range of sequencing errors (up to 4%). In extensive evaluations on simulated and real datasets, we showed that SlideSort-BPR can predict breakpoint reads with high accuracy.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
E.Wijaya et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Reference-free prediction of rearrangement breakpoint reads at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Moreover, as we expected (see Section 3.4), similar results were obtained for 30 and 60 bp reads with identical coverage, in which every 60 bp read was also split into 30 bp subreads (Supplementary Fig. S11). This result suggests the effectiveness of our method for long reads. In this experiment, we systematically set M=max f=2; 4g, where is the theoretical mean of the dataset (i.e. the mean value of degrees is computed from the theoretical distribution in Section 3.5 with a given coverage depth and error rate), because the thresholds consistently achieved reasonable F m and T m values; see the fourth and fifth columns in Supplementary Table S2. Moreover, we have compared SlideSort-BPR with other methods including BreakDancer (Chen et al., 2009), Delly (Rausch et al., 2012) and CREST (Wang et al., 2011) with the simulated dataset. See Supplementary Sections S2 and S3 for the details of the evaluation methods of each tool. In Figure 4, we exhibit comparison on 100 dataset and Supplementary Figure S10 on 50 dataset. In addition, we tried Velvet (Zerbino and Birney, 2008), one of the well-developed de novo assemblers, for detecting breakpoints, and evaluated the recall (Supplementary Fig. S11). These results indicate that on higher-coverage dataset (e.g. 100), SlideSort-BPR performs better in precision and recall than other tools in detection of breakpoints. And on lower coverage (e.g. 50), although our method performs worse in recall, still it maintains good precision. Because our method does not predict the SV events per se, the comparison with the above SV prediction tools is done at the breakpoint reads (split reads) level. These reads are the intermediate results of these tools. Hence, this evaluation does not reflect the final performance of SV predictions. For predicting SVs, these tools use further steps (e.g. assembly and realignment of unmapped reads followed by minimum support counting). Notice that these methods aim to maximize sensitivity instead of precision. The typical input for the SV prediction tools is the alignment file (SAM/BAM). In our experiment, the alignments are done using BWA as a front-end aligner with the default parameters. BreakDancer does not produce split reads, only SV region coordinates. We use Pindel (Ye et al., 2009) to process BreakDancer output to obtain the split reads. When evaluating Velvet, we only considered recall as performance measure because it is difficult to evaluate precision; because Velvet is a general purpose assembly tool, it is not specifically designed for detecting breakpoints. There are no criteria applicable to remove false-positive findings in its result. Finding such criteria falls beyond the scope of this study. If the substring of a breakpoint read spans within 75 bp of the breakpoint position is contained in a contig, we deemed it to be a correct hit. 4.2 Results for curated rearrangement breakpoints (Dataset 2) By our experiment using Dataset 2, we confirmed that SlideSortBPR predicted few clusters (from one to eight) as candidates for breakpoints, but it still has good recall, predicting almost all the known breakpoints. See Supplementary Table S3 for details. This table shows the predictions of rearrangement breakpoints from SlideSort-BPR. They are ordered by their respective events and their related diseases. The rearrangement events occur in a specific chromosome as denoted by the karyotype. The annotation in dbCRID indicates the number of breakpoints and their positions in the genome for each event. In this experiment, we split every read into 30 bp reads (4) (Section 3.4) and used d = 4 and = 0.1 because that threshold gave better results in our experiments on Dataset 1. We also set M = 10 because that threshold provides reasonable F m and T m values [Equations (8) and (9)]: F 10 =5:92  10 8 (related to false-positive findings) and T 10 = 0.982 (related to true-positive findings) for the conditions in this experiment (l=30; c=100; e=1:83  10 4 and d = 4).
