Motivation: The prediction of receptor—ligand pairings is an important area of research as intercellular communications are mediated by the successful interaction of these key proteins. As the exhaustive assaying of receptor—ligand pairs is impractical, a computational approach to predict pairings is necessary. We propose a workflow to carry out this interaction prediction task, using a text mining approach in conjunction with a state of the art prediction method, as well as a widely accessible and comprehensive dataset. Among several modern classifiers, random forests have been found to be the best at this prediction task. The training of this classifier was carried out using an experimentally validated dataset of Database of Ligand-Receptor Partners (DLRP) receptor—ligand pairs. New examples, co-cited with the training receptors and ligands, are then classified using the trained classifier. After applying our method, we find that we are able to successfully predict receptor—ligand pairs within the GPCR family with a balanced accuracy of 0.96. Upon further inspection, we find several supported interactions that were not present in the Database of Interacting Proteins (DIPdatabase). We have measured the balanced accuracy of our method resulting in high quality predictions stored in the available database ReLiance.
INTRODUCTIONThe 'omics' era has presented tremendous opportunities for highthroughput investigations into important questions facing the research community. Many investigative strategies of implementing data mining techniques in combination with high throughput experiments have accomplished much. Several of these highthroughput experimental methods, yeast two-hybrid systemsY2H (), pull-down assays (), tandem affinity purification (), mass spectrometry (Gavin * To whom correspondence should be addressed), microarrays () and phage display (), have all generated enormous datasets, yet they are incomplete and are composed of many false positives and false negatives. Several databases exist to store information about validated or predicted proteinprotein interactions (PPI). They include the Munich Information Center for Protein SequencesMIPS database (), the Molecular InteractionsMINT database () the IntAct database (), the Database of Interacting ProteinsDIP (), the Biomolecular Interaction Network DatabaseBIND () and the BioGRID database (). Some, like the Yeast Proteome Database () contain interactions which are derived from wet lab results, as well as those curated from literary sources. Currently, there exists thousands of candidate receptors and ligands and potentially hundreds of thousands of interactions. As the exhaustive assaying of every possible receptorligand pairs is impractical, a computational approach to the prediction task is necessary. For example,created a receptor ligand matching algorithm for the chemokine and tgf families. Later, we more aptly matched the tgf family with kernels () with an increase in recall of 0.76 over the 0.44 obtained from the results ofFollowing this, we have benchmarked several machine learning techniques, and assayed several parameters, on the receptorligand interaction prediction task (submitted for publication). The results of this work show that we can obtain a balanced accuracy of 0.84 in this prediction task. Having used a 'golden standard' () to determine which is the best machine learning technique to apply to this problem, we now seek to make in silico predictions. The starting point of this novel course of research is the widely applied and powerful field of text mining. In this article, we present a strategy that takes into account text mining information in conjunction with a popular machine learning algorithm, the random forest (), which integrates several data sources such as domain, expression and phylogeneticbased evidence. We build our new candidate list by searching for genes that are co-cited with the receptors and ligands from the DLRP database (). We then make predictions using our trained classifier and evaluate the results in terms of known pairs, as well as in terms of distribution of the co-citations in our ranked list of predictions.the new examples where mapped to Gene Ontology and a search was performed for classifications containing the term 'receptor' with more than five members. The three classifications resulting from this search criteria were 'Peptide Receptor Activity, G-protein Coupled', 'Transmembrane Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Activity' and 'Cytokine Receptor Activity'. We then used the DIP database as a baseline for calculations of sensitivity, specificity and balanced accuracy for each classification
METHODS
OverviewWe propose a pertinent process () to carry out this prediction task, using a state-of-the-art prediction method and an accessible and comprehensive dataset. Among several classifiers, random forests have previously been identified to work best for this prediction task (submitted for publication). The training of this classifier was carried out using an experimentally validated dataset of receptorligand pairs (). New examples are then classified using the trained classifier. The process begins with the collection of candidate genes to enter as new examples to our trained classifier. The new examples may be derived in a variety of ways (an up-regulated gene list, genes that contain a specific protein domain, protein-array experimentation). In our setting, we look at genes that are co-cited with the receptors and ligands from the DLRP database. The DLRP was constructed using experimentally determined ligand-receptor cognate pairs through a literature review. The database contains 314 proteins, 210 of which are used in our training set.
Creation of the candidate listWe created a candidate list by taking the 210 receptors and the ligands in the DLRP database () and finding all the co-cited genes [using the text mining track of the STRING database (for which all the information from all the data sources was available. In total, 483 candidates form this list.
Data sourcesThe data were collected and processed as reported insubmitted for publication). Briefly, profiles associated to genes were retrieved from various databases [i.e. Kegg, Interpro, Toucan, (. These profiles are vectors of measurements, which represent the candidate ligand or receptor. We create a feature value for each candidate receptorligand pair by taking the two vectors and applying a pairwise similarity measure (cosine, mutual information, absolute correlation coefficient, jaccardi coefficient) to them. This value is now the feature value that corresponds to the similarity between each ligand and receptor. The feature values which arise from the use of the various sources are then inputted into our random forest. These profiles contained between 79 (expression data) and 674 features (domain data) depending on the data source being considered. For the phylogenetic vector, complete protein sequences were retrieved for seven species (
A study of receptorligand pairingsfor putative motifs in the upstream sequence of the genes. Each protein is then represented by a vector of size 674. Each value represents the score of the corresponding motif for the given protein. The pathway data were retrieved from the Kegg Pathway database (). Only the pathways in which at least one of the 210 training example receptors and ligands is involved are used to build the final profiles. This means that, in the case of Kegg, candidate proteins are represented by sparse binary vectors of size 314.
ClassifierFollowing our previous work, we selected the method that provides the best balanced accuracy (submitted for publication). This method was found to be the random forest with a balanced accuracy of 0.84 (submitted for publication). We used the best performing similarly measures for each data source (domain, phylogeneticabsolute correlation coefficient; expression, kegg, motifabsolute cosine). Our classifier was trained using the DLRP dataset described previously (). We applied Matlab 2010a implementation of random forest (class TreeBagger) with the number of trees set to 1000 and the number of variables to select at random for each decision split set to default value (square root of number of variables). To achieve stability in the prioritized lists, the algorithm has been trained and tested 200 times, after which the new predictions were assigned by averaging scores. The running time for this procedure was 2h. The candidate list was inputted into the trained classifier (trained and calibrated as described above). Each possible receptorligand pair was classified as interacting or noninteracting and was ranked according to a score assigned by algorithmthat is, the probability of observation belonging to particular class given as fraction of observations of that class in predicted leafs across the ensemble. The resulting list is of size 116 403 with 7521 positive predictions, 108 882 negative predictions and 7958 predictions for which co-citations exist.
Co-citation and receptor family analysisCo-citation values were downloaded from text mining track of the STRING database (). The normalized co-citation score is the total number of co-citations for the members of a bin divided by the connectivity score for the members of a bin and then scaled to the maximum value across all bins. The co-citation analysis was performed by comparison of the ranked results with the co-citation score. In order to assess the biological relevance of our work in terms of individual receptor families, we map our candidates to Gene Ontology (GO) classifications and examine the performance of our predictions to individual receptor families. Gene Ontology analysis was carried out by mapping the candidate list to gene ontology classifications that contained the word 'receptor' and had more than five members. Three classifications resulted from this search criteria ('Peptide Receptor Activity, G-protein Coupled', 'Transmembrane Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Activity' and 'Cytokine Receptor Activity'). The predictions from our method were then assessed using the members of each of these classifications by comparing our predictions with the interactions reported in the DIP () database for these classifications as it is known to contain experimentally validated receptorligand pairings ().
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONEvaluating the results of our predictions can be challenging, as the overall objective of our work is to predict novel receptorligand pairs, yet the merits of this work must be measured using known interactions. In order to address this, we look at the qualitative aspect of the co-citation profile of the ranked predictions. Furthermore, we look at the receptor classifications of Gene Ontology and assessOn the left we see the ranked bins that have a length corresponding to their normalized co-citation score. The normalized co-citation score is the total number of co-citations for the members of a bin divided by the connectivity score for the members of a bin and then scaled to the maximum value across all bins. The bins colored in red correspond to the bins that contain pairs, which are called a positive by our classifier. On the right, we see the ranked bins that have a length corresponding to their connectivity score. The connectivity score is the total number of edge degree (number of predicted interactors in the genome) of each of the members of the bin. The dark blue bins correspond to bins, which contain members with higher connectivity than average. The green dashed lines correspond to the average value across all bins our ability to make predictions in terms of sensitivity, specificity and balanced accuracy with respect to the known DIP interactions for these families. Finally, we assess the predictions one-by-one by examining the top ten predictions in the different quarters of the ranked predictions.
Co-citation analysisAssuming co-citation should positively correlate with correct pairing of candidate pairs, we examine the predicted prioritized candidate list in terms of co-citation. The overall shape of the prioritized candidate list () suggests that the performance of our workflow is consistent with an accurate classification strategy. Looking at, we see the 100 ranked bins containing the co-citation values for the prioritized list. Looking at the top six bins, we find that there is a peak in co-citation, suggesting an overall positiveprediction area. Indeed, if we examine the first quarter of the bins, we see that there is an enrichment of co-cited terms as they are higher than the average level (value 0.4035), which one would expect to see if the co-citations were uniformly distributed (P-value <0.05 when applying a t-test between the first and second quarters). Looking at the second and third quarters, we see a depletion of co-cited terms in those bins, whereas the fourth quarter contains levels of co-citation close to the average level. This plot suggests that our classifier is able to learn the structure in the data of interacting receptors and ligands, as well as noninteracting pairs, thus explaining the enriched and depleted areas of the plot (P-value <0.05 when applying a t-test between the first and second quarters). The bins toward the end of the ranking, which measured at about the average level, suggest that a low classifier score is assigned to pairs that show structure related to neither interacting nor noninteracting pairs. In fact, we examined these pairs and found that they were highly connected relative to the rest of the list, suggesting that the classifier could better identify pairs with where the candidate ligand and receptor had fewer, specific interactions and not more promiscuous proteins.
Receptor Family analysisIn order to find areas of high competency in our prioritization, we map the candidates to Gene Ontology [using DAVID (and perform a search for classifications containing the term 'receptor' and found three classifications with more than five members (). The three classifications resulting from this search criteria were 'Peptide Receptor Activity, G-protein Coupled', 'Transmembrane Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Activity' and 'Cytokine Receptor Activity'. We then used the DIP database as a baseline for calculations of sensitivity, specificity and balanced accuracy for each classification. More specifically, we take the candidates from our experiment that are mapped to these classifications and compare our positive predictions with those reported in the DIP database. We find that we are able to successfully predict receptor ligand pairs within the G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR) family with a balanced accuracy of 0.96. The GPCR family represents the most important group of current drug targets because 40% of all modern medicinal drugs are GPCR related () (e.g. imatinib, cetirizine, hydroxyzine and acebutolol). This is no surprise as they are key agents in several diseases () (e.g. WHIM syndrome, Retinitis pigmentosa and Cryptorchidism). We searched our results for novel interactions that were made with members of this family, which did not exist in the DIP database. We examined the top 10 predictions () from our prioritization involving members of the GPCR family found several supported interactions such as those between TCF7CTNNB1 (), LEF1-CTNNB1 () and ANGPT2-F2R (). In addition, we find high STRING () scores for the following interactions CCL22-CCR1, CXCL13-CCR1 and CCL22-CX3CR1. Notably, we found that two of these novel in silico predictions (CXCL13-CCR1 and CCL22-CX3CR1) showed experimental evidence of interaction ().
Qualitative analysisWe examine the 10 co-cited predictions made at the top of each quarter of our ranking and find that the several of the predictions made at the top of the 1st quarter were supported (). Among these interacts are those between CD3G-CD3D (), B2M-CALR (), CDC14A-CDC7 (), PDGFRB-GRB7 () and SMAD7-ACVRL1 (). The second and third quarters (which were below the threshold of a positive call in the algorithm) contain predictions that were not supported.The remaining, fourth quarter contained three supported interactions (Supplementary Tables 1, 2 and 3). The interactions present in the fourth quarter are due to the highly connected nature of the interacting receptors and ligands that are assigned low scores (as described above).
i572
A study of receptorligand pairings
The Author(s) 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
(Hubbard et al., 2009). Sequences were then aligned using ClustalW (Thompson et al., 1994) to detect orthology. The gene expression profiles were retrieved from the Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation (GNF) human expression atlas (Su et al., 2004). Each profile contains 79 values corresponding to the 79 conditions considered by (Su et al., 2004). The domain information is retrieved from the InterPro database (Hunter et al., 2009), through EnsEMBL. Only the domains present in at least one of the 210 receptors and ligands considered are kept for further analysis. The motif data was created using the Toucan toolbox to search i570 at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
