ReMark is a fully automatic tool for clustering orthologs by combining a Recursive and a Markov clustering (MCL) algorithms. The ReMark detects and recursively clusters ortholog pairs through reciprocal BLAST best hits between multiple genomes running software program (RecursiveClustering.java) in the first step. Then, it employs MCL algorithm to compute the clusters (score matrices generated from the previous step) and refines the clusters by adjusting an inflation factor running software program (MarkovClustering.java). This method has two key features. One utilizes, to get more reliable results, the diagonal scores in the matrix of the initial ortholog clusters. Another clusters orthologs flexibly through being controlled naturally by MCL with a selected inflation factor. Users can therefore select the fitting state of orthologous protein clusters by regulating the inflation factor according to their research interests. Availability and Implementation: Source code for the orthologous protein clustering software is freely available for non-commercial use at http://dasan.sejong.ac.kr/∼wikim/notice.html, implemented in Java 1.6 and supported on Windows and Linux. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONIdentifying orthologs automatically is very useful for functional annotation, and studies on comparative and evolutionary genomics. An orthology group identified by a semi-automated method is the Clusters of Orthologous Group (COG) database () in National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). It first identifies groups of three proteins with best reciprocal BLAST () hits, and then performs case-by-case manual analysis to eliminate false-positives.introduces InParanoid, a fully automatic program to detect orthologs and inparalogs between two species.developed OrthoMCL, which generates orthologs from multiple species using the MCL algorithm (). The MCL algorithm is known to be effective for detecting protein families with especially complicated domain structure (). It is a graph partitioning algorithm, based on network flow, which is to simulate the flow * To whom correspondence should be addressed. within a graph such that the flow is encouraged where the current is strong, but it is discouraged where the current is weak. We here introduce the ReMark tool that clusters orthologs flexibly through adjusting a parameter according to the user's interest. The fundamental algorithms and its evaluation were introduced in the previous work (). Based on reciprocal BLAST best hits of gene pairs between two genomes, the method utilizes, to get more reliable results, the diagonal scores in the matrix of the initial ortholog clusters and clusters orthologs flexibly through being controlled naturally by MCL with a selected inflation factor. Users can therefore select the fitting state of orthologous protein clusters by regulating the inflation factor according to their research interests.
IMPLEMENTATIONThe ReMark provides multiple, flexible approaches to cluster orthologous proteins. The ReMark software program works in two steps (shown in). In the first step, n genomes (protein sequence sets in the FASTA format) of our interest are selected. Next is to cluster orthologous proteins recursively using our recursive clustering algorithm from the initial table with reciprocal best hits derived by our software program (RecursiveClustering.java) written in Java. The clustering recursively detects and merges gene pairs with identical genes. In this step, score matrices are constructed from the initial clusters produced in the previous step. The second step is to split the initial clusters into more refined, tighter and consistent clusters using the MCL algorithm implemented by our software program (MarkovClustering.java) written in Java. In this step, the score matrices produced in the previous step are transformed into Markov matrices to simulate random walks on a graph. Finally, the terminal ortholog clusters are produced through adjusting its inflation factor. To demonstrate how to use the ReMark tool, we have downloaded 12 genomes from NCBI at ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/. The dataset was used by the Recursive program in ReMark. After executing the program, initial clusters (score matrices) were generated. We computed the initial clusters with the MCL program in ReMark adjusting the inflation factor from 1.3 to 2.0. We obtain a group of protein clusters after running MCL with the score matrices.showed that both methods of InParanoid and OrthoMCL have the best overall performance of 10 others using awith self-BLAST best scores, and the circle sizes mean the self-similarity, represented by scores, of amino acid sequences of genes themselves. Links represent the reciprocal BLAST best scores of gene pairs between two genomes, and the link thickness means the similarity of amino acid sequences of gene pairs (orthologs). statistical technique called latent class analysis (LCA) (). However, there is no gold standard datasets to evaluate ortholog clusters as they mentioned. According to each strategy, the results of the 10 methods are different each other. Resampled Inference of Orthology (RIO) () has the least FP (1-Specificity) rate, and euKaryotic Orthologous Groups (KOG) () the least FN (1-Sensitivity) rate. Each strategy has its positive and negative points. Nevertheless, in order to identify which method can generate more accurate results,notably investigated the consistency of OrthoMCL and KOG with enzyme commission assignments, concerning protein function and domain architectures. By an intuitive measure similar to this (), based on the consistency of Kegg Orthology (KO) database () with the ortholog group tables containing curated orthologous genes extracted from metabolic and regulatory pathways, we tested how much our results are consistent with KO using InParanoid as the baseline approach. We then recognized that our method performed significantly better than InParanoid as investigated, changing an inflation factor in the condition of not including inparalogs. In this study, we selected 12 genomes in different domains () to test our method more extensively, and made three different datasets consisting of six genomes and three different datasets comprising nine genomes (). In this experiment, we compared ours, produced by ReMark, with results produced by InParanoid version 4.1 with default conditions. The inparalogs are in this time included in InParanoid's results unlike the previous test (). As shown in Figures 2 and 3, users can get better ortholog clusters with proper inflation factors. According to the size of selected genomes, the factors can be modulated to optimize the quality of ortholog clusters. We can generally get almost the same as or better results than InParanoid's at the inflation factor 1.4.The COGs are groups to cluster orthologs among multiple genomes without any premature threshold. However, the quality of ortholog clusters depends on the BLAST algorithm, which may not give accurate results between evolutionary distant species. The COG method dependant on the reciprocal BLAST best hits may therefore need the manual analysis of biologists. This takes timeconsuming processes. To overcome this difficulty, both InParanoid and OrthMCL made automatic ortholog clusters with taking a premature threshold. However, applying the threshold could raise sensitivity, but reduce specificity. That is, this may lose real true positive orthologs prematurely. ReMark, therefore, uses the natural threshold regulated by the MCL with adjusting inflation factors, gaining 340% more orthologs than InParanoid. In addition, the ReMark uses diagonal components that have self-BLAST best scores in contrast with OrthoMCL. The reason we use the diagonal terms here is that the node with a high return weight can give an effect for changing cluster granularity (). It would be natural to apply the diagonal terms since the self-score of each gene is different according to the size of the amino acid sequences of a gene considered. In our experiment, it was observed that the ortholog clusters, generated with diagonal scores, were more consistent with KO than without, showing about 7% more accuracy (). In conclusion, this method clusters orthologs flexibly and more accurately through being controlled naturally by employing MCL with an inflation factor and diagonal components that are selfBLAST best scores.
DISCUSSION
K.Kim et al.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [12:29 30/5/2011 Bioinformatics-btr259.tex]
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
