The integrative analysis of multiple high-throughput data sources that are available for a common sample set is an increasingly common goal in biomedical research. Joint and individual variation explained (JIVE) is a tool for exploratory dimension reduction that decomposes a multi-source dataset into three terms: a low-rank approximation capturing joint variation across sources, low-rank approximations for structured variation individual to each source and residual noise. JIVE has been used to explore multi-source data for a variety of application areas but its accessibility was previously limited. We introduce R.JIVE, an intuitive R package to perform JIVE and visualize the results. We discuss several improvements and extensions of the JIVE methodology that are included. We illustrate the package with an application to multi-source breast tumor data from
IntroductionIn biomedical research, a growing number of platforms and technologies are used to assess diverse but related information. This has motivated a number of methods for the integrative analysis of multisource data, wherein multiple different sources of 'omics' data are available for a common sample set. A good guiding principle for analyzing multi-source data is to simultaneously model features that are shared across multiple sources and features that are specific to a particular source. A number of recent methods have adopted this strategy, extending wellestablished techniques such as partial least squares (L fstedt and), canonical correlation analysis (, non-parametric Bayesian modeling (), non-negative factorization () and simultaneous components analysis (). The joint and individual variation explained (JIVE) method () was developed as a multi-source extension of principal components analysis (PCA). JIVE quantifies the amount of joint (shared) variation between data sources, reduces dimensionality and allows for visual exploration of joint and individual (source-specific) structure. JIVE can also be used as a processing step prior to the application of other methods, such as clustering techniques (). JIVE was designed for the analysis of biomedical data from multiple technologies but has been used for other diverse applications, such as the analysis of data that were processed using different computational pipelines () and the analysis of rail commute patterns at different times of day (). Previously, only spartan Matlab code was available to perform JIVE. In this note, we introduce the R.JIVE package, for which our intentions are 3-fold: (i) to improve the accessibility of this method among the bioinformatics community, (ii) to implement important extensions and improvements of the JIVE method and (iii) to allow for quick and flexible visualization of JIVE results.
Features and implementation
The JIVE methodJIVE decomposes a multi-source dataset into three components: (i) an approximation of rank r capturing joint variation across sources, V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com(ii) approximations of rank r i for structured variation individual to each source i and (iii) residual noise. For dimension reduction and interpretation, it is helpful to consider the low-rank approximations in factorized (or " point cloud " ) form, analogous to PCA. Joint structure corresponds to an r-dimensional sample subspace revealing patterns that explain substantial variability across multiple sources, whereas individual structure corresponds to an r i-dimensional sample subspace revealing patterns that explain substantial variation in one source but not others. With given ranks, the JIVE algorithm iteratively estimates joint and individual structure to minimize the overall sum of squared residuals. Simultaneous estimation of individual structure allows the underlying joint structure to be captured more accurately, and vice versa. A permutation-based approach may be used to specify the ranks, which is important to accurately quantify joint and individual structure. The joint and individual structures are assumed to be orthogonal, which makes the decomposition identifiable.
Improvements and extensionsIn this package, we have made some important additions to the original algorithm: @BULLET Missing data is handled in a straightforward way via the singular value decomposition (SVD) using the package SpatioTemporal (). @BULLET Ranks may be selected via a Bayesian information criterion (BIC) motivated approach inspired by, in addition to the permutation approach. Permutation-selected ranks are generally more accurate but BIC selection can be much faster for certain datasets. @BULLET Orthogonality may be enforced between the estimated individual structures, which improves robustness of the estimates to rank misspecification.See the Supplementary Material for further details.
Package detailsThe jive(.. .) function takes a multi-source dataset and several options as input and returns an object of class jive with the estimated joint and individual structure. Several functions are provided to summarize and generate quick publication-quality visualizations of the results in the form of a barchart, heatmaps or PCA plots.
Example: TCGA BRCA dataWe illustrate R.JIVE using publicly available multi-source genomic data for 348 breast cancer (BRCA) tumor samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data freeze (Cancer Genome Atlas Network, 2012). We apply JIVE to the mRNA expression, DNA methylation and miRNA data processed as previously described (). Permutation testing identifies Rank 2 joint structure, Rank 20 structure individual to expression, Rank 12 structure individual to methylation and Rank 18 structure individual to miRNA. Visualizations of the resulting decomposition are shown in. Heatmaps of the estimated joint structure show joint patterns shared by the three data sources. The point cloud view of joint structure shows that these patterns largely correspond to three BRCA sample clusters, which were previously identified using integrative clustering as present across these and other genomic sources (). Specifically, one pattern distinguishes Basal-like tumor samples (Cluster 1) from other samples; among the remaining samples a subgroup of Luminal A tumors with a low fraction of genomic alteration and improved clinical prognosis (Cluster 2) is distinguished. A vignette to reproduce this analysis, with additional visualizations and interpretation of the results, is available within the R package and as Supplementary Material at Bioinformatics online.
Funding
M.J.O'Connell and E.F.Lock at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
