Motivation: Small nucleolar RNAs are an abundant class of non-coding RNAs that guide chemical modifications of rRNAs, snRNAs and some mRNAs. In the case of many 'orphan' snoRNAs, the targeted nucleotides remain unknown, however. The box H/ACA subclass determines uridine residues that are to be converted into pseudouridines via specific complementary binding in a well-defined secondary structure configuration that is outside the scope of common RNA (co-)folding algorithms. Results: RNAsnoop implements a dynamic programming algorithm that computes thermodynamically optimal H/ACA-RNA interactions in an efficient scanning variant. Complemented by an support vector machine (SVM)-based machine learning approach to distinguish true binding sites from spurious solutions and a system to evaluate comparative information, it presents an efficient and reliable tool for the prediction of H/ACA snoRNA target sites. We apply RNAsnoop to identify the snoRNAs that are responsible for several of the remaining 'orphan' pseudouridine modifications in human rRNAs, and we assign a target to one of the five orphan H/ACA snoRNAs in Drosophila. Availability: The C source code of RNAsnoop is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONBox H/ACA snoRNA facilitates the conversion of Uracil to pseudouracil () in a specific sequence context (). The specificity for a particular target site is the consequence of the hybridization of snoRNA and target RNA, in most cases a ribosomal RNA. The target U is positioned by two specific interactions of the flanking target RNA sequence with the complementary sequence of the recognition loop of the snoRNA (), see. The 'correct' secondary * To whom correspondence should be addressed. structures of snoRNAs are typically hard to predict. Thus, the exact structure of the interior loop, and hence the sequence motifs complementary to the binding site, are unknown. We employ here the idea of Thermodynamic Matchers () to determine the energetically optimal structure of an H/ACA snoRNA that is bound to a given putative target sequence. The implementation of Thermodynamic Matchers () is not directly applicable, however, since the snoRNAtarget interaction corresponds to a complex pseudoknot (in the conceptual concatenation of snoRNA and mRNA) that is beyond the scope of existing RNA folding software. The prediction of putative snoRNA target sites is an integral part of two programs [snoGPS () and Fisher ()] that attempt to detect H/ACA snoRNAs in genomic DNA. Both programs search for sequence complementarities between a list of possible target sites and the binding region of the snoRNA candidate. In these models, mismatches between the target and the snoRNA are not allowed. Furthermore, neither program provides information on the energetics of the interaction or the stability of the stems, two factors that were recently shown to be important for correctly predicting snoRNAtarget interactions (). We present here a dynamic programming algorithm named RNAsnoop, that specifically captures the structure of the snoRNA target interaction and is optimized for scanning speed. The thermodynamic considerations are combined with a machine learning component to increase the specificity of target predictions, which can be improved even further by including comparative information.
SINGLE-SEQUENCE RNASNOOP
Specialized folding algorithmRNAsnoop implements a specialized co-folding algorithm that takes into account that stringent structural constraints must be satisfied for a functional interaction of a box H/ACA snoRNA stemloop and its target. As input, RNAsnoop takes one of the typical two stemloop components of a known or predicted H/ACA snoRNA. The closing stem, T is assumed to be known from the a priori prediction of the snoRNA structure. The part of the snoRNA sequence enclosed by T is allowed to interact with the target structure.outlines the general principle.Page: 611 610616. Box H/ACA snoRNAs typically interact with both stemloop structures with regions of a target RNA flanking the Uracil residue that is to be pseudouridylated. Computation of the interaction structure is performed separately for the two stemsloop components of a H/ACA snoRNA. The closing stem T at the root of each branch is assumed to be given from the structure prediction. The region inside of T is decomposed into the upper stemloop structure with an energy contribution M, left and right interaction structures with their energy contribution L and R, respectively. Since RNAsnoop scans the target RNA in 5 3 direction, the snoRNA is read in 3 5 direction.
RNAsnoopThe interaction structure can be decomposed into the unbranched stemloop 'above' the pseudouridylation site, and the left and right 'arms' of the binding site itself. The total energy of these components will be optimized by dynamic programming. In addition, the snoRNAtarget interaction is influenced by the short closing stem of the interaction loop. The upper stemloop structure of the snoRNA (with sequence y) is simply modeled as an unbranched fold. The energies of its optimal substructures satisfy the recursionM pk,q+l + I(y,y),where H(y) denotes the energy parameters () for a hairpin loop formed by the subsequence y,y) is the energy of an interior loop composed of the sequences yand y, again including the delimiting base pairs (y p ,y q ) and (y u ,y v ). Inspection of known snoRNArRNA interactions revealed that the interaction region can contain only single and tandem mismatches but no bulges. Therefore, we allow only stacked base pairs and symmetrical loops of lengths 2 and 4. Thus, the left part satisfies the recursionL ik,j+k +I(x,y[j,j +k]).The index i runs along the target RNA x, while j refers to the position on the snoRNA y. To ensure that all interactions start inside the recursion matrix we set L i,j = 0 The r.h.s. array R contains the optimal folding energies of the interaction structure up to positions i on the target and j on the snoRNA consisting of the l.h.s. binding region L, the snoRNA stem loop M and the partial r.h.s. binding region R i,j. It thus extends a r.h.s. binding region or refers to its first base pair. In the latter case, nucleotide x i2 is the uracil that is pseudouridylated. The corresponding recursion readsR ik,j+l +I(x,y[j,j +l]) min lL i3,j+l+1 +M j+1,j+lFor each i, the best binding energy at target position i is max j R i,j. Space and time requirements for the M-matrix are limited by the size |y| of the snoRNA stemloop structure, which is a user-specified constant, typically 120 nt. Formally, the space and time complexity is O(|y| 2 ) and O(|y| 4 ), respectively. The space requirements for the L and R arrays are limited to 5|y| independent of the target |x| of the target RNA. This is possible because the length of interior loops in the recursions is restricted to not more than 4 and the transition from L to R recursion only looks back to i4. The time complexity for L is O(|x||y|), while for R we need O(|x||y| 2 ) operations. The total run time is thus O(|x||y| 2 +|y| 4 ), i.e. we have a linear 'scanning algorithm' for long target RNAs. Due to the difference in accessibility between sites with pseudouridine and uridine residues in both human and yeast (seeand Supplementary), we extended RNAsnoop so that accessibility information are considered in the folding step. Accessibility profiles as computed by RNAup () or RNAplfold () describe the energy necessary to open the secondary structure on an interval of the target sequence. The full implementation of RNARNA interactions is too expensive in terms of computational resources for a target search program. We therefore borrow the approach from RNAplex (), which uses an affine approximation to speed up the computation of RNARNA interaction energies. A recent extension () shows that the accuracy can be improved substantially by incorporating precomputed accessibility profiles in the parameterization of the interaction energies. Here, we use the same idea to approximate the influence of the target site accessibility on the snoRNArRNA interactions, while preserving the linear run time of RNAsnoop.showed that the interaction energy is necessary but not sufficient to distinguish functional from non-functional snoRNArRNA interactions. Stability of the stems enclosing the pseudourydilation pocket as well as structural features relative to the stems and the interaction regions are equally relevant. In order to take those parameters into account we used a machine learning method [support vector machine (SVM)] to analyze the output of RNAsnoop. We developed two models depending on whether or not RNAsnoop considers the target site accessibility. We used the experimentally verified interactions from yeast () and human (). When using the human interactions for testing we trained exclusively on the yeast dataset. Since the training dataset did not contain experimentally confirmed non-functional interactions, we augmented it by adding artificial ones. For each snoRNA-stem involved in a verified interaction, we let RNAsnoop run against yeast 28S and 18S sequence. All hits that had an interaction energy smaller than the one of the experimentally validated interaction and that do not target a known Page: 612 610616) and energy features (shaded regions). TE: lower stem energy, LE: 5 interaction energy, DE: upper stem energy, RE: 3 interaction energy, For each nucleotide in the target, its local opening energy is represented by a gray circle, where light gray represents low local opening energy and dark gray high local opening energy. The target total opening energy (OE) is the sum of all local opening energies, YE: YE = LE + RE + TE + DE, XE: XE = LE + RE + DE, dYE: dYE = YE + OE, t_i_gap: number of nucleotides between the 5 end of the upper stem and 3 end of the 5 interaction on the snoRNA, U_gap: number of nucleotides between the 3 end of the 5 interaction and the 5 end of the 3 interaction on the mRNA, i_b_gap: number of nucleotides between the end of the lower stem and the 3 end of the 5 interaction on the snoRNA, i_t_gap: number of nucleotides between the 5 end of the 5 interaction and the 5 end of the snoRNA stem, stem_length: length of the upper stem, stem_asymmetry: difference in the number of nucleotides located in loops between the 5 and 3 side of the upper stem, gap_right: number of gaps in the 3 interaction on the mRNA. (Right) Box-plots showing the accessibility distribution for all known uridines (gray, 1062 datapoints) and pseudouridines (white, 92 datapoints) sites in human 28S and 18S rRNAs. The target accessibility was computed by using RNAup on the whole length sequences of 28S and 18S rRNAs. The target size was varied between 3 and 19 nt in steps of 2 nt and was centered around the (pseudo)uridine site. pseudouridylation site were considered non-functional. The final training dataset contained 43 positive and 103 negative interactions. For both models we derived a set of 29 features to pass to the SVM, and then selected a subset following the approach described by. Features that were included at the end are described in some detail in. We used different feature set depending on whether accessibility is taken into account or not. For the case where the target accessibility was neglected, only five features are used, four of which describe the geometry of the interaction itself (t_i_gap, U_gap, i_t_gap and gap_right) and the length of the intervening stem stem_length. For the model with accessibility, 11 features are used. In addition to features describing the geometry of the interaction (t_i_gap, U_gap, i_b_gap, i_t_gap and gap_right) and of the upper stem (stem_length and stem_asymmetry), we utilize the four energy values YE, DE, XE and dYE defined in the caption of. Training and test datasets can be found in Supplementary Tables T3 and T4.
Machine learning component
H.Tafer et al.
Performance
AccuracyWe compared the prediction accuracy of RNAsnoop, snoGPS and fisher on the human () and yeast () datasets of experimentally confirmed/rejected snoRNArRNA interactions. For a given snoRNA involved in a confirmed interaction, we determined how many target sites were predicted to bind with a better score/energy than the experimentally reported one.summarizes these rank values for the confirmed interactions in yeast. We clearly see that fisher is less sensitive, detecting only 16 of the 44 interactions in yeast. Still, these 16 interactions were all ranked first, indicating that fisher has a high specificity. In comparison, RNAsnoop and snoGPS detect 43 and 41 of the 44 verified interactions in yeast, and 11 and 10, respectively, in human. We remark that RNAsnoop did not identify the interaction of snR82 with LSU-U2349, because RNAsnoop predicts the adjacent position LSU-U2351 as preferred target. On average, RNAsnoop ranks the confirmed interactions higher in the list than snoGPS. This trend is also seen in the ROC curve in, where RNAsnoop shows a higher prediction accuracy than snoGPS. In human, RNAsnoop performs better than snoGPS. In particular, the SVM version successfully rejects the four nonfunctional snoRNArRNA interactions and successfully ranks 11 out of the 12 confirmed interactions first (). Still, one of the confirmed interaction was rejected by the SVM. Further, we looked at the false positive rate of RNAsnoop. To this aim, we considered the putative targets of orphan snoRNA HBI-36 (), a brain-specific snoRNA found in all vertebrates () returned by RNAsnoop. We downloaded from BIOMART () the unprocessed transcript sequences that are expressed in brain and that have homologs in chicken. We did not limit ourselves to exons as it was proven that at least C/D snoRNA can bind intronic regions and subsequently influence the splicing process (). We downloaded a total of 9429 unspliced sequences, summing a total of 0.75 Gb, roughly a quarter of total human genome. For each sequence, we used RNAplfold to compute the local accessibility (). RNAsnoop was used without the SVM functionality.
P-value >0.5.This corresponds to one hit every 586 nt. At a P-value of 0.844, the false positive rate drops to 0.00001 predictions per nucleotide (Supplementary). While the number of false positives diminishes uniformly with increasing P-values, the energy dependency of the false positives is sigmoid shaped. The false positives rate grows slowly between 40 kcal/mol and 30 kcal/mol, then increases strongly between 30 kcal/mol and 20 kcal/mol before reaching a plateau between 20 kcal/moland 10 kcal/mol. A false positive rate of 0.00001 predictions per nucleotide is reached for an energy of 28 kcal/mol (Supplementary).
Run timeWe compared the run time of RNAsnoop with that of snoGPS and RNAhybrid. We modified fisher to turn it Page: 614 610616
H.Tafer et al.into a target finder; the resulting run time, however, was so high that we decided not to evaluate it further. RNAhybrid uses a dynamic programming algorithm to find putative miRNAtargets and has a run time of O(|x| |y|). Since the run time of RNAsnoop is linear in the target size but quadratic in the snoRNA size, we varied the length of both sequences. Since H/ACA snoRNA stems vary greatly in length (), we incremented the snoRNA stem size in steps of 30 nt from 60 up to 420 nt, keeping the target RNA length fixed to 5000 nt. Conversely, the target length was varied between 1000 and 256 000 nt with a snoRNA stem length set to 200. We set the threshold for each program so that they returned at most one hit. Independently of the snoRNA or target sequence size, snoGPS and RNAsnoop have a similar run time. They are around 15 times faster than RNAhybrid (Supplementary Figs S2 and S3).
A COMPARATIVE VERSIONThe use of alignments in the target search can further help to find real snoRNARNA interactions. On one hand, the absence of conserved target site in closely related species may indicate that the proposed interaction does not occur in nature. The presence of compensatory mutations between the snoRNA binding bucket and the target site, on the other hand, can lend further credibility to single-sequence target predictions (). The alignment extension of RNAsnoop is based on the same approach used in RNAalifold (), where a thermodynamic energy minimization folding algorithm is coupled with a simple scoring model to assess evolutionary conservation. As in the single sequence algorithm, the upper stem is modeled as an unbranched fold by a slightly modified RNAalifold algorithm. The interaction part uses the same approach as RNAalifold, with the sole difference that only interior loops are allowed between the snoRNA and its target. For an efficient analysis of data, we provide and recommend the perl script SNOOPY. It uses both the SVM as well as the homology information to predict putative target interactions. SNOOPY takes as input a snoRNA alignment and a target alignment. In a first step SNOOPY uses mLocARNA to obtain sequence/structure alignments of the snoRNAs (). If the sum of scores of mLocARNA pairwise alignments for a sequence is <2500, then the sequence is discarded. Duplicates and sequences belonging to species that are present in only one of the two alignments are also removed. SNOOPY preselects possible targets in a userdefined reference organism by means of the single-sequence version of RNAsnoop and one of the two SVM models. For each reported targets, SNOOPY extracts the corresponding slice from the alignments and then realigns the corresponding subsequences with Clustalw (). Target sequences for which the pairwise alignment score is below a threshold, or which do not exhibit a U residue at the previously predicted site, are removed together with the snoRNA sequences from the same organisms. Whenever the number of retained sequences is above a user-defined threshold, the alignment version of RNAsnoop is applied. Finally, SNOOPY reports for each snoRNA alignment a user-specified number of putative interactions. These interactions can be ranked either by their SVM score or by the single sequence interaction energy for the reference organism.
APPLICATIONSIn order to test the usability of RNAsnoop , we consider the problems of finding snoRNAs associated with 'orphan' pseudouridylation sites in human rRNAs. Although the role of snoRNAs in locating target uridine residues was discovered more than a decade ago, there are still a few pseudouridylation sites in human rRNAs () for which the responsible snoRNAs have not yet been determined. We used the single sequence version of RNAsnoop to predict the possible snoRNAs that may pseudouridylate these orphan sites. For this we used all the known human H/ACA sequences reported in snoRNA-LBME-db () and tested them against the 11 reported orphan sites in the human LSU and SSU. Based on the currently available snoRNA data, eight orphan sites can be mapped to existing snoRNA stems. Interestingly, two orphan snoRNAs (ACA38B, ACA51), and two stems, for which no function was reported, were among the predictions. Additionally, four stems with known targets were predicted to target four of the orphan sites. The predicted interactions are listed in,and Supplementary. We used SNOOPY to assign putative targets to the five orphan snoRNAs found in Drosophila (Or-aca1, Or-aca2, Or-aca3, Or-aca4 and Or-aca5). For each orphan snoRNAs reported in Flybase (), we searched for homologous sequences in the 11 other Drosophila species by using blast (). For each species, the sequence with the highest homology with D.melanogaster was selected. The sequences were then aligned with mLocARNA, a variant of the Sankoff algorithm. For each snoRNA, the full-length alignment was then divided into a 5 and 3 stem alignments. The rRNA alignments were retrieved from the arb-silva database (). In order to get the best possible alignments, we realigned them with Clustalw, Muscle (), and RNAsalsa (). The quality of the alignments was assessed by determining how well the conserved pseudouridylation sites in D.melanogaster and Homo sapiens were aligned in the 12 drosophilid rRNA sequences. Based on this quality measure, RNAsalsa was found to perform best (Supplementary Tables T1 and T2). Alignments of snRNAs were taken from. Of the five orphan snoRNAs, only Oaca-4 was reported to have a target. We predict that the first stem modifies U2499 on the 28S rRNA (and Supplementary). This target site is interesting since it was reported to be pseudouridylated (), but no corresponding snoRNA is known. Moreover, in human and yeast, this position which correspond to U3674 in human and U2191 in yeast, is conserved and pseudouridylated (). U3674, finally, remains an orphan site in human. Interestingly, both the target and binding buckets are completely conserved from D.melanogaster to D.willistoni, see. On the other hand, 6 out of the 12 bp found in the upper stem exhibit compensatory mutations. The fact that no credible targets have been predicted for the remaining four orphan snoRNAs is not unexpected. First, snoRNAs have also been implicated in modifying 'non-canonical targets' such as mRNAs (), some cause cleavage of pre-rRNAs (), andrecently showed that Or-aca5 is Page: 615 610616processed by Dicer, suggesting a function in the RNA interference pathway.
RNAsnoop
DISCUSSIONWe presented here RNAsnoop, a tool specifically designed to predict complex H/ACA snoRNARNA interactions that are outside the scope of conventional RNARNA prediction tools. In contrast with previous tools, it uses a dynamic programming approach coupled with a nearest-neighbor energy model to identify putative targets. This allows RNAsnoop to capture structural andenergetic features essential for correctly predicting snoRNAtarget interactions (). Coupled with a SVM classification, SNOOPY achieves good performance ranking first 11 out of 12 confirmed snoRNAmRNA interactions in human and excluding all experimentally rejected interactions. These good results should, however, not be overestimated as both the training and test datasets are small and were extracted from only two species. The run time of RNAsnoop is comparable with that of snoGPS, and scales linearly with the length of the target sequence. Together with the improved accuracy, this makes RNAsnoop not only suitable for target search in rRNA and snRNA sequences or in specific putative mRNA candidates, but also for large-scale genome-wide surveys. Funding: European Union under the auspices of the FP-6 SYNLET and the FP-7 QUANTOMICS project (in part); the Austrian GENAU project 'Regulatory Noncoding RNA' (in part).
Conflictof Interest: none declared.
The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
19  ACA42_2 18S 109 + 1 1 1 1 ACA50_1 18S 34 + 1 1 1  ACA50_2 18S 105 + 2 1 1 1 ACA62_1 18S 34 + 3 24 1 1 ACA62_2 18S 105 + 2 1 1 1 ACA67_1 18S 572 + 2 2 1 1 ACA67_2 18S 109 + 1 1 1 1 The numbers represent the rank of the interaction for the corresponding snoRNA stem. In column 'Type', +, represent experimentally confirmed or rejected interactions, respectively. When using the human interactions for testing, we trained the SVM exclusively on the yeast dataset.
