Motivation: Next-generation sequencing technology enables an entirely new perspective for clinical research and will speed up personalized medicine. In contrast to microarray-based approaches, RNA-Seq analysis provides a much more comprehensive and unbiased view of gene expression. Although the perspective is clear and the long-term success of this new technology obvious, bioinformatics resources making these data easily available especially to the biomedical research community are still evolving. Results: We have generated RNA-Seq Atlas, a web-based repository of RNA-Seq gene expression profiles and query tools. The website offers open and easy access to RNA-Seq gene expression profiles and tools to both compare tissues and find genes with specific expression patterns. To enlarge the scope of the RNA-Seq Atlas, the data were linked to common functional and genetic databases, in particular offering information on the respective gene, signaling pathway analysis and evaluation of biological functions by means of gene ontologies. Additionally, data were linked to several microarray gene profiles, including BioGPS normal tissue profiles and NCI60 cancer cell line expression data. Our data search interface allows an integrative detailed comparison between our RNA-Seq data and the microarray information. This is the first database providing data mining tools and open access to large scale RNA-Seq expression profiles. Its applications will be versatile, as it will be beneficial in identifying tissue specific genes and expression profiles, comparison of gene expression profiles among diverse tissues, but also systems biology approaches linking tissue function to gene expression changes. Availability and implementation: http://medicalgenomics.org/rna _seq_atlas Contact
INTRODUCTIONOver the next years, the availability of next-generation sequencing (NGS) data will offer an entirely new perspective for clinical research and help usher in personalized medicine. So far, several databases offer storage or download of NGS data (). However, to access the valuable information of this promising new technique, the user has to manually download the data and be familiar with their analysis to extract the valuable information. This is currently not the case for most biomedical researchers. We therefore created the RNA-Seq Atlas, a database and user interface (UI) providing easy access to NGS data. Currently, RNA-Seq Atlas holds gene expression profiles on eleven human, healthy tissues and can be accessed over an intuitive web interface. To further increase the utility of the RNA-Seq Atlas, the data were linked to multiple microarray gene profiles representing normal and pathological states. Furthermore, various query tools were designed to offer a great variability of individual analysis.
DATABASE ORGANIZATION AND ACCESS
Data sourcesThe provided genome-wide expression compendium originates from eleven healthy, human tissue samples pooled from multiple donors spanning 32 384 specific transcripts corresponding to 21 399 unique genes () (ENA ERP000257; ArrayExpress E-MTAB-305). The tissues include adipose, colon, heart, hypothalamus, kidney, liver, lung, ovary, skeletal muscle, spleen and testes. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina GA-II sequencer, generating an average of 50 million reads per tissue, with sequence reads of 36 or 50 nt depending on tissue. The expression level were estimated by mapping and counting reads to single gene sequences derived from the UCSC genome browser, followed by normalization to Reads Per Kilobase of exon model per Million mapped reads values (). Moreover, to enable an integrative comparison between RNASeq and microarray expression profiles we integrated a panel of 84 microarrays from BioGPS (), Normal Tissue Gene Expression Study () as well as (
RNA-Seq Atlasby linking the RNA-Seq Atlas data to the NCBI Nucleotide database (). Also, information on corresponding gene symbol, aliases, description, chromosomal location, Entrez ID as well as EnsEMBL ID were assembled from the NCBI Entrez and EnsEMBL databases (). Additional outgoing links to HGNC (), HPRD (), OMIM (), BioGPS (), Nextbio () and GENT () were supported. Finally, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) () was accessed to identify gene signaling as well as molecular pathway affiliations; and data on cellular component, biological process and molecular function were collected from the Gene Ontology database (). Finally, the RNA-Seq Atlas was crosslinked to our liver-specific databases LoMA ().
Data organization and web interfaceRNA-Seq Atlas is implemented within a Drupal content management system environment over a Linux-PostgreSQLApache-PHP stack. The database organization is founded upon a menu which allows access to the news, data, search and download sections. The news section keeps users up to date about recent changes and current statistics, whereas the download section give the possibility to download the RNA-Seq Atlas in tab separated text file format. RNA-Seq atlas can be accessed through simple (data section) or advanced (search section) query forms. The advanced query offers four detailed options:(1) Full text search.(2) Comparison of specific tissues profiles; also allowing for comparative analysis not only between normal tissue information but also to NCI60 data and thus between normal and tumor tissues.(3) Explore common (and diverse) gene expression profiles between tissues.(4) Explore pathway profile; e.g. selecting one or multiple KEGG pathway resulting in a list of involved genes. Finally, a 'details' link provides additional information including: gene symbol, description, aliases, chromosomal location, Entrez ID, Ensembl ID, Gene Ontology, KEGG pathway as well as the expression profile within the normal human tissues and cancer cell lines.
Future directionsFuture directions include an incorporation of more data from healthy and cancer tissue to provide a richer source of comparative transcriptomics and implementation of a Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) analysis engine within the RNA-Seq Atlas.
CONCLUSIONIn this work, we present RNA-Seq Atlas, an easily accessible database and UI, offering access to NGS gene expression profiles. Furthermore, to enhance the bioinformatics integration, the data is linked to a wide variety of commonly used and established databases and knowledge repositories. To further enlarge the very broad scope of RNA-Seq Atlas and to facilitate the analysis of gene expression profiles of several pathological conditions, the data were linked to cancer cell line expression profiles. Finally, the implementation of a wide variety of querying tools allows the user to start individual analysis, enabling for both bioinformaticians and experimental researchers.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
