RNA-seq, the application of next-generation sequencing to RNA, provides transcriptome-wide characterization of cellular activity. Assessment of sequencing performance and library quality is critical to the interpretation of RNA-seq data, yet few tools exist to address this issue. We introduce RNA-SeQC, a program which provides key measures of data quality. These metrics include yield, alignment and duplication rates; GC bias, rRNA content, regions of alignment (exon, intron and intragenic), continuity of coverage, 3 /5 bias and count of detectable transcripts, among others. The software provides multi-sample evaluation of library construction protocols, input materials and other experimental parameters. The modularity of the software enables pipeline integration and the routine monitoring of key measures of data quality such as the number of alignable reads, duplication rates and rRNA contamination. RNA-SeQC allows investigators to make informed decisions about sample inclusion in downstream analysis. In summary, RNA-SeQC provides quality control measures critical to experiment design, process optimization and downstream computational analysis. Availability and implementation: See www.genepattern.org to run online, or www.broadinstitute.org/rna-seqc/ for a command line tool.
INTRODUCTIONRNA-seq is a highly parallelized sequencing technology that allows for comprehensive transcriptome characterization and quantification (). As with all forms of parallelized sequencing, significant computational processing is required to unlock transcript abundance levels and other measures for biological interpretation (). However, prior to the calculation of biologically relevant data such as transcript abundance, presence of novel isoforms and genotype identity, it is necessary to evaluate the performance of the RNA-seq experiment itself. Summary statistics and quality control scores provide insight into inherently complex data prior to downstream analysis. Here we present RNA-SeQC, a metrics tool with application to two domains: experiment design and process optimization; and quality control prior to computational analysis. Metrics such * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(a) RNA-SeQC will work with one or more input samples to produce both a comparative summary across samples as well as a more detailed report for each sample. (b) The comparative summary report includes an extensive range of metrics (in addition to those shown) as well as coverage plots. (c) For each sample, additional reports quantify the coverage profile (variation, gaps, etc.) for individual transcripts as duplication rate, rRNA abundance, alignment rates, coverage continuity and correlation to reference expression profiles are highly informative during selection of experiment conditions and library construction methods (). RNA-SeQC's multisample input feature allows for direct comparison across samples (). Additionally, a single-sample mode can be used to monitor samples on an ongoing basis to rapidly assess the quality of a particular sequencing run, and to monitor and optimize these measures in production over time and prior to downstream analysis. RNA-SeQC provides a suite of experiment quality measures, many of which are currently not provided by other available tools (Supplementary Material).
METRICSRNA-SeQC provides three types of quality control metrics: Read Counts, Coverage and Correlation. A list and description of these metrics is shown below. RNA-SeQC is compatible with any alignment method that produces a specification-conforming BAM file (), with flags properly set. For additional information, usage and software requirements, see the GenePattern help document provided as Supplementary Material 1. Metrics
RNA-SeQCreports are provided in HTML for human consumption, as well as tab-delimited text files for pipeline integration.
Read countsThe following metrics are generated by counting reads with particular characteristics. Rates are also provided, and are calculated as either per total reads or per aligned reads. Since the BAM format does support multiple alignments per read, this implementation ignores any read flagged as not being a primary alignment. @BULLET Total, unique and duplicate reads @BULLET Mapped reads and mapped unique reads @BULLET rRNA reads: counted in one of two modes: (i) interval mode where an interval file defines the location in the given alignment to which rRNA reads map; and (ii) BWA mode, where an independent BurrowsWheeler Aligner () alignment to reference rRNA sequences is performed.@BULLET Transcript-annotated reads: intragenic (regions between genes), intergenic (within genes), exonic and intronic. These regions are defined in a user-specified GTF file (Supplementary Material). GENCODE annotations () are used by default. @BULLET Expression profile efficiency: the ratio of exon-mapped reads to the total reads sequenced.@BULLET Expressed transcripts: count of transcripts with reads 1.@BULLET Strand specificity: to assess the performance of strand-specific library construction methods, the percentage of sense-derived reads is given for each end of the read pair. Whereas a non-strand-specific protocol would give values of 50%/50%, strand-specific protocols typically yield 99%/1% or 1%/99% for this metric.
CoverageThe following metrics are based on coverage: the number of reads that cover a given genomic position (in units of reads per base). RNA-SeQC quantifies the uniformity of coverage with several different metrics. To reflect the effect of expression level on these metrics, we select genes from three categories: low, middle and high expression genes (see Supplementary Material) and also report the average of these metrics for each gene set.@BULLET Downsampling: to normalize data to a specific total read count we enable an on-the-fly random reduction of reads to reach a user-defined number. This is useful for comparing certain statistics across datasets, e.g. gap metrics, which are not otherwise adjusted for depth. @BULLET GC bias: to assess effects of GC content on sequencing performance, all coverage metrics are additionally reported for three levels of transcript GC content: high, low and moderate (see Supplementary Material for default threshold settings). @BULLET Coverage plots: plots of coverage level versus base index, either for a single transcript or a set of transcripts.
Expression correlationOne of the most valuable ways to interpret the performance of an RNA-seq run is to compare the measured expression levels to a reference (). RNA-SeQC provides RPKM-based estimation of expression levels (). When run with multiple samples, RNA-SeQC creates a matrix of correlations among all combinations, reporting the Spearman (rank based) and Pearson (quantity based) correlation coefficients. Optionally, an array based or RNA-seq reference expression profile can be provided for the correlation analysis. Correlation metrics are also provided for the different GC content stratifications to measure GC bias.
IMPLEMENTATIONImplemented in Java, RNA-SeQC is platform independent and requires no installation. For investigators who prefer a web interface to a command-line tool, this software can be run using the GenePattern web interface found at http://www.GenePattern.org (). Within the RNA-SeQC software package, Read Count metrics were implemented by inheriting from the ReadWalker class of the GATK software package (). Transcript annotations are bound to the walker in the RefGen format. This format is created on-the-fly from a user-provided GTF file. The program is designed to support the minimal GTF specification, but the GTF format used by GENCODE () is recommended. For continuity of coverage calculations, the GATK's Depth of Coverage walker was used to calculate the number of bases at a given position in the genomic alignment. Finally, ribosomal RNA quantification is performed by realigning all reads to rRNA reference sequences using the BurrowsWheeler Aligner ().
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
