Motivation: Synthetic biology aims to develop the artificial gene networks with desirable behaviors using systematic method. These networks with desired behaviors could be constructed using diverse biological parts, which may limit the development to complex synthetic gene networks. Fortunately, some well-characterized promoter libraries for engineering gene networks are widely available. Thus, a synthetic gene network can be constructed by selecting adequate promoters from promoter libraries to achieve the desired behaviors. However, the present promoter libraries cannot be directly applied to engineer a synthetic gene network. In order to efficiently select adequate promoters from promoter libraries for a synthetic gene network, promoter libraries are needed to be redefined based on the dynamic gene regulation. Results: Based on four design specifications, a library-based search method is proposed to efficiently select the most adequate promoter set from the redefined promoter libraries by a genetic algorithm (GA) to achieve optimal reference tracking design. As the number and size of promoter libraries increase, the proposed method can play an important role in the systematic design of synthetic biology. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONSynthetic biology seeks the improvement of rational design and reprogramming of biological systems based on design principles. During the past decade, synthetic biology had significant progress in designing biological parts. Synthetic biologists have assembled these parts into genetic circuits to achieve basic functions such as toggle switches (), oscillators (), pulse generators (), genetic counters (), logic evaluators (), filters (, b), sensors () and cellcell communicators (). Recently, the design concepts of next-generation gene networks, such as * To whom correspondence should be addressed. tunable filters, analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters, adaptive learning networks and protein-based computational circuits, have been proposed to enable the construction of more complex biological systems (). With the full understanding of biological parts and modules, synthetic biologists can construct useful next-generation synthetic gene networks with real-world applications in medicine, biotechnology, bioremediation and bioenergy (). At present, engineered organisms contain only very simple genetic circuits since there are problems for assembling biological parts into more complex genetic circuits. For example, although standard biological parts can be obtained from the Registry of Standard Biological Parts (http://partsregistry.org), only a few parts have measured characteristics describing quantitative behavior in the composed devices (). There is still lack of an efficient method to select adequate biological parts from usable libraries to engineer a genetic circuit to track the desired reference trajectory (). In this article, we first redefine the presented promoter libraries based on promoter activity, and then a proposed library-based search method is used to efficiently select adequate promoters through their promoter activities in order to engineer a synthetic gene network with desired behaviors despite intrinsic fluctuations and environmental disturbances on the host cell. The proposed librarybased search method can solve the global optimization problem by employing genetic algorithm (GA) (). Hence, the most adequate promoters from redefined promoter libraries can be efficiently selected to achieve a desired reference trajectory. Finally, two design examples are given to illustrate the design procedure of the proposed method in silico. In the future, synthetic biologists can employ the proposed library-based search method to select the most adequate promoter set from redefined promoter libraries to construct a predictable synthetic gene network.
METHODSIn order to efficiently select adequate promoters from different promoter libraries for synthetic gene networks to achieve desired behaviors, the promoter libraries should be redefined based on the promoter activities according to the promoter characteristics and experimental data in the present promoter libraries. The design procedure for a synthetic gene network is shown in, including following steps: (i) characterize the redefined promoter libraries based on the promoter activities; (ii) construct a stochastic. The design procedure for synthetic gene networks. The design procedure can divide four steps: (i) construct redefined promoter libraries based on dynamic gene regulation; (ii) construct a synthetic gene network from prescribed genetic circuit topology; (iii) provide a desired reference trajectory to be tracked; (iv) the most adequate promoter set c * can be obtained using library-based search method through GA.dynamic model based on the prescribed genetic circuit topology; (iii) provide the desired reference trajectory to be tracked; and (iv) employ the librarybased search method to select the most adequate promoter set c * by employing GA.
Synthetic biology
Redefinition of promoter libraries based on promoter activitiesIn general, two types of promoters are used to regulate gene expression in gene networks, i.e. constitutive-and repressor-regulated promoters. Their promoter activities of them are both indirectly measured by the fluorescent protein (), and a dynamic model can be used to indirectly evaluate the promoter activities (). The scheme of indirectly measuring the promoter activities of promoters is shown in. It is worth to note that activatable promoters can also be used in synthetic gene networks. Since activatable promoters, however, are not used in this study, their promoterlibraries are not mentioned here. The related discussion of promoter libraries for activatable promoters is mentioned in the Supplementary Material. In order to redefine the constitutive promoter library, Lib const , a dynamic model infor a promoter c in Lib const can be built. The promoter activity of c can be determined by assuming the dynamic model at a steady state ()where y ss denotes fluorescence of the gene network at the steady state;  and  yEGFP denote the degradation rates of mRNA yegfp and protein yEGFP, respectively.  denotes the translation rate;  is the ratio of fluorescence to the concentration of yEGFP (). In this study, we redefine the constitutive promoters BBa_J23100BBa_J23118 in the Registry of Standard Biological Parts (http://partsregistry.org) to build a constitutive promoter library Lib const and denote as J 0 J 18 listed in. The detailed procedure of evaluating the promoter activity is shown in Supplementary Material. Since a repressor-regulated promoter is regulated by the repressor, it has always the minimum and maximum expression with and without the repressor binding, respectively. Therefore, a promoter in repressor-regulated promoter libraries has two promoter activities, with and without saturating concentration of repressor binding. In, for example, a constitutive promoter expresses the TetR repressor, which is regulated by anhydrotetracycline (ATc) and represses the TetR-regulated promoter. In order to simplify the illustration, we denote the repressor activity r of TetR as the following form ():Page: 2702 27002706where K ATc denotes the ATc-TetR dissociation rate, and n ATc denotes the binding co-operativity between ATc and TetR. Then we denote the promoter regulation function p TetR (c,r ) as ()
C.-H.Wu et al.where K TetR and n TetR denote the TetR-DNA binding affinity and the binding co-operativity between regulatory protein TetR and DNA, respectively. The promoter c in Lib TetR has two promoter activities c r and c s , i.e. c ={c r ,c s } Lib TetR. The promoter regulation function p TetR (c,r ) in (3) has the minimum value c r and maximum value c s with and without the saturating concentration of the repressor activity in (2). Finally, the promoter activities c r and c s of c can be determined aswhere y min (c,t ) and y max (c,t ) denote the minimum and maximum fluorescence at the steady state, and  yEGFP denotes the degradation rate of yEGFP. The promoter activities c r and c s of each promoter c in Lib TetR are shown in. Furthermore, the parameters K ATc and n ATc from the repressor activity in (2) and K TetR and n TetR from the promoter regulation function in (3) are identified and listed in. The promoter activity c ={c r ,c s } of each promoter in the LacI-regulated promoter library Lib LacI can be also determined by a similar process, as listed in. The detailed procedure for redefining the promoter libraries is shown in Supplementary Material. Finally, the promoter regulation function can be extended to illustrate the promoter activity in the constitutive promoter. The promoter regulation function for a constitutive promoter can be rewritten and described as
Construction of synthetic gene network based on circuit topologyConsider the synthetic two-stage transcriptional cascade in(). The yegfp expression is controlled by LacI protein, which can be repressed by the TetR repressor. TetR is expressed constitutivelyfrom the promoter selected from Lib const. When IPTG is added to the growth medium, IPTG binds to the LacI repressor and then induces the yegfp expression. Suppose,t ) as the concentrations of mRNA tetR, lacI, yegfp and proteins TetR, LacI, and yEGFP, respectively. The dynamic model inwith promoters c 1 , c 2 and c 3 , selected from the promoter library Lib const , Lib TetR Lib LacI , respectively, is modeled as follows (whereIn general, biological parts are inherently uncertain in this network. We assume that the promoter activities, degradation rates of mRNAs and proteins, translation rates are stochastically uncertain due to gene expression noises in transcriptional and translational processes, thermal fluctuations, DNA mutations and evolutions () as follows:wheredenote the amplitudes of stochastic parameter variations, and n i (t ) is a Gaussian noise with zero mean and unit variance.Page: 2703 27002706
Synthetic biologySynthetic gene networks often also suffer from environmental disturbances on the host cell, as follows:The design purpose is to select the most adequate promoter setcorresponding promoter libraries so that the observed output y(c * ,t) can track the following desired reference trajectory.Hence, in order to engineer a stochastic synthetic gene network in (9), which can robustly and optimally track a desired trajectory (10), a library-based search method is provided to efficiently select the most adequate promoterpromoter libraries.
Synthetic gene network design: library-based search methodConsider a more general design for a synthetic gene network. We extend the above gene network inwith promoters from constitutive, TetR-and LacI-regulated promoter libraries to an n-gene network with promoters from m promoter libraries Lib j , j = 1,2,...m based on a prescribed genetic circuit topology. In the n-genegene network, the promoter regulation function for the promoter can be represented as follows:where K j and n j are the corresponding parameters to be identified or estimated. For example, the parameters K TetR and n TetR are for the TetRregulated promoter library estimated and listed in. Hence, a dynamic model of the n-gene circuit topology with n promoters selected from m promoter libraries with intrinsic parameter fluctuations and environmental disturbances is represented as  X (c,t ) = f (X,c,t )+f (X,c,t )n (t )+v (t ) y (c,t ) = HX (c,t )) denote the concentrations of mRNA and proteins in the synthetic gene network, respectively.denotes the concentrations of mRNAs and proteins in the synthetic gene network; f (X,c,t) denotes the nonlinear gene regulation of transcription and translation based on the circuit topology; f (X,c,t ) denotes the parameter fluctuations of the non-linear gene regulation f (X,c,t ); and y (c,t ) =[y 1 (c,t),...,y p (c,t)] T denotes the observed proteins we are interested in. H is a pn output matrix determining what proteins we are interested in. The stochastic dynamic system in (12) can be established from the prescribed genetic circuit topology, and the most adequate promoter set} selected from corresponding promoter libraries Lib j , j = 1, 2, ..., m can make the synthetic gene network track the prescribed desired trajectories via the library-based search method. For convenience in illustrating the proposed library-based search method, four design specifications are given as follows:(1) Given the desired reference trajectory y r (t ) = f r (t ), which dimension is consistent with the numbers of fluorescent proteins y (c,t ) in (12).(2) Given the promoter libraries Lib j , j = 1, ..., m as in(4) Select a promoter set c ={c 1 ,c 2 ,...,c n } from the promoter libraries Lib j , j = 1, ..., m to minimize the following cost function, i.e.If the cost function in (13) can be minimized by selecting the most adequate promoter set c * ={c * 1 ,c * 2 ,...,c * n } under design specifications (1)(4), then the observed output y(c * ,t)of the synthetic gene network can optimally and robustly track the prescribed reference trajectories y r (t ) under the intrinsic parameter fluctuations and environmental disturbances on the host cells. Using conventional optimal design methods, the many combinations of promoter sets required to satisfy four design specifications generally will waste a large amount of computation time and trail-and-error experiments. In this study, a library-based search method using a genetic algorithm (GA) is employed to select the most adequate promoter set c * from corresponding promoter libraries. GA is a stochastic optimization algorithm, originally motivated by the mechanisms of natural selection and evolutionary genetics. GA has been proven to be efficient for solving constrained optimization problems in many areas () and further details on GA can are available elsewhere (). The analysis of computational complexity is shown in the Supplementary Material. By the library-based search method and four design specifications, the most adequate promoter set c * can be selected in design specification (2). Despite intrinsic parameter fluctuations and environmental disturbances in design specifications (3), the gene network can achieve the desired reference trajectory in design specification (1) by minimizing the cost function J (c ) in design specification (4). In fact, this library-based optimal reference tracking problem in (13) is a highly non-linear optimization problem. In conventional search algorithms, the optimal solution can be obtained, but it may not be the global optimization. The library-based search method using GA is an iterative procedure to select the most adequate promoter set} that satisfies design specifications (1)(4). When the most adequate promoter set c * is selected, design specifications (1)(4) for the synthetic gene network can be satisfied, and then the synthetic gene network can track the desired reference trajectory robustly and optimally. A design procedure for this library-based search method using GA is given as follows.
Design procedure(1) Build redefined promoter libraries from the experimental data of maximum and minimum outputs and inputoutput relationship between the fluorescence, repressor and inducer.(2) Construct a genetic circuit topology such asor 4 with promoters, and then build the stochastic dynamic model in (12) for the synthetic gene network.(3) Provide the design specifications (i)(iv) for the synthetic gene network in (12).(4) Generate initial promoter sets from the redefined promoter libraries.(5) Calculate the cost function J(c) in (13) for each promoter set c in the population.(6) Create offspring by GA operator (i.e. reproduction, cross-over and mutation).(7) Evaluate the new promoter sets and calculate the cost function of each promoter set obtained by natural selection.(8) Stop if the search goal is achieved, or an allowable generation is attained; else go to step 6. In each iteration or generation of GA, these genetic operators are performed to generate new populations (i.e. promoter sets), and these new populations are evaluated via the cost function in (13). On the basis of
C.-H.Wu et al.these genetic operators and evaluations, a better new population of candidate solutions is formed in each genetic generation.
RESULTSIn this section, two in silico design examples are given to illustrate the design procedure of the proposed library-based search method. First of all, synthetic biologists need to engineer a genetic circuit topology, and then a dynamic model could be constructed. Finally, the proposed library-based search method is used to obtain the most adequate promoter set
Design of synthetic transcription cascadeConsider the dynamic system (7) or (9) of the synthetic transcriptional cascade shown in. The design specifications are provided and listed as follows:(i) The desired reference trajectory to be tracked isi.e, the reference trajectory y r (t ) is high from 40 to 80 h and low at other times. In this design example, 10 mM IPTG is added to induce the network transition from 40 h and is removed at 80 h. The concentration of yEGFP will track the reference trajectory y r (t ) in (14).are independent Gaussian white noises with zero means and unit variances. (iv) The following mean-square tracking error needs to be minimizedIn order to solve the constrained optimal tracking design problem of synthetic gene network via the proposed librarybased search method, GA operators are set as follows:(i) a roulette wheel selection is used to increase the selection efficiency of the population with a lower cost function score; (ii) the cross-over rate is 0.8; (iii) the chromosome mutates uniformly with the mutation rate 0.1. Then the most adequate promoter setThe simulation result shows that the proposed library-based search method can efficiently find the most adequate promoter set c * (See Supplementary).
Design of synthetic genetic oscillatorConsider a synthetic gene oscillator with negative feedback loops shown in(). The repressor protein LacI inhibits the expression of the gene cI, whose protein product in turn inhibits the expression of the gene tetR. The repressor protein TetR inhibits the transcription of lacI and yegfp. The negative. c 3  Lib CI is a CI-regulated promoter that has no library at present, so we suppose the promoter regulation function has a fixed form as (17). feedback loops lead to temporal oscillations if the adequate promoter set is selected. For convenience, the concentrations of mRNA: lacI, cI, tetR, yegfp and proteins: LacI, CI, TetR, yEGFP are denoted by
.., 20 in, respectively. The dynamic system for circuit topology inis given asSince there is no CI-regulated promoter library at present, we suppose that the promoter regulation function for CI has a fixed form aswhere K CI and n CI are binding affinity and binding co-operativity between CI and DNA, respectively. Based on the synthetic gene network in (3) with intrinsic fluctuations and environmental disturbances, the design specifications are provided and listed as follows:(i) The desired reference trajectory to be tracked is(ii) The indexes of TetR-and LacI-regulated promoter libraries inare both from 0 to 20. The promoter regulation function for the CI-regulated promoter library is shown in (4) with K CI = 20 and n CI = 2.(iii) According to the values of system parameters, we assume the parameter fluctuations with the standard deviations(iv) The following mean-square tracking error is to be minimized.The proposed library-based search method is used to solve the constrained optimal tracking design problem through GA. GA operators are set as follows:(i) a roulette wheel selection is used to increase the selecting efficiency of the population with a lower cost function score; (ii) the cross-over rate is 0.8; (iii) the chromosome mutates uniformly with the).
DISCUSSIONThe main challenge in genetic circuit design lies in selecting wellmatched genetic parts that combine and produce the desired behavior reliably. Some studies have proposed to engineer a synthetic gene network to achieve a desired steady state () or an H 2 optimal tracking of a desired oscillator (). However, the above design methods need to tune some kinetic parameters to achieve the desired steady or oscillatory state. In fact, tuning intrinsic parameters of biological devices to fit the designed parameter is currently quite a difficult or even unfeasible task for biotechnology. Further, it is still hard to select adequate biological parts to implement a desired cellular function with quantitative value. To overcome this problem, synthetic biologists usually create many versions of synthetic circuits with diverse characteristic by directed evolution, point mutation or random combinational of DNA components, and the functions of these versions are investigated to engineer the gene circuit with the desired behavior (). But when the design of the genetic circuit is complex, the number of mutated versions needed to be created and tested is dramatically increased. Hence, these experimental steps become tedious and time consuming due to the significant amount of trail-and-error experiments. Our method is to select the existent promoters from promoter libraries and will be more appealing to synthetic biologists in the future. In this study, the present promoter libraries are first redefined based on the dynamic gene regulation from experimental data, and a library-based search method is then introduced to engineer a synthetic gene network with desired behaviors by satisfying four design specifications. Through re-characteristic biological part datasheets, we can design a synthetic gene network with a new function in the existing libraries without having to perform a large number of trail-and-error experiments. Using GA operators, the library-based search method is used to mimic the realistic gene network evolution under natural selection to fit four design specifications but with much fast evolution needed for synthetic gene networks to achieve their desired behaviors. Hence, the proposed method can efficiently engineer a synthetic gene network to perform its desired behaviors despite intrinsic parameter fluctuations and environmental disturbances. In design examples of the synthetic gene network, the most adequate promoter set c * is selected to achieve the minimum tracking error between the desired reference trajectory and the observed output (i.e. fluorescence) despite intrinsic parameter fluctuations and environmental disturbances in vivo, as shown in Supplementary. It is worth to notice that this method is also useful for constructing a synthetic oscillator (). After constructing the synthetic gene network and providing four design specifications, the library-based search method can efficiently select the most adequate promoter set to track the desired trajectory, as shown in Supplementary. For the oscillator design in, only 71.4% of the promoter sets selected fromhave oscillatory behavior, and only a few set of these can track the reference trajectory. Furthermore, by the proposed method, the design procedure of a synthetic gene network can be simplified for in vivo experiments.
CONCLUSIONIn this study, promoter libraries are redefined based on their promoter activities so that they are more suitable for the gene circuit design of synthetic biology. The library-based search method can produce biological insights for how to design a synthetic gene network with prescribed functions. A GA-based search method is proposed to mimic the gene network evolution under natural selection to select adequate promoters to fit four design specifications with more fast evolution speed. The proposed design method to select the most adequate promoter set from promoter libraries will help synthetic biologists to simplify the design procedure of synthetic gene networks and accelerate the progress of synthetic biology. With advances in modern DNA synthesis technologies, together with well-defined characteristics of promoters and other standard biological parts, in the future our systematic method could be widely applied for the faster design cycle of synthetic gene networks.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [14:50 5/9/2011 Bioinformatics-btr465.tex]
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
