Motivation: High-throughput cell-based phenotypic screening has become an increasingly important technology for discovering new drug targets and assigning gene functions. Such experiments use hundreds of 96-well or 384-well plates, to cover whole-genome RNAi collections and/or chemical compound files, and often collect measurements that are sensitive to spatial background noise whose patterns can vary across individual plates. Correcting these position effects can substantially improve measurement accuracy and screening success. Result: We developed SbacHTS (Spatial background noise correction for High-Throughput RNAi Screening) software for visualization, estimation and correction of spatial background noise in high-throughput RNAi screens. SbacHTS is supported on the Galaxy open-source framework with a user-friendly open access web interface. We find that SbacHTS software can effectively detect and correct spatial background noise, increase signal to noise ratio and enhance statistical detection power in high-throughput RNAi screening experiments.
INTRODUCTIONRNAi is a process in which gene expression is inhibited by small RNA molecules such as small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and short hairpin RNAs. High-throughput RNAi screening is a breakthrough technology for functional genomics and for drug target discovery (). A frequently used screening platform uses 96-well or 384-well microtiter plates, on which each well contains siRNA oligos designed to target a specific gene. A number of methods and tools are available for data normalization (), visualization () and analysis of such experiments (). A challenge confronting the collection of precision measurements during High-Throughput Screening (HTS) is that the required experimental steps, such as procedures including cell culture, transfection, reagent delivery, incubation and HTS-plate scanning, may introduce spatially correlated background noise varying across experiments, batches and plates (). Ignoring position effects results in low signal to noise ratios and reduces sensitivity. Recently, edge effects have been considered in normalization of high-throughput RNAi screening data (); however, the only existing approach to address the global spatial background noise across a plate is to use B-score statistics () to adjust row and column effects using analysis of variance. This method can be an effective approach for simple row and column effects. In our exploratory analysis of the highthroughput RNAi screening data, complex spatial patterns have been observed for most of the plates. Thus, simplified background correction approaches may often lead to overcorrection for some well plates and undercorrection for others. To help address this limitation, we sought advanced statistical models to enhance accuracy of quantification and correction of complex spatial background noise in high-throughput RNAi screening experiments. Kriging interpolation () is a well-established and widely used statistical model to fit spatial patterns in the observed data. In this study, we adapted a Kriging model to quantify and correct spatially correlated background noise in high-throughput RNAi screening data and developed a userfriendly software package, SbacHTS (Spatial background noise correction for High-Throughput RNAi Screening), together with intuitive data visualization and quality assessment tools, for opensource implementation of the Kriging correction. We find that SbacHTS software can effectively detect and correct spatial background noise, increase signal to noise ratio and enhance statistical detection power for RNAi screening experiments.
METHODSSbacHTS software uses Kriging interpolation to fit spatial noise patterns and correct noise in high-throughput screening data. For each individual plate, at well s, let Y s  X s  " s be the observed intensity (e.g. cell viability readout from the well), which includes both signal (X s ) and spatially correlated background noise (" s ). We assume X s is from a normal distribution X s $N s , 2 s , where s is the mean effect of siRNA in well s, and " s is from a multivariate Gaussian distribution " s $ N ~ 0, AE, where AE  2 , d i, j   2 I. Here, , d i, j  is a function of the distance between well plates i and j, d i, j  js i  s j j, with parameters , and 2 I models the independent white Gaussian noise. Using this model, we can estimate the spatial background noise" s and the signal X s at each location s from the observed value Y s. The software exports the estimated signals as a data matrix. For details about statistical inference and parameters estimation, reader can refer to. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
RESULTSThe SbacHTS software () is developed with an intuitive web interface to facilitate broad implementation in the screening community. We used a real screening dataset () to evaluate the performance of SbacHTS software (e). This experiment used a commercial whole-genome arrayed siRNA library with 267 96-well plates to compare siRNA effects between paclitaxel-treated (experimental group) lung cancer cells and vehicle-treated (control group) lung cancer cells in triplicate.
Spatial noise pattern visualizationSbacHTS displays the spatial background noise pattern across each plate () and the corresponding fitted spatial background noise (). This allows for fast and intuitive user appreciation of the position effects and spatial distribution of the calculated background noise across each plate for each screen. In addition, SbacHTS software exports observed intensity display too.
Improvement of coefficients of variation and statistical detection powerIn the example dataset, the genome-wide siRNA screening experiments were carried out in triplicate. The coefficients of variation can, therefore, be calculated for each siRNA pool. Importantly,demonstrates that spatial background correction decreases the coefficients of variation, indicating improvement of the signal to noise ratio in the experiments. For example, the 90th percentile of coefficients of variation decreases from 0.044 in the original data to 0.039 after spatial correction. As a result, for 90% of genes, the statistical power to detect 10% changes increases from 0.88 to 0.94 when the Type I error rate is 5%. The goal of this screening experiment was to identify siRNAs, which significantly decrease cell viability in the experimental group compared with the control group (referred as hits). For each well, the cell viabilities were compared between the experimental group and the control group, using Student's ttest, and a P-value was calculated. A Beta Uniform model () was used to determine the false discovery rate (FDR). After applying spatial background correction, we identified 867 hits with an FDR of 50.05, whereas we only identified 101 hits from the original data (Supplementary) using the same criterion. Therefore, we successfully reduced the false-negative rate when controlling the same FDR (Supplementary).
Visualization of batch effectsSbacHTS software provides a function to summarize the measurements (such as observed readouts or z scores) of each plate using a box-plot, grouping the box-plots by relevant variables (e.g. processing dates or batches). This function allows users to detect systematic bias or batch effects caused by uncontrolled experimental factors ().
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
IMPLEMENTATION SbacHTS software is implemented in R and available as a Galaxy (Giardine et al., 2010) tool with a user-friendly web interface. A detailed user manual and demonstration data are available at http://www.galaxy.qbrc.org/. Although a genome-wide siRNA screen was used to demonstrate SbacHTS, the software is also applicable to other highthroughput screening experiments with similar workflow, such as chemical compound screening. Our results show that SbacHTS can correct spatial background noise, increase signal to noise ratio and improve hit identification from high-throughput screening experiments. In addition, SbacHTS is computationally efficient, requiring 55 minutes to process the 267-plate genomewide data. Fig. 1. (a) A Galaxy-based user-friendly web application of SbacHTS. (b) Visualization of spatial background noise pattern across plate. (c) Visualization of the fitted spatial background noise. (d) Density plots of coefficients of variation before (black line) and after (red line) spatial correction. (e) Visualization of batch effects using box-plots. Each box-plot summarizes the readouts from one plate, and the color indicates different experiment dates
SbacHTS at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
R.Zhong et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
