Structural analysis of long DNA fragments, including chromosomes and whole genomes, is one of the main challenges in modern bioinformatics. Here, we propose an original approach based on spectral methods and its implementation called SBARS (Spectral-Based Approach for Repeats Search. The main idea of our approach is that repeated DNA structures are recognized not within the nucleotide sequence directly but within the function derived from this sequence. This allows us to investigate nucleotide sequences on different scales and decrease time complexity for dotplot creation down to ÂðnÞ. Availability and implementation: Pre-compiled versions for Windows and Linux and documentation are available at
INTRODUCTIONThe vast majority of approaches used to analyze nucleotide and amino acid sequences are based on algorithms working with text strings. Until recently, such methods were justified because the length of processed genetic text was relatively short. The evolution of sequencing techniques, however, has resulted in dramatically increased datasets, providing nucleotide sequences that are comparable with whole genome in size. Algorithmic 'correction' of point mutations is computationally intensive and timeconsuming. At the same time it is reasonable to assume that a number of mutations are unintentionally incorporated into comparisons of large fragments of DNA (410 000 bp), resulting in significant decrease in efficiency of the text-based algorithms. To bypass the problems of the text-based algorithms, a number of effective spectral algorithms based on Fourier transform were developed, which are used to search for minisatellites [Spectral Repeat Finder (SRF) () and OWMSA (, multiple alignments [MAFFT (, etc. Despite a high performance, these tools are focused on finding short repeats and have a number of limitations for the analysis of long sequences and searching for extended homologous fragments.In the present article, we propose an original method for finding different types of long repeats in genome-scale DNA sequences. We also offer a possible solution for the problem of dotplot creation whose time complexity can be reduced to n.
METHODSSpectral-Based Approach for Repeats Search (SBARS) is based on the analysis of a function obtained from the nucleotide sequence. In our method, we used GC-content curve as a higher-order representation of the nucleotide sequence. The main parameters of GC-content are sliding window (W1) and its step (d1). The resulting GC-content curve is divided into overlapping frames with width (W2), wherein each frame is displaced relative to the other by a step d2. After that we perform pairwise comparison of frames by integral estimation of distance between them:where f i , g i are two fragments of GC-content. Note that 0 1, as f i W 1 and the number of terms in the sum is equal to W 2. Therefore, the distance does not depend on the sizes of the windows. For recognition of repeats, the following decision rule is used: if 5" where " is a threshold, then the fragments are considered to be similar; if ! ", the fragments are not similar (). In addition to the GC-content, we used the GA-content curve with the same parameters W 1 and d 1 , which allow us to unambiguously recover a DNA sequence from this curves (Supplementary Material). Simultaneous recognition by two curves provides more stable results and allows us to define the various types of repetitions with minimal computational cost. For example, consider a fragment of GA-content with length W 2 , which in the function values by definition is limited by window W 1 size. '' shows three types of transformation under GA-content, and each of them is related to the corresponding transformation under DNA sequence if this sequence is decoded from GC-,GA-content curves. For reversed DNA sequence, we made reverse GA-content curve. To obtain the fragment of the DNA sequence corresponding to complementary sequence, the GA-content should be transformed to CT-content using the following expression: CT-content  W 1  GA-content. For reverse complement transform, one needs to make both transforms, which are described earlier, in an arbitrary order. The main feature of the method is that all of the fragments of GC-, GA-content are approximated using orthogonal polynomials (Legendre, Chebyshev, Fourier) and are presented in the form of the expansion coefficients. Thus, all the transformations and estimations of expression (1) are performed using the vectors of expansion coefficients, and this allows us to identify similarity between the GC-,GA-content fragments by comparing the first few coefficients (usually $10) (). The other feature of the method is scalability. The dotplot size depends not only on the size of nucleotide sequence but also on the parameters. In *To whom correspondence should be addressed. common case, the complexity of our algorithm can be represented as three components. The first component is making GC-,GA-content whose time complexity is linear. The second component is evaluating vectors of expansion coefficients whose complexity is also linear because of the number of frames to be converted into vectors is n d2. The last component is pairwise comparison of vectors and constructing dotplot. The complexity of the last component is  n 2 d 2 2 . If the size of a sequence is increasing but parameters are fixed, the complexity of this component is quadratic, and consequently whole complexity will also be quadratic. But if we increase the parameters proportionally to the length of the sequence, then the last component will be constant and complexity of whole algorithm will be n. In the last case, the dotplot size does not depend on the sequence length. This facilitates construction of low resolution matrix even for large nucleotide sequences.
IMPLEMENTATIONSBARS is a complete implementation of the algorithm given earlier with graphical user interface. The main objective of the program is to construct a dotplot and obtain the coordinates of repeated fragments in the sequences. The program is an advanced real-time viewer for DNA sequences at different scales. The program is written in C with OpenMP directives, and graphical user interface is based on the QT library. A detailed guide with examples is located at http://github.com/mpyatkov/sbars/ raw/master/SBARS.pdf We compared our program with Gepard (), which is the closest equivalent to our program by performance. The time complexity of Gepard is n log n. The output of the programs is fixed size dotplot for sequences in different scales. For similar quality dotplots (Supplementary Material), especially for long sequences, our method demonstrates less computation time ().
DISCUSSIONSBARS is a fast and efficient tool for identifying dispersed (direct, inverted) and tandem DNA repeats. The program is not aimed at the comparison of individual nucleotides. The main idea of this approach is to quickly identify the similarity of individual fragments within the query sequences, disregarding single nucleotide insertions or deletions. The current version of the program efficiently identifies repeated sequences and can be developed for the analysis of long insertions or deletions because of chromosome rearrangements in similar sequences. The underlying spectral algorithm demonstrated good scalability on multicore processors ().Note: Selfplots of sequences with different lengths have been calculated on a 2.2 GHz AMD Phenom 9550 Quad-Core machine using Gepard and SBARS. The resulting dotplots and the corresponding parameters are presented in the Supplementary Material.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
M.I.Pyatkov and A.N.Pankratov at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
