The simulation experiment description markup language (SED-ML) is a new community data standard to encode computational biology experiments in a computer-readable XML format. Its widespread adoption will require the development of software support to work with SED-ML files. Here, we describe a software tool, SED-ED, to view, edit, validate and annotate SED-ML documents while shielding end-users from the underlying XML representation. SED-ED supports modellers who wish to create, understand and further develop a simulation description provided in SED-ML format. Availability and implementation: SED-ED is available as a standalone Java application, as an Eclipse plug-in and as an SBSI (www.sbsi.ed.ac.uk) plug-in, all under an MIT open-source license. Source code is at https://sed-ed-sedmleditor.googlecode. com/svn.
INTRODUCTIONThe simulation experiment description markup language (SED-ML) () is an XML language that aims to describe computational biology experiments so that they may be reproduced and exchanged between different software tools. In brief, SED-ML Level 1 encodes uniform time course simulation descriptions. It describes from where to obtain a model, the type of simulation to run and the content and presentation of the simulation output. SEDML is designed to be machine-readable rather than human-readable, and to most modellers, SED-ML should be largely hidden. However, there is a need for curators and SED-ML document editors to easily view, annotate and validate SED-ML files without being exposed to the underlying XML. SED-ED is an application designed to address the needs of these users.
SED-ED applicationto be applied to the model to modify its behaviour. In the former case, SED-ED auto-generates XPath expressions based on the user's selection of a model element in a tree view of the model. This feature is available for any XML-based modelling language. Similarly, a point-and-click viewer identifies model elements targetted for changes. Once a change has been described, the differences compared with the original reference model are highlighted in colour. In SED-ML, models can be referenced using any valid uniform resource identifier (URI). SED-ED will retrieve the contents of models automatically that are referenced in the local file system, by a URL, or from MIRIAM identifiers () to the BioModels database (). For large SED-ML files, workflows can be complex. SED-ED has an inbuilt search that will highlight elements in the editor and the view can also be filtered, for example, to show only those elements that are used to generate a particular output. The SED-ML specification (http://sed-ml.org) suggests the use of a binary archive file format to conveniently exchange resources that are currently unavailable from public databases. SED-ED can directly edit and view these archive files and can also generate archive files from the original resources. SED-ED currently does not include the ability to actually simulate a model using the protocol described in a SED-ML document. However, the SED-ED plugin for SBSI (www.sbsi.ed.ac.uk) integrates with that tool's simulation capability, enabling the execution of both regular and archived SED-ML files, providing that the algorithm and modelling language are supported. Currently, SBSI is limited to execution of System Biology Markup Language (SBML,) models.
IMPLEMENTATION The information encoded by SED-ML describes a sequential series of steps to perform a computational experiment and can be conveniently represented diagrammatically as a workflow graph. SED-ED provides a graphical editor to manipulate this workflow, in which nodes depict high-level SED-ML elements and edges the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Fig. 1. A screenshot of the SED-ED editor. An overview of a SED-ML document's contents is shown in the left-hand panel and the contents displayed as a graphical workflow in the main panel. A dialog highlights in red how a model selected in the editor is altered compared with a reference model. relations between them. Within the application window there are two main panes: the editor itself and an outline view that summarizes the SED-ML document's XML contents (Fig. 1). SED-ED supports both de novo creation of SED-ML files and import of existing files, and a full graphical editor for creating elements and their interconnections. Any editor needs to provide freedom to enter data in a non-specified order, in order to be usable, while at the same time ensuring that persisted data is not corrupt or meaningless. Therefore, during the editing process it may be the case that the document is temporarily invalid (for example, because of duplicated identifiers, or invalid maths syntax). SEDED automatically detects syntax errors and inconsistencies in the document, and displays them in a 'Problems View' from where the causes of the error can be accessed. SED-ML re-uses several other standard representations and ontologiesHTML for annotations, XPath for identifying model elements, MathML (Ausbrooks et al., 2003) to describe mathematical manipulations of both input and output variables, and the kinetic simulation algorithm ontology (KiSAO) (Courtot et al., 2011) to describe simulation algorithms. SED-ED provides extensive editing support for these technologies so that users do not have to learn their details. For HTML, SED-ED provides a split-pane note editor showing the source HTML and a browser view. Mathematical statements are entered using a straightforward text-base syntax, based on the C programming language syntax. An embedded KiSAO ontology helps the user to supply correct, unambiguous information regarding applicable simulation procedures. XPath expressions are used in two circumstances in SED-ML: to identify variables and to identify the target of changes
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
DISCUSSION This article presents the SED-ED application for working with SEDML files. At present, software support for SED-ML is at an early stage, with varying degrees of conformance to the specification [e.g. CellDesigner 4.2 (Funahashi et al., 2003), SED-ML Web Tools (http://sysbioapps.dyndns.org/SED-ML%20Web%20Tools/)]. This latter tool provides strong support for SED-ML, including simulation capability. However, while SED-ED uses a graphical approach to presenting a SED-ML document's contents to the user, SEDML Web Tools uses a text-based approach and a scripting language. Both these approaches have their advantages and endusers will benefit from the choice of software. Software support is likely to increase as the standard becomes more widely adopted SED-ML is part of the Combine (http://co. mbine.org/) initiative to coordinate the development of the various community standards and formats in systems biology, which has the support of many simulation tool developers. SED-ED has no dependencies on SBML and can therefore, be used with SED-ML documents referring to models written in any XML-based language. Future versions of SED-ED will contain plugin points for modelling language-specific functionality. The future development of SED-ED will naturally be tied to the development of the SED-ML language. The diagrammatic workflow representation we have chosen is adaptable to the addition of new language elements and will also become increasingly useful as the complexity of SED-ML workflows increases. SED-ED is implemented as a collection of OSGi-compatible Java modules, and can therefore be readily integrated into an application environment that uses this technology. Full user documentation is incorporated into the application, and an introductory tutorial is available online at http://jlibsedml.sourceforge.net/sed-ed/tutorial.html.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
