Effective access to the vast biomedical knowledge present in the scientific literature is challenging. Semantic relations are increasingly used in knowledge management applications supporting bio-medical research to help address this challenge. We describe SemMedDB, a repository of semantic predications (subject–predi-cate–object triples) extracted from the entire set of PubMed citations. We propose the repository as a knowledge resource that can assist in hypothesis generation and literature-based discovery in biomedicine as well as in clinical decision-making support. Availability and implementation: The SemMedDB repository is available as a MySQL database for non-commercial use at http://skr3. nlm.nih.gov/SemMedDB. An UMLS Metathesaurus license is required. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONScientific discoveries depend on synthesis of knowledge from the literature and generation of novel hypotheses for testing. In biomedicine, the overwhelming size of literature makes it difficult for researchers to identify promising new avenues, which may involve insights from seemingly unrelated subfields of the domain. Large-scale information extraction in the form of semantic relations is increasingly proposed for advanced knowledge management and discovery systems (). In this note, we describe SemMedDB, a repository of semantic predications extracted from the titles and abstracts of all PubMed citations by SemRep (), a rule-based semantic interpreter. Elements of semantic predications are drawn from the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) knowledge sources (); the subject and object pair corresponds to Metathesaurus concepts, and the predicate to a relation type in an extended version of the semantic network. For example, SemRep extracts the predication Infection-CAUSES-Guillain-Barre Syndrome from the sentence Infections can trigger GBS. By normalizing the free text describing a relation to UMLS domain knowledge, SemRep provides the ability to combine and link knowledge from various sources as well as aggregate knowledge at PubMed scale. SemRep extracts 30 predicate types, largely relating to clinical medicine (e.g. TREATS, DIAGNOSES, ADMINISTERED_TO, PROCESS_OF), substance interactions (e.g. INTERACTS_WITH, INHIBITS, STIMULATES), genetic etiology of disease (e.g. ASSOCIATED_WITH, CAUSES, PREDISPOSES) and pharmacogenomics (e.g. AFFECTS, AUGMENTS, DISRUPTS). For a full list and descriptions of these predicate types, we refer the reader to. Several evaluations have focused on different domains and linguistic structures. Results are summarized in. Numbers in the first column indicate the number of predications evaluated. The SemMedDB repository consists of information regarding semantic predications extracted from PubMed citations by preprocessing and stored for efficient access. The repository underpins Semantic MEDLINE (http://skr3.nlm.nih.gov/SemMed), a Web application that incorporates PubMed-based information retrieval with semantic predications, automatic summarization and visualization (). In this note, we propose the repository as a stand-alone, large-scale knowledge resource that can be exploited independently of Semantic MEDLINE. With the ability to access the full extent of the repository, the users can circumvent the 'search summarizevisualize' model of Semantic MEDLINE and apply advanced data mining algorithms directly to support biomedical research as well as clinical practice, for hypothesis generation and literature-based discovery.
OVERVIEW OF SemMedDBThe SemMedDB repository is implemented primarily as a MySQL relational database that consists of tables holding *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
USE CASESSemMedDB is being used to support a range of biomedical applications, especially for literature-based discovery and hypothesis generation.proposed a mechanistic link between cortisol, testosterone and age-related sleep-quality decline, whileapplied graph-theoretical notions to elucidate the relation between sleep and depression. More recently,replicated these results by exploiting information foraging theory.used analogical reasoning in a high-dimensional vector space to suggest drug therapies. Similarly,proposed predication space for drug target discovery and drug repurposing, whereascombined predications with DNA microarray data to generate novel hypotheses on Parkinson disease. We are currently combining predications with microarray data to automatically generate gene regulatory networks. SemMedDB has formed the basis of several clinical applications.generate therapy-oriented summaries to support clinical decision making, whileelucidate the association between medical concepts co-occurring in clinical reports. The repository also underpinned a recent study to identify interactions between drugs mentioned in clinical reports.
CONCLUSIONWe described the SemMedDB repository, which makes the semantic content of all PubMed citations as extracted by SemRep available to the research community. The utility of the repository for hypothesis generation, literature-based discovery and clinical decision making has so far been demonstrated from within the Semantic MEDLINE paradigm and independently. Given its scale and size, this repository can further serve as the basis of advanced data-mining techniques and assist in uncovering novel relationships in biomedicine.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
A Pubmed-scale semantic predication repository at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
H.Kilicoglu et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
