Descriptions of genetic variations and their effect are widely spread across the biomed-ical literature. However, finding all mentions of a specific variation, or all mentions of variations in a specific gene, is difficult to achieve due to the many ways such variations are described. Here, we describe SETH, a tool for the recognition of variations from text and their subsequent normalization to dbSNP or UniProt. SETH achieves high precision and recall on several evaluation corpora of PubMed abstracts. It is freely available and encompasses stand-alone scripts for isolated application and evaluation as well as a thorough documentation for integration into other applications. Availability and Implementation: SETH is released under the Apache 2.0 license and can be down-loaded from http://rockt.github.io/SETH/.
IntroductionOver the last decades, a wealth of information about genetic variations and their effect on phenotypes has been published in the scientific literature. However, finding such variations, the genes they affect, and the associated effects on phenotypes is cumbersome due to the many ways in which variations can be described. Despite efforts towards defining nomenclature guidelines for genetic variants (den), authors often use descriptive natural language instead of following a suggested formalism, which incurs ambiguity and uncertainty in which variation actually is described. This severely hinders the usage of published variation data for subsequent analyses such as biological and clinical interpretation. Several tools have been developed to facilitate the identification of genetic variants in text (for a recent evaluation we refer to Jimeno Yepes and Verspoor 2014b), but none of them is freely available, recognizes and normalizes mentions to an acknowledged nomenclature, links variations to structured databases (e.g. dbSNP or UniProt), and covers a large range of mutation types. SETH is an open source tool unifying all these features. Furthermore, SETH achieves consistent high precision and recall on several publicly available gold standard corpora.
MethodsSETH's workflow is depicted in. It consists of two main components: (i) Recognition of genetic variants mentioned in text (see Section 2.1) and (ii) mapping of recognized variants to dbSNP or UniProt identifiers (see Section 2.2).
Named-entity recognitionSETH relies on four complementary modules to recognize genetic variants. i. Nomenclature EBNF: Variation mentions adhering to the human mutation nomenclature, described by den Dunnen and Antonarakis (2000), are recognized by an Extended Backus Naur (EBNF) grammar which was originally published byfrequently observed deviations from the nomenclature ('p.Arg282 >Gln' instead of 'p.Arg282Gln'). ii. MutationFinder: Short phrases describing single nucleotide substitutions are recognized using a modified version of MutationFinder (). We included patterns detecting nonsense mutations ('Ala15Ter', 'A15X'), DNA substitutions ('-650A > T'), and mutations using ambiguous amino acid letter codes ('Asx' for Aspartate or Asparagine). iii. Nomenclature RegExes: Using a set of regular expressions, SETH recognizes deletions ('852  123delT'), insertions, substitutions ('IVS123-12A->T'), and frameshift mutations ('A123fsX1') following nomenclature recommendations from(Ad Hoc Committee on Mutation Nomenclature, 1996). Regular expressions have been developed by implementing a test-driven approach integrating variation mentions from eleven different proposals for a mutation nomenclature. iv. Literal mentions: Literal mentions of dbSNP identifiers ('rs334', 'rs334:A > C') are recognized using regular expressions. SETH merges mutations found by more than one NER-module into a single mention. This strategy helps to resolve ambiguous cases by favoring matches against the most rigorous and recent nomenclature over others. For example, MutationFinder might detect a substring of a variation, while the EBNF grammar detects the full mutation mention. All recognized mutation mentions are categorized into one of the following: substitution, deletion, insertion, duplication, insertion-deletion (insdel), inversion, conversion, translocation, frameshift, short-sequence repeat or literal dbSNP mention.
Named-entity normalizationFollowing the initial recognition of mutation mentions, SETH links variations to a unique identifier of the dbSNP (for single nucleotide variations) or UniProt database (regarding the protein containing the mutation) if possible. To disambiguate between multiple possible identifiers, this step requires additional information about genes or proteins mentioned in the same article. SETH currently is configured to work with PubMed abstracts for which it uses precomputed results from the gene recognition tool GNAT () and NCBI's gene2pubmed (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/DATA/GENE_ INFO/). However, the modular implementation of SETH makes it simple to replace the gene recognition tool to be used, in order to adapt to other types of texts, such as patents or clinical trial reports. The normalization procedure uses the heuristics discussed by. These heuristics account for frequent differences between textual and structured database information by performing a physical validation. This validation technique compares detected variations with the DNA coding sequence (CDS) or protein sequence in the respective dbSNP or UniProt database, taking into account systematic differences like post-translational modifications or inversed DNA strands. SETH rewrites mentions of variations using a HGVS-compliant representation, substituting, for instance, 'DF508' with 'p.Phe508del'. This is useful for mapping large repositories of mutation mentions into the latest mutation nomenclature, helping to decrease ambiguity.
EvaluationWe assessed the performance of SETH on a series of publicly available corpora for named entity recognition and dbSNPnormalization (see). All these corpora are annotated on abstract level and performance of named entity recognition was evaluated using an exact matching strategy. We also annotated a text corpus of 630 publications with mutation mentions by sampling papers from the journals The American Journal of Human Genetics and Human Mutation published between 1992 and 2012. To ensure a high variability of textual variation expressions, we uniformly sampled 30 publications per year. This corpus is freely available from the SETH project web page. Regarding identification of variations, SETH achieves F 1 scores over 85% across several corpora, demonstrating its robustness and independence from particularities of the curation processes in these different corpora. In their own evaluation on two publicly available test corpora, tmVar () outperforms SETH by 45% points for NER. However, SETH has been compared with four freely available tools for mutation recognition in intrinsic and extrinsic experiments by Jimeno Yepes and Verspoor (2014b). In their work, the authors evaluated MutationFinder (), EMU (), OMM (), tmVar () and SETH. In the intrinsic set-up, SETH outperformed all competitors in terms of F 1 on the Variome fulltext corpus (Jimeno Yepes and Verspoor, 2014a) using exact matching for evaluation. In the extrinsic set-up, where only coverage was measured, SETH achieved the best result for the COSMIC database (). Finally, the performance of normalization to human dbSNP identifiers was assessed on two publicly available corpora (). The first corpus provides annotations for gene name, which were used in our normalization experiments. For the second corpus from Thomas et al. we used the precomputed GNAT and gene2pubmed results.
ConclusionWe introduced SETH, an open-source tool for recognizing and normalizing mentions of variations in natural language text. By rewritingvariants using the HGVS nomenclature and normalization to dbSNP, SETH facilitates indexing and information retrieval of heterogeneous occurrences of the same biological variant across the literature. SETH achieves state-of-the-art performance and is the only freely available tool performing physical validation not only for protein sequence mutations but also for DNA variations. Variation mentions recognized by SETH in PubMed and PubMed Central can be browsed in GeneView () at http://bc3.informatik.hu-berlin.de/.
FundingThe development of SETH was supported by the BMBF-funded projects: ColoNet, VirtualLiver, and OncoPath.
Conflictof Interest: none declared.
Bioinformatics, 2016, 13 doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw234 Advance Access Publication Date: 2 June 2016 Applications Note Bioinformatics Advance Access published June 9, 2016 at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
P.Thomas et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
