Motivations: Characterizing protein–protein interfaces and the hydrogen bonds is a first step to better understand proteins' structures and functions toward high-resolution protein design. However, there are few large-scale surveys of hydrogen bonds of interfaces. In addition, previous work of shape complementarity of protein complexes suggested that lower shape complementar-ity in antibody–antigen interfaces is related to their evolutionary origin. Results: Using 6637 non-redundant protein–protein interfaces, we revealed peculiar features of various protein complex types. In contrast to previous findings, the shape complementarity of anti-body–antigen interfaces resembles that of the other interface types. These results highlight the importance of hydrogen bonds during evolution of protein interfaces and rectify the prevailing belief that antibodies have lower shape complementarity.
IntroductionInteractions are one of the most fundamental activities of biomolecules. Disturbance of these interactions underlie biological disorders including cancers and neurodegenerative diseases. Characterizing interactions is important to understand the detailed mechanisms of life (). Complementarity is a key concept in molecular recognition. Previous studies have extracted common features of proteinprotein interfaces and revealed peculiar features of particular classes of interfaces. Traditional structural surveys of proteinprotein interactions often divided complexes into hetero-dimers and homo-dimers and into different functional classes, such as antibodyantigen, enzyme inhibitor/substrate and 'other' complexes (). A key driving force of molecular recognition and specificity is forming hydrogen bonds and salt bridges. Unlike salt bridges, hydrogen bonds are orientation-dependent. Hence, modulating hydrogen bond networks is critical for specificity in protein engineering and design (). Hydrogen bonds are also crucial for protein folding where the patterns formed define secondary structure elements. Based on 319 protein complexes, Nussinov and co-workers reported that backbonebackbone hydrogen bonds are dominant within protein structures whereas side-chainside-chain hydrogen bonds are most common across proteinprotein interfaces (). Another important factor in the complementarity of molecular recognition is the shape of the interfaces. There are several analyses on shape complementarity of protein interfaces (). In such an analysis based onthat the shape complementarity of antibodyantigen interfaces was lower on average than that of proteinprotein interfaces in general (). Antibodies evolve independently of foreign antigens, while other proteins involved in proteinprotein interactions typically evolve with their counterparts, so that the shape complementarity of general interfaces is optimized by both partners. However, a later analysis with two high-resolution crystal structures suggested that the observed lower shape complementarity of antibodyantigen complexes was due to the low quality of the crystal structures (). Since the discussions were based on a limited number of proteinprotein complexes, a more comprehensive analysis of the complementarities of the interfaces is required to understand the essential nature of molecular recognition and to guide the rational design of protein therapeutics. The question is relevant today as computational design efforts strive to create de novo interfaces by optimizing only one protein in the pair, as antibodies do. Antibodies provide a natural system that can demonstrate what level of shape complementarity is possible in single-sided interface design. In this study, we focus on hydrogen bond networks using 6637 non-redundant protein complexes. Our main dataset includes 547 antibody V L V H (light and heavy variable domain) pairs, 191 antibodyprotein antigen complexes, 104 antibodypeptide antigen complexes, 88 enzymeinhibitor/substrate complexes, 102 'other' complexes and 92 obligate complexes. For a reference, we also analyzed 2251 and 3262 proteinprotein interfaces of hetero-and homodimers. The analyses reveal peculiar features of each protein complex type. We discuss the impact on antibody modeling, docking simulations and interface designs.
Methods
Protein interfaces analyzedThe non-redundant antibody structures and the complexes, enzyme inhibitor/substrate, 'other' complexes, obligate complexes, heteroand homo-dimer complexes were taken from the PDB through SAbDab (), Docking Benchmark 5.0 (), a work of obligate complexes () and the 3D-complex database (), respectively. Antibody structures were renumbered by Chothia's standard. Details of the dataset preparation are described in the Supplementary Materials.
Hydrogen bond detection and shape complementarityHydrogen bonds and shape complementarity by the S c measure were calculated using the Rosetta libraries (). To detect hydrogen bonds in proteinprotein interfaces, we also used HBPLUS (). Since the results of Rosetta and HBPLUS were comparable, we report only the Rosetta results. The Rosetta command lines are available in the supplementary text.
Results
Asymmetric usages of the backbone and side chains in antibody hydrogen bond networksTo study the pattern of hydrogen bonds in interfaces, we first focused on the usage of backbone and side-chain polar atoms. As previously observed (), all interfaces other than enzymeinhibitor/substrate complexes showed dominant usage of side-chainside-chain hydrogen bonds (3460%) (). Interestingly, asymmetric usage of backbone and side chain was observed in the V L V H interfaces of antibodies. That is, the V H domain uses the backbone while the V L domain mainly uses the side chain to form hydrogen bonds in the interface (). Although the number of hydrogen bonds is small in V L V H interfaces (average 3.7 6 1.7), this trend is observed broadly across different antibodies in the dataset with varying germline genes. We analyzed the V L V H interfaces as a separate category since V L V H antibodies are a family of closely related proteins. Proteins sequences evolve over time. Likewise, but in much shorter time scale, the V L and V H sequences diverge from germline genes of light and heavy chains, respectively. The sequence identities in each domain family typically vary between 40 and >90%. To eliminate a potential bias caused by germline gene family redundancy, we repeated the same analysis using the 153 antibodies that have unique germline gene family pairings in our dataset. Even after removing the redundancy, the observation still holds (Supplementary). Visual inspection revealed that 94% (595/634) of these V H backboneV L side chain hydrogen bonds involved the backbone of complementarity determining region (CDR) H3 (H95H102). This observation can be viewed in light of the antibody evolution. Relative to V L , V H , especially the CDR-H3, is more diverse in terms of both sequence and conformation and more often involved with antigen recognition. Thus, to maintain the V L V H association, a V H domain must use the backbone to form proper hydrogen bonds. On the other hand, the light chain is relatively conserved in terms of sequence including CDRs, and it can use the side chain to form hydrogen bonds without losing these interactions during the evolution. This implies that the sequences, especially in V L domain, encode theside-chain, side-chainbackbone and side-chainside-chain interactions, respectively. The first letter indicates V L domain, antibody, enzyme, or other proteins and the second letter indicates V H domain, antigen, inhibitor/substrate, or other proteins correct V L V H orientation during the antibody evolution, also emphasizing the importance of the CDR-H3 backbone conformation on the domain orientations. A dominant hydrogen bond in V L V H domains was between the side chains of two glutamines at positions L38 and H39. This pair is conserved in 86% (471/547) of the V L V H dataset, and 88% (413/ 471) of those side-chain pairs form hydrogen bonds. Despite the high conservation in the sequences, an experiment has demonstrated that the L38:GlnH39:Gln hydrogen bond does not correlate with antibody stability (). Analysis on the relative orientation of the V L V H domains of antibodies has become an active area of research (), along with the demand for high-resolution antibody modeling (). In light of this trend in the field, our analysis characterized V L V H interfaces by analyzing hydrogen bond networks, and our observation may be useful for the correct sampling of V L V H domain orientations. All hydrogen bonds in V L V H interfaces are enumerated in Supplementary Table S2. Structure prediction of CDR-H3 is also a hot topic in antibody modeling field (). Conformations of CDR-H3 can be classified into kink or extend forms (), and a few hydrogen bonds, such as L36:Tyr, appear to contribute these conformations. However, these residues are not necessarily conserved when CDR-H3 stems assume the kink conformation (), and these hydrogen bonds in the V L V H interfaces alone do not define either kinked or extended conformations (). The kinked or extended region is defined as four consecutive Ca atoms (H100XH103) in antibodies having CDR-H3 loops longer than four residues. In our V L V H set, there are 529 such antibodies, where kinked or extended conformations are definable. When hydrogen bonds are broken down in the V L V H interfaces, 18.1% (354/1951) of them involve the kinked or extended regions, 30.5% of them involve the rest of the H3 loop and 39.4% of them are between L38:GlnH39:Gln. The remaining hydrogen bonds are in the other parts of the V L V H domains. The difficulty of CDR-H3 modeling arises mainly from the fact that CDR-H3 is governed by V(D)J recombination. Although D and J germline gene segments assignments are difficult, we can predict the V genes using IgBLAST (). We found that, in 10 897 somatic mutations of V genes in our V L V H set, only 0.95% (104/10 897) of the mutations contribute to hydrogen bonds in the V L V H interface. In other words, most of the hydrogen bonds in V genes are encoded already in germline sequences, in agreement with our observations that V L domains, which are less variable, tend to use their side chains to form hydrogen bonds. The distributions of the number of hydrogen bonds in all types of the interfaces are available in Supplementary. Overall, the number of hydrogen bonds in the V L V H interfaces (average 3.7) was smaller compared with other interfaces (average 6.215.6), reflecting the hydrophobic nature of the V L V H interfaces. This observation is consistent with the higher fraction of buried non-polar atoms in V L V H interfaces compared with other interfaces (Supplementary). The average hydrogen bond densities (number of hydrogen bonds per 100 A  2 buried surface area) in each interface are given in Supplementary Table S3. V L and V H domains and other obligate complexes do not exist in isolation, i.e. they are always associated to form a complex. However, a critical difference between V L V H and obligate interfaces is that the V L V H domain pairing is generally considered to be random, and V H domains can associate with several different V L domains, which is known as receptor editing (). The smaller number of hydrogen bonds may enable the quasi-promiscuous binding. In antibodyprotein antigen interfaces, as expected, there were more hydrogen bonds to the V H domain than to the V L domain (5.2 6 3.0 and 2.4 6 2.0, respectively) (Supplementary), emphasizing the importance of the V H domain in antigen recognition. Forty two percent (418/987) of the V H-mediated hydrogen bonds involved CDR-H3, followed by CDR-H2 (H52H56) and FR H-mediated hydrogen bonds (24 and 23%, respectively). In the FR H cases, most of the hydrogen bonds were formed by the residues adjacent to CDRs, such as H58 (in 42 of 231 FR H-mediated hydrogen bonds, or 18%), H50 (12%), H33 (12%) and H61 (6%). Similarly to the V L V H interfaces, we also found that, in 4,460 somatic mutations of V genes in our antibody-protein set, only a small fraction (163/4460  3.7%) of the mutations contribute to hydrogen bonds in the V genes. Note that, in the antibody-protein interfaces, about half (49%) of the hydrogen bonds are mediated by CDR-H3 and L3, both of which are generated by V(D)J recombination, and we investigated only V genes here. Unlike V L V H interfaces, most of the interactions in antibody-antigen interfaces are via CDRs. Hence, it is still possible that hydrogen bonds to antigens would be formed via somatic mutations in CDR-H3 and L3. In antibodypeptide interfaces, the number of backbonebackbone hydrogen bonds was comparable to the number of backbone side-chain or side-chainbackbone hydrogen bonds (). A possible explanation is that peptide antigens are smaller than protein antigens, and the number of residues that can contribute to interactions with the antibody is smaller. As a result, the backbone of peptide antigens needs to contact the antibody for favorable binding. On the antibody side, as previously reported in, peptide recognition of antibodies can be divided into two structural classes depending on the length of CDR-H3; when H3 is short (<7 residues), the peptide conformations are extended on the pocket formed by the six CDR loops whereas when H3 is long (7 residues), the peptides are buried into the pocket (Supplementary). Due to the spatial constraint, the backbones of antibodies more easily contact the peptides, especially in the latter case, where, on average, there are more hydrogen bonds between backbones of antibodies and the peptide antigens than the first class of antibodypeptide complexes (1.6 6 1.3 and 2.9 6 2.1 for short and long H3, respectively). It is sometimes difficult for epitope scanning () to recognize a conformational epitope since tertiary interactions within the protein stabilize the peptide conformation; these interactions are absent in the lone peptide. So segmented proteins have unsatisfied backbone hydrogen bond donors/acceptors, and antibodies that recognize peptides may have to make backbone contacts to stabilize the peptide conformation. Some antibodies may bind a lone epitope peptide in a different conformation than the binding to the epitope in the parent-protein context.Unlike the other interfaces, the most frequent hydrogen bonding pattern in enzyme complexes was the backbonebackbone pair (). When dividing the enzymes into proteases and other types, the dominant hydrogen bonds in the protease-inhibitor complexes were backbonebackbone hydrogen bonds whereas those in the other types of enzymes came from the side-chainside-chain pairs, as seen in other interfaces. This observation is probably a Shape complementarity and hydrogen bond preferences in proteinprotein interfacesreflection of the difference in the biological roles: proteases cleave peptide backbones of substrates, whereas other enzymes typically recognize the other types of bonds, such as glycosidic or phosphodiester ones. In a previous work (), Jackson computed interaction energies comprising van der Waals and electrostatic terms in a molecular mechanics formulation, showing that, in the 12 proteaseinhibitor complexes studied, the energies from backbonebackbone interactions account for the highest fraction (41%) of the total energies. However, although hydrogen bonds could be considered as electrostatic interactions in general, in his calculations, the electrostatic component of the proteaseinhibitor interactions only account for 24% of the total energies. Perhaps the molecular mechanics formulation could not fully describe hydrogen bonds because of the lack of directionality in the functional form. Indeed, an orientation-dependent hydrogen bonding potential in Rosetta discriminated native interfaces better than molecular mechanics calculations (), particularly due to hydrogen bond specificity. The dominant contribution of backbonebackbone hydrogen bonds is reminiscent of formation of secondary structure within protein structures (). Supplementaryshows the examples of these hydrogen bonds. In these cases, the backbones of enzymes and inhibitors become closer upon binding. Thus, we next analyzed the shape complementarity of the interfaces.
Backbone
Shape complementarityof antibody-protein antigen complexes is close to those of generic proteinsshows the shape complementarity by the S c measure of eight types of proteinprotein interfaces. Contrary to previous findings (), these data indicate that the shape complementarity of antibodyprotein interfaces is comparable to those of the enzyme complex, obligate, hetero-and homodimer interfaces while the 'other' interfaces show less complementarity (Wilcoxon rank-sum test, P < 0.01). It has been proposed that the antibodyantigen complex interface shape depends on antigen types: groove-like binding is common in antibodypeptide interactions whereas antibodyprotein interfaces tend to be more flat (). Although antibodypeptide interfaces do exhibit the highest shape complementarity (0.75 6 0.06, P < 0.01), this observation may arise from the fact that S c can be affected by edge effects. When S c is computed, grid points of molecular surface are defined and a local geometric quantity is extracted from them. S c is the median value of the local geometric quantity after removing grid points on the edge of the interface. Many more edge points could be removed in small interfaces or the elongated shape of peptide interfaces than in larger protein interfaces (), which may lead to the higher S c values of peptide-mediated interfaces. Shape complementarity of V L V H domain interface are higher than the other interfaces (other than antibodypeptide ones) (P < 0.01), possibly due to the obligate nature of the interfaces. Proteaseinhibitor complexes have higher shape complementarity than the other enzymeinhibitor/substrate complexes (P < 0.01), probably due to the larger number of backbonebackbone hydrogen bonds in the interfaces. S c values can suffer poor quality of crystal structures (). Hence, we repeated the same calculation for 3487 high-resolution crystal structures (Resolution 2.0 A  ), confirming that the shape complementarity of antibodyprotein antigen complexes is close to the general interfaces (Supplementary). Shape complementarity of protein interfaces could be defined in various ways (). Therefore, we did a second computation based on the gap volume index () as another metric of shape complementarity (Supplementary). Gap volume index also suggested that shape complementarity of antibodyprotein interfaces is close to enzyme and 'other' interfaces while these interfaces are less complementary than obligate complexes (P < 0.01). The lower complementarities of the antibody, enzyme and 'other' complexes would be explained by the observations that these interfaces are more polar than the obligate ones (Supplementary), and polar interfaces often accommodate water molecules to fill the gap regions (). These gaps or cavities could be filled in by water molecules. By definition, S c values exploit the median of local geometric quantities based on normal products in interfaces to quantify the relative shape of the surfaces with each other. On the other hand, the gap volume index measures the volumes of the cavities in interfaces and normalizes them by the buried surface areas. Hence, S c values and gap volume index provide different information on the complementarity of proteinprotein interfaces, and both methods may help characterize interfaces in protein docking and design.
Discussion and conclusionsWhat has been already known about proteinprotein interfaces in general was that obligate interfaces are more hydrophobic, have better shape complementarity, and evolve slower than transient ones (). Amino acid compositions of interfaces are also well studied; generally, compared with the other surfaces on proteins, proteinprotein interfaces are enriched in non-polar and aromatic residues whereas charged residues tend to be depleted (). Arg residues are a notable exception in that it is one of the common hot spot residues in interfaces, as well as Trp and Tyr residues (). Based on 1150 two domain proteins, 583 homodimers and 94 heterodimers, residue-level local network patterns were also. Shape complementarity (S c ) of proteinprotein interfaces. Higher values mean better complementarity. The result of antibody-peptide interfaces was not shown because S c measure can suffer from the edge effect of small interfaces. For box-and-whiskers plots, medians are shown by the thick line, boxes show the range from the first (Q1) to third (Q3) quartile, whiskers extend to the most extreme data point within 1.5 times the interquartile range of the Q1 and Q3, and points show additional outliers proposed in proteinprotein interfaces (). Furthermore, by exploiting all the 57 944 PDB entries available at that time (), 20 034 atomic-resolution motifs (i.e. 3D organization of atoms) were identified in proteinprotein interfaces (). In the past, few studies investigated the hydrogen bonds in interfaces beyond the average numbers and the individual geometries, such as angles and distances (). In the case of antibodies specifically, there are some studies about hydrogen bonds in antibodyantigen (protein) interfaces (), but few discussed the insights into evolution (i.e. somatic maturations) and peptide immunizations, nor analyzed V L V H domain interface, as we have done in this study. The results in this report have implications for antibody modeling and proteinprotein docking problems. Since hydrogen bonds via backbones can be preserved after mutations, asymmetry of hydrogen bonding patterns in V L V H interfaces suggests that mutations in V H domain might be more tolerated than those in V L domain in engineering better antibodies. Hydrogen bond density of V L V H interfaces is almost half of those of the other interfaces, highlighting the hydrophobic, promiscuous nature of the domain associations. Although there seems to be no obvious correlations between the number of hydrogen bonds and the geometric descriptors of V L V H orientations (Supplementary) (), constraining the conserved L38:GlnH39:Gln hydrogen bonds during the domain orientation sampling would be a possible approach to better capture correct V L V H orientations. Packing V L side chains could be critical in CDR-H3 modeling and V L V H positioning. Finally, epitope scanning by fragmentation of antigens may lead to unusual recognition of peptides and/or binding that differs from the binding of the full antigen. Backbonebackbone hydrogen bonds are common in the proteaseinhibitor complexes. An important problem in proteinprotein docking is in global sampling i.e., identification of potential-binding sites of protein surfaces. An application of our observations may be to use backbone complementarity based on hydrogen bonds and, possibly, to use information of dehydration of backbone atoms () to identify binding sites in proteaseinhibitor systems. In contrast to the previous discussion, the shape complementarity of antibodyprotein interfaces seems to be similar to those of other interfaces. Through somatic maturation, antibodies can evolve over short time scales, leading to antibodies having higher affinity and stability, even though the evolution toward binding is only on one side of the interface, it is sufficient to reach high shape complementarity typical of other proteinprotein interface types (). Still, higher gap volume index being considered, water molecules could also play a role to complete the better fit of interfaces. Although modulating hydrogen bonds in computational design is still challenging, mimicking the maturation process, designing proteins with higher shape complementarity by modulating backbone backbone hydrogen bonds, as observed in the proteaseinhibitor complexes, is a promising approach.
Funding
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
D.Kuroda and J.J.Gray at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
