The Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) is a public repository of gene expression data. Although GEO has its own tool, GEO2R, for data analysis, evaluation of single genes is not straightforward and survival analysis in specific GEO datasets is not possible without bioinformatics expertise. We describe a web application, shinyGEO, that allows a user to download gene expression data sets directly from GEO in order to perform differential expression and survival analysis for a gene of interest. In addition, shinyGEO supports customized graphics, sample selection, data export and R code generation so that all analyses are reproducible. The availability of shinyGEO makes GEO datasets more accessible to non-bioinformaticians, promising to lead to better understanding of biological processes and genetic diseases such as cancer. Availability and Implementation: Web application and source code are available from http://gdan cik.github.io/shinyGEO/.
IntroductionThe Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) is a public repository of genomic data () that currently hosts >50 000 gene expression datasets containing >1 million samples. GEO is a valuable resource for identifying biomarkers of biological processes and disease. Its datasets have been used to identify biomarkers of HRAS and MYC pathway activity (), biomarkers of monocyte differentiation in response to viral infection (), and prognostic biomarkers in breast (), bladder () and lung cancer (). Biomarker evaluation in GEO datasets typically involves data retrieval and gene (probe) selection followed by an appropriate statistical analysis. A differential expression analysis determines whether the expression of a gene differs significantly across two or more groups of samples. A survival analysis determines whether gene expression is significantly associated with an event (such as death from disease), through comparison of KaplainMeier curves based on censored time to event data (). To facilitate data analysis, GEO provides an interactive web tool [GEO2R; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/geo2r/], which allows users to identify differentially expressed genes in GEO datasets. However, GEO2R does not support survival analysis and is designed for gene discovery rather than for evaluation of individual genes. In addition, although specialized tools have been developed to facilitate gene expression analysis by non-bioinformaticians (), there are no available tools that allow a user to evaluate whether a specific gene is differentially expressed or associated with survival in a specific GEO dataset. In this paper, we describe shinyGEO, a web-based tool for performing differential expression and survival analysis on gene expression datasets in GEO. In addition, shinyGEO produces publicationready and customizable graphics, allows for sample selection, data correction, data export for custom analyses and R code generation for reproducibility.
MethodsshinyGEO is implemented using R [https://www.r-project.org/], a free, open-source software environment for statistical computing and graphics; and shiny [http://shiny.rstudio.com/], an R package for building interactive web applications. In shinyGEO, processed gene expression datasets are downloaded from GEO using the GEOquery package (). P-values are calculated using a two-sample t-test or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) for differential expression. For survival analysis, the log-rank test is used to compare samples with high expression (e.g. top 50%) to samples with low expression (e.g. bottom 50%). Optimal cut points by P-value are identified and adjusted P-values calculated using the survMisc package (Contal and O').
Software usageAn overview of shinyGEO is provided in Supplementary Figures S1 and S2. First, the user selects the GEO accession number for a desired dataset, followed by the platform. The user can carry out a differential expression or survival analysis, and selects the gene and probe of interest. For a differential expression analysis, the user selects the two or more groups to compare. Dot plots are dynamically generated to visualize expression differences across groups, and results from the appropriate statistical analysis are displayed. For survival analysis, the user selects the survival information (i.e. the columns from the sample data containing the time to event and outcome information), and whether to use the median or optimal cut point to define high and low expression groups. The corresponding KaplanMeier curves are then dynamically generated and the statistical results displayed. For both analyses, shinyGEO supports sample selection and data correction, and graphs can be formatted with respect to color and axis labels. The user can also export the data and generate the R code used for each analysis, following best practices in scientific computing () to ensure reproducibility.
Example applicationWe demonstrate shinyGEO by repeating a recent analysis which found that high telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) expression is associated with poor disease-specific survival in bladder cancer patients (). We analyze the dataset GSE13507, which contains expression profiles for 165 primary bladder tumors and 10 normal bladder samples obtained from the Chungbuk National University Hospital (). A differential expression analysis finds that TERT expression is up-regulated in primary tumors compared to normal bladder samples, with a low foldchange (FC  1.14, P  0.013,). Following, we limit the survival analysis to only those patients with muscle-invasive tumors who did not receive chemotherapy or additional treatment (Supplementary). For our selected patients, a cancer-specific survival analysis (using the outcome column 'characteristics_ch1.9') finds that high TERT expression is associated with poor outcomes (HR  3.61, adjusted P  0.049,), consistent with the findings of. Raw data is exported (Supplementary File S1), and for reproducibility we 'Save R Code'. Within R, a notebook integrating R code and output can then be generated using the rmarkdown library (Supplementary File S2) ().
FundingThis work is supported, in part, byApplication for analyzing gene expression omnibus datasets
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
