Motivation: High-dimensional omic data derived from different technological platforms have been extensively used to facilitate comprehensive understanding of disease mechanisms and to determine personalized health treatments. Numerous studies have integrated multi-platform omic data; however, few have efficiently and simultaneously addressed the problems that arise from high dimensionality and complex correlations. Results: We propose a statistical framework of shared informative factor models that can jointly analyze multi-platform omic data and explore their associations with a disease phenotype. The common disease-associated sample characteristics across different data types can be captured through the shared structure space, while the corresponding weights of genetic variables directly index the strengths of their association with the phenotype. Extensive simulation studies demonstrate the performance of the proposed method in terms of biomarker detection accuracy via comparisons with three popular regularized regression methods. We also apply the proposed method to The Cancer Genome Atlas lung adenocarcinoma dataset to jointly explore associations of mRNA expression and protein expression with smoking status. Many of the identified biomarkers belong to key pathways for lung tumorigenesis, some of which are known to show differential expression across smoking levels. We discover potential biomarkers that reveal different mechanisms of lung tumorigenesis between light smokers and heavy smokers. Availability and Implementation: R code to implement the new method can be downloaded from
IntroductionThe success of the Human Genome Project enables genome-wide studies of various biological activities in humans and other organisms. The extensive development of high-throughput biotechnologies have made data accessible from different platforms, including RNA sequencing, copy number variation, DNA methylation and protein lysate arrays. Although vital to the progress of biomedical research, these multi-platform data impose new challenges for data analysis. In addition to high dimensionality and complex correlations within and across platforms, different types of omic data also likely have different scales and distributions (). Therefore, appropriate and effective analytical methods are desirable to extract useful information from the emerging data platforms. Integrative analysis of multi-platform data has been proposed to study the interplay within and between different levels of biological data (). A large number of statistical methods have been discussed for different applications and purposes. For example, sequential analysis (e.g. multiple concerted disruption, () confirms or refines the findings obtained from one data type by analyzing additional omic data collected from the common set of samples. Pairwise correlation of genetic variables (e.g. weighted gene correlation network analysis, ()) is used to infer molecular network interactions. Network analysis (e.g. jActiveModules ()) identifies active or aberrant subsets in a certain biological system using molecular network interactions based on graphical models. Bayesian network approaches () identify biomarkers that are associated with clinical outcomes by incorporating another type of biomarkers collected from the same samples through prior distributions. Another line of work in canonical correlation analysis (CCA) intends to identify the linear combinations of the two sets of genetic variables which have maximum correlation with each other. More recent development based on the original CCA includes sparse CCA which identifies the linear combinations of the two high-dimensional genomic data by incorporating penalty function, supervised CCA which associates the linear combinations with some clinical outcome, and multiple CCA which extends to the case of more than two datasets (). We propose to simultaneously analyze multi-platform data to detect predictive biomarkers for a response variable of interest, which is typically a disease-associated phenotype. The widely used variable selection approach aggregates genetic variables derived from different platforms as covariates in regression models for the response variable (). To address the extremely high dimensionality of the covariate space, which is much larger than the number of samples, sparsity-induced penalization methods have been commonly used. This line of work includes the L 1-penalty-based Lasso (), its improved version, adaptive Lasso (), L 1 and L 2 combined elastic net () and smoothly clipped absolute deviation (SCAD) (). The SCAD method has been shown to have appealing theoretical oracle properties (unbiasedness, sparsity and continuity) (). However, the drawbacks of regression-based methods include a limitation on the number of selected variables according to the available sample size and the incapability to detect correlated variables. To address these challenges, we propose a framework of shared informative factor models to use in integrating multiple types of omic data plus a disease-associated response variable. In contrast to the conventional factor models, we incorporate the disease phenotype information in the factor space to detect genetic variables that interact with the response variable. In addition, we assume a common structured factor across multiple data types for the purpose of detecting different levels of the important disease-associated genetic variables. The proposed framework lays the foundation for incorporating prior biological knowledge on functional pathways and networks, both within a data type and across different data types to improve the biological relevance of the results.
Methods
A framework of shared informative factor modelsWe describe a new model framework to explore associations between a disease phenotype and high-throughput genetic data generated from multiple (! 2) platforms. Herein, we focus on twoplatform data for the purpose of demonstration. Let the n  p 1 matrix X 1 and n  p 2 matrix X 2 denote two data matrices containing the intensity measurements of p 1 genetic variables obtained from platform 1 and those of p 2 genetic variables obtained from platform 2, respectively. Correspondingly, we let the length-n vector y denote the phenotypes of n subjects (e.g. smoking status, cancer subtype). The system is built upon the generalized linear models, considering exponential family of distributions for genetic variables in X 1 and X 2 (e.g. continuous measurements, count data). We can express the transformed mean functions of the expression intensities of genetic variables via canonical link functions g 1 and g 2 , respectively corresponding to X 1 and X 2 , as follows,For the demonstration, we focus on continuously measured genetic variables (e.g. gene expression, protein expression, DNA copy number), for which the identity link g 1 l  g 2 l  l is used. We also assume the genetic variables in X 1 and X 2 follow normal distributions (posterior to transformation when appropriate). The n  1 parameter vectors a 1 and a 2 respectively correspond to baseline sample effects in two sets of genetic data. The jth columns of the n  p 1 residual matrix e 1 of X 1 and the n  p 2 residual matrix e 2 of X 2 follow mean-0 normal distributions with the respective variances r 2 1j and r 2 2j. Our interest is drawn to the multiplicative terms CA and CB, which capture the associations between the phenotype and genetic variables. Our framework has two main distinctions from the conventional factor models that have similar forms. First, the n 1 parameter vector C is structured to deliver the phenotype information. In the case of a K-categorical phenotype (e.g. K levels of smoking status),with c l indicating the common effect that the subjects in the lth phenotype contribute to the associations between the phenotypes and genetic variables. Second, the same C is employed in these two models to represent the common intrinsic sample characteristics in the two sets of genetic data. The length-p 1 vector A and length-p 2 vector B contain the weights that the genetic variables contribute to the structured sample characteristics shared by the two sets of genetic data. The elements of A and B are called association scores. We call this new system shared informative factor models (SIFORM). For model identifiability, we impose P n i1 c 2 i  1. We also follow the established practice of standardizing the intensity values of each genetic variable prior to the downstream analysis.
Model estimationIn the above-described framework, the log-likelihood of the two sets of observed genetic data isTo identify important genetic variables associated with the phenotype of interest, we also impose a sparsity regularization on the elements of the parameter vectors A and B in model estimation. We adopt the SCAD penalization method (), which uses symmetric penalty functions that are non-concave on 0; 1 to simultaneously select the variables and estimate the coefficients. SCAD has been shown to have good theoretical properties and to offer promising empirical results. We obtain parameter estimates via minimizing the following objective function, which is simply the negative penalized log-likelihood,). Herein, d 1 and d 2 are the penalty tuning parameters that respectively correspond to the two sets of genetic data. We adopt the local linear approximation of Zou andfor the sparsity penalty term and find a convex function to implement the efficient majorizationminimization algorithm (). Using P d1 ja j j as an example, the local linear approximation can be expressed as P d1 ja j j % P d1 ja k j j  P 0 d1 ja k j jja j j  ja k j j;where a k j is the value of a j estimated at step k. Then the majorization function of the local linear approximated penalty isSimilarly, we can obtain the majorization function G d2 jb j j for P d2 jb j j. We have thus obtained the parameter estimates by iteratively minimizing the following objective function,At the k  1th step, we can obtain the closed-form penalized loglikelihood estimators for the elements of A and B as b a j k1  ja:All the other parameter estimates are obtained via their closed-form solutions in a straightforward manner at each step; therefore, we omit the details here. The tuning parameters k  d 1 ; d 2  are important for calibrating the goodness-of-fit for the data and model sparsity. We adopt the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) (), which is widely used in high-dimensional studies (), and defined as BIC  2l  lognp 1  p 2   df k;where df k is proportional to the summation of the number of nonzeros in b A and the number of nonzeros in b B. The pair of d 1 ; d 2  that achieves the smallest BIC value is obtained by using a twodimensional grid search over a pre-determined space. The value is typically between 0 and 10 for each tuning parameter.
Iterative algorithmWe provide the details of the iterative parameter estimation procedure in Algorithm 1. The convergence threshold e is set to be 10 5. We also learn from extensive simulations that the estimation seems to stabilize within 300 iterations. We stop the iterative procedure when either convergence is reached or 300 iterations are completed, whichever occurs first.
Simulation studiesWe conducted extensive simulations to assess the performance of the proposed SIFORM and compared its performance to several popular regularized regression methods SCAD, Lasso, adaptive Lasso (adaLasso), and two canonical correlation analysis (CCA) based methods: multiple CCA (mCCA) and penalized collaborative regression (pCollRe) (). These methods can be implemented directly using the respective R packages ncvreg, glmnet, parcor and PMA. The tuning parameters are selected by the 5-fold cross-validation procedure. We use seven simulation scenarios to study the various data generation models, inter-genetic marker dependence structures and residual variances. In scenarios 13 and 56, we consider a phenotype variable Y categorized into four groups and two high-dimensional genetic profiling matrices, X 1 and X 2. In the three penalized regression methods, all the genetic variables in X 1 and X 2 are treated as the covariates to predict the phenotype. Note that multinomial logistic regression models are used for the response variable of smoking status in four categories. For SCAD, we take the union of all the nonzero coefficients identified in three separate logistic regression models, treating the category of non-smoker as the reference group. In contrast, SIFORM conveniently uses A and B to identify the important biomarkers despite the different disease phenotypes. InIntegrating multi-platform bioinformatic dataaddition, we investigated scenarios 4 and 7 wherein integration of three bioinformatics data platforms is considered. In brief, scenarios 14 generate genetic data from model (1), and scenarios 57 simulate discrete phenotype data from multinomial logistic regression models. The data matrices X k k  1; 2; 3 in scenarios 57 and residuals e k (k  1,2,3) in scenarios 14 are simulated from multivariate mean-0 normal distributions. The corresponding variances are set to be 1 for all the multivariate normally distributed variables in scenarios 14. In scenario 6, they are sampled from a lung cancer dataset obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). In terms of the data dependence structure, the genetic variables in X 1 and X 2 are mutually independent in scenario 1; the genetic variables with nonzero coefficients are correlated with q  0:8, and 1432% of the remaining genetic variables are weakly correlated with q  0:2 in scenarios 27. Throughout all the scenarios, sparse true biomarkers that are associated with the phenotype are assumed. Additional details for the five simulation scenarios follow.We ran 100 simulations for each scenario. We report the average value and standard error of the true positive rate (TPR), true negative rate (TNR) and false discovery rate (FDR) among the top genetic variables detected that have the largest values of jAjorjBj for SIFORM, and the largest absolute values of the regression coefficients for the other methods. For scenario 3 with 100 true biomarkers, we focus on the top 10 biomarkers detected by different methods. For all the other scenarios, we focus on the top 5 biomarkers detected. We report the variable selection results in. The first four scenarios correspond to the generation of data from the shared informative factor models, considering independent and dependent genetic variables, different levels of dimensionality and different number of platforms. The simulations demonstrate the consistently superior performance of the SIFORM method compared to those of the five other methods in terms of biomarker detection accuracy across the scenarios. pCollRe shows the second best performance, especially in high-dimensional scenarios, partially because both sparsity-induced L 1-and smoothing L 2-penalties are used to obtain better-behaved estimates (). In contrast, mCCA's performance appears to be inferior and unstable in terms of TPR and FDR. Among the penalized regression methods, SCAD detects the highest number of true biomarkers while sacrificing false positives, and thus yields a high FDR. The remaining two penalized regression approaches, Lasso and adaLasso, detect fewer true biomarkers, and adaLasso produces a lower FDR than Lasso and SCAD. We also considered generating data from a logistic regression model under scenarios 5, 6 and 7, which represent different dimensionalities and numbers of platforms of genetic data. While the differences between SIFORM and the other three methods are not as large as in the first three scenarios, the advantage of using SIFORM in terms of selecting true biomarkers is still clear. In the most scenarios, SIFORM detects the most true biomarkers with the smallest FDR among all the six evaluated methods. In contrast, SCAD, Lasso and mCCA yield high FDR, implying that large numbers of trivial genetic variables are selected into the models. pCollRe is again the second best performer, in fact, it discovers more true positives than SIFORM in scenario 6, but at the sacrifice of FDR. Furthermore, we evaluated the phenotype prediction performance of SIFORM and pCollRe via cross-validation, and the result suggests that pCollRe may not be well-suited for prediction, coherent with the observation in the literature (). For simplicity, in scenario 6 we focused on the samples in the two most extreme phenotype categories y  1 versus 4. We used leave-oneout cross-validation and obtained the average misclassification rate for each dataset. To make a fair comparison, we focused on the predictive performance of the top 5 biomarkers identified by each method. The means (standard deviations) of misclassification rates of SIFORM and pCollRe are, respectively, 0.283 (0.085) and 0.409 (0.090) across 100 generated datasets. The result indicates that SIFORM also outperforms pCollRe in terms of prediction.The good behavior of the BIC method is indicated by clear convex curves, with d 1  3:4; d 2  4 chosen as the optimal tuning parameter values for this dataset. In a common scenario, we note that the results are very similar across different simulated datasets, and thus, we use the tuning parameter values obtained from a single dataset for computational consideration.
Lung cancer applicationsLung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States (). Among the major histological types of lung cancer, adenocarcinoma is the most common form in non-smokers (). We investigated the applicability of SIFORM to the TCGA lung adenocarcinoma dataset available through the data portal hosted by the National Cancer Institute (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/). Particularly, we focused on two phenotypes, smoking status and survival, to demonstrate the applicability of SIFORM and explore new molecular biomarkers that may facilitate understanding of lung cancer.
The association of biomarkers with smoking statusCigarette smoking is the most important risk factor for lung cancer; however, approximately 25% of lung cancer cases are not attributable to tobacco use. Striking differences in the epidemiological, clinical and molecular characteristics of lung cancer have been demonstrated when the cancer arises in a non-smoker versus a smoker (). This suggests that the lung cancers are likely caused by separate biological mechanisms for smokers and nonsmokers. Substantial studies have identified the genes and pathways that contribute to lung tumorigenesis in smokers (e.g. EGFR, KRAS and TP53) (), and these discoveries have led to the development of targeted therapies (e.g. EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib; anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab) (). However, most of the studies have analyzed genetic profiles in a single assay, and the etiology of lung tumors that arise in non-smokers remains unclear (). Therefore, it is worthwhile to integrate multi-platform bioinformatic data to discover predictive biomarkers that are associated with the smoking status of patients diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma.
Data descriptionThe TCGA lung adenocarcinoma dataset includes samples from 225 patients, from whom expression intensities of 20 531 genes and 160 proteins were measured using the respective platforms of Illumina RNA sequencing and reverse-phase protein array (RPPA) technology. The variable of smoking status has four categories. Among the 225 patients represented in the samples, there were 49 with the status of 'current smoker', 86 with 'current reformed smoker for < or  15 years', 58 with 'current reformed smoker for >15 years' and 32 with 'lifelong non-smoker'. The gene expression data were normalized using the RNA-seq by ExpectationMaximization approach () and logarithm-transformed prior to downstream analysis. The protein concentration data were also normalized by subtracting the median, both column-wise and row-wise ().
A subsample studyThe six methods we investigated aim to simultaneously analyze genetic variables to detect predictive biomarkers for a given phenotype. We were further interested in investigating the capabilities of the methods to detect biomarkers that are likely marginally associated with the phenotype, using individual marker tests as the reference. We subsampled 300 genes and 100 proteins from all the genetic variables. Because the truth is unknown in a real data study, we treated 30 genes as the true biomarkers; these genes were identified via gene shaving () or with the smallest P-values obtained from a univariate F-test. The remaining 270 'null' genes are genes that have the largest P-values obtained from the univariate F-test. Among the 100 proteins, 10 were treated as truly important as determined by gene shaving and univariate test results. The other 90 'null' proteins are proteins with the largest P-values based on the univariate F-test. We report the results of our implementation of all six methods in(a), which lists the TPR, TNR and FDR values. Compared to the other methods, SIFORM has superior performance in terms of accurate biomarker detection. pCollRe has the second highest true positive rate among the remaining methods. Lasso performs the worst in both true and false biomarker detection, while SCAD and adaLasso have similar performances, with discovery rates better than Lasso. These results are consistent with the simulation results demonstrated in the previous section.
Full data analysisWe implemented the following steps to filter out trivial genes in the RNA-seq data. First, we removed 5% of the genes that had extremely small coefficient of variation values, where the coefficient of variation is defined as the ratio of the standard deviation to the absolute value of the mean of the gene expression intensities. Second, we removed genes for which the difference between the top 90% quantile and the bottom 10% quantile was no larger than 0.8. Then, we filtered out the genes with P-value ! 0:03 based on a univariate analysis of variance F-test. This procedure retained 3707 genes for further analysis. We implemented all six methods for the integrative analysis of the genomic and proteomic data. To determine the tuning parameter values in SIFORM, we performed a grid search over 4; 14 for d 1 and 1; 10 for d 2. We obtained d 1 ; d 2   5:2; 4 as the local optimal values. SIFORM identified 17 genes that had nonzero coefficients in A: ATP13A4, BANK1, C20orf103, C5orf41, C7, DBF4B, FAM65C, LOC100132707, MACROD2, PCDHAC2, RSPO2, STOM, THOC4, TLR3, TMEM173, UGT1A4 and USP53. SIFORM also detected 13 proteins based on B: 4E-BP1, 4EBP1_pT70, Akt_pS473, caspase-7_cleavedD198, Chk1, Chk2_pT68, EGFR_pY1068, JNK2, PCNA, PDK1_pS241, Ret_pY905, stathmin and tuberin. We performed hierarchical clustering of the samples based on the Pearson correlation distance and applied Ward's linkage method to the selected genes and proteins. The clustering heatmaps using the 17 genes and 13 proteins, respectively, are displayed in. In both panels, we observe that most 'non-smokers' (yellow) and 'current reformed smokers for >15 years' (orange) are clustered together. In addition, most of the 49 'current smokers' (blue) are mixed with some 'current reformed smokers for < 15 years' (green). However, the data for some of the 86 recently reformed smokers (green) behave differently from the rest of the group; these samples enlarge the overall difference between the green and blue groups. The observations can be somewhat reflected from the estimate of C  0:064; 0:074; 0:015; 0:104. The close values c 1 ; c 2  between 'non-smokers' and 'current reformed smokers for >15 years' indicate similarity between the major genetic profiling characteristics of these two categories of smoking status. The relatively large difference between c 1 ; c 2 ; c 3 and c 4 manifests possible genetic profiling variations between (roughly) non-smokers, recent smokersIntegrating multi-platform bioinformatic dataand current smokers. In particular, the most different genetic profiles are those of non-smokers compared to current smokers, which agrees with our intuitive expectation. We can also visually see that the most identified biomarkers show clear differential expression between light smoking and heavy smoking. For instance, the genes contained in the first 13 rows of the heatmap in the upper panel have lower expression levels in heavy smokers but higher expression levels in light smokers, and the bottom four genes show the opposite expression pattern. As an example, gene UGT1A4 (the 14th gene in the upper panel of) appears to be up-regulated in the heavy smokers but down-regulated in the light smokers. Extensive evidence shows that UGT1A4 can be induced by cigarette constituents (). We summarize the comparisons among the six methods in terms of variable selection as follows. @BULLET SCAD, Lasso, adaLasso, pCollRe and mCCA identify 60, 22, 33, 27 and 12 genes, respectively. SCAD detects more genes than the other methods; however, it likely yields the largest number of false positives, as indicated by the simulation studies. No common gene is identified across the six methods. This implies an ongoing challenge for genetic studies of the association between smoking and lung cancer, which is also reflected in the very limited medical literature in this area of research. SCAD, Lasso and mCCA, all of which are known to produce high false positives, identified 5 genes in common. AdaLasso and pCollRe, which are known to have appealing empirical and theoretical properties (), identified very few genes that overlap with those identified by the other comparative methods but substantially overlap with those identified by SIFORM (13 by adaLasso and 10 by pCollRe). @BULLET In terms of proteomic profiling, SCAD, Lasso, adaLasso and mCCA identified very few proteins, 3, 0, 1 and 1, respectively, that are associated with smoking status. In contrast, our proposed method, SIFORM detected 13 proteins and pCollRe detected 10. SIFORM and pCollRe identified 9 proteins in common, which could be more convincing due to the good performance of pCollRe in simulation studies. Next, we studied the biological relevance of the genes and proteins detected by SIFORM. Conducting pathway analysis with a web-based tool, Pathway Commons (http://www.pathwaycom mons.org/pcviz/), we discovered that 13 genes likely interact with each other through functional pathways and networks. This is displayed in(a), where these genes are highlighted in green.The important miRNAs associated with a common pathway are shown in red. The 8 detected proteins appear to be in several common pathways, as highlighted in green in(b). Several of them are known to be associated with lung cancer. EGFR, which was detected in our study, has been found to play a key role in lung tumorigenesis. Approximately 10% of non-smallcell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cases in the U.S. and 35% in East Asia have tumor-associated EGFR mutations. EGFR mutations are more often found in tumors from non-smokers with adenocarcinoma histology (http://www.mycancergenome.org/content/disease/lung-can cer/egfr/;), which supports the biological relevance of our finding. Activated EGFR can regulate the activity of another detected gene, PCNA, and trigger its important downstream signaling pathway AKT/PI3K (). PCNA, an index of tumor cell proliferation, has high expression in poorly differentiated lung adenocarcinomas (). Another detected biomarker, AKT1, is an isoform of AKT (). The signal transduction pathway AKT/PI3K is involved in the regulation of cell proliferation, survival, differentiation, adhesion, motility and invasion. Aberrations of this pathway have been implicated in lung cancer development and progression (). Most of the proteins selected by SIFORM are associated with the tumorigenesis of NSCLC through the AKT pathway, as shown by(b). First, the activated AKT pathway regulates tuberin (TSC2), which inhibits the mTOR nutrient signaling input through the tuberous sclerosis complex. mTOR has been correlated with NSCLC tumor progression (). Second, the activated AKT phosphorylates CHEK1, an integral component of the DNA damage response. The overexpression of CHEK1 is associated with poor tumor differentiation and significantly worse patient survival in NSCLC (). In addition, activated AKT induces the phosphorylation and inactivation of EIF4EBP1, and the increased phosphorylation of EIF4EBP1 is found to be associated with progression of several types of cancer, including lung adenocarcinoma (). In addition to EGFR, we identified another activator of the AKT/PI3K pathwaysRET. The alteration of RET has key roles in cell growth, differentiation and survival, and has been associated with NSCLC (). In addition to PI3K/AKT, RET signaling activates the MAPK family, including MAPK9 (JNK2) (). Some studies have found that MAPK9 is frequently activated in NSCLC (). In summary, EGFR and its downstream PI3K/AKT pathway are among the most important molecular therapeutic targets for NSCLC (). Existing studies suggest differences in EFGR mutations between smokers and nonsmokers, and thus implicate the AKT/PI3K pathway and its downstream targets as playing nontrivial roles that differ in patients who develop lung cancer and have a history of smoking versus those who have never smoked. In contrast, other methods have identified only one protein, collagen VI, which is an extracellular matrix protein. Although collagen VI has been correlated with tumor progression, its role in NSCLC is rarely discussed (). Cross-validation: We evaluated the prediction performance of each method used in simulation. For simplicity, we focused on the 81 patients whose habits placed them in the two most extreme categories related to smoking: 49 who were current smokers and 32 who were lifelong non-smokers. We used leave-one-out crossvalidation to predict the smoking status of each patient. This procedure was repeated 81 times to obtain the overall misclassification rate. To make a fair comparison, we focused on the predictive performance of the top 5 biomarkers with the largest absolute coefficient estimates. The misclassification rates of SIFORM, SCAD, Lasso, adaLasso, mCCA and pCollRe are respectively 0.407, 0.469, 0.593, 0.556, 0.605 and 0.593. These results indicate that SIFORM has the best prediction accuracy. The overall high misclassification rates across the six methods might arise from the limited sample sizes and the recognized difficulty of differentiating the genetic mechanisms of lung cancer attributable to smoking versus not smoking.
The association of biomarkers with survivalThe 5-year survival rate for lung cancer is only approximately 15%, and the conventional treatments (e.g. chemotherapy) have limited impact on improving survival of advanced NSCLC. Biological functions of biomarkers may play important roles in disease formation and progression. Therefore, identification of such biomarkers can likely advance targeted cancer therapies towards the direction of personalized medicine (). The integrative analysis of multi-platform bioinformatic data aims at understanding the underlying relationship between survival and genetic activities at different levels in patients with lung adenocarcinoma. We investigate the same set of gene intensity and protein expression data as described in Section 4.1. The only difference is that the survival phenotype is considered here. We divide 219 patients into two groups (Long-Term Survival (LTS) and Short-Term Survival (STS)) according to the length of survival time. By using an extreme discordant phenotype design (), we define the top 25% (55 patients, surviving >896 days) of the patients as LTSs and the bottom 65% (29 patients, surviving <593 days) as STSs. We include these 84 patients in data analysis.
A subsample studyWe again subsampled 300 genes and 100 proteins, among which 30 genes and 10 proteins are selected as the true biomarkers. The sampling and selection procedure is described in Section 4.1.2. We report the results obtained by the six methods in(b). Compared to the other methods, SIFORM shows superior performance in terms of biomarker detection accuracy, in particular, TPR. pCollRe performs the second best, while Lasso produces the smallest true negative rate. The variables detected by each method are all the true biomarkers (FDR  0) for this particular case. Overall, the result is also consistent with the simulation studies.
Full data analysisWe filtered out trivial genes in the RNA-seq dataset in the similar fashion as described in Section 4.1.3. This procedure results in 2529 genes included in the following data analysis. We implemented all the six methods. For SIFORM, the tuning parameters d 1 ; d 2  are set to (4.7, 1.9) using the BIC method. Consequently, SIFORM identified 12 proteins: 4E-BP1, CD49b, Cyclin_B1, ER-alpha, ERalpha_pS118, Fibronectin, INPP4B, LCN2a, Napsin-A, PAI-1, PCNA and TTF1. In comparison, SCAD, Lasso, adaLasso, mCCA and pCollRe detected 1, 1, 1, 1 and 4 proteins, respectively; these five methods identified only one common protein, estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha. The prognostic values of ER expressions in lung cancer have been extensively discussed. ER proteins, including ER-alpha, is found to be associated with a poorer prognosis among NSCLC Integrating multi-platform bioinformatic datapatients (). This protein is also discovered by SIFORM. We also notice that the most proteins identified by SIFORM are found biologically relevant to lung cancer prognosis. 4E-BP1 is a eIF4E binding protein, which is known to be related to reduced survival in a variety of cancers including lung adenocarcinoma. High 4E-BP1 expression has been found to be correlated with worse overall survival of lung cancer patients (). Cyclin B1 plays a key role in the G2-M phase transition of the cell cycle, the elevated expression level of which has been shown as an indicator of poor prognosis in NSCLC (). Fibronectin, which plays an important role in cell adhesion, migration, growth and differentiation by mediating cellular interactions with the extracellular matrix, stimulates NSCLC cell growth and survival through activation of Akt/mTOR/p70S6K and inactivation of LKB1/AMPK signal pathways (). Napsin-A and TTF1 have been extensively studied as the correlated prognostic factors for lung cancer patients' survival. Patients with high expression levels of TTF-1 and Napsin A have better survival rates than those with low levels of expression (). Finally, high expression levels of PAI-1 and PCNA proteins indicate a shorter survival for patients diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma (). In terms of gene expression profile, SCAD, Lasso, adaLasso, mCCA and pCollRe identified 24, 40, 17, 215 and 29 genes, respectively, compared to none detected by SIFORM. However, no common genes are identified across these five methods. Moreover, we observe that only eight genes are identified by any four methods simultaneously, but none of them has been reported to be correlated with lung cancer survival in the literature. We also used the KaplanMeier method to further investigate if the selected proteins can differentiate patients in terms of length of survival time. Specifically, we fit logistic regression to the binary survival phenotype ('STS' versus 'LTS') treating the 12 proteins as the covariates, and then call the linear prediction value, based on the estimated coefficients, as the single score for a patient. Each patient is reclassified into two subgroups (called 'long-term survivors' versus 'short-term survivors') based on their calculated scores by using 0.5 as the cutoff. We display the KaplanMeier curves of the two subgroups based on the patients' original survival data in, which clearly shows the distinctive survival curves between the two subgroups (P-value  0.045). This result suggests that the 12 proteins selected by SIFORM can potentially be considered as prognostic biomarkers for lung adenocarcinoma. Furthermore, we evaluated the prediction performance of all the methods via leave-one-out cross-validation. The misclassification rates of SIFORM, SCAD, Lasso, adaLasso, mCCA and pCollRe are, respectively, 0.322, 0.369, 0.631, 0.560, 0.417 and 0.607. SIFORM again outperforms all the others in terms of prediction accuracy for the survival phenotype.
DiscussionWe have proposed a generalized statistical framework SIFORM to jointly model high-throughput omic data produced by multiple platforms and to discover associations between these genetic variables and a disease-associated phenotype. The new method conveniently produces direct rankings of genetic variables in terms of the strength of association with the response variable. Extensive simulation studies demonstrated the superior performance of SIFORM in terms of biomarker detection accuracy, regardless of inter-variable correlations, compared to the performances of other penalized variable selection methods. Biological meaningfulness of the proposed method is supported by two TCGA lung adenocarcinoma studies that investigate the association of the integrated mRNA expression and RPPA protein concentration data and two phenotypes, smoking status and discretized survival. In particular, we discovered that most of the identified proteins either belong to known key pathways for NSCLC tumorigenesis or are prognostic biomarkers in NSCLC. We also discovered some proteins that are potentially associated with the different ways in which NSCLC develops in smokers versus non-smokers. The proposed framework appears to fit the lung cancer data reasonably well. However, a more comprehensive version of this framework can be developed to improve the goodness of fit of the model if appropriate. A possible solution is to include a nonparametric mean component, for example, with the structure of singular value decomposition, and use model selection methods (e.g. BIC) to determine the rank of the additional component. This idea requires extensive investigation and, therefore, is deferred to our future research. Another ongoing research project is to modify SIFORM by incorporating the prior biological pathway information to improve biomarker detection accuracy. Specifically, further regularization of the parameters, for example, a graphic model based penalization method (), will be investigated.
Funding
Kaplan-Meier Curves for Subgroups Divided by Selected Proteins
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
X.An et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
