SIMToolbox is an open-source, modular set of functions for MATLAB equipped with a user-friendly graphical interface and designed for processing two-dimensional and three-dimensional data acquired by structured illumination microscopy (SIM). Both optical sectioning and super-resolution applications are supported. The software is also capable of maximum a posteriori probability image estimation (MAP-SIM), an alternative method for reconstruction of structured illumination images. MAP-SIM can potentially reduce reconstruction artifacts, which commonly occur due to refractive index mismatch within the sample and to imperfections in the illumination. Availability and implementation: SIMToolbox, example data and the online documentation are freely accessible at
IntroductionIn structured illumination microscopy (SIM), a sequence of images is acquired, each taken with a different position of an illumination pattern in a fluorescence microscope but without a mask in the detection path (). Subsequent processing of the raw data is required to reconstruct the final image. Current SIM methods include optical sectioning microscopy (OS-SIM) () and super-resolution SIM (SR-SIM) (). Several different algorithms can be used to process SIM data (). SIMToolbox offers a set of MATLAB functions for processing both OS-SIM and SR-SIM data according to a variety of methods. SIMToolbox can also apply an alternative method for processing the data, maximum a posteriori probability estimation (MAP-SIM) (). The tools can be accessed from a user-friendly graphical user interface. Our goal is to offer a collection of processing methods, which were developed based on extensive testing with real data. The software can be used to process data acquired by commercial SIM systems; however, some of the tools and documentation provided are meant for researchers developing their own systems. In addition to the software, we provide example data, a user's guide and a detailed description of the implemented methods and algorithms. Please refer to the Supplementary Note for further details.
Features and methods
OS-SIMSIMToolbox can process OS-SIM data using homodyne detection (), maximumminimum projection () or several forms of scaled subtraction (). When using scaled subtraction, it is necessary to have knowledge of the illumination pattern positions
SR-SIMSIMToolbox can process SR-SIM data using the Heintzmann Gustafsson method (). Briefly, the image processing steps are as follows:1. Forward fast Fourier transformation (FFT) of the raw data. 2. Identification of peaks in the frequency spectrum. The software can accomplish this with high accuracy using spatial calibration methods () or using spot detection methods (OvesnytOvesnyt al., 2014). 3. Shifting of spectral components in frequency space. 4. Apodizing the frequency spectrum according to one of several possible functions. SIMToolbox offers several apodizing functions including a standard incoherent model, cosine bell, Butterworth, triangle and application of the Lukosz bound (). 5. Inverse FFT with an adjustable inverse filter parameter to recover an image with resolution beyond the conventional limit.
MAP-SIMAn alternative method for processing SR-SIM data is the MAP-SIM method introduced by our group (Luke et al., 2014a, b). Here, image details beyond the diffraction limit are estimated by maximum a posteriori restoration methods, and optically sectioned, conventional resolution image information is processed by homodyne detection. The two components are then combined by spectral merging in the frequency domain. The result is then apodized, and an inverse FFT is performed to recover the final image. Our experience has been that MAP-SIM can, in some cases, produce super-resolution images with fewer artifacts than the HeintzmannGustafsson method. Such artifacts seem to be primarily caused by problems with the sample, especially refractive index mismatch between the mounting medium and immersion fluid. Reconstruction artifacts can also be caused by high noise levels, by poor SIM pattern contrast or other imperfections in the illumination or by the use of inappropriate parameters in the reconstruction process. For example, we have found that the choice of apodizing and inverse filter parameters (SR-SIM steps 4 and 5 above) have a large impact on the results.shows a comparison of some of the various methods supported by SIMToolbox, acquired using the methods introduced by our group (). Please see the Supplementary Note for more details about this SIM experiment.
SummarySIMToolbox is open-source software for processing SIM data. This allows researchers building their own systems to process their data using a unique set of tools and concepts. The software also offers features not currently present in commercially available software, making it a useful choice for reconstructing super-resolution images acquired with commercial equipment.
FundingThis work was supported by the UCCS center for the BioFrontiers Institute and by the CTU (SGS14/148/OHK3/2T/13). T.L. acknowledges a SCIEX fellowship (project code 13.183).SIMToolbox
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
P.Kek et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
