Motivation: Similarities in core residue packing provide evidence for divergence or convergence not reported using other methods. Results: We apply a new method for rapid structure comparison based on Simplicial Neighborhood Analysis of Protein Packing (SNAPP) to the diverse structural classification of proteins (SCOP) α/β-class of protein folds. The procedure identifies inter-residue packing motifs shared by protein pairs from different folds. A threshold of 0.67 Å RMSD for all atoms of corresponding residues ensures inclusion of only highly significant similarities comparable with those observed for identical catalytic residues in homologues. Many tertiary packing motifs are shared among the three classical Rossmannoid folds, as well as thousands of other motifs that occur in at least two distinct folds. Merging of neighboring packing motifs facilitated recognition of larger, recurrent substructures or cores. The anti-codon-binding domain of an archeal aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase (aaRS) was discovered to possess a packed core in which eight identical amino acid residues are within 0.55 Å RMSD of the comparable structure in the FixJ receiver, a member of the Rossmannoid family that also includes the CheY signaling protein and flavodoxin-like proteins. Further investigation identified close variants of this core in five other Rossmannoid folds, including a functionally relevant core in Class Ia aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Although it is possible that the two essentially identical cores in the ProRS anti-codon-binding domain and the FixJ receiver converged to the same structure, the consensus core obtained from the structural and sequence alignments suggests that all the implicated protein folds descended from a simpler ancestral protein in which this core provided nucleotide binding and proto-allosteric functions.
INTRODUCTIONDemonstrating structural similarities between proteins has long provided the initial evidence for common structural motifs * To whom correspondence should be addressed. representing evolutionary divergence or convergence. Most approaches rely on comparing the arrangement of secondary structures or other local substructures in 3D (;). Considerably less development has been devoted to identifying more precise structural details. Comparison methods that focus on precise arrangements of amino acid residues are usually used to identify catalytic, ion binding and small molecule binding sites (). Often, the aim is to recognize similarities across distinct protein folds for function prediction or active-site comparisons among homologous protein structures (). Such atomic level comparisons have generally not been extended to features outside active sites. Yet, as distantly related proteins with different folds usually have substantial active-site differences, comparing structural features outside the active sites may yield more definitive evidence for divergence from a common ancestor for proteins with specific sub-structural motifs. Central to the present work is identification of tertiary contact motifs found in pairs of proteins from at least two different folds. The method identifies recurrent tertiary contacts between protein secondary structure elements. Similarities are observed at the atomic level of detail where conformations of individual amino acid residues are repeated in similarly packed arrangements of side chains on the secondary structure faces. In conventional analyses, the most regularly repeated features of tertiary contacts observed are residue pairs separated as (i, i + 2) in -strands, and as (i, i + 3) and (i, i + 4) on the surface of -helices (). In this work, these residue pairs will be referred to as secondary structure-coupled residues (SCRs). SCRs yield 'knobs-and-holes' () that form the close-packed interfaces between secondary structure elements. The regular spacing in sequence and in 3D of SCRs leads to preferred orientations for the secondary structures in 3D that have been observed in similar protein structures. Results presented here demonstrate that tertiary, i.e. non-sequence local arrangements of residues interacting at the interfaces of secondary structure elements yield evolutionary clues that cannot be obtained by comparing one-dimensional motifs. We analyze the structural classification of protein (SCOP) /class of proteins, in which   motifs are repeated to form layered sandwich structures with helices on both sides of a central, parallel -sheet. The largest related superfamily of proteins in this
S.Cammer and C.W.Carterclass is the Rossmannoids, which comprises 12 different folds presumed to be present in the last common ancestor (LCA) of all organisms (). Many motifs have been identified here that connect the three classical Rossmannoid folds, as well as the others, and many more motifs have been discovered that are shared by at least two different folds in the /-class. A large, interesting and widely shared motif is a core of eight residues linking an -helix to three parallel -strands in flavodoxinlike (Rossmannoid) fold members, FixJ and CheY, and in the anti-codon-binding domain of Class II prolyl-and glycyl-tRNA synthetases and the accessory -subunit of mitochondrial DNA polymerase . These two fold families have not been previously identified as possessing such detailed similarity. Interestingly, this core is partially represented in five other Rossmannoid folds, including Class I aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, where it appears also to serve an allosteric function (). The prevalence of this motif in proteins that bind to nucleotides, and the presumptive functional importance in Class I aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, suggest that a single ancestral protein may have diverged to form the Rossmannoids and the anti-codonbinding domain. As the Rossmannoids diverged before the LCA of all organisms, the detected core similarity would represent one of the most ancient protein structural modules yet identified.
METHODS
DatabaseFive classes from the SCOP 1.73 database guided assembly of a nearexhaustive collection of representative protein structures from the Protein Data Bank (). One protein structure was selected for each species represented and for every domain in the SCOP , , /,  +  and multi-domain proteins classes. In all, 11 610 fold representatives were compiled from 9197 structures in SCOP.
Structure representation and packing decompositionAll structures were represented by a single-point per residue based on sidechain centroids. Tetrahedral packing simplices were identified using SNAPP (), which uses Delaunay tessellation to decompose the set of side-chain centroids into non-overlapping tetrahedra where four residues form nearest neighbors. Each four-body contact was represented by combining the single-letter codes in sequence order with the three distances of sequence separation of the residues along the chain. Distances used were 2, 3 and 4 for SCRs, and L for distances greater than four residues of separation. For example, IILV_2_L_L refers to a Delaunay simplex composed of residues 151I, 153I, 165L and 176V. A four-body pattern that includes at least one SCR is referred to here as Secondary structure-Coupled Residues And Packing Environment (SCRAPE). SCRAPEs constitute elemental links between secondary structures and are therefore elementary tertiary packing motifs. SCRAPEs common to at least two different folds were screened to identify packing arrangements within 0.67  RMSD for all atoms. This degree of similarity is comparable with similarities in serasphis catalytic triads among homologous trypsin-like serine proteases ().
Motif findingSCRAPEs repeated in protein structures from two different folds initially were compared geometrically using tetrahedra defined by connecting side-chain centroids. Motifs were identified and analyzed using the following workflow:(1) SCRAPEs, i.e. residue side chain centroid tetrahedra, are identified in all protein structures in the database using SNAPP based on Delaunay tetrahedralization.(2) Tetrahedra with identical residue types and sequence spacing found in pairs of structures from different folds are superimposed and compared.(3) When all-atom RMSD for the four residues in a tetrahedron is <0.67 , the tetrahedron is considered to be a motif shared by both structures.(4) When neighboring motifs are identified in the same structure pair, these motifs are combined to form a composite motif linking the two structures.(5) All motifs linking structures in different fold pairs are tabulated and used for generating similarity networks that graph motif distribution of among different folds in the database.Network edges were drawn based on various cut-offs for number of residues shared. Many of these structure similarity networks were generated and visualized for subsets of the data. Superimpositions of hundreds of structure pairs were visualized directly.
RESULTSProtein structures from the SCOP /-class were analyzed for SCRAPEs in recurring packing motifs that might help discriminate between evolutionary divergence and convergence. There were 32 180 instances of protein structure pairs from different folds possessing SCRAPE pairs that were within 0.67  RMSD for all atoms. SCRAPES were combined to form composite motifs, revealing a total of 18 107 similarities between protein pairs from distinct folds in the /-class. The overall motif distribution can be visualized by drawing a graph where edges represent the highly significant structural similarities shared by two protein structures.illustrates the protein structure similarity network obtained for the SCOP /-class. The network reveals many precise similarities between proteins from different folds, suggesting many evolutionary connections between members of the /-class. The most prominent feature of the / similarity network is a sub-structure formed from edges connecting the three classical Rossmannoid folds defined in SCOP: Class 2NAD(P)-binding Rossmann; Class 3FAD/NAD(P)-binding domains; Class 4 nucleotide-binding domains ().shows 1841 connections between c.2 and c.3, 266 connections between c.2 and c.4 and 285 connections between c.3 and c.4. Each edge represents similarity of at least four residues between fold representatives. The most significant similarities can be observed in graphs that impose a minimum threshold of similar residues.shows a graph representing the). of comparison used here can reveal relationships among proteins that have diverged to the point of having distinct folds, as well as possibly identifying cases of convergence to a common motif.Residues comprising cores shown in2
Rossmannoid folds share anti-codon-binding domain
S.Cammer and C.W.Carter
Rossmannoid folds share anti-codon-binding domainstructure resolutions and RMSDs. Despite the stringent cut-off, only two structures infailed to exhibit this motif. Pre-computed multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) were obtained from the conserved domain representatives at NCBI using the structure sequences as queries to determine the consensus core positions. Consensus sequences are shown in. Most positions followed the structures inclosely, although some positions were represented by nearly equal numbers of similar amino acid types in the MSAs.(iv) The motif at the N-terminus of the Rossmann fold has independently emerged as having important nucleotide-binding and proto-allosteric functionality. The widespread occurrence of this motif is especially interesting in light of its consensus association with nucleotide-binding functions and its likely allosteric behavior (). Anti-codon binding by the ProRS domain leads to structural rearrangement that is likely communicated to the active site (). Structural changes in the FixJ motif upon phosphorylation of D54 complement the rearrangement of F106 associated with its activation for transcriptional regulation (), and a similar change occurs in the bacterial chemotaxis response regulator, CheY (). The homologous motif in Class I tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase functions in molecular switching that accompanies both induced fit and catalysis (). Mutation (i.e. of F37I) exerts long-range effects on the relative stability of different TrpRS conformational states and reduces the catalytic contribution of the Mg 2+ ion ().
The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS (i) Four-body simplices afford a valuable extension of graph theoretic applications from active site configurations to a far broader class of evolutionary problems: SNAPP detects precisely repeated structural details in many proteins from a nearly exhaustive representation of protein structures in the SCOP / class. The similarities indicate either evolutionary divergence or convergence. Although convergence cannot be ruled out, the N-terminal location and the coincidence of primary, secondary and tertiary structural similarities (Table 1; Fig. 2A) highlighted herebetween classical Rossmannoids in the protein structure similarity networkare most naturally interpreted in terms of an early adaptive radiation and hence of divergent evolution. This interpretation is reinforced (Shakhnovich et al., 2003) by the fact that divergence could have been driven by the adaptive radiation of the same primordial functions of the core motifnucleotide (phosphate) binding and conformational switching (Fig. 2B) shared by descendant Rossmannoid folds. (ii) Construction of composite packing motifs involving elemental links between secondary structures affords a new metric for ancient protein phylogeny: any core motif identified by our procedure implicitly comprises many bona fide examples of divergent evolution represented in the MSAs belonging to each fold family. Importantly, there is less variation between the motifs in different fold families in Figure 1C than is evident within single fold families (i.e. the ArgRS and TrpRS core motifs in Table 1). Comparison of the core motif in ArgRS and TrpRS illustrates that using a strict threshold for RMSD and residue identity for identification helps assure significance of the motifs identified, especially in the face of considerable variation evident in motif instances within consensus superfamilies. (iii)One eight-residue motif, in particular, links the N-terminal  cross-over to a downstream -strand especially frequently in the Rossmannoid family: common amino acids in all seven topologies are consistently reinforced by the associated MSAs, raising the possibility that at some time before the LCA, a small ancestral protein with this N-terminal  cross-over connection of 3040 amino acids, tied to a downstream -strand, diverged to eventually form all Rossmannoids including the Class I aminoacyltRNA synthetases, as well as the anti-codon-binding domain of Class II aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases for proline and glycine, and the accessory -subunit of the mitochondrial DNA polymerase  (Kaguni, 2004). This example, therefore, shows that examining precisely repeated inter-residue packing arrangements using an SNAPP-based bioinformatics approach can lead to consistent and novel inferences about evolutionarily divergent and/or convergent motifs shared by proteins with similar but distinct folds.
