SmashCommunity is a stand-alone metagenomic annotation and analysis pipeline suitable for data from Sanger and 454 sequencing technologies. It supports state-of-the-art software for essential metagenomic tasks such as assembly and gene prediction. It provides tools to estimate the quantitative phylogenetic and functional compositions of metagenomes, to compare compositions of multiple metagenomes and to produce intuitive visual representations of such analyses. Availability: SmashCommunity source code and documentation are available at
INTRODUCTIONMetagenomics allows the culture-free characterization of natural and host-associated microbial communities and provides an understanding of their structure, dynamics and functionality as well as the environmental factors that shape them (). Although the volume of metagenomic data being deposited to public repositories is increasing exponentially () and more large-scale studies are underway (), there are still no standards for experimental and computational methods required to analyze such datasets (), making it hard to compare results from these studies. Web-servers such as CAMERA (), IMG/M () and MG-RAST () host published metagenomic datasets and enable users to perform additional and comparative analysis on them. However, there is an imminent need for stand-alone computational pipelines that enable in-house analysis of new metagenomic datasets using standardized methods and comparison of datasets from different environments. MG-RAST and the MEGAN stand-alone tool () perform functional and phylogenetic analyses of metagenomes. However, they do not estimate quantitative abundances as they simply count the reads mapping to known genes or speciesa measure strongly affected by gene length and genome size. They also do not assemble metagenomic reads and are thus unable to identify
FEATURESSmashCommunity can analyze sequences generated by Sanger and 454 sequencing technologies. It provides optimized parameter sets for Arachne () and Celera () for metagenome assembly, and GeneMark () and MetaGene () for predicting protein coding genes on metagenomes (see Supplementary Notes). Assembly or gene prediction performed outside of SmashCommunity can also be loaded into the repository using ACE and GFF files. SmashCommunity includes scripts for downstream analysis of datasets. They can generate intuitive tree-based visualizations of the results using the batch access API of the interactive Tree of Life (iTOL) web-tool (). For example, samples can be phylogenetically characterized (i) using best BLAST hitsto microbial reference genomes above taxonomic rank specific sequence similarity thresholds, or (ii) by identifying reads containing 16S rRNA sequences () and classifying them (). Quantitative phylogenetic profiles (relative abundances) are then calculated more accurately by counting the reads and correcting for genome size or 16S rRNA gene copy number variation. These profiles could be uploaded to the iTOL website, browsed online, downloaded and automatically post-processed to generate useful visual representations (). Proteincoding genes can be annotated using BLAST-based homology to orthologous groups from eggNOG () and KEGG pathway () databases and functional profiles are estimated using read abundance after normalizing for gene length. SmashCommunity can also compare multiple metagenomes using these profiles, cluster them based on a relative entropy-based distance measure suitable for comparing such quantitative profiles, perform bootstrap analysis of the clustering and generate visual representation of the clustering results (). Several of the analysis tasks in SmashCommunity can be performed on data from SmashCell and vice versa. Documentation for the full set of features is available on SmashCommunity website.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. operons and multidomain genes in low or medium complexity metagenomes. Finally, these tools do not have a modular, open source structure allowing users to plug in alternative tools for the various steps in metagenome analysis, nor do they provide the advantages of a locally installed, queryable database containing all raw analysis results (see Supplementary Table 2 for detailed comparison of metagenomic analysis tools). To address these issues we have developed SmashCommunity (Simple Metagenomics Analysis SHell for microbial communities) to annotate shotgun metagenomes with inbuilt tools for quantitative and comparative analyses. 2 DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION SmashCommunity shares design principles and routines with SmashCell. (Harrington et al., 2010), a complementary framework for the analysis of high-throughput single cell-amplified microbial genomes. It is written in Perl with modular architecture, welldefined inter-modular interfaces and a locally installed database (Supplementary Figs S1 and S2). Each task in metagenomic analysis, such as sequence assembly or gene prediction, is implemented as a module that is a wrapper around a software program that implements this task. This design of independent modules with common interfaces supports multiple choices for each task and enables replacement of programs with better alternatives when available. SmashCommunity comes with built-in support for current stateof-the-art programs that are publicly available (see Supplementary Notes) and additional programs can easily be incorporated.
The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org 2977 at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
