DNA methylation is a major epigenetic modification in human cells. Illumina HumanMethylation27 BeadChip makes it possible to quantify the methylation state of 27 578 loci spanning 14 495 genes. We developed a non-parametric normalization method to correct the spatial background noise in order to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. The prediction performance of the proposed method was assessed on three fully methylated samples and three fully unmethylated DNA samples. We demonstrate that the spatial normalization outperforms BeadStudio to predict the methylation state of a given locus.
INTRODUCTIONDNA methylation is a major epigenetic modification that regulates transcription by gene silencing and have a role in the protection of chromosomal integrity. Methylation occurs in cytosines which precede guanines in dinucleotide called CpGs. Illumina HumanMethylation27 BeadChip () is a valuable technology for genome-wide screen of DNA methylation. As any microarray technology, BeadChip suffers from spatial artifact that requires a correction in order to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. To our knowledge, the methylumi R package () is the only one to deal with Illumina methylation BeadChip but does not address the spatial correction. The proposed method SMETHILLIUM consists of a spatial correction of the background noise, a probe summarization and a confidence assessment. The performance of the method is evaluated on six real samples with known methylation states. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.
METHOD
BeadChip designLet us note (B M i,j ) j=1,...,n M i the set of beads for the n M i methylated probes, and (B U i,j ) j=1,...,n U i the set of beads for the n U i unmethylated probes for a locus i (i = 1,...,N where N is the total number of loci). Whatever the methylation state and for any locus i, the intensity signal for both types of probes is measured by the same single colour channel using the single-base extension process (). However, as purines and pyrimidines are labelled, respectively, with a red and green dyes, beads can be attributed to a red set R, or a green set G. For all probes, both red and green signal intensities are quantified for any B M i,j and B U i,j. For a given channel, the raw intensities are noted I M i,j and I U i,j .
Spatial normalizationOn all Illumina methylation BeadChip, a number of n 0 Negative Control Beads (NCB) are calibrated to not hybridize with any DNA template. We thus consider that the intensities measured on the NCB correspond to spatial noise. More precisely, we assume that the red (respectively green) intensities I R 0,i , i = 1,...,n 0 (respectively I G 0,i , i = 1,...,n 0 ) measured on these probes are related to their locations BC R i , i = 1,...,n 0 (respectively BC G i , i = 1,...,n 0 ) on the chip via an unknown function N R () (respectively N G ()). In the following, we only consider the spatial noise in the red channel since the procedure for the green channel is the same. As local polynomial estimation techniques apply at the boundaries (), we estimate the function N R () non-parametrically by a local polynomial estimator N R (,s) constructed upon the 2D LOESS model. The parameter s in (is called the span. A small s value will reduce the bias of N R (,s) and increase variance while a large s value will reduce variance and increase the bias. Choosing s is an issue and we propose an adaptive method for the choice of an optimal data-driven s based on crossvalidation approach. Namely, for each colour channel, and for each s on an arithmetic grid S, we compute the average prediction error (PE) of N R () by N R (,s) as follows:where N R,i (,s) is the leave-one-out version of the LOESS estimator N R (,s). We then choose the span s * R which satisfies:The s * R which minimizes the average PE is afterward used in the estimation of N R (). Our local polynomial estimator of N R () is thenNote that the resulting estimator achieves the global optimal rate of Stone (1984). Once the span selected, the LOESS model allows the extrapolation of the background noise for all the beads in the set R (respectively G) takingPage: 1694 16931695into account their location. For the set R of all red beads,
C.Sabbah et al.) is the extrapolated value for a given bead where S is either M or U. The I S i,j intensity corrected from the red background correction is computed as follows:with ed(i,b) =  exp[1(b+)/i] where i is the raw signal intensity and b is its estimated background. We choose  = 1 as recommended by Edwards (2003). A similar procedure is applied to correct the green background noise.
Probe summarizationFor each locus i, the method computes the methylated, unmethylated and beta values using median (another method of summarization based on the mean is available and described in the Supplementary Material) as follows:where Med n j=1 (X j ) is the median of (X 1 ,...,X n ). Depending on the beta value, a methylation state is assigned according to the following decision rule for each locus i:where H represents a hemi-methylation state and 0 < l  0.5.
Confidence for methylation stateIn order to define a confidence value for the assigned methylation state, a non-parametric test is proposed. In the following, we only consider the red beads since the test procedure for the green beads is the same. Namely, we use the WilcoxonMannWhitney statistic test. For any given locus i, let med U i and med M i be the theoretical values of the median of the normalized intensities. Let med 0 be the theoretical value of the median of the normalized NCB intensities. The test we propose works as follows:Typically, we expect that i H 0 is rejected for all loci since at least one type of probes must be significantly different from the NCB. Therefore, loci showing systematically high P-values over a set of experiments will be unreliable, possibly for technical reasons.
ROC and performance predictionIn order to validate the efficiency of the method, DNA extracted from a T24 bladder cancer cell line was used. A first group of DNA samples (called met1.1, met3.1 and met3.2) was treated with Methylase SssI such that all CpGs loci are methylated. A second group of DNA samples (called RCA, Zeb3.1 and Zeb3.2) was amplified by PCR for the RCA sample and by the Zebularine methylation inhibitor for the Zeb3.1 and the Zeb3.2 samples such that all CpGs loci are unmethylated after treatment. Therefore, both groups of samples are representative of a fully methylated DNA and a fully unmethylated DNA. Then, both groups of samples were individually hybridized on Illumina HumanMethylation27 BeadChip and separately normalized according to the proposed method. Raw data are available from our web site. The pooled beta values of the six samples were considered to assess the prediction performance. For each sample and each locus, the methylation state was assigned as described above. For each l in, the proportions of correctly classified loci p M (l) and p U (l) are computed as follows: let ( metbe, respectively, the beta values for the methylated and the unmethylated samples. Then,where I() is the indicator function. The global performance criterion is defined by averaging both previous proportions:Page: 1695 16931695 SMETHILLIUMshows the global performance criterion on the beta values calculated with the SMETHILLIUM procedure, the BeadStudio procedure and also the raw data (beta values computed without any normalization and with intensities summarised using the mean).illustrates the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves obtained by the same three methods.
ResultsFigures 1, 2 and 3 shows that the spatial normalization allows a better separation between the methylation state than the Illumina's proprietary software BeadStudio (). This is confirmed by the global criterion in. Our method allows a better concentration of the beta values around their expected value allowing the possibility to better identify intermediate state such as hemi-methylation. For a l threshold of 0.35, the global performance criterion is 80% after SMETHILLIUM normalization, 53% with BeadStudio and 60% without normalization (raw).
CONCLUSIONWe developed a non-parametric spatial normalization method that improves the signal-to-noise ratio allowing a more reliable prediction of the methylation state as compared with BeadStudio. The method is implemented in R and publicly available. We recommend the user to use in-house experiments in order to define the most optimal l threshold for their data.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
