Motivation: Although small nucleolar RNAs form an important class of non-coding RNAs, no comprehensive annotation efforts have been undertaken, presumably because the task is complicated by both the large number of distinct small nucleolar RNA families and their relatively rapid pace of sequence evolution. Results: With snoStrip we present an automatic annotation pipeline developed specifically for comparative genomics of small nucleolar RNAs. It makes use of sequence conservation, canonical box motifs as well as secondary structure and predicts putative targets. Availability and implementation: The snoStrip web service and the download version is available at
INTRODUCTIONSmall nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are one of the most abundant and evolutionarily ancient groups of functional non-coding RNAs (ncRNA) dating back at least 23 billion years to the last common ancestor of Archaea and Eukarya. They fulfill an impressive variety of cellular functions ranging from specifying the locations of chemical modifications in several ncRNA classes and nucleolytic processing of rRNAs to the synthesis of telomeric DNA and an involvement in genomic imprinting and alternative splicing, reviewed e.g. by. They broadly fall into two classes distinguished by secondary structure and characteristic sequence boxes, after which they are named box C/D and box H/ACA snoRNAs. A variety of computational tools has been devised to identify snoRNAs de novo in searches of genomic DNA, see e.g.. Homologous snoRNAs are often hard to find because of their small size, poor sequence conservation andin the case of box C/D snoRNAslack of a conserved secondary structure. So far no specific tool for homology-based snoRNA search has been devised. At the same time, the Rfam database covers only a subset of the known snoRNAs and many of the seed alignments contain only few independent sequences (70% of the snoRNA alignments contain516 sequences). Available snoRNA databases, on the other hand, mainly focus on single organisms, e.g. snoRNALBME-db on human and the Umass-database on yeast. Lacking overall sequence conservation and structural elements combined with characteristic sequence motifs makes it hard to detect snoRNAs by means of sequence homology, i.e. NCBI-blast, only.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONThe snoStrip-pipeline has been designed to fill this gap. It embraces five parts: (i) a homology-based search procedure to accumulate potential snoRNA candidates, (ii) a post-filter that uses the conservation of box motifs and putative target sites to increase specificity, (iii) a module for extracting additional features including secondary structure and putative target predictions, (iv) the computation of family-wide alignments and (v) an optional validation check. Each novel snoRNA candidate and its corresponding snoRNA-derived information are subsequently stored in an internal database called snoBoard. The snoStrip-pipeline can either be run with single or multiple query families, each of which may contain one or more query sequences.(i) Homology search. The snoStrip-pipeline uses a set of known snoRNA sequences fs 1 , s 2 ,. .. , s n g of a given family S as queries to identify their homologs in a given target genome. First blastn with relaxed parameters (word size W  8, E-value 10 3 , mismatch, gap opening and gap extension parameters q  1, G  2 and E  1) is used. If no candidate is returned, a covariance model (CM) is generated from S using infernal 1.0.2 (). To increase sensitivity, the model is calibrated with exp-cmL-loc set to 3.0 Mb. An infernalderived candidate for a genome of length N is accepted if its bitscore exceeds log 2 2N and E50:01. (ii) Box filtering and target site extraction. Short conserved box motifs are characteristic for bona fide snoRNAs. However, several specific nucleotides and structural components have to be present to ensure their functionality. For detailed information and references, please have a look at our manual on the web server. Given a snoRNA family S and a snoRNA candidate s new , snoStrip uses MUSCLE () to obtain a temporary alignment of s 1 ,. .. , s n with s new. If the location of a box motif in the alignment agrees for all sequences s i and the box of s new fits certain restrictions (see manual), this position is selected as box location in the candidate. Otherwise, a gap-free search window roughly delimited by the minimal and maximal start positions of the boxes in the known sequences is used to determine the location that best fits a position weight matrix (PWM) created from the corresponding box motifs of s 1 ,. .. , s n. Candidate antisense elements (ASE, 920 nt in length) are located immediately upstream of box D and/or D'. We extracted corresponding PWMs of these lengths to score snoRNA candidates. Testing on randomized and true data returned 13 nt as the most sensible window size and 0.7 as score threshold for acceptance [in accordance with, see our web site]. (iii) Property extraction. An important feature of snoRNAs is their type-specific secondary structure. We use RNAsubopt () with type-specific folding constraints: box C/D snoRNAs are required to contain an internal loop delimited by the boxes C and D, whereas box H/ACA snoRNAs are prohibited from forming base pairs in their hinge and tail regions, *To whom correspondence should be addressed  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com respectively. Correctly folded box C/D sequences are pruned at the base of the closing stem (or after at most 10 bp), other candidates are truncated 8 nt upstream of box C and downstream of box D. Box H/ACA snoRNAs are assumed to terminate 3 nt after the ACA box. Target predictions for putative snoRNA sequences are either performed by RNAsnoop (H/ACA) () or by PLEXY (C/D) (). For box H/ACA snoRNAs, we use target RNA accessibility profiles precomputed by RNAup (Muckstein). We omit this step for box C/D snoRNAs, as the accessibility around methylation sites does not significantly differ from the overall accessibility (data not shown). Finally, all single sequence predictions are mapped to the positions in target RNA alignments to facilitate the analysis of the conservation of the predicted modification sites. (iv) Family-wide alignments. All potential snoRNA sequences assigned to a specific family are aligned with MUSCLE. (v) Validation check. In an optional post-processing validation check, we analyze all detected candidates with respect to their alignment score and target binding affinity (details in the manual). For fungi, the snoStrip web server provides easy access to this snoRNA annotation pipeline. This service can be deployed in two operating modes: (a) genome-wide snoRNA annotation and (b) single sequence conservation. Owing to resource constraints, the web version accepts moderate size genomes (60 MB) as input. Although in (a) the taxonomic range that is to be used as query can be specified, for mode (b) it is necessary to provide sequence-specific box motifs. The service returns a variety of results that can be downloaded, e.g. mfasta-and gff-files, family-wide alignments and alignments displaying conserved snoRNAtargetRNA interactions, see. For (large) genomes of multicellular plants and animals the snoStrip pipeline is easily applicable in a locally installed version. We have, for instance, conducted an extensive survey of metazoan snoRNAs that will be reported elsewhere. In the following, we briefly outline snoStrip results on fungi and Giardia lamblia. The initial query set consisted of 231 experimentally verified snoRNAs from five fungal species (see detailed manual on our web server). Running the snoStrip-pipeline resulted in 43500 putative snoRNAs in 63 fungal genomes. A more detailed overview is given in the table below. This provides by far the most comprehensive collection of fungal snoRNAs today and sets the). By sequence, 29 families were recovered in both isolates B and E. With default settings, the pipeline rejected three of these families because of their aberrant box C sequences, which harbor two 2 substitutions. In summary, with our snoStrip pipeline we provide a convenient and efficient way to annotate homologous snoRNAs in newly sequenced genomes. Complementarily, single snoRNA genes can be evolutionary traced across a widespread of species. Our snoStrip-generated collections of snoRNA data constitute a valuable resource for large-scale studies, e.g. on snoRNA evolution and target interaction. It further enables a more generalized characterization of snoRNA species, e.g. for improving the accuracy of machine learning approaches for de novo snoRNA prediction.san example of the web server output, the conservation of the target interaction between the 18S rRNA (left) and the ASE of box C/D snoRNA family snR52 (right) is shown
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
S.Bartschat et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
