Motivation: The recent advances in genome sequencing have revealed an abundance of non-synonymous polymorphisms among human individuals; subsequently, it is of immense interest and importance to predict whether such substitutions are functional neutral or have deleterious effects. The accuracy of such prediction algorithms depends on the quality of the multiple-sequence alignment, which is used to infer how an amino acid substitution is tolerated at a given position. Because of the scarcity of orthologous protein sequences in the past, the existing prediction algorithms all include sequences of protein paralogs in the alignment, which can dilute the conservation signal and affect prediction accuracy. However, we believe that, with the sequencing of a large number of mammalian genomes, it is now feasible to include only protein orthologs in the alignment and improve the prediction performance. Results: We have developed a novel prediction algorithm, named SNPdryad, which only includes protein orthologs in building a multiple sequence alignment. Among many other innovations, SNPdryad uses different conservation scoring schemes and uses Random Forest as a classifier. We have tested SNPdryad on several datasets. We found that SNPdryad consistently outperformed other methods in several performance metrics, which is attributed to the exclusion of paralo-gous sequence. We have run SNPdryad on the complete human proteome, generating prediction scores for all the possible amino acid substitutions. Availability and implementation: The algorithm and the prediction results can be accessed from the Web site
INTRODUCTIONSingle-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are single nucleotide variations between different individuals of the same species. They account for the majority of the genetic variations among human individuals, as it is estimated that a single SNP is present in every 2000 nt between any two individuals (). Depending on how the amino acid is affected by the polymorphism, the SNPs in the protein coding regions can be classified into synonymous SNP (those that do not change amino acid), non-synonymous SNP (nsSNP) (those change the amino acid) and nonsense mutations (where a SNP results in a stop codon). Based on the data from the 1000 Genomes Project, it is estimated that on an average a human individual possesses 10 00011 000 non-synonymous substitutions compared with the reference human genome sequence (). A number of databases had been developed to curate and store these human SNP data, which include dbSNP, OMIM, SNPdbe and dbNSFP (). In addition to SNPs found in the protein coding regions, recent genome-wide association and expression Quantitative Trait Loci (eQTL) studies and the large-scale ENCODE project also revealed many SNPs located outside of the protein coding regions (called regulatory SNPs or rSNPs) that are also implicated in human diseases. However, these rSNPs are not discussed here, as we only focus on the effect of SNPs found in the protein coding regions. Synonymous SNPs are usually assumed to be functional neutral because they do not change the protein sequence, but in rare cases they can affect protein folding, disrupt RNA secondary structure or disrupt miRNA binding sites (). Although many nsSNPs are probably selectively neutral, i.e. having little functional effects, a substantial fraction of these nsSNPs are indeed predicted to be deleterious because they can potentially disrupt functional sites on a protein or affect their correct folding (). Many nsSNPs are also linked to human disorders; many of these disease associated SNPs are documented in databases, such as OMIM, pharmGKB and HGMD (). Because of the potential functional consequences of nsSNPs, several computational methods had been developed to in silico predict whether an nsSNP is deleterious. Some of these methods include SIFT, PolyPhen, PolyPhen2, SNPs3D, SNAP and MutationTaster (). These methods usually work by estimating the likelihood that a mutation (nsSNP) is tolerated based on whether the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. amino acid residue is observed in other evolutionarily related orthologous or paralogous protein sequences or sequence fragments, and whether the mutation is tolerated based on protein structure and the physiochemical properties of the amino acids. The major differences among these methods are how these evolutionary and structural features are extracted, and what algorithm (classifier) is used in combining these features to make a decision. There also exist ensemble methods, such as Condel and Logit, which use Naive Bayes and Logistic Regression, respectively, to combine individual prediction methods (Gonzalez). As described above, an accurate and unbiased multiple sequence alignment of a protein of interest with its orthologous and paralogous sequences is essential to derive a conservation profile of the protein, which can be used to estimate how a mutation is tolerated (). Ideally, only orthologous sequences should be used in this step because these orthologs are expected to perform similar function in related organisms, and the corresponding amino acid position is expected to have the same evolutionary, biophysical and structural constraint. However, to the best of our knowledge, all the current nsSNP analysis algorithms include paralogous sequences in the multiple sequence alignment (MSA) step, which perhaps was a necessity a few years ago because of the scarcity of the fully sequenced proteome sequences. However, inclusion of paralogous sequences can potentially introduce noises in generating protein sequence conservation profiles because when compared with orthologs, protein paralogs are more likely to diverge in sequence and in cellular functions. On an average, the amino acid sequence identity between paralogous protein pairs is only 30% (). The recent breakthroughs in sequencing technology have generated fully sequenced genomes and proteomes for a large number of vertebrates, which potentially can eliminate the need for including paralogous protein sequences in building multiple sequence alignment. In this article, we show that, by including only orthologous protein sequences, we achieved better performance in predicting deleterious nsSNPs. Other innovations in our method include the choice of using Random Forest in classification, which had been previously shown to be effective in high-dimension data classification (). We benchmarked our prediction method, termed SNPdryad, against other methods and showed that SNPdryad consistently achieved better sensitivity and specificity on the datasets tested.summarizes the overall design of SNPdryad. The input of SNPdryad is a non-synonymous human SNP and the sequence of the human protein that the SNP is on; the output is the predicted deleterious score for the input nsSNP. The higher the score, the more deleterious the input nsSNP is predicted to be.
METHODS
Overview of the SNPdryad algorithm
Collecting orthologous protein sequencesWe ran the Inparanoid program to obtain orthologous protein sequences from other organisms (); the human proteins were extracted from Ensembl (GRCh37). To ensure the quality of the final multiple sequence alignment, we limited our ortholog search to only mammalian species. Such an approach has been proven to be successful in detecting conserved regulatory elements ().
Generating sequence alignment profileWe used the MUSCLE software for multiple-sequence alignment, using the default parameter setting (). Other alignment tools such as MAFFT and Clustal were also tested; MUSCLE was picked because of its alignment accuracy and speed (). Given a multiple sequence alignment, the next step is to derive a positional-specific conservation profile and use it to estimate the tolerance toward mutations at each position. Two important calibrations are needed at this step: how to weight each input protein sequence, and how to score the amino acid substitutions. Kumar and colleagues previously showed that the choice of sequence-weighting scheme and substitution-scoring scheme are crucial at this step in distinguishing the deleterious nsSNPs from the rest (); therefore, we explored four different sequence-weighting schemes and two different substitution-scoring schemes in our work (a total of eight distinct ways of measuring conservation scores). All of the eight conservations scores were input into SNPdryad as features and were automatically weighted and selected by Random Forest classifier to achieve the best performance.
Constructing feature vectors2.4.1 Sequence-weighting schemes (i) In the first sequence-weighting scheme, each individual input protein sequence is treated equally and given the same weight. (ii) In the second sequence-weighting scheme, a weight is calculated for each input protein sequence based on its overall sequence similarity to the human protein sequence. In particular, the sum of pair-wise BLOSUM62 alignment score is computed as the weight to quantify the pair-wise sequence similarity. The higher the sequence similarity (sum of BLOSUM62 scores), the higher weight is given to the input sequence. Such a weighting scheme is different from the ones used in PolyPhen2, SIFT and other prediction methods, which in contrast give low weight to the sequence that is highly similar to the human sequence. The rationale in their approaches is that such a low weight can eliminate redundant or highly similar sequences when searching for homologous sequences in a large sequence database. In contrast, SNPdryad does not have such drawbacks because only orthologous protein sequences are allowed in the alignment. SNPdryad can confidently assign a high. Overall design of the SNPdryad algorithm. Given an nsSNP and the human protein, SNPdryad collects the orthologous protein sequences from other mammals and performs a multiple-sequence alignment (MSA). Once aligned, SNPdryad calculates features from the alignment and uses the trained Random Forest classifier to predict and output a deleterious effect score
Physiochemical properties of amino acids In addition tosequence conservation profile, we also included the physiochemical properties of the amino acids as a feature in our classification scheme. The following properties are included: hydropathy index (), polarity (), mass (), volume (), surface area (), residue non-polar surface area (), estimated hydrophobic effects for residue burial and side chain (), population percentage of being exposed in solvent, being buried in solvent and being neither exposed nor buried in solvent (). We note that these features are not independent from each other.
Other features To alleviate the noise and fluctuationin the data, the number of protein sequences included in the multiple-sequence alignment and the number of distinct amino acid residues in the nsSNPcontaining column are also used as features in the classifier. The rationale for such treatment is that the conservation scores derived from alignment of higher number of sequences are deemed more reliable than scores derived from fewer sequences. In addition, functional annotation of the region on the protein where the SNP is present is also important. Based on such a rationale, we have included the presence of the annotations from PFAM, SUPERFAMILY and PROSITE as the features for predictions (). The complete list of features used is listed in Supplementary Table S1.
Classification methodsWe evaluated 10 leading classification methods, applied them onto the aforementioned features and benchmarked their performance following a standard 10-fold cross-validation procedure. These methods include Random Forest (), Naive Bayes (), Bayes Network (), Multilayer Perceptron (), AdaBoost (), Support Vector Machine using Polynomial Kernel (), Support Vector Machine using Radial Basis Kernel () and three k-Nearest Neighbor Classifiers (). These methods are implemented in software WEKA (); their parameter settings are well-tuned and described in the Supplementary Text.
DatasetsTo ensure a fair comparison, we have downloaded the datasets from the PolyPhen-2 Web site, namely HumDiv and HumVar (version 2.1.0) (). Both datasets were compiled from UniProtKB (). Specifically, HumDiv was compiled using the annotation keywords, which imply causal mutationphenotype relationships, whereas HumVar was compiled from all the human disease-causing mutations annotated. HumDiv has 7070 neutral nsSNPs and 5322 deleterious nsSNPs, whereas HumVar has 21 142 neutral nsSNPs and 20 989 deleterious nsSNPs. In particular, HumDiv is considered higher in quality than HumVar because the SNPs in HumDiv were selected using a controlled set of keywords.
RESULTS
Classification model selections in SNPdryadWe trained and tested the aforementioned 10 classification models on HumDiv and HumVar, following the standard 10-fold cross-validation. The results are shown infor HumDiv and HumVar. It is clear that, for each classification method and for both HumDiv and HumVar, using only orthologous proteins had a better performance than inclusion of paralogous proteins. Not only did the orthologs-only approach achieve better prediction accuracy and Area Under Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) Curve (AUC), but it also had lower level of error. In addition, the Random Forest method had the best performance; this is also consistent with a previous comparison study showing that Random Forest is the best in highdimensions empirically (). The predictive power of the Random Forest classifier lies in its ensemble nature with bagging and random subspace techniques. Instead of relying on a single-decision tree, Random Forest takes into account the votes of multiple decision trees to make the final prediction decision.
Comparisons on the HumDiv and HumVar datasetsNext, we compared the prediction performance of SNPdryad (using only orthologs and Random Forest classifier) with other commonly used nsSNP analysis methods, MutationTaster, PolyPhen2 and SIFT (). Some other prediction methods such as SNPs3D were not included in the comparison because they are no longer actively maintained (). Ensemble methods such as Condel, which reanalyze results from other methods, are not included in the comparison either. We used the HumDiv and HumVar datasets for the basis of the comparison. PolyPhen2 and other methods also used the same datasets in evaluations. To ensure an objective and unbiased comparison, we downloaded the prediction results from the web servers of PolyPhen2, SIFT and MutationTaster, respectively, in January 2012.compares the ROC curves and the Precision-Recall curves for these four methods. It is clear fromthat SNPdryad outperforms all three other methods on both HumDiv and HumVar datasets, whereas PolyPhen2 has the second best performance. We like to note that PolyPhen2 was fully trained on the same HumDiv and HumVar datasets, whereas the other methods were not; this may complicate the comparison. After comparing the overall prediction accuracy, we next investigated how frequently the methods agreed with each other on whether an nsSNP is considered deleterious. Because these methods use different statistical schemes to denote prediction confidence or degree of harmful effect, it is impossible to select a single statistical threshold (e.g. a single P-value) to apply to all methods and compare the predictions that are above this threshold. To overcome this problem, for each method, we first selected all the nsSNP that are predicted to be deleterious and ranked these nsSNPs according to this specific method's own scoring scheme, from the most deleterious to the least deleterious. We then compared the overlap among the top ranked nsSNPs predicted by each method. The resultant Venn diagrams are shown in. Three observations can be made from these Venn diagrams. (i) At a lower cutoff, the methods have a greater level of overlap in their predictions; however, among the top predicted nsSNPs, the overlapping fraction becomes much smaller. (ii) The nsSNPs that are predicted to be deleterious by more than one method are always more accurate than those predicted by a single method. Notably, such observation is in contrast to a previous study (). A possible explanation is that SNPdryad and PolyPhen2 are trained on the same datasets, boosting their ensemble performance. (iii) SNPdryad predicts more unique deleterious nsSNP that are missed by the others at a higher accuracy. For example, among the top 10% predicted nsSNPs, SNPdryad predicted 260 unique deleterious nsSNPs alone (256 are true positives, accuracy  98%). We next ranked the nsSNPs from HumDiv by the predicted scores of each of the three methods, and calculated the pair-wise Spearman's rank correlation coefficients. As a comparison, we also calculated the correlations with the annotated deleterious effect provided in the HumDiv dataset (0 denotes neutral and 1 denotes deleterious).shows that among the four methods, SNPdryad has the highest correlation with Annotation (0.83) than the others, suggesting that SNPdryad has higher accuracy than other methods.
Exclusion of paralogs contributes to better performance in SNPdryadAfter concluding that SNPdryad is accurate in predicting deleterious nsSNPs, at least on the HumDiv and HumVar datasets, we next investigated whether such a superior performance was the result of either a better classifier (Random Forest) or the factNote: RF, Random Forest; NB, Naive Bayes; BNet, Bayes Network; MLP, MultiLayer Perceptron; AB, AdaBoost; POLY, Support Vector Machine using Polynomial Kernel; RBF, Support Vector Machine using Radial Basis Kernel; kNN, k Nearest Neighbor. The parameter settings can be referred to supplementary data. In each row the classification model that has the best performance is highlighted in bold. that we only included orthologous protein sequences. We compared the AUC values of PolyPhen2 (and 2B, 0.95 for HumDiv and 0.89 for HumVar) to the AUC values of different classifiers that we tested in SNPdryad (). It can be seen fromthat if homologous sequences are used, PolyPhen2 has higher AUC than all the classification models except for Random Forest (0.96). However, the top half of theshows that if only orthologous sequences are used, several other classification methods such as BNet (Bayesian Net), MLP (MultiLayer Perceptron) and AB (AdaBoost) actually have better AUC scores (0.96) than PolyPhen2 (0.95). Such comparisons showed that the decision of including only orthologous protein sequences is the primary reason for the good prediction power of SNPdryad.To further illustrate such an idea, two examples of deleterious nsSNPs are shown in the Supplementary Figures S1S6, which are correctly predicted by SNPdryad but by neither PolyPhen2 nor SIFT. These cases demonstrate that the quality of the MSA is crucial in accurately predicting deleterious nsSNPs. The first case is a SNP located at the position 1161 of the Complement C3 protein (P01024), which changes a Glutamine residue (Q) to a Lysine residue (K), causing increased susceptibility to hemolytic uremic syndrome atypical type 5 (AHUS5) (UniProt variation ID: VAR_063219). Supplementary Figures S1S3 compare the MSAs generated by SNPdryad, PolyPhen2 and SIFT, respectively. The substitutions to Lysine (K) or Arginine (R) are found in the alignments generated by both PolyPhen2 (Supplementary) and SIFT (Supplementary), misleading these algorithms to predict this particular SNP as a neutral substitution in human. This is likely caused by the inclusion of protein sequences paralogous to the input human protein. In contrast, neither Lysine (K) nor Arginine (R) is found in the orthologous sequence alignment computed by SNPdryad, which accurately predicted this nsSNP as deleterious (Supplementary). Supplementary Figures S4S6 show another example of a mutation at position 104 on human Transthyretin protein (P02766), which changes an Isoleucine (I) to a Serine residue (S) (UniProt ID: VAR_007584). This deleterious mutation has been shown to contribute to transthyretin-related amyloidosis (AMYL-TTR). The sequence alignments generated by both SIFT (Supplementary) and PolyPhen2 (Supplementary) include residue Serine at position 104, which likely caused both programs to predict this substitution as a neutral one. SNPdryad accurately predicted this mutation as a deleterious mutation (Supplementary).
Prediction on nsSNPs annotated in SNPdbeNext, as an independent benchmark, we used SNPdryad to make predictions on the nsSNPs curated in the SNPdbe database, and compared the results of SNPdryad, PolyPhen2, SIFT and MutationTaster. SNPdbe is a comprehensive database that collects and annotates SNP information from multiple sources, including dbSNP, SwissProt, OMIM and 1000 Genomes (URL: http://www.rostlab.org/services/snpdbe/) (). A small subset of these SNPs has disease association information. Based on the SNPdbe database dump (), we have compiled a dataset, which is given in Supplementary Table S3.depicts the ROC curves and the PrecisionRecall curves for these four methods. Again, SNPdryad has the best performance among these methods.
Prediction on nsSNPs annotated in ExoVarAs another independent benchmark dataset, we have selected the latest ExoVar dataset (). ExoVar consists of not only the UniProt annotations but also the recent rare nsSNPs in the 1000 Genomes Project. To be consistent with the past study (), we have removed the variants that are not derived alleles. As shown in, the performance of SNPdryad is similar to that of Logit and better than all the other methods, including PolyPhen2 and MutationTaster. It is worth noting that both Logit and Condel are ensemble methods, which take input predictions from individual methods and output a weighted average. SNPdryad has the best performance among all the independent methods.
Predictions on human proteomeIn this section, we first trained SNPdryad on the HumDiv dataset then ran it on the entire human proteome (Ensembl version GRCh37.64) for all the possible substitutions at all the amino acid positions. Note, in this sense, we are testing the functional effect of amino acid substitutions instead of on nsSNPs. Prediction Score Distribution: Supplementarydepicts the average prediction scores for all the possible pair-wise substitutions between 20 amino acid residues, averaged over all the possible amino acid positions in the human proteome. The complete predictions can be accessed at our Website: http://snps. ccbr.utoronto.ca:8080/SNPdryad/. In general, not surprisingly, we observe that the predicted deleterious effect of replacing one amino acid by another is consistent with their similarity in physiochemical properties. In particular, most of the nonsynonymous substitutions to Tryptophan (W) are likely to be deleterious and most of the non-synonymous substitutions to Alanine (A) are likely functional neutral. Furthermore, Serine(S) and Threonine (T) are mostly interchangeable to each other based on the prediction scores. In total, we scanned 92 012 human proteins (including protein isoforms) and 36 935 804 amino acid positions; a total of 10 120 155 substitutions ($1.4%) were predicted to be fully deleterious (with the SNPdryad prediction score of 1). Next, we investigated whether such fully deleterious SNPs are enriched or depleted among common human variants. To achieve this, we filtered the nsSNPs annotated in the SNPdbe database, and retained only those common nsSNPs that have major allele frequency 40.05, as estimated by the 1000 Genomes Project. This resulted in 14 733 nsSNPs on 6645 proteins (designated as Query set). Among them, 627 nsSNPs were predicted by SNPdryad to be fully deleterious. As a Background control dataset, we also took the same 6645 human proteins, and simulated all the possible non-synonymous substitutions at all positions under the constraint that their amino acid type changes [e.g. Arginine (R) to] do exist in the aforementioned 14 733 common variants. The resultant Background had 32 246 488 nsSNPs, among which 2 529 197 nsSNPs were predicted to be fully deleterious by SNPdryad. By computing the hypergeometric cumulative distribution function between the Query set and Background set, we observed significant depletion of fully deleterious nsSNPs among the common nsSNPs (Query Set) with P51:0674  10 69. Such depletion of highly deleterious SNPs, while fully expected, further demonstrated the value and effectiveness of prediction algorithms such as SNPdryad. PFAM Domain Statistics: We are interested to know where these fully deleterious substitutions are located, especially which PFAM protein domains are enriched of such extremely deleterious substitutions. Supplementarylists the top PFAM domains that contain the highest number of harmful (i.e. fully deleterious) nsSNPs. It shows that the G protein coupled receptor (GPCR) domain (PF00001) contains the highest number of harmful nsSNPs as predicted by SNPdryad. GPCR domains are important domains in cell-surface receptors, which sense molecules outside of cells in many disease-causing signaling pathways. They are also important therapeutic targets, as $40% of all modern drugs target GPCR proteins (). We also used odds-ratio to ascertain the statistical significance of these enrichments (last column). (Assuming every sequence position in every human protein are equally likely to be hit by a harmful nsSNP, we define the sum of the sequence lengths of the domain hits of a Pfam domain D as l D in a human proteome. We also define the sum of the sequence lengths of all the proteins in the human proteome as l Total. Given a harmful nsSNP, the probability that it is located at the domain D is calculated as lD lTotal. If we have N harmful nsSNPs, the expected number of their hits located at the domain D can be calculated as N  lD lTotal. Based on such an idea, the expected nsSNP hits are calculated for each domain. The odds-ratio of a domain is then calculated as the number of observed deleterious nsSNPs residing in a domain, divided by the expected number of deleterious nsSNPs in the domain.)
DISCUSSIONIn this article, we described SNPdryad, a novel computational method that can predict deleterious effect of amino acid substitutions occurred in human proteins. As elaborated in this article, SNPdryad outperforms other leading algorithms in accurately predicting deleterious nsSNPs. We demonstrated that this is primarily because SNPdryad only includes orthologous sequences in building the multiple-sequence alignment, as opposed to other contemporary methods, which include paralogous sequences as well. Such an innovation allows construction of a more accurate protein sequence conservation profile, allowing a more precise estimate on whether a substitution is tolerated at a specific position. This would not have been possible until now, when a large number of mammalian or vertebrate genome sequences have been completely sequenced, thanks to the drastically decreasing cost of genomic sequencing. The next-generation sequencing technology has generated a deluge of genomic sequences and subsequently, a wealth of genetic variation data such as nonsynonymous polymorphisms. We envision that an intelligent algorithm such as SNPdryad can take advantage of this large amount of data and further improve the accuracy of predicting deleterious nsSNPs.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
SNPdryad: Predicting deleterious amino acid substitutions at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from weight to a similar orthologous sequence that is believed to be functionally consistent with the human sequence. (iii) In the third weighting scheme, each input sequence is weighted according to their evolutionary distance from human. We first ran the PhyML program on the aligned sequences to build a phylogenetic tree (Guindon et al., 2010); each sequence is then assigned the weight of 1 minus the additive branch length to human sequence. (iv) In the fourth approach, we adopted the same scheme as in the weighting method used in the 'evolutionary trace' (Mihalek et al., 2004). This method takes into account the sequence conservation at multiple levels of the phylogenetic tree constructed and assigns weights globally. 2.4.2 Substitution-scoring schemes We tested two substitutionscoring schemes in estimating the conservation level at each amino acid position: information entropy (Shannon Entropy) and simple BLOSUM62 scores. The former is an unbiased measure of amino acid conservation, whereas the latter can take into account the biophysical properties of each amino acid. In the end, by combining four different sequence-weighting schemes and two different substitution-scoring schemes, we calculated eight different conservation scores for each amino acid at each position that has an nsSNP in the human protein sequence. Next, we calculated the differences in conservation score between the reference allele and the variant allele and incorporated it as a feature into the classification model. Overall Conservation Statistics: Besides the conservation score calculated at the nsSNP-containing column in the multiple-sequence alignment, the mean and standard deviation of the entropy of the alignment is also calculated. Z-score can thus be calculated for the nsSNP-containing column.
K.-C.Wong and Z.Zhang at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
SNPdryad: Predicting deleterious amino acid substitutions at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
