Motivation: Recently, gene窶田oexpression relationships have been found to be often conditional and dynamic. Many studies have suggested that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have impacts on gene expression variations in human populations. Results: The SNPxGE 2 database contains the computationally predicted human SNP窶田oexpression associations, i.e. the differential coexpression between two genes is associated with the genotypes of an SNP. These data were generated from a large-scale association study that was based on the HapMap phase I data, which covered 269 individuals from 4 human populations, 556 873 SNPs and 15 000 gene expression profiles. In order to reduce the computational cost, the SNP窶田oexpression associations were assessed using gap/substitution models, proven to have a comparable power to logistic regression models. The results, at a false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 0.1, consisted of 44 769 and 50 792 SNP窶田oexpression associations based on single and pooled populations, respectively, and can be queried in the SNPxGE 2 database via either gene symbol or reference SNP ID. For each reported association, a detailed information page is provided.
INTRODUCTIONIt is widely accepted that eukaryotic gene expression variation may be potentially modulated by many genetic and epigenetic factors such as transcription factors, cis-regulatory elements, enhancers/repressors, transposons, miRNAs, nucleosome positioning, DNA methylation, histone modifications and by environmental factors (). Moreover, much of gene expression variation is heritable (). Recently, many studies have suggested that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) also have impacts on gene expression variations in human populations.found that many regions within 1 Mb of 374 expressed genes of interest had significant association of SNPs with expression variation. Subsequently,performed association analyses of expression levels of 14 925 transcripts with SNPs and copy * To whom correspondence should be addressed. number variants using multiple linear regression and suggested that SNPs captured 83.6% of the total detected genetic variation in gene expression. Later on,carried out another association analysis of >2.2 million common SNPs with gene expression using multiple linear regression and identified at least 1348 and 180 genes with association signals in cis and trans effects, respectively.suggested that common genetic variants accounted for differences in gene expression as well as prevalence of complex diseases among ethnic groups.also reported several thousands of significant associations between expression quantitative nucleotides and transcript clusters in two of HapMap populations. In a separate study,identified that some genes, which were differentially expressed among human populations, were also associated with particular biological processes. Using a Bayesian hierarchical model,found strong enrichments of quantitative trait loci for gene expression (eQTLs) in 250 bp upstream regions of transcription end site (TES) and around the transcription start site (TSS). Similarly,identified genetic variations in more than a thousand genes, which influenced the overall gene expression or splicing. In addition to individual gene expression profiles, the relationships among transcripts such as coexpression are also often studied for deciphering gene regulatory mechanisms. The identification of human genecoexpression relationships using microarray data has often relied on overall correlations between gene expression profiles across many experiments or conditions (). Recently, some studies have suggested that the coexpression relationships between genes are often dynamic and conditional, which may be dependent on cellular states (), developmental stages (), disease status (case or control) () or human populations (). However, few studies have related such differential coexpression to genetic bases. The effects of SNPs on gene expression variation in humans have been well documented, and so it is reasonable to conjecture that the differential coexpression between two genes may be associated with the genotypes of an SNP, which is termed as an SNPcoexpression association in this study.showed a biological switch mechanism in coexpression between correlation and inverse correlation of two genes, controlled by the genotypes of an SNP. However, the switch mechanism in two genes' coexpression controlled by an SNP could be only part of the whole picture of SNPcoexpression associations because it is also possible that two genes are well coexpressed under individual genotypes of an SNPPage: 404 403410
Y. Wang et al.while their coexpression cannot be detected if different genotypes of the SNP are pooled, or that two genes are well coexpressed under one or two genotypes of an SNP while are not coexpressed under others. Furthermore, Kayano et al.'s method was only able to assess 310 8 SNPexpressionexpression combinations, of which only 142 gene expression profiles were included, more than two orders of magnitude fewer than what is typical in a genome-wide expression data. Studies of associations between larger number of transcripts and genotypes data are computationally demanding. Thus, databases that deposit pre-computed associations are informative and helpful to biological researchers. For example, the SCAN database provides queries of the results of association of HapMap variants with gene expression at user-specified thresholds (). Genevar allows researchers to investigate expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) associations within a gene locus of interest in real time (). However, detecting genome-wide SNPcoexpression associations, a type of three-way associations, is more computationally intractable. Thus, a resource providing the results of a comprehensive analysis of SNPcoexpression associations, which are based on practical three-way association models and large-scale computation, should be very informative to the scientific community. In this study, we adopted an efficient method presented by, which enabled us to assess up to 10 13 SNP-expression-expression combinations. The results are deposited in a freely available database named SNPxGE 2 .
METHODS
The raw dataThere are different expression datasets available on the HapMap samples [e.g. exon array (), Illumina (), Affy focus (. In this study, normalized gene expression values (generated by Illumina Human WG-6 array) of 269 HapMap individuals from four populations including 90 CEPH trios of European descent (CEU), 90 Yoruba trios from Nigeria (YRI), 45 unrelated Han Chinese from Beijing (CHB) and 44 unrelated Japanese from Tokyo (JPT) were downloaded from GENEVAR (ftp:// ftp.sanger.ac.uk/pub/genevar/ CEU_children_ norm_march2007.zip, CEU_parents_norm_march2007.zip, CHB_norm_march2007.zip, JPT_ norm_march2007.zip, YRI_children_norm_march2007.zip & YRI_parents_ norm_march2007.zip) (). Annotation of Illumina Human WG-6 array was downloaded from ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.uk/ pub/genevar/illumina_Human_WG-6_array_content.csv. For each probe set (transcript), only the lowest level gene ontology (GO) terms within each of the three categories including biological process, molecular function and cellular component were considered. Out of the 47 294 transcripts, 15 000 genes with the highest expression level variations, which are more likely to have gene expression variations rather than random variations, were selected for further analysis. The SNP genotypes from phase I HapMap (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/hapmap/genotypes/200506_16c_phaseI/full/redundant-filtered/) were used (). For detailed experimental procedures, please refer to;).
Modeling SNPcoexpression associationsThe SNPcoexpression associations of interest, i.e. the differential coexpression between two genes is associated with the genotypes of an SNP, have been proven to exist in humans bybased on 142 gene expression profiles belonging to five disease pathways andscore_o = R AA R AB score_g = R AA +R AB R AA+AB .Note that rare alleles/genotypes may also be involved in SNPcoexpression associations. We do not consider them in the current study because of frequent high correlations by random chance (i.e. the P-values of correlations are relatively high due to small degrees of freedom).
Simulation study for comparing different models for SNPcoexpression associationsLogistic regression was assumed to be a reasonable approach for modeling differential gene expression combinations and SNPcoexpression associations despite of heavy computational burden (). To test the effectiveness of on/off and gap/substitution scores for modeling SNPcoexpression association, a simulation study
SNPcoexpression associationssimulated. In a random three-way combination, because the two genes were assumed to be not associated, their expression data were generated according to a normal distribution with mean and variance equal to 8 [denoted by N(8,. In an SNPcoexpression association, the expression data of the first gene was generated from N(8, 8), whereas the expression data of second gene were generated by multiplying the expression levels of the first gene by a coefficient sampled from uniform distribution, U, for each one of the three genotypes and then by adding a noise term generated from N(0,8). Mathematically, the simulation process could be summarized as follows:To determine a proper  value for gap/substitution model, three choices including 1, 1.5 and 2 were tested. The fitness of logistic regression was evaluated using Akaike information criterion (AIC). A lower AIC indicates better fitness. For an SNP-expression-expression combination, the lowest AIC among three possible genotype combinations was used to represent its fitness. Ten datasets using different MAF were simulated. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for comparing logistic regression, on/off model and gap/substitution model are shown in. In general, smaller MAFs tend to result in lower performance. To show potential transition (between bad and good performance) of ROC curves, more figures were plotted between MAF = 0.1 and MAF = 0.3. The comparison shows that on/off and gap/substitution models are, at least, as powerful as logistic regression for detecting SNPcoexpression associations based on the data in this study. When MAF < 0.15, all models perform badly (i.e. close to the diagonal line). Thus, SNP loci with an MAF < 0.15 were removed from the HapMap genotype data. Then the loci in complete linkage disequilibrium were merged. The total numbers of available SNPs in the HapMap genotype data were 407 733, 360 109, 347 415, 481 321 and 556 873 for CEU, CHB, JPT, YRI and the pooled populations, respectively. The performance of gap/substitution model is slightly affected by the choice of . When MAF ranges from 0.2 to 0.275, the performance of gap/substitution model is comparable among different  values. When MAF 0.175 and MAF 3, gap/substitution models with =2 and =1 perform best, respectively.suggested  = 1.5 for detecting differential gene combinations. In this simulation study, gap/substitution model with  = 1.5 is more stable across different MAFs, though not the best at each MAF. It seems that the results of this simulation study are not adequate for determining the best  value, although they generally show that the on/off and gap/substitution models can be effective in detecting SNP coexpression associations. The determination of the best  value could be solved in real data applications.
Computational strategy for detecting SNPcoexpression associationsThe SNPcoexpression associations were computed based on both single populations and pooled populations. To detect SNPcoexpression associations, any two transcripts that have the same GO terms (at the lowest levels) were considered for the subsequent downstream analysis. Note that extremely big GO terms (i.e. involving >900 of the
Y. Wang et al.dual-processor quad-core nodes (Intel Xeon, 2 GB RAM/core) was 15 days, compared to >1000 days if Kayano et al.'s method were used. As a primary method for assessing the significance of SNPcoexpression associations, we permuted the genotype data and repeated the above procedure, to calculate an FDR for each potential SNPcoexpression association. Let score_or and score_gr and score_op and score_gp denote the on/off and gap/substitution scores on real genotype data and permuted genotype data, respectively. For an on/off score x and a gap/substitution score y, the FDRs can be computed according to the basic idea (Storey and):where F is the number of false positives, and S is the total number of associations called significant. This formula is adapted to the following two equations for this study: #{score_op i > x, i = 1,2,...,3284179} #{score_or i > x, i = 1,2,...,3284179} and #{score_gp i > y, i = 1,2,...,3284179} #{score_gr i > y, i = 1,2,...,3284179} Since the procedure for FDR estimation has the same computational needs as the computation procedure on real genotype data, it is impractical to do multiple permutations. However, the FDR estimation in this study should be reliable because of the large number of permuted/uncorrelated SNP loci, equivalent to on average 10 000 permutations at an MAF interval of 0.01. The significance of SNPcoexpression associations was also evaluated based on another permutation strategy. The top 100 000 SNPcoexpression associations based on each model were retrieved. For each of these associations, the genotypes of the SNP were permuted 1000 times, resulting in 1000 scores on null data. The null distribution of on/off or gap/substitution scores was simulated based on the 1000 permutation of top 100 000 associations, i.e. 10 8 null scores. The P-values for real scores were initially estimated by the number of null scores greater than a query real score divided by 10 8 , and subsequently adjusted for multiple comparisons using Benjamini and Hochberg's method ().
RESULTS
Identified SNPcoexpression associationsWe first tested whether the identified SNPcoexpression associations are meaningful, i.e. distinguishable from those based on permuted SNP data. Comparisons of score distributions for top 20 000 SNPcoexpression associations between real and permuted genotype data are shown in. In general, the distributions of on/off scores are indistinguishable between real and permuted genotype data, suggesting that human genome is likely to generate random on/off SNPcoexpression associations. For all populations, the distributions of gap/substitution scores based on real genotype data have obvious right shifts when compared with those based on permuted genotype data, indicating that the gap/substitution model is more powerful in detecting SNPcoexpression associations than the on/off model. The difference between two models may also suggest that in human genome, the scenario where genes show coexpression under individual genotypes but not under pooled genotypes is more widespread than the scenario where genes switch coexpression relations between positive and negative values under different genotypes. In, it appears that the difference of gap/substitution scores between real and permuted genotype data are generally larger at  = 1.5 than at  = 1 or 2. Further, with an FDR threshold of 0.1, gap/substitution model with  = 1.5 generated much more SNPcoexpression associations than  = 1 or 2 (). These analyses suggest that the gap/substitution model is more powerful at  = 1.5 than at  = 1 or 2. To provide more useful information, we considered the SNPcoexpression associations with FDR <0.1 under the gap/substitution model with  = 1.5 as a reasonable set of results, including 44 769 and 50 792 SNPcoexpression associations based on single and pooled populations, respectively. The HapMap populations are indeed different ethnic groups. The results suggest that SNPcoexpression associations exist both within an ethnic group and among ethnic groups. Further, we found that there are striking differences in the number of SNPcoexpression associations among ethnic groups. CHB and JPT have <2000 SNPcoexpression associations, whereas CEU and YRI have 9522 and 33 346 SNPcoexpression associations, respectively. Between ethnic groups, there may be up to 87% common gene coexpression relations in the SNPcoexpression associations (), indicating that some SNP-dependent coexpression relations may be widespread in humans. However, we found that common coexpression relations are often associated with different loci in different ethnic groups, reflecting substantial genetic variations among ethnic groups. In addition, only 40% coexpression relations are shared between single and pooled populations (), suggesting that a large number of SNPcoexpression associations can be detected only if genetic variations are increased when different ethnic groups are studied together. Previous studies on associations between SNPs and expression levels show that associated SNPs tend to be proximal (cis-) to their respective genes (). Out of the 95 561 SNP coexpression associations identified in this study, 48 143 have information of chromosomal locations according to the Ensembl database (http://www.ensembl.org/). We found that in 47 407 (98.5%) SNPcoexpression associations, the SNPs are located remotely from the coexpressed genes (i.e. not between 1 kb upstream and downstream of the coexpressed genes). In addition, in 41 406 (85.3%) SNPcoexpression associations, the SNPs are located on a different chromosome from the coexpressed genes. These analyses suggest that most of SNPcoexpression associations are transassociations, distinct from the case of associations between SNPs and expression levels. Further, we defined that an SNP is related to a gene if it is located between 1 kb upstream and downstream of the gene. Out of the 95 561 SNPcoexpression associations, there were 43 924 unique associated SNPs, which were found to be related to a total of 4644 unique genes. A GO term enrichment analysis was applied to these SNP-related genes using Fisher's exact test with Bonferroni correction. The top 10 associated GO terms (not including cellular component) are summarized in. It appears that the SNPrelated genes are more likely to be regulatory genes (i.e. genes that regulate the activity of other genes), which are widely involved in binding, signal transduction and transcriptional regulation.
Availability of the databaseThe identified SNPcoexpression associations were deposited in the SNPxGE 2 database. The SNPxGE 2 database is freely available at http://lambchop.ads.uga.edu/snpxge2/index.php. The SNPcoexpression associations can be searched on website via
SNPcoexpression associations
Y. Wang et al.gene symbol or reference SNP ID, which represent units of SNPcoexpression associations. Alternatively, all the associations can be downloaded as a plain text file. On the home page, a quick search engine which supports keyword search and batch search is provided. An advanced search page is also provided, which allows the user to choose a cutoff FDR, to search by GO terms or to use exact search. When the user submits a query (e.g. XPO4) on the home page, a brief information page is returned (), on which the icon for a particular association can be clicked on for detailed information. On the detailed information page (), three pieces of information are provided: (i) parameters for the SNPcoexpression association, including population, gap/substitution score, P-value, FDR and associated GO terms; (ii) genomic information for the three units of the SNPcoexpression association, including positions, RefSeq IDs and Ensembl IDs for the two transcripts, and position, function and related gene (if the SNP is located between 1 kb upstream and downstream of a gene) for the SNP; (iii) a plot showing
A stand-alone tool for analyzing any two transcriptsIn the current study, in order to make the genome-wide SNPcoexpression association studies feasible based on our current computational capabilities, the two transcripts of an SNPcoexpression association were restricted to the same GO terms. However, we are aware that the two transcripts that are associated with the genotypes of an SNP may belong to different GO terms. Thus, we provide a stand-alone program on the 'download' page, for the search of associated SNPs for any two transcripts of interest. The usage of the program is described in its incorporated manual. The user may use the 'download' web page to plot an SNPcoexpression association of interest.
DISCUSSIONUnlike traditional eQTL analyses, in this study, we have associated differential coexpression relations between two genes with the genotypes of an SNP on a genome scale. We found that most of the associated SNPs in SNPcoexpression associations are located remotely from the coexpressed genes, and that the SNPrelated genes are enriched with regulatory functions. A potential mechanism underlying SNPcoexpression associations could be thatthe associated SNPs affect the functions or expression of their related genes, which are regulators of downstream coexpressed genes, and thereby these associated SNPs could fine tune coexpression relationships between genes. Gene expression is important for understanding the genetics of complex diseases. This study suggests that natural variations in human gene expression may exist in coexpression relationships. The analysis of genetically determined variation in coexpression relationships may enhance understanding of both the underlying genetics and the population differences in complex diseases. The SNPxGE 2 database provides information on computationally predicted human SNPcoexpression associations. The interfaces of SNPxGE 2 are friendly and easy to use. Biologists may use this database to find whether their genes of interest have coexpressed/interacting partners associated with a particular distribution of genotypes, and/or their potential upstream regulatory genes, which are difficult to detect using routine correlation analyses. Biologists may also use this database to study potentially dynamic and complex relationships among the members of a biological process using GO term search. SNPxGE 2 is a continuing project and is expected to grow substantially over the coming years as next-generation sequencing technologies like Illumina, 454 Plus PacBio and Ion Torrent have made the data generation cheaper and newer mapping technologies will lead to enormous amounts of RNASeq data for studying gene expression (), which is quantitative enough to be included in human SNPcoexpression association analyses. Furthermore, mapping differential gene coexpression to more genetic features like DNA copy numbers (generated from array CGH data) is also under investigation and will be incorporated into SNPxGE 2 in the next release. In addition, this study establishes preliminary results for constructing human genotype-dependent coexpression networks, which will be carried out more extensively in the future.
SNPcoexpression associations
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
140 SNPs. However, Kayano et al.'s method, which incorporated several different statistical tests and logistic regression, was not efficient for a comprehensive study on a genome scale. Also, they addressed only one case of SNPcoexpression association. Therefore, we considered the approach introduced by Dettling et al. (2005), which consisted of single statistical tests and was proven to be as powerful as logistic regression, but at the same time the computational cost in terms of searching for differentially expressed gene combinations were considerably low. Although Dettling et al.'s work dealt with binary association, the three-class association problem in our SNP coexpression associations can be modeled by finding the best one from the three possible binary associations. For this study, we adopted the following convention: the correlation between two expression profiles was measured by Pearson's correlation coefficient. Given a dataset in which expression levels and genotypes are measured at once for each individual, for a pair of expression profiles E 1 ,E 2 and an SNP locus with genotypes AA, AB or BB, the genotypedependent correlations between E 1 and E 2 (the correlations based on a subset of individuals with the same genotype) are denoted by R AA , R AB and R BB , respectively, and the overall correlations between E 1 and E 2 in any two of the genotypes are denoted by R AA+AB , R AA+BB and R AB+BB. The on/off model finds a maximum difference among genotype-dependent correlations, which is calculated as score_o = max(|R AA R AB |, |R AA R BB |,|R AB R BB |) The on/off model could be regarded as an alternative approach to address the switch mechanism introduced by Kayano et al. (2009). The gap/substitution model tests whether the sum of genotype-dependent correlations is significantly higher than the overall correlation, which is calculated as score_g = max(|R AA +R AB R AA+AB |, |R AA +R BB R AA+BB |, |R AB +R BB R AB+BB |) where  is a pre-defined constant. A good gapsubstitution association may be interpreted as the expression patterns of two genes are well correlated under individual genotypes at a genomic locus, while their overall correlation cannot be observed. In the above equations, if the frequency of a genotype is <10%, we only consider the interactions in the other two genotypes. In such case, the above equations become the original forms proposed by Dettling et al. (2005), i.e. assuming that BB is not considered,
