Motivation: Finding somatic mutations from massively parallel sequencing data is becoming a standard process in genome-based biomedical studies. There are a number of robust methods developed for detecting somatic single nucleotide variations However, detection of somatic copy number alteration has been substantially less explored and remains vulnerable to frequently raised sampling issues: low frequency in cell population and absence of the matched control samples. Results: We developed a novel computational method SoloDel that accurately classifies low-frequent somatic deletions from germline ones with or without matched control samples. We first constructed a probabilistic, somatic mutation progression model that describes the occurrence and propagation of the event in the cellular lineage of the sample. We then built a Gaussian mixture model to represent the mixed population of somatic and germline deletions. Parameters of the mixture model could be estimated using the expectation-maximization algorithm with the observed distribution of read-depth ratios at the points of discordant-read based initial deletion calls. Combined with conventional structural variation caller, SoloDel greatly increased the accuracy in classifying somatic mutations. Even without control, SoloDel maintained a comparable performance in a wide range of mutated subpopulation size (10–70%). SoloDel could also successfully recall experimentally validated somatic deletions from previously reported neuropsychiatric whole-genome sequencing data. Availability and implementation: Java-based implementation of the method is available at http:// sourceforge.net/projects/solodel/
IntroductionAdvances in next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies enable us to find novel aspects of disease onsets that could not be detected in the previous chip-based technologies. Finding somatic mutations is a representative NGS analysis to detect genetic variants that occurred after conception. Various types of somatic mutations such as single nucleotide variations (SNVs) (), gene-fusions (and transposable element insertions () have been focused in a number of disease genome studies, which has led to a successful development of the relevant computational detection methods (). Somatic copy number alteration (SCNA) is one of the major genomic aberrations frequently found in cancer (). Several SCNA detection algorithms have been developed based on read-depth comparison () and/or read-pair analysis () between tumor and matched control samples. While these algorithms have successfully discovered a number of diseaseassociated SCNAs, several hurdles still remain. First, many somatic mutations reside only in a small population of the sample to be present in a low allele fraction; this problem is well known as tumor cellularity or tumor subclonality in cancer. Furthermore, non-tumor diseases may harbor similar issues due to somatic mosaicism. For example, remarkably low-frequent (down to a few percent) mutations have been reported in brain diseases such as neuropsychiatric disorders and neurodevelopmental malformations (). At this range, conventional SCNA detection methods can be seriously compromised because their key evidence (read-depth discrepancy in disease-control pair) is obscured; copy number changes occur only in a subset to make only an insignificant difference in overall read-depth (). Consequently, these subtle read-depth changes are hardly distinguished from natural variance. Second, matched control samples (e.g. blood, saliva or normal tissue) are not always available. Genomic study of brain diseases is one typical case; because brain tissues are usually collected posthumously, control samples are no more available once they are missed in the initial design. For example, only 22% of brain non-tumor (and 72% of brain tumor) whole-genome samples deposited in the sequence read archive contain matched-control information (Supplementary). Although less frequent, there is still lack of matched control in general cancer data including 59 case-only studies (2799 samples) archived in the database of genotypes and phenotypes. This absence of control samples prohibits the use of current algorithms for SCNA detection. We found the two critical problems, low mutational frequency and absence of control, turn to be a rather solvable probabilistic problem when considered simultaneously. A germline mutation is expected to be observed in the entire population of the sample. So the expected allele frequency of a germline mutation is 50% for heterozygous and 100% for homozygous events. And we expect a broadly shared somatic mutation would represent a similar frequency to germline mutations. On the contrary, if a somatic mutation exists only in a subpopulation (e.g. 10% of the sample), the allele frequency of its heterozygous mutation is expected to be much lower (e.g. 5%); these frequencies are hardly expected in germline mutations according to the binomial probability (that one haploid is dominantly sequenced by chance) and can be separated without control. If we can catalog all existing somatic and germline mutations in the sample, the overall allele frequency distribution can be utilized to de-convolute somatic mutations in a subpopulation from the others. However, the classification of somatic mutation among the all cataloged mutations is also dependent upon the assumed subpopulation composition; for example a 1% allele frequency is generally a noise, but can be a successful somatic mutation candidate with a 2% sized subpopulation. So an efficient inference should be applied to find the optimal list of somatic mutations with proper composition that maximizes the observation probability. Another problem is interpreting the deviations in read-depth to a deletion call and its frequency. Deletions in rare populations (<5%) are difficult to be distinguish from noises. Likewise, rich populations (>90%) are almost germline-like and hardly separated. Here, we introduce a novel computational method SoloDel (Somatic Low-frequent Deletion call model) to find low-frequent somatic deletions with and without matched control data. We first construct a probabilistic model of somatic mutation progression to represent the composition of two subpopulation groups, normal and mutated cells. Two types of model parameters, a rate of somatically affected haploid p s (a half of mutated subpopulation size assuming that all somatic deletions are heterozygous) and a proportion of somatic to total deletion k s are defined for somatic deletions to show the status of the mutated cell population and the number of somatic deletions. We then fit the constructed model for a given sample with the assumption that the sample consists of normal cells and mutated cells. Optimal model parameters that maximize the observation probability are estimated by applying the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithms for Gaussian mixture model, which represent the mixed allele frequencies of deletions from normal and mutated cells. We accept the mixed model only if the likelihood of the estimated model is higher than that of a simple germline model (subpopulation free). Final somatic deletion candidates that show higher probability to be somatic are selected based on the estimated model. Using simulated data with various conditions, we demonstrated that SoloDel accurately estimates the mutated subpopulation size with an average error rate of 1%. False rejection of mixture model only happened in near-germline samples. With the combined use of external structural variation caller, we also showed that SoloDelgreatly improves the accuracy in terms of overall precision and recall in the entire range of subpopulation size and total number of somatic deletions (1001000). Moreover, the performance remained consistent without matched control in a wide range of subpopulation size (10%-70%). Finally, we could successfully recall experimentally validated low-frequent somatic deletions from neuropsychiatric disease samples. This implies that low-frequent somatic deletions can also be recruited using our in silico probabilistic model to alleviate high-priced and laborious deletion searching procedures including nested-PCR and single cell sequencing.
Methods
Method outlineOverall workflow of SoloDel is shown in. The input is sequenced paired reads from a mixed disease sample, which contains subpopulations of mutated cells. General preprocessing steps including read mapping to the reference genome, sorting, removing duplicate reads, and indexing are required. A resulted BAM file is fed to the following processes. The first step is an initial calling of deletion candidates. A called candidate can be classified as (i) a germline deletion, (ii) a somatic deletion or (iii) a false positive. False positives are predicted and filtered out based on the sequence homology in the subsequent step. Somatic deletions are further selected using a somatic progression model with their parameters estimated based on the observed value of called candidates. By using the estimated model, candidates that have higher probability to be somatic than germline are considered to be our final callset.
Initial calling of deletion candidatesTwo major approaches, read-depth analysis () and read-pair analysis () have been generally applied for germline deletion calling from NGS data. Unlike germline deletions, particularly for non-tumor diseases, somatic deletions frequently exist in a small fraction of a cell population. In this case, the performance of read-depth analysis can be seriously compromised due to the insufficient read-depth deviation that is easily obscured by the sequencing and mapping variances (). Most of the available read-depth based tools mainly target somatic deletions in cancer (), leaving the aforementioned problem where no clear decline of read-depth is observed. However, a number of anomaly (discordantly) mapped paired-end reads can be obtained with a sufficient sequencing depth to indicate the presence of somatic deletions (). Therefore, we only used the read-pair analysis method in our initial calling step to minimize potential false negatives that come from the limited read-depth resolution. Of the available read-pair based tool, we applied BreakDancer () and DELLY () in SoloDel for their accuracy of breakpoint mapping and popularity of usage.
Filtration of false-positive candidatesRepetitive DNA sequences occasionally disguise the paired-end read mapping to generate false deletion calls (). To reduce the false-positive calls, we defined the following procedure that assesses the possibility of a deletion call resulting from sequence homology using Blat alignment tool (). Assume that two ends of a paired-end read p{r 1 , r 2 } were mapped to genomic locations g 1 and g 2 (g 1 < g 2 ), respectively, to call a deletion. The gap between g 1 and g 2 is abnormally large, by definition, compared with the expected insert size i of the sequencing data. We captured two read-length sized reference sequences, which denote the possible alternative mapping sites that make p revert to a concordant read (Supplementary). We compare the captured sequences s 1 and s 2 to their corresponding read sequences r 2 and r 1 to check if they match exactly and continuously in >90% of the regions. Finally, deletion calls that captured sequences are matched to their alternative sites (s 1 matches r 2 or s 2 matches r 1 ) are filtered out. The remaining calls are considered as a mixture of high confident germline and somatic deletions.
Somatic deletion generation modelTo represent the status of generated deletions of a given sample, we defined a probabilistic model for somatic deletion generation (). In the development of normal tissue, precursor cells are replicated and generate daughter cells that possess identical composition of germline deletions of precursor cells. Those inherited germline deletions are denoted by D g. However, if a somatic event is occurred during the development, somatic deletions are generated and affect to subordinate cells. These affected cells additionally possess the set of somatic deletions denoted by D s. A somatic event affects the constitution of somatic deletions in two ways. First, the time of a somatic event decides the rate of deletion-harboring haploid, defined as p  fp g ; p s g. The population of the mutated cell that contains somatic deletions is represented by this parameter. Second, the scale of a somatic event decides the proportion of deletion loci, defined as kfk g ; k s g. The number of generated deletions is represented by this parameter. All cells possess identical composition of germline deletions. For germline deletions, the expected p g is 0.5 and 1.0 for heterozygous and homozygous deletions, respectively. We hypothesized that the probability of somatic homozygous deletions (two independent somatic deletions occur at the exactly same genomic loci) is ignorable. Therefore, the rate of somatically affected haploid, p s , is bounded between 0 and 0.5. The number of heterozygotic germline deletion, N g , and somatic deletion, N s , is depicted by the blue and red lines in the genome (). The proportion of germline and somatic deletion loci, k g and k s , are calculated from each count divided by the total number of deletion loci, N g  N s. Through the defined parameters, p and k, the status of generated deletions of a given sample can be represented.
Probabilistic estimation of deletion candidates with observed valuesFor each deletion candidate d i that passed the sequence homology filter, we can calculate the reduced depth of predicted region (x i ) and the total depth of flanking region (n i ) (). To select somatic deletion candidates, classification of true somatic deletions from germline heterozygous deletions is indispensible. For given observed values n i and x i , we can consider each value as the sequence of independent trials and the number of successes of the binomial distribution. Then, probability of a deletion with observed values can be estimated by the binomial probability mass function:As d i can either be a germline heterozygous deletion or a somatic deletion, the success probability p of binomial distribution follows the rate of deletion-harboring haploid, p g and p s , for each case. The probability that d i is from the germline heterozygous deletions or the somatic deletions follows the ratio between the number of germline heterozygous deletions and somatic deletions, k g and k s. Therefore, the probability of a deletion for given observed values n i and x i can be obtained as follows.Given h  fp; kg, the likelihood function is derived by the product of probabilities of independent deletion candidates with observed values.The maximum likelihood estimator of h  fp; kg can be obtained as follows with the constraints:
Estimation of model parameters and selection of somatic candidatesFor the estimation of p and k, we applied the EM algorithm based on the Gaussian mixture model (). For each deletion candidate d i , we first calculated the point estimates ^ p i for the rate of deletionharboring haploid by dividing observed values. Candidates from germline homozygous deletions that show ^ p i close to 1 are filtered out.Since we assumed binomial trials for the observed values n i and x i , each trial follows the Bernoulli distribution with success probability p. The p can be either p g or p s depending on the origin of a deletion, then the point estimate ^ p i is the sample mean of given Bernoulli trials. Therefore, distribution of the point estimates ^ p i for all deletion candidates will be approximately Gaussian by the central limit theorem. We hypothesized that the point estimates ^ p i are derived from the Gaussian mixture model of two groups: somatic and germline heterozygous deletions.To estimate the parameters of Gaussian mixture model, we applied the EM algorithm with the number of components k  2. Estimated mixture model parameters directly represent the parameters of deletion model (p, k). Using the estimated parameters, likelihoods of mixture and germline models are calculated as follows:If the likelihood of germline model is higher than that of mixture model, we reject the mixture model and consider all candidates asgermline heterozygous deletions. If the likelihood of mixture model is higher, then we accept the mixture model and calculate the somatic candidate score (S i ):Deletion candidates with S i > 0 are selected as final somatic deletion candidates. In other words, the most likely explanation for the origin of these deletions is a somatic subpopulation, not a highly deviated sequencing from a uniform sample. Overall processes in SoloDel were implemented as a Java-based single program utilizing open source libraries including Picard, SAMtools (), and other libraries for advanced mathematics.
Generation of simulation dataTo test the performance of SoloDel, we generated multiple sets of simulated data with widely varying core parameters. Datasets were created with various ranges of mutated subpopulation size and the number of generated somatic deletions, which correspond to model parameters p s and k s , respectively. Subpopulation size was varied from 0% to 100% with 10% intervals, and the number of generated somatic deletions varied from 100 to 1000 with 100 intervals. Each number of homozygous and heterozygous germline deletions was fixed to 1000. A total of 110 simulation datasets were designed to be generated based on the combination of two variables. For each simulation dataset, we generated two set of diploid genomes, one for normal genome that only contains germline deletions and another for mutated genome with germline and somatic deletions together. All simulated genomes were derived from the reference genome of human chromosome 1 (hg19) by introducing random deletions. The size of introduced deletions was randomly selected between 500 bp to 10 kb. Generation of simulated genome was implemented by Python. GemSim () was used to generate paired-end reads from the simulated genomes based on the Illumina paired-end error model. The number of required paired-reads was calculated based on the planned mean coverage (70). A total of 86 000 000 paired reads were generated for each simulation dataset. Among them, the relative abundance of the mutated genome was calculated according to each assigned subpopulation size. All generated pairedend reads were mapped using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner () and merged into one alignment (BAM) file for each dataset. Merging, sorting, removing duplicates and indexing of alignment (BAM) file were performed using SAMtools software package (). The resulting BAM files for each dataset were tested to SoloDel and several previous SCNA detection algorithms (). For the performance measure of SoloDel, two different external initial callers BreakDancer () and DELLY () were tested to avoid the performance bias by initial callers. The performances of all methods were compared in precision, recall and F-score.
Results
Estimated results of model parametersWe first examined the accuracy of parameter estimation for our probabilistic model with simulation data. Estimation results for all simulation datasets from SoloDel with BreakDancer are visualized in the heat map to represent the performance (). Each cell of the heat map indicates one simulation subtype defined by a combination of p s and k s. To evaluate the accuracy of the acceptance/ rejection call for the mixture model, we generated a negative test set from a mutation-less cell population (0%, p s  0) and a fully mutated cell population (100%, p s  0.5) with no matched control provided; these are the cases for the germline model and should be rejected for the mixture model. A perfect model should accept the mixture model for all datasets except the negative sets (p s  0 and p s  0.5). We found that SoloDel successfully rejects the mixture model for the negative cases, with only a few reporting false rejections at the near germline area (p s  0.4 to 0.45). To clarify the false rejection of mixture samples, we plotted the mis-rejected Gaussian mixture distributions (). With the low numbers of generated somatic deletions (N s ), most somatic distributions were covered with the large germline distribution due to the small difference of mean values between two distributions. Although the mutated subpopulation size is large (p s  0.4 and p s  0.45), germline and somatic distributions were clearly classified when the dataset possesses a large enough number of somatic deletions. For datasets with small subpopulation size, which are in the main hotspot for SoloDel, mixture models were accepted perfectly for all cases. The gradient of each heat map cell represents the accuracy of the estimated parameter p s. As the minimal deviation of true p s between generated datasets is 0.05, accuracy for cases that deviations between true and estimated p s above 0.05 are assigned to zero and depicted as white color. If the estimated p s is exactly matched to the true p s , the accuracy is assigned to 1. The average of the absolute deviation between true and estimated p s was less than 0.005 (1% of the mutated subpopulation size), representing the robustness of the parameter estimation of SoloDel. Even with the false rejected datasets, estimations of p s were successfully achieved regardless of the acceptance of mixture model. Estimated parameters (p s , k s ) with true values are shown in Supplementary Table S4. SoloDel with DELLY also showed similar results, which represent the unbiased performance of parameter estimation (Supplementary).
Performance tests of somatic deletion callingTo evaluate the performance of somatic deletion calling, we ran SoloDel and previous SCNA detection methods to all simulation datasets and predicted somatic deletion candidates for each data. We referred to a recent evaluation study () to select high performing previous methods for comparison including BIC-seq () and Control-FreeC (). Other high-ranked tools from the referred review have been considered but finally excluded from the comparison; VarScan2 () and COPS () were tested but had too low accuracy due to their oversegmentation, and SegSeq () only works on single-end reads. Besides the reviewed tools, BreakDancer and DELLY were also included according to their stated availability of SCNA calling with matched control data. In a test, we considered a result is correct if the genomic coordination of predicted somatic deletion reciprocally overlapped the corresponding true somatic deletion in more than 50%. Based on this criterion, precision, recall and F-scores were measured. All deletions generated in simulation have been hidden and reserved. We note two major advantages of SoloDel compared with previous methods: (i) accurate separation of low-frequent somatic deletions and (ii) discrimination of somatic deletions from unmatched sequencing data. Since none of the previous methods support the SoloDellatter, SoloDel's performance in this condition is unrivaled. Therefore, we divided the evaluation process in two steps. First, we used simulation dataset with matched control to compare the performances between previous methods and SoloDel (lines inand Supplementary). And second, we assessed the performances of SoloDel without matched control data to measure its robustness (circles inand Supplementary). In the test on dataset with matched control, SoloDel with readpair methods outperformed other tools in most conditions (, blue and orange solid lines). As expected, read-depth based methods (BIC-seq and Control-FreeC) hardly detected somatic deletions with small subpopulation size (<30%), even after applying an inherent contamination rate estimation, due to the insufficient read-depth deviations. DELLY (without SoloDel) kept high precision along with the change of subpopulation size; however, a significant drop in recall was observed with small subpopulation size (<30%). We assume that the loss of sensitivity resulted from the absence of subpopulation information (mixture rate) to cause a false filtration of true somatic deletions with a small number of supporting reads. When DELLY was combined with SoloDel, the problem has been successfully addressed (blue lines in). BreakDancer showed almost similar performances to those with SoloDel, but was slightly lower in precision due to a few false-positive calls. Application of SoloDel successfully removed those noises and increased precision (orange lines in). We also confirmed the consistent outperformance of SoloDel regardless of the generated deletion size (Supplementary Figs S4 and S5). Finally, we found that SoloDel without matched control (blue and orange circles) performed almost comparably (to with matched-control), except only at high somatic portions (>80%). Again, note that separation of somatic from germline mutation without control becomes theoretically intractable as being close to 100%. From this point of view, SoloDel's initial rejection of mixture model can be the best estimate of the sample composition. Moreover, when a sufficient number of deletions exist in a sample (, later), SoloDel was able to rescue most of the true somatic deletions with high precision even at a near-germline sample (>80% somatic portion). A few recent studies have reported potential somatic mutations from unmatched data by applying a navenave threshold of allele frequency (). Although target genes were considerably limited and intensive experimental validations were followed in previous studies, such threshold-based classification possesses several inherent problems. First, an arbitrarily selected threshold does not have logical basis to support its validity, and second, compulsive application of an arbitrary threshold can cause high rate of false positives, especially critical to mutation-less samples. We confirmed superior overall performance of SoloDel compared with the navenave threshold-based method for unmatched data (Supplementary). Besides the outperformance, SoloDel can overcome those problems by providing rationale for threshold estimation based on the somatic progression model and mixture model examination with likelihood comparison. All taken together, we demonstrated that SoloDel accurately identifies somatic deletions of various mutational frequencies (subpopulation size and total deletion number) and availability of matched control based on the rational estimation processes.
Performance tests on simulated data with multiple subpopulationsIn SoloDel, the estimation of mixture model was performed based on the assumption that the data are derived from two independent Gaussian distributions. However, in the real disease samples, the generation of multiple subpopulations has been continuously reported (). We thus tested the performance of SoloDel with the data composed of multiple subpopulations. We constructed simulation data with multiple subpopulations based on the real tumor case previously reported (). In the previous work, authors found the clonal evolution patterns that consist of four subclones in the tumor sample and measured their relative abundance by analyzing mutant allele frequencies of somatic point mutations from whole-genome sequencing data. We reproduced this clonal evolution patterns with measuredabundances of subclones to the simulation dataset by introducing somatic deletions (and). The number of introduced deletions was decided based on the rate of validated mutations for each subclone in the previous work. Performances of BIC-seq, Control-FreeC, DELLY and BreakDancer with matched control data were compared with that of SoloDel without matched control for this multiple subclone data. BIC-seq failed to report any somatic deletions from every subclones. Although the data consist of multiple subpopulations, SoloDel showed acceptable performance with the estimation based on the mixture of two subgroups (somatic and germline). In the performance comparison, overall measurements of SoloDel outperformed those of Control-FreeC and DELLY regardless of the type of initial caller (). Although Control-FreeC showed good performance in precision, most somatic deletions from subclone P3 and P4 were missed. DELLY detected substantial number of somatic deletions from P3, but lost all deletions from P4. Combined with SoloDel, DELLY recovered a part of somatic deletions from subclone P4 that consists of less than 5% of cell population. This result indicates the importance of appropriate model estimation for the detection of somatic deletion with small subpopulation size. Only BreakDancer showed comparable results, but performances of SoloDel were achieved without matched control information. With multiple subclone data, we confirmed again the competitiveness of SoloDel compared with previous methods.
Somatic deletion calling on neuropsychiatric dataDetecting low-frequent somatic deletions in the real data is a challenging problem. Most previous studies have searched and validated the existence of somatic deletions based on the SNP arrays, which cannot capture somatic deletions with small subpopulation size (). A recent study reports the detection of low-frequent somatic deletions in neuropsychiatric). Although they only focused on a small number of somatic candidates with high probability, a few of them were experimentally validated by Sanger sequencing and single cell sequencing of deletion breakpoints. We applied SoloDel to the real whole-genome sequencing data from the previous study, composed of two schizophrenic brain and two normal brain data with the absence of matched control information. Mixture models were accepted for all samples, indicating the presence of mutated subpopulation with somatic deletions. A total number of 287 and 238 somatic deletion candidates for normal brains and 382 and 346 candidates for schizophrenic brains were called by SoloDel, compared with the predicted number of 29 and 18 candidates for normal brains and 15 and 18 candidates for schizophrenic brains in the previous study. Although called results of SoloDel may include a certain amount of false positives, much higher number of calls than previous study was expected according to the declared risk of excessive false negatives due to the intensive minimization of false-positive rate (). Differed from the result of previous work, more number of somatic deletion candidates were called from the schizophrenic cases, which may suggest the relationship between the number of occurred somatic deletion and the onset of disease. We then examine the called candidates to confirm somatic deletions that were validated in the previous study.shows the called results for the previously validated candidates. Among the six validated somatic deletions, five were successfully called as somatic by SoloDel. One exceptional candidate was classified as germline; however, mis-classification was due to the corrected penalty of high variance of read-depth at the predicted region of deletion. Validated somatic deletions covered a broad range of somatic portion, supporting unbiased confirmation of called results from SoloDel.
DiscussionIn this article, we developed a novel computational method SoloDel for detecting low-frequent somatic deletions with and without matched control samples. We defined a probabilistic model for somatic deletion generation and estimated model parameters using EM algorithms to provide the criteria of classifying somatic deletion candidates. Compared with previous methods, we showed outstanding performances of detecting low-frequent somatic deletions with various simulation datasets. With the real sequencing data, we successfully recalled experimentally validated somatic deletions confirmed by the previous study, supporting the reliable performance. Recent studies have been increasingly reporting the contribution of low-frequent somatic mutations to the onset of various diseases including neuropsychiatric diseases (). However, confirmed list of low-frequent somatic mutations are still limited due to the lack of detecting methods, insufficiency of matched control information and difficulty of experimental validation. Advances of new techniques such as single cell sequencing and targeted ultradepth sequencing will allow us to fill up the catalog of low-frequent somatic mutations. Decline of sequencing cost and growth of interest for the somatic analysis will increase the datasets with matched control and improve the quality of somatic call. With enough numbers of secured gold standards, the development of computational tools for accurate detection of somatic mutations will be followed. There are several issues to enhance the detecting ability of SoloDel. To detect low-frequent somatic deletions as intended, enough coverage of whole-genome sequencing data is indispensable. Initial calling of deletion candidates that completely depend on the external callers is another issue to improve. Consideration of polyploidy that affects the estimation of subpopulation size may also elevate the performance of SoloDel by using GC content normalization (). In spite of the issues for improvement, SoloDel showed considerable results compared with the conventional methods even with the harsh conditions, which makes it applicable for identifying low-frequent somatic deletions of many challenging cases.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Fig. 2. Defined model of somatic deletion generation. (a) During the normal development process, daughter cells replicated from precursor cell inherit identical composition of germline deletions (blue dots and lines). However, subpopulation of cells can obtain somatic deletions (a red dot and line) by a somatic event during the development. (b) A somatic event affects the composition of somatic deletion in two ways in a fully developed tissue. The time of a somatic event determines the population of mutated cells (the number of cells with red backgrounds), and the scale of a somatic event determines the number of generated somatic deletions (the number of red lines in the genome). Both aspects are reflected by the model parametersa rate of somatically affected haploid (p s ) and a proportion of somatic to total deletion (k s ). The figure shows an example of a mixed tissue with p s  0.2 (mutated subpopulation size is 0.4) and k s  0.25 (Color version of this figure is available at Bioinformatics online.) SoloDel
J.Kim et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
