SORTALLER is an online allergen classifier based on allergen family featured peptide (AFFP) dataset and normalized BLAST E-values, which establish the featured vectors for support vector machine (SVM). AFFPs are allergen-specific peptides panned from irredundant allergens and harbor perfect information with noise fragments eliminated because of their similarity to non-allergens. SORTALLER performed significantly better than other existing software and reached a perfect balance with high specificity (98.4%) and sensitivity (98.6%) for discriminating allergenic proteins from several independent datasets of protein sequences of diverse sources, also highlighting with the Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) as high as 0.970, fast running speed and rapidly predicting a batch of amino acid sequences with a single click. Availability and implementation: http://sortaller.
INTRODUCTIONAllergy symptoms affect more than 25% of the population in industrialized countries (). The allergy mechanism is an immunological reaction against an allergen that is often IgE mediated, but non-IgE mediated (i.e. cell mediated) or mixed IgE and non-IgE mediated reaction may be more important in food allergy (). Biotechnology is rapidly developing, which involves the introduction of novel proteins into drugs or foods, and those proteins can be allergenic (). It is essential to avoid transferring a gene that encodes a major allergenic protein (from any source) into a drug/food crop that did not previously contain that protein. To accurately discriminate candidate genes from allergens before transferring those into a drug/food organism would aid preventive efforts to curb the rising incidence of allergies. Sequence comparison of novel proteins for similarity to known allergens is a critical part of the weight of evidence approach used to ascertain the safety of the gene(s) to be transformed. Over
METHODS AND RESULTS
DatasetsA total of 2359 allergenic protein sequences were firstly obtained from the Allergome database (), the Swiss-Prot Allergen Index (http://www.uniprot.org/docs/allergen.txt), the Food Allergy Research and Resource Program allergen protein database (http://www.allergenonline. org/) and the Allergen Nomenclature database of the International Union of Immunological Societies (http://www.allergen.org/). After filtered by negative results of IgE binding, 2290 allergenic protein sequences were retained. The non-allergenic protein sequences were excerpted from commonly consumed commodities and human by searching in the UniProt/Swiss-Prot protein database (). 234 760 non-allergenic protein sequences were retained by a filtering process (detailed in Supplementary material).
Allergen classifierAfter analyzing the AFFP rationale, we have panned 444556 AFFPs from 211 known families and ungrouped allergenic proteins by adopting a specific screening procedure with different sliding window sizes. Of all allergen families, more than half of the families contained only one AFFP, and most AFFPs were shorter than 200 aa (detailed in Supplementary material).A SVM-based classifier was constructed and optimized in concert on two major parameters, i.e. sliding windows of different peptide lengths for AFFP identification and the constant C value in sigmoid function for raw BLAST E-value scaling. It was shown that 20 amino acids was the optimal peptide length for AFFP screening and the C value of 4 in the sigmoid function contributed to the optimum effects on allergen prediction. Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC;) value as high as 0.969 manifested the best prediction result acquired under this circumstance (see Supplementary Table S2 and).
Predicting allergens using substantially optimized algorithm
Benchmarking performance in comparison with existing methodsThe independent dataset of 1000 sequences (including 500 allergens and 500 non-allergenic proteins) and 14 arduous proteins (including at least four allergens referenced by IgE experiments) were used to compare SORTALLER with the following methods that can be accessible: (i) the FAO/WHO evaluation scheme, which is based on the identity of six or more contiguous amino acids or a minimum 35% sequence identity over a window of 80 amino acids; (ii) EVALLER (); (iii) three different prediction methods of AlgPred (); (iv) AllerHunter (); (v) APPEL () and (vi) Allermatch (). As shown inand Supplementary, the SORTALLER software significantly outperformed the other methods and achieved a perfect balance between substantially higher specificity and sensitivity in discriminating allergens from diverse sources. The following aspects may contribute to the superiority of SORTALLER, such as MCC used as the performance measuring end point, which orchestrated two parameters, specificity and sensitivity, to express an unbiased accuracy indicator; the appropriate amount of AFFPs bearing enough information of allergens and synergetically optimized sigmoid function; BLAST used for fast and reliable detection of the similarities of query sequence with AFFPs (detailed in Supplementary material).
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the past 5 years, several sophisticated bioinformatic methods have recorded substantial achievements in allergen prediction (Barrio et al., 2007; Fiers et al., 2004; Muh et al., 2009; Saha and Raghava, 2006; Zhang et al., 2007). Although these tools are effective for predicting allergenic proteins from sequence segments that show homology with known allergens, they are less accurate for novel proteins with low similarity to any known allergens, especially for the undeveloped exogenous genes with desirable traits. In this study, we developed an allergen prediction method, SORTALLER, which predicts allergens by using a novel algorithm on allergen family featured peptides (AFFPs), which were substantially optimized on most of the SVM-based (WebbRobertson et al., 2010) classifier parameters. SORTALLER outperformed other methods and achieved a perfect balance between high sensitivity and high specificity for discriminating allergenic proteins from diverse sources. This method could be used as the first step of programmed allergenicity assessment, and a web server of SORTALLER has been developed to allow for simultaneously and rapidly predicting a batch of amino acid sequences.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CONCLUSION SORTALLER is unique since it is founded on preferential panning of specific AFFPs harboring perfect information for allergens sorting based on a thoroughly optimized procedure. The novel classifier outperformed other methods and exhibited highly balanced sensitivity and specificity and higher accuracy. Moreover, the AFFP dataset incorporated in SORTALLER would be useful for regimens of component-resolved diagnosis and peptide immunotherapy.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
