Motivation: To understand the molecular mechanisms of neurons, it is imperative to identify genomic dissimilarities within the heterogeneity of the neural system. This is especially true for neuronal disorders in which spatial considerations are of critical nature. For this purpose, Hirudo medicinalis provides here an ideal system in which we are able to follow gene expression along the central nervous system, to affiliate location with gene behavior. Results: In all, 221.1 million high-quality short reads were sequenced on the Illumina Hiseq2000 platform at the single ganglion level. Thereafter, a de novo assembly was performed using two state-of-the-art assemblers, Trinity and Trans-ABySS, to reconstruct a comprehensive de novo transcriptome. Classification of Trinity and Trans-ABySS transcripts produced a non-redundant set of 76 845 and 268 355 transcripts (4200 bp), respectively. Remarkably, using Trinity, 82% of the published medicinal leech messenger RNAs was identified. For the innexin family, all of the 21 recently reported genes were identified. Spatial regulation analysis across three ganglia throughout the entire central nervous system revealed distinct patterns of gene expression. These transcriptome data were combined with expression distribution to produce a spatio-transcripto map along the ganglia chain. This study provides a resource for gene discovery and gene regulation in future studies.
INTRODUCTIONFollowing the complete set of transcripts is elemental for uncovering novel molecular components, and for studying physiological and pathological conditions. Next-generation sequencing technologies provide cost-effective means for quantifying the transcriptome. Recent technological advances have revolutionized the field, making it possible to analyze the transcriptome of selected sets of cells within an organism, leading to the collection of data at a high spatial-transcriptomic resolution. Exploring gene expression profiles quantitatively in combination with the cellular physical distribution in an intact model may provide the link between genomic information, contextual function and behavior. In the brain, associating gene regulation of collections of neurons within their spatial organization and role is of special importance to the study of health and disease. Particularly it is important in neurodegenerative diseases where loss of function is highly correlated with abnormalities in form (). To perform such mapping, the nervous system of the medicinal leech, Hirudo medicinalis was selected. This system, a favorable model for investigating development, regeneration and repair, provides a useful model due to its simple structure and distinct behaviors (). The central nervous system (CNS) of the leech consists of a chain of ganglia that has been characterized anatomically and physiologically, and presents high similarity between ganglia (). Each such ganglion contains 400 neurons, most with known function and connections (). Previous gene expression studies on leech CNS have resulted in the characterization of specific genes (). Attempts have been made to clone genes of interest via the candidate gene approach (). Recently, an expression sequence tag database was constructed and is now available to the scientific community (). Yet, functional genomic studies in the H.medicinalis are in their infancy (). Recent approaches in RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis accommodate low amounts of total RNA, multiple condition comparisons and overcome the de novo assembly challenge (). Here, an RNA-seq method is used to study transcription along the leech CNS. The transcriptome of three ganglia is examined: close to the head, mid-body and close to the tail. This choice of three representative ganglia enables querying of gene expression profiles and linking gene expression with CNS spatial organization, at the single ganglion level. The choice of three biologically distinct conditions and not the common two-condition differential analysis () adds a level of complexity, enabling the identification of latent patterns of expression. In the current study, a transcriptome of the adult leech H.medicinalis CNS was produced. A non-redundant set of transcripts has been identified and analyzed in various forms, including geneisoform relationships, functional relationships, full-length analysis and gene ontology. To verify the full-length analysis and coverage level, the innexin family, which has been previously studied in the leech, was tested (H.medicinalis and Hirudo Verbana) (*To whom correspondence should be addressed.). A differential expression analysis over the three spatially distinct regions has been used to identify patterns of gene expression. The gene expression profiles were characterized and classified into nine major patterns, demonstrating dominant expression distributions along the ganglia chain. In the present study, advantage is taken of a simple model, the leech CNS, together with a novel differential expression approach, to combine the transcriptome with the spatial configuration, thus, producing a spatio-transcripto map of the CNS. Resultant data provide a highly useful functional and genomic resource for future systemic studies. Moreover, the strategy for transcriptome analysis presented here may be helpful in other similar transcriptome studies.
METHODS
Leech RNAAs described in the Workflow (Supplementary), RNA has been extracted from three adult medicinal leeches (Supplementary). All were obtained from a H.medicinalis colony grown in France at Ricarimpex Farm. Leeches are maintained in our animal facility in tanks populated with about 20 leeches in a controlled environment, at 16 C and 12 h/12 h day/night cycle. Before use, leeches were placed on ice for 30 min and then dissected dorsally. Three ganglia were harvested from each leech (numbers 2, 10 and 19) (and Supplementary). For technical replicas, ganglion number 10 was harvested from three additional leeches, pooled together for RNA isolation and separated into three samples for RNA-seq.
RNA isolation and quality controlTotal RNA was extracted from each ganglion using RNeasy Lipid Tissue (Qiagen). The quality and quantity of each RNA sample was assessed by Agilent's 100 Bioanalyzer pico chip. RNA samples contained a concentration of 45170 pg/l.
RNA amplificationRNA has been amplified using Ovation Kit v2.0 (NuGEN). Before amplification, all samples were lyophilized using a SpeedVac instrument and then suspended in 5 l of nuclease-free water.
Illumina sequencing and quality controlComplementary DNAs (cDNAs) were quantified using Nanodrop and Bioanalyzer DNA 1000 Chip (Supplementary). Two micrograms (in 100 l) of cDNAs were fragmented using Bioruptor instrument with three 10 s ('on') cycles of sonication interrupted by 90 s pauses ('off'). The library preparation proceeded with the 'END-REPAIR' reaction from the NEB kit (NEBNext) and then with TruSeq DNA/RNA library preparation. cDNA libraries were loaded on a high-sensitivity chip and quantified on the QuBIT instrument (Supplementary), to prepare the two 6-plex pools that were separated into two pools (Supplementary). The two pools were quantified (molarity) on Bioanalyzer with the High Sensitivity DNA kit and diluted. The cDNA libraries were generated using messenger RNA-seq (mRNA-seq) assay for transcriptome sequencing on Illumina Hiseq2000. Three cDNA libraries were generated from the total RNA of ganglion number 19 and three cDNA libraries were generated from the pooled total RNA of ganglion 10 in equal amounts, and sequencing was performed in one lane to generate 50 bp single end (SE) reads. A similar procedure was carried out for ganglia numbers 2 and 19. Library construction and) and three more samples were taken for technical replicates from ganglion 10 (for more information see Section 2 and SupplementaryS3) sequencing was performed by a commercial service provider (IGA, Applied Genomics Institute). The sequenced data generated in this study were deposited at Gene Expression Omnibus (record GSE45569 or in Sequence Read Archive (SRA) accession number SRR799260-71).
De novo assemblyVarious programs for de novo assembly of the 50 bp SE sequence reads were tested to generate a non-redundant set of transcripts/transcripts. Among the various programs available, the publicly available program Trinity (version trinityrnaseq_r2012-03-17) () was used. Trinity has been developed for assembly of short reads using de Bruijn graph algorithm by single k-mer. Trinity was executed in the inchworm method and default assembly parameters were used. The publicly available program, Trans-ABySS (version 1.3.2) (), which has been developed for assembly of short reads using de Bruijn graph algorithm by multiple k-mer, was used as well. It has been suggested () to use the assembly of ABySS (version 1.3.2) () followed by Trans-ABySS. Assembly of transcripts generated by ABySS into transcripts using Trans-ABySS with default parameters for SE sequence reads and k-mer values of (2550) was performed.), and then, as recommended by the Cufflinks pipeline (Version 2.0.2) (), Tophat (Version 2.0.4) () for splice junction mapping, followed by estimating read counts using cufflinks. To obtain a reasonably sized set of transcripts, a smaller set was defined by filtering out transcripts estimated by RSEM with mean counts of 53 and45000 across all samples. This range based on the xy correlation as presented in the scatter plots (Supplementary) has led to $20% of filtered out transcripts. Those transcripts were irregular, such as ribosomal RNAs or polymerase chain reaction duplicates, products of amplification.
Mapping reads and estimating counts
Full-length and coverage analysisIdentifying whether reconstructed transcripts are full-length is notoriously difficult. For de novo assembly, the task is even harder, as there is no reference to work with. Usually for de novo assembly, the alternative for organism transcripts is a close organism transcript. This was accomplished here in a few steps. First, published genes were examined and then innexin genes were analyzed as a well-studied family in the leech (). Blast results of Trinity and Trans-ABySS assemblies were used to detect innexin genes in our reconstructed assemblies. Innexins with an E-value cutoff set to e 10 were chosen first, after which, for maximizing confidence, only the innexin genes with an E-value of 0.0 were chosen, filtered for a perfect match, otherwise the innexins may be aligned to 41 transcript (innexins show high levels of similarity among themselves). For further analysis, only innexin genes that both Trinity and Trans-ABySS reconstructed were used. For the coverage analysis, the same innexin genes reconstructed by both Trinity and Trans-ABySS were used and then Bowtie was used for mapping the raw reads to the innexins.
Geneisoform relationshipDe novo assembled transcriptomes present a unique challenge in obtaining an accurate geneisoform relationship. Therefore, the RSEM () tool 'rsem-generate-ngvector' was used to cluster isoforms based on measures directly relating to read mapping ambiguity. This tool first calculates the 'unmappability' of each transcriptthe ratio between the number of k-mers with at least one perfect match to other transcripts and the total number of k-mers of this transcript where k is a parameter. Then, an Ng vector is generated by applying a K-means algorithm to the 'unmappability' values with the number of clusters set to 3. This ensures that the mean 'unmappability' scores for clusters are in ascending order. All transcripts with lengths 5k are assigned to cluster 3.
Functional relationships and gene ontologyTo establish functional and evolutionary relationships, BLASTX (version 2.2.23) was used to identify sequence conservation. Both Trinity and Trans-ABySS assemblies were run against Swiss-Prot and non-redundant databases downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Best hits were used as DAVID () input for detecting enriched gene ontology for the assemblies. Results of the single best hit were extracted and hits with an E-value of e 10 were considered significant.
Differential expressionTwo approaches were implemented to determine the differential expression of the transcripts. Initially, EBSeq (Version 1.1.3) (), which uses an empirical Bayesian approach to accommodate multiple condition comparisons was used. EBSeq uses RSEM counts as input with upper quartile normalization. EBSeq classified transcripts into five patterns with a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.05 (). Each pattern was further divided into sub patterns by changing 6  to ! and 5 symbols to achieve a more accurate representation of EBSeq patterns (). Next, EBSeq patterns were divided into three groups by a simple condition: all transcripts in the same state of expression in the first two ganglia were defined in the same group (). In addition, Cuffdiff (Version 2.0.2) () was used with upper quartile normalization and with an FDR threshold of 0.05. Cuffdiff uses Cufflinks counts as input for the beta negative binomial approach. Unlike EBSeq, Cuffdiff sorts out only two conditions at a time.
RESULTS
Sequencing and quality controlAn amount of 221 138 673 sequence reads were generated, each 50 bp in length, encompassing roughly 11 giga bases (Supplementary). The expression levels of the technical replicates, estimated by RSEM, showed a strong Pearson correlation (r  $0.9) (Supplementary). All samples passed FastQC basic statistics for quality estimation, per base sequence quality, per sequence quality score and length distribution.
De novo transcriptome assemblyThe de novo assembly of the H.medicinalis CNS transcriptome was reconstructed by various assembly programs. As described in Section 2, assembly was performed first using Trinity, which generated 76 845 non-redundant transcripts/contigs (4200 bp in length).Swiss-Prot database and a set of 100 601 transcripts produced significant alignment to the NCBI non-redundant database. Using BLASTN, Trinity was found to have identified 86 of 104 (82%) reported mRNAs, whereas Trans-ABySS identified 82 (78%). The N50, median, average length, total length of transcriptome and GC content for transcripts generated by Trinity was 2188, 550, 1124, 86 436 165 bp, 41.60%, whereas those generated by Trans-ABySS was 1140 , 535 , 809, 217 129658 bp, 42.24% (Supplementary). The same tests have been performed for Helobdella robusta and Capitella teleta, as described in Supplementary Table S4. Estimating mapping rate of the assemblies using Bowtie revealed that $50% of the reads with at least one reported alignment for Trinity assembly and $30% for Trans-ABySS assembly (Supplementary).
Geneisoform relationshipUsing RSEM over Trinity output isoforms showed that most transcripts had 1 isoform, 3 isoforms and 2 isoforms (50 548, 21 273, 5024, respectively), and Trans-ABySS showed that most transcripts had 3 isoforms, 1 isoform and 2 isoforms (212 543, 29 226, 26 586, respectively) (Supplementary).
Contribution of specific samples to the analysisBy estimating the percentile of transcripts expressed in each sample (Supplementary), we found that according to the Trinity assembly, the highest number of the transcripts expressed across all samples was in sample number 5, which is ganglion number 10. According to the Tran-ABySS assembly, this was sample number 12, which is also ganglion number 10. The lowest number of transcripts came from sample 1, which is ganglion number 2 for both the Trinity and Trans-ABySS assemblies. Other samples had similar quantities between assemblies.
Full-length and coverage analysisFor both Trinity and Trans-ABySS assemblies, 21 different innexin genes were found, as reported previously (). With an E-value cutoff of 0.0 (see Section 2), 13 innexin genes were found for Trinity assembly as well as for Trans-ABySS assembly, four of which were found to be highly similar, whereas the other nine presented various lengths in different assemblies. Trinity assembled longer transcripts compared with Trans-ABySS in eight of the nine cases (Supplementary). In addition to full-length analysis, coverage of those 13 innexin genes was also tested and found without preferences to either 5 0 or 3 0 , as could be expected (Supplementary).
Pattern distributionAfter filtering out, transcripts of 53 and 45000 mean counts across all samples, 63 077 transcripts were examined for spatial distribution using EBSeq. EBSeq classified Trinity transcriptsinto five patterns, each of which contained a different number of transcripts as shown in. Transcripts were then filtered out by setting an FDR of 0.05, which resulted in less transcripts per pattern () and correlated transcripts in each pattern to the BLASTX results. A list of genes expressed within each pattern was found. DAVID analyses showed that many genes identified by EBSeq were involved in neuron projection, nervous system regulation, neurogenesis regulation, neural differentiation, developmental processes and metabolism. Once the groups were defined (as described in Section 2) and each of the sub groups counted, dominant sub groups were identified as described in(G1.1, G2.2, G3.1). By examining this hypothesis using a 2 goodness-of-fit test, the data were found in consistent with random distribution (SupplementaryC). Furthermore, all possible pairings between the leeches were examined (leech number 1 versus 2, 2 versus 3 and 1 versus 3), and the same dominant behavior of sub groups was observed (SupplementaryC). In addition, using a 2 test for independence, a dependency was observed between the states (equal/unequal expression) of the transcripts in ganglion 2 and 10 and those of the transcripts in ganglion 10 and 19 ( 2  1851.208, degrees of freedom (df)  1, P52.2e-16) (Supplementary). To further establish the statistical significance of the abundance of the identified spatial gene patterns between the nine samples, 30 retagged locations out of the original data were produced (Supplementary). The identified patterns in the shuffled patterning were reevaluated., the middle circle is ganglion number 10 (orange) and the right is ganglion number 19 (green). EBSeq patterns can be categorized into sub patterns and then divided into three groups (G1, G2, G3) and nine sub groups (') as described in Section 2. G1.1 is an example of equal expression between the three ganglia. G2.3 is an example of downregulation between the three ganglia from left to right. G3.3 is an example of upregulation between the three ganglia from left to rightResults from this analysis provide further validation to the statistical tests used to establish the patterns. When Cuffdiff results were classified to identify the EBSeq pattern with a contig match, perfect matches were found (Supplementary).
DISCUSSIONAlong with the rapid advances in sequencing technologies, a set of bioinformatics tools has recently been developed for shortread sequence data assembly () and analysis (). De novo assembly of short reads without a known reference genome is considered non-standard and non-trivial, but still attracts enough attention to provide the community with an adequate set of tools (). Whole-transcriptome sequencing provides a functional genomic view of the studied tissue. Recent developments in high-throughput technologies have provided a plethora of molecular data, but a thorough account of RNA expression levels in the H.medicinalis is still lacking. In this study, a de novo assembly of transcriptome is produced using short reads from non-model annelids, the H.medicinalis, for which public sequence data are still limited. The production of a verified transcriptome is used here as a tool to study the CNS of H.medicinalis. H.medicinalis is one of the most important annelids and as such a valuable model for studying nervous system structure, function, development, regeneration and repair. More than 221 million sequence reads were generated for H.medicinalis. Validation of the different assembly tools significantly affects the assembly output and is needed for optimal results. Trinity and Trans-ABySS have been used for the reconstruction of the H.medicinalis transcriptome. More reported mRNAs of H.medicinalis have been identified using Trinity. Moreover, examination of full-length transcripts reveals that Trinity reconstructed fuller transcripts for the innexin family, making Trinity transcripts the choice for downstream analyses. Furthermore, we found that the N50, median and average lengths of the transcripts generated using Trinity were longer () and with higher similarity to related organisms as shown in Supplementary Table S4 (a comparison with Trans-ABySS) (). A non-redundant set of 76 845 transcripts is reported. The geneisoform relationship of the H.medicinalis transcripts shows that the largest fraction of transcripts presents a single isoform. About 30% of the transcripts show significant homology with Swiss-Prot sequences. Comparison with other openly available leech datasets, the transcriptome of H.robusta, shows a 39% identity at the amino acid level (Supplementary). Interestingly, a comparison with Capitella capitata (a polychaete) shows similar high levels of amino acid identity (34%) (Supplementary). The unannotated transcripts () might indicate novel, and possibly, species-specific functions. Perhaps most importantly, the expression pattern distribution in the leech nervous system presents a significantly larger class of transcripts that are co-expressed along the leech's spatial configuration. Other patterns are much smaller and do not co-express, but rather dominate specific expression patterns along the nervous system. This may indicate that (i) most of the transcripts tend to be located in the ganglia butare not ganglion specific. For example, HSP90 belongs to the previously described 'pattern 1', which supports our classification patterns, and (ii) within each group there is a sub group more dominant, which may suggest that spatial regulation dominates gene function in the ganglia chain. In conclusion, the specific genes and their spatial templates of expression across the CNS of a whole organism provide the community, for the first time, a functional affiliation between genomic and nerve loci.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Gene function in the ganglia chain at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
D.Hibsh et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
