Motivation: Most biological processes are mediated by the protein– protein interactions. Determination of the protein–protein structures and insight into their interactions are vital to understand the mechanisms of protein functions. Currently, compared with the isolated protein structures, only a small fraction of protein–protein structures are experimentally solved. Therefore, the computational docking methods play an increasing role in predicting the structures and interactions of protein–protein complexes. The scoring function of protein–protein interactions is the key responsible for the accuracy of the computational docking. Previous scoring functions were mostly developed by optimizing the binding affinity which determines the stability of the protein–protein complex, but they are often lack of the consideration of specificity which determines the discrimination of native protein– protein complex against competitive ones. Results: We developed a scoring function (named as SPA-PP, spe-cificity and affinity of the protein–protein interactions) by incorporating both the specificity and affinity into the optimization strategy. The testing results and comparisons with other scoring functions show that SPA-PP performs remarkably on both predictions of binding pose and binding affinity. Thus, SPA-PP is a promising quantification of protein–protein interactions, which can be implemented into the protein docking tools and applied for the predictions of protein–protein structure and affinity. Availability: The algorithm is implemented in C language, and the code can be downloaded from
INTRODUCTIONProteins often function only when they are assembled into complexes (). The formation of highly efficient and specific protein complexes, particularly proteinprotein complexes, is a fundamental process in the cell. The structures of the proteinprotein complexes are the principal components of a systems-level description of genome-wide protein networks, which rely on the coordinated and tightly regulated activities of interacting proteins (). The proteinprotein interactions play a key role in various mechanisms of protein functions () and become attractive targets for therapeutic intervention (). Thus, determination of the proteinprotein structures and insights into their interactions are increasingly important in the post-genomic era. Although the individual protein structures are increasingly well determined, protein assemblies are still poorly represented in the Protein Data Bank (). This is because the experimental determination of assembly compositions and structures generally requires the combination of a number of the experimental techniques and theoretical approaches to maximize completeness, accuracy and resolution (). As an alternative, computational docking approaches provide a practical mean to predict the structures of multi-protein assemblies starting from the individual components (). Computational docking procedure usually incorporates two steps (), initial sampling of the configurational space of the interacting proteins to generate docking poses and pose scoring to select the putative native (or nearnative) proteinprotein conformations. Comparative assessment of the current proteinprotein docking and scoring approaches shows that efficient sampling strategies may generate the library of poses, including the native or near-native poses. However, the scoring function often fails to discriminate the native or nearnative poses against other non-native poses and can not always produce reliable estimation of the binding affinity of the complex (), suggesting there is substantial room for the improvement of the scoring functions. The development strategies of previous scoring functions for proteinprotein docking (), whether physicsbased, empirical or knowledge-based, mainly focus on the prediction of binding affinity (or free energy), which determines the stability of the complex. However, high affinity does not guarantee high specificity, which is controlled by either partner binding to other proteins discriminatively (). The development strategies of previous scoring functions are often lack of the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. considerations of the specificity, which is the discrimination of the specific native proteinprotein complex against the competitive ones. According to the Boltzman distribution (P $ expF=KT), the equilibrium population is exponentially dependent on the binding free energy. A gap in binding free energy or affinity will lead to significant population discrimination between the specific complex and alternative ones. As such, introducing the consideration of specificity into the computational design of proteinprotein interactions has achieve a few successful applications (). These work designed interactions that seek to stabilize the desired structures and also destabilize the competitive structures, as the specificity-related interactions lie in the binding patches constituting the interface of the complex (Malod). Thus, to develop a scoring function, the strategy should satisfy the requirement that the stability of the specific complex is maximized, whereas the stability of competing complexes is minimized, which can guarantee both the stability and the specificity for the specific complex. The conventional definition of specificity is the preference of a protein ligand specifically binding to a protein receptor over other competitive alternatives (). The definition is clear, although in practice, the quantification of the conventional specificity still remains challenging (). The conventional specificity requires comparison of the affinities of all the different protein receptors with the same protein ligand (). This makes the practical quantification of the specificity impossible, as the receptor universe is huge, and the information is often incomplete on the competitive alternatives. To circumvent the challenge, we have proposed a novel concept named as intrinsic specificity, which had been successfully applied in the receptorligand (where the ligand is small molecule and the receptor is the protein) system (). Here, we apply the concept to the proteinprotein system. The intrinsic specificity refers to the preference in affinity of a protein ligand binding to its protein receptor with a preferred pose over other poses (). Imagining the N-and C-terminus of multiple protein receptors is linked together, resulting in an effective single large receptor; then the conventional specificity can be transformed to the intrinsic specificity that a ligand binds to the large receptor covering the whole universe of proteins with a preferred pose over other poses (). The equivalence of conventional specificity and intrinsic specificity is under the assumption that the protein receptor is sufficiently large to represent the whole universe of proteins and their interfaces. In reality, there is only finite number of protein folds ($1300) in nature (). Thus, the protein receptor may not need to be infinitely large to represent the whole universe of proteins. A reasonable size of protein surface may provide a few of the diversified interfacial interactions presumably formed by the whole universe of proteins. The process of proteinprotein binding can be physically quantified and visualized as a funnel-like energy landscape towards the native binding state with local roughness along the binding paths (). The native conformation of the complex is the conformation with the lowest binding energy. The energies of the conformation ensemble follow a statistical Gaussian-like distribution. According to the theory of energy landscape, the intrinsic specificity ratio (ISR  E E
ffiffi ffiS p , where E is the energy gap between the energy of native conformation and the average energy of conformation ensemble, E is the energy roughness or the width of the energy distribution of the conformation ensemble and S is the conformational entropy) can be defined to quantify the magnitude of intrinsic specificity. The ISR indicates the capability of discriminating the native binding conformation from other non-native ones for a particular protein ligand on its receptor. The ISR can be readily quantified with computationally generated non-native poses (decoys). Therefore, ISR physically provides a quantitative measure of the thermodynamic specificity without evaluating the conventional specificity through exploring the whole set of receptor universe. In this work, we designed a strategy for developing the scoring function of proteinprotein interactions to maximize the affinity and specificity simultaneously. The idea of the strategy is to adjust the statistical knowledge-based potentials of atom pairs by iteration until the scoring function can discriminate the native binding pose against the decoys. The developing procedure is shown in Supplementary. We tested the derived scoring function of proteinprotein interactions (named as SPA-PP) via the performance on the identification of native binding pose and the prediction of binding affinity, and we made comparisons with the results calculated by the widely used software RosettaDock and two other existing scoring functions.(a) The same protein ligand (red, L) binding with multiple protein receptors (blue, R 1 to R n ), showing the conventional specificity as the gap in binding affinity of the protein ligand binding to the specific protein receptor (R n ) in discrimination against other protein receptors. The binding affinities are represented with corresponding energy spectrum (Green). (b) The same protein ligand (red, L) binding on a large protein receptor (blue) with multiple binding modes (M 1 to M n ), showing the intrinsic specificity as the gap in binding affinity of the native binding mode (M n ) in discrimination against other binding modes. The large protein receptor can be thought as the multiple different receptors linked together
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Preparation of the datasetsThe dataset of proteinprotein complexes for developing SPA-PP was extracted from the Dockground resource (), which provides a dynamic generation of dataset of proteinprotein complexes based on the user-defined filtering criteria. To drive a high quality set of pairwise non-redundant proteinprotein complexes of training dataset and testing dataset, a series of filtering criteria were composed on the Dockground resource. Only the dimeric complexes solved by X-ray diffraction with resolutions better than 2.5 A  were selected. The sequence identity (570%) between each two complexes was used to discard redundant structures. The dimeric structures with true biological interfaces were kept by checking the head lines of the pdb files with remarks 'AUTHOR DETERMINED BIOLOGICAL UNIT: DIMERIC' or 'SOFTWARE DETERMINED QUATERNARY STRUCTURE: DIMERIC' or both of them. The threshold number of interface residues were set to be 430. The resulting dataset contains 3045 dimeric proteinprotein complexes, including 2648 homodimers and 397 heterodimers (Supplementary). This dataset was randomly partitioned into two equal subsamples, one subsample is assigned as the training dataset and the other one as the testing dataset (named as testing dataset1). In addition to the aforementioned testing dataset1, a benchmark dataset for testing was also collected. It combines three available protein protein benchmarks. The first benchmark is the non-redundant proteinprotein docking benchmark version 4.0 (), which contains 176 complexes. The second benchmark is the Dockground benchmark (), which contains 233 complexes. The third benchmark is an affinity benchmark (), which contains 144 complexes with measured dissociation constants. By keeping one entry if there are overlaps among the pdb lists of these three proteinprotein benchmarks, the remaining 325 complexes constitute our benchmark dataset (Supplementary), which covers all available benchmarks of proteinprotein complexes. For convenience, this benchmark dataset was named as testing dataset2. Both testing dataset1 and dataset2 were used for the validation of ability of binding pose prediction for SPA-PP, and among the testing dataset2, the 144 complexes with experimental measured affinities were used for the validation of the ability of binding affinity prediction for SPA-PP.
Preparation of docking decoysTo develop SPA-PP, an ensemble of decoys is needed to calculate the ISR and carry out the iteration algorithm. The RosettaDock v3.2.1 was taken as the structure optimizing and docking tool () for both the training and testing complexes. Three steps were performed. First, each docking partner of the complex was prepared in isolation for optimizing their side-chain conformations before docking using the pre-packing protocol. Second, the pre-packed complexes were then relaxed and minimized with high resolution by the refinement protocol. Third, the refined structures were taken as the starting structures for the docking using the local docking perturbation protocol. The smaller protein was defined as the docking ligand in the complex, and the other was assigned as the receptor, which was kept fixed during docking. Thousand ligand orientations for each complex were generated by docking. Other docking parameters were set as default. The generated decoys are normally structured diversely with I rms (interface C root-meansquare displacement between the native conformation and docked decoys) ranging from small to large values. Three example complexes with small, middle and large number of interfacial residues are shown in Supplementaryto illustrate the structural diversity of the decoys.
Derivation of observed statistical potentialsThe knowledge-based statistical scoring function needs a set of distancedependent atom-pair potentials to quantify the interactions. In our work, the initial observed atom-pair potentials were directly derived from the Boltzmann relation widely used in the knowledge-based statistical potentials (), which is u obs k r  K B T ln g obs k r  1 where g obs k r is the observed pair distribution function, which can be calculated by g obs k r  f obs k r f obs k R : 2 f obs k r is the observed number density of atom-pair k within a spherical shell between r and r  r, and the f obs k R is the number density within the sphere of the reference state where there are no interactions between atoms. The former can be directly extracted from the database of proteinprotein complexes, whereas the later was obtained based on the approximation that the atom-pair k is uniformly distributed in the sphere of the reference state (). Respectively, they were calculated aswhere M is the total number (3045) of native proteinprotein complexes extracted from the Dockground resource, n m k r and N m k are the numbers of atom-pair k within the spherical shell and the reference sphere, respectively, for a given proteinprotein complex m, whereare the volumes of the spherical shell and the reference sphere, respectively, where r is the bin size and R is the radius of sphere. r and R are set as 0.3 A  and 6.4 A  , respectively. There are 14 spherical shells with bin size 0.3 A  from the shortest radius 2.2 A . Based on the definition of atom type by SYBYL (), 12 atom types were used to cover the heavy atoms involved in proteinprotein interactions (Supplementary), these atom types were converted from PDB files by OpenBabel (). These atom types lead to 78 types of atom pairs for the proteinprotein interactions. There are 1092 types of interaction pair by multiplying the number of atom pairs (78) and the number of shells (14).
Derivation of expected statistical potentialsThe observed statistical potentials have its limitations, as the statistical potentials extracted from Equation (1) is not exactly the expected potentials that nature uses to stabilize the complexes (). The origin of this problem lies in the construction of the reference state where the atom pairs are uniformly distributed and independent of each other (). In reality, the protein interactions involve the excluded volume, sequences and connectivity. Thus, the observed statistical potentials are always not equal to the expected potentials (). To solve the reference state issue and improve the statistical potentials, earlier efforts () taking different approaches have been devoted in optimizing the statistical potentials. An effective way is to take into account both native and non-native conformations (decoys) () based on the energy landscape theory () that the native conformation should be sufficiently favored over alternative non-native structures thermodynamically. However, none of the earlier works combined both the specificity and affinity to discriminate native conformation over nonnative conformations of proteinprotein docking. In this work, we considered the importance of both the affinity for stabilizing the native conformation and the specificity of discrimination over non-native conformations to optimize the statistical potentials. We used the iterative method () shown in the next subsection to realize the optimization. Similarly as the observed statistical potentials, the expected statistical potentials are calculated as u exp k r  K B T ln g exp k r  5 where g exp k r is the expected pair distribution function from all the native and non-native conformations, which is g exp k r  f exp k r f exp k R
: 6Given the population discrimination of the native and non-native conformations, the expected number density of atom-pair k was calculated with Boltzmann-averaged weighting over the ensemble of conformations (;), that iswhere M is the number of native complexes aforementioned, and N is the number of total conformations (1001, including the native conformation and decoys) for each complex m. n represents the nth generated decoy of the complex m. is an arbitrary constant analogous to the inverse of temperature and set as 0.1. U mn is the parameter that is assumed to be able to discriminate the naive conformation against decoys. As discussed, both the stability and specificity are required to form a specific functional complex. Thus, U mn is designed as a combination parameter coupling the affinity and ISR, which is given bywhere E mn is the energy score of the proteinprotein conformation (nth decoy of the complex m) by summing over all the expected interatomic pair potentials among the interface, representing the affinity of the proteinprotein conformation. mn is the ISR representing the specificity of the proteinprotein conformation (t k r represents the occurrence times of the atom-pair interaction between the proteinprotein interface. m is a scaling factor that accounts for the contribution of the entropy to the specificity ( m  1 ffiffiffiffi ffi Sm p , where S m is the conformational entropy of the complex m) (). Here, m approximately depends on the number of interfacial residues) of the native proteinprotein conformation of the complex m. An interfacial residue is defined if any atom of this residue in one partner of the native proteinprotein conformation is within 10 A  from the other partner. m normalizes the increase of ISR with the number of interfacial residues. E mn is the energy gap between the energy of a given conformation E mn and the average energy of the conformation ensemble 5E e m 4, including the native conformation and all the decoys of the complex m, E mn is the energy roughness or the width of the energy distribution of conformation ensemble, namely,, 54 means the average over the ensemble of conformations.
Optimization of scoring functionThe basic idea of the iterative method here is to circumvent the inaccessible reference state problem by improving the statistical pair potentials until they are able to discriminate native binding mode from decoys. The expected potentials obtained from the ensemble of conformations generally are not equal to the potentials from the observed native conformations. The difference between the expected statistical potentials and the observed statistical potentials, as well as the iterative equation can be expressed byk r is the expected distance-dependant potentials u exp k r starting from i  0, and the new expected statistical distance-dependant pair potentials u i1 k r was taken to compute the E mn and mn , as well as U mn , through Equations (911). In return, the U mn was used to update the expected pair potentials through Equations (59). Thus, the expected pair potentials were adjusted with the difference u i k r at each iteration step. The controls the speed of the convergence and was set as 0.1. The iterative procedure was repeated until the success rate of the best-scored conformations passing the high-quality accuracy of CAPRI criteria (Supplementary) converges to a value (normally over 98.0%). The final set of the expected pair potentials constitutes the optimized scoring function of proteinprotein interactions, i.e. SPA-PP.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Optimized scoring functionA straightforward way to validate the effectiveness of the iterative procedure on the improvement of the scoring function is to show the evolution of the average RMSD of the best-scored poses and the success rate of the best-scored poses passing high accuracy of CAPRI evaluation criteria (). It can be seen that the success rate increases from 93.3% and converges to 98.1%, whereas the average RMSD decreases from 0.53 and approaches to 0.17 as the adjusting of the scoring function via iteration. Almost all the best-scored poses of the proteinprotein complexes in the training set are identified as the native conformations by the optimized scoring function (SPA-PP), and the structures of the best-scored poses are identical to their native conformations with low RMSDs. This indicates that the accuracy of the statistical expected knowledge-based pair potentials are improved gradually as the iteration continues until the convergence is reached. Our optimization strategy couples the adjustments of the affinity and specificity simultaneously. We can see that the distribution of ISR value of pre-optimized and optimized SPA-PP is clearly separated, and the average value of ISRs for the native poses increases from 5.3 to 7.3 (). It implies that the specificity of native conformation is more obvious, whereas the stability is more strengthened by the optimized SPA-PP. The results validate that the performance of SPA-PP is optimized and improved on characterizing both the stability and specificity of the native pose. To assess how different the docking predictions ranked by a new scoring function from a random order, Feliu and Oliva. (2010) proposed a statistical assessment of the performance of a scoring function on determining the number of near-native conformations among the top-ranked conformations. In this work, we used its P-value calculation [details are in the Feliu and] to get the number of successful cases among our testing dataset1 (320 complexes). A successful case is defined by considering at least one hit located in the top-ranked decoys of the complex. The success curves (Supplementary) show that the successful rate of optimized SPA-PP is much better than that of random ordering. Also, compared with preoptimized SPA-PP, the successful rate of optimized SPA-PP is improved after optimization. The statistical assessment indicates that the optimization strategy is successful, and the optimized SPA-PP could be an accurate scoring function on the predictions of native pose identification and binding affinity ranking. In the proteinprotein docking problem, scoring functions are generally used for two applications: (i) to score and rank the binding poses generated by the docking programs and (ii) to predict and explain the experimentally determined proteinprotein affinities. Thus, to evaluate the performance of SPA-PP, two kinds of tests related to corresponding applications are carried out, and the testing results are shown later.
Binding pose predictionThe purpose of proteinprotein docking is to look for the native or near-native binding mode for the assembly proteins. Whether the scoring function can select out the best-scored binding pose that resembles the native conformation determines the scoring and ranking ability of the scoring function. Ideally, the scoring function should be transferable and work equally for the diverse proteinprotein complexes. For this reason, the performance of binding pose prediction for SPA-PP is tested on two diverse testing datasets (testing dataset1 and dataset2, for details see Section 2). The performances of identifying the native pose are compared among the optimized SPA-PP, pre-optimized SPA-PP and the energy function implemented in RosettaDock3.2.1 (). Also, to emphasize the importance of ISR on the optimization of scoring function, the optimized scoring function, which is obtained by only taking affinity into the optimization (called as Affinity-PP), is also listed for comparison, i.e. Equation 9 becomes U mn  E mn. The success rates of the native pose identification for both testing datasets show that the optimized SPAPP performs much better than pre-optimized SPA-PP and even better than RosettaDock whose force fields perform extremely well for protein folding and protein assembly over other energy functions (). This suggests that optimized SPA-PP is successful on the ability to identify native or near-native binding poses. The comparison of Affinity-PP and SPA-PP demonstrates that incorporation of ISR into the optimization strategy improves the performance of the scoring function on the identification of native or near-native binding poses. The high success rate also means that optimized SPA-PP is effective to discriminate the native binding pose against decoys, namely, able to characterize the specificity.
Binding affinity predictionIn addition to the prediction of binding pose, the prediction of binding affinity is another important application of proteinprotein scoring function (). It determines the accuracy of binding energy predicted by the scoring function compared with the experimental measurements. Because of scaling, the scoring functions usually can not reproduce the absolute values of experimental binding affinity; the Pearson correlation coefficient (C P ) between the predicted and experimental measured binding affinities was computed. Among the 144 complexes of affinity benchmark set (), 72 complexes are defined as rigid docking complexes with I rms 1:0 (interface C root-mean-square displacement between the bound and unbound complexes), and the remaining are classified as flexible docking complexes. This benchmark set of binding affinities contains a diverse set of proteinprotein complexes with reliable experimental binding affinities and for the first time provides an opportunity for evaluating the performance of scoring functions on the binding affinity prediction. The correlations between the predicted and experimental affinities are shown in. The results of DFIRE () and PMF () were obtained from the literature (), and for consistence with this literature, the complexes 1UUG, 1IQD, 1NSN, 1DE4, 1M10, 1NCA and 1NB5 were also excluded in the calculations. Compared with RosettaDock, as well as other two scoring functions DFIRE and PMF (), the performance of SPA-PP for the rigid docking complexes ranks best with C P  0:63 (and), and the C P for all the benchmark set is only lower than that of RosettaDock. The results indicate that SPA-PP isnot only capable of discriminating the native conformation against non-native conformations but also accurately predicting the binding affinities for proteinprotein binding without large conformational change. The comparison of Affinity-PP and SPA-PP demonstrates that ISR is an important factor to improve the performance of the scoring function. The specificity is critical to the proteinprotein interactions and necessary to be incorporated to the optimization of scoring function. It is worth noticing that for flexible binding, SPA-PP, as well as other scoring functions, performs poorly with C P s50.3. This is reasonable, as the scoring function only captures the features of static structure and can not easily incorporate the information of conformational change because of flexibility. RosettaDock includes minimization function during the docking process. This minimization is restricted to the side-chain rotamers. That means RosettaDock considers certain degrees of flexibility into the docking process. This might be the reason why RosettaDock seems to be better in semi-rigid docking than others (Supplementary). However, all scoring functions, including RosettaDock, are bad in scoring performance on the docking with large conformational changes. The computationally efficient treatment of large conformational changes during binding still remains a challenge ().
CONCLUSIONIn this work, we developed a scoring function for proteinprotein interactions, named as SPA-PP. The development strategy of SPA-PP takes into account of both specificity and affinity of proteinprotein binding. It represents a significant advance over the previous investigations on proteinprotein binding interactions and scoring functions, which only focused on affinity for development. Also, we used the largest set of high-quality proteinprotein structures so far for training the scoring function. It makes SPA-PP independent on the training set and more general for applications. The remarkable performance of SPA-PP was validated by testing the ability on the predictions of native pose and binding affinity. The success of SPA-PP demonstrates that the specificity is critical to the proteinprotein interactions and necessary to be incorporated to the scoring function and the computational design of the proteinprotein interactions. SPAPP is a kind of statistical pair-potentials, which are discrete potentials dependent on the distances between the interacting atom pairs. The statistical pair-potentials incorporate multiple energy terms, such as van der Waals interactions, electrostatic interactions and hydrophobic interactions, into one potential energy term. Therefore, the computational docking procedure with SPA-PP could cost less computational time if SPA-PP is implemented into the sampling and ranking of proteinprotein binding.) is 0.63 (statistical significance P50:001). The predicted affinity is obtained by scaling the binding scores with a linear equation:y  0.018  4.79, which is a fitting equation based on the experimental affinities
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Z.Yan et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Quantification of proteinprotein interactions at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
