Motivation: Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a poorly characterized class of molecules that have been identified decades ago. Emerging high-throughput sequencing methods as well as first reports on confirmed functions have sparked new interest in this RNA species. However, the computational detection and quantification tools are still limited. Results: We developed the software tandem, DCC and CircTest. DCC uses output from the STAR read mapper to systematically detect back-splice junctions in next-generation sequencing data. DCC applies a series of filters and integrates data across replicate sets to arrive at a precise list of circRNA candidates. We assessed the detection performance of DCC on a newly generated mouse brain data set and publicly available sequencing data. Our software achieves a much higher precision than state-of-the-art competitors at similar sensitivity levels. Moreover, DCC estimates circRNA versus host gene expression from counting junction and non-junction reads. These read counts are finally used to test for host gene-independence of circRNA expression across different experimental conditions by our R package CircTest. We demonstrate the benefits of this approach on previously reported age-dependent circRNAs in the fruit fly. Availability and implementation: The source code of DCC and CircTest is licensed under the GNU General Public Licence (GPL) version 3 and available from https://github.com/dieterich-lab/ [DCC or CircTest].
IntroductionCircRNAs are a recently rediscovered class of abundant and universally expressed RNA species (). The development of software solutions for detecting and quantifying circRNAs is slowly gaining momentum despite the increasing interest in circRNAs. CircRNAs are characterized by a back-splicing event where the downstream 3 0 splicing 'tail' joins back with the upstream 5 0 splicing 'head' to form a circular RNA structure (see Supplementary). This structure becomes visible in sequencing data as 'scrambled' exons as the co-linearity of genome and transcript is violated. However, the existence of 'back-splicing' junction reads does not prove the circularity of the transcript of origin. Other mechanisms (e.g. trans-splicing) may yield such reads, but only circRNAs are depleted in polyA-enriched samples and resistant to RNAse R treatment. So far, all available algorithms are using these 'back-splicing' reads as a key element in circRNA detection. As a consequence, detection performance heavily depends on the employed read mapper and its ability to map circRNA junction reads to the underlying genome or transcriptome. The two most recent addition to the circRNA detection tool set are CIRI () and KNIFE (). Other circRNA detecting pipelines have been published along with research papers but seem to perform worse than the two in the corresponding benchmarks.It has been recently shown that circRNAs may vary in their abundance relative to their host gene (). It is interesting to statistically discern cases where circRNA and linear isoform expression are tightly coupled from the ones where expression diverges between the two. To this end, read counts over the back-splice junction are typically used as an estimate of circRNA expression and read counts from exons or linear splice junctions as an estimate of the host gene expression.
Results
Efficient circular RNA detection by DCCWe motivate our circRNA detection workflow from the review paper of Lasda and Parker (2014). Essentially, we are looking for chimeric read alignments, which are reported by the fast and spliceaware read mapper STAR (). Our method works with single and paired-end data and executes a sequence of analysis steps as outlined in Supplementaryand below: 1. If paired end reads are available, mapping of mates must be consistent with a circular RNA template. 2. Filtering by minimal number of junction reads per biological replicates to suppress 'noisy' candidates.3. Test for presence of canonical GT/AG splicing signal at circRNA junction borders. Candidates with non-canonical splicing signals are discarded. 4. Removal of back-splicing events that map to the mitochondrial genome. 5. Suppression of mapping artefacts by masking candidates from repetitive or homologous regions. 6. We report new alternative linear splicing events (circle skipping junctions) if detected (see Supplementary).As a result set, we report identified candidate circles by genomic coordinates, gene locus annotation, type of circularization and overlap with gene body annotation (see Supplementary Tables S1S3).
Beta-Binomial for modelling circular RNA expressionWe employ a beta-binomial model downstream of the circRNA detection and read counting to model changes in circRNA expression relative to that of the host gene. We assume that the observed read counts either originate from linear or circular isoforms. Suppose we have k groups (e.g. age groups) and each group has m replicates. We define fx ij ; n ij  : i  1;. .. ; m; j  1;. .. ; kg as the set of relevant read counts for a given candidate circular RNA junction where x ij is the number of back-spliced reads and n ij is the number of all reads (circRNA plus linear plus pre-mRNA). We assume that x j (the number of circular junction read counts for group j) follows a binomial distribution with n trials and probability of success h. We further assume that the parameter h of the binomial distribution follows a beta distribution with pseudocounts a and b. This leads to an analytically tractable compound distribution where one can think of the parameter of the binomial distribution as being randomly drawn from a beta distribution (): h $ Betaa; b; x j $ Binn; h We are interested in testing whether the mean l  aa  b 1 of the distribution differs between the respective groups j 2 1;. .. ; k. Our null hypothesis states that there is no difference between group means l 1  l 2  :::  l k while overdispersion is the same for all groups. The alternative hypothesis states that there is heterogeneity across group means. We select between the two alternative hypotheses with a likelihood ratio test (ANOVA). All relevant routines are implemented in the R package CircTest, which depends on the aod packages Lesnoff et al. (2012).
Benchmark of DCCWe contrast the performance of DCC with CIRI and KNIFE on several RNA-seq datasets (see Data section in Supplementary Text). In principle, true positive circRNAs are resistant to RNase R treatment, and thus the same circRNA should be detectable from RNase R treated samples as well as from rRNA-depleted total RNA-seq samples. Especially, the CircleSeq protocol () provides a gold standard as it involves RNase R treatment, which will partially digest linear isoforms, while circRNAs are preferentially retained. For simplicity, we define circRNA candidates that were predicted from both experiments (CircleSeq and rRNA-depleted) as true positives (TP), whereas candidates that are just predicted from rRNA-depleted RNA-seq libraries were defined as false positives (FP). We acknowledge the fact that incomplete RNAse R digestion of linear isoforms may lead to mis-classifications in this simple scheme.shows the benchmark results for RNA-seq data from whole mouse brain. DCC predicts fewer circRNA candidates than KNIFE. However, the precision (TP/(TP  FP)) of DCC is much higher (97%) than the one of CIRI and KNIFE with 89% and 41%, respectively. Intriguingly, the total number of true positive predictions from DCC (2744) is highest on this particular data set. Similar results were obtained for another dataset (see Supplementary Text and Supplementary). Supplementaryprovides more details on prediction performance and overlap. DCC is implemented in python 2.7, was extensively tested on Mac OS and Linux systems and runs considerably faster than CIRI (see Supplementary).
Host gene independent regulation of circRNA abundance with developmentWe used DCC subsequently to study circRNA abundance in animal development and quantified relative changes of circRNA versus host gene expression based on read count data (see Supplementary) with our CircTest package. Briefly, we used the rRNA-depleted total RNA-seq data fromand focused on brain samples from 3 developmental stages (1 day, 4 days and 20 days) across 6 biological replicates. We tested circRNA candidates that were present in at least 6 out of 18 samples with at least 5 junction spanning reads for divergent expression to the host gene. From the initial 116 circRNA candidates, 72 of the circRNAs were significant (P-value 0:05 after correction for multiple testing, see Supplementary).
DiscussionWe present a software tandem for circRNA detection (DCC) and relative quantification (CircTest). We could show that DCC has a higher precision than its competitors for single and paired-end data sets. Moreover, we adapt a statistical framework based on the beta-binomial distribution for identifying host gene independent changes in circRNA expression. Additional information are provided in Supplementary Text.
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
J.Cheng et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
