Motivation: Understanding the substrate specificity of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 pro-tease is important when designing effective HIV-1 protease inhibitors. Furthermore, characterizing and predicting the cleavage profile of HIV-1 protease is essential to generate and test hypotheses of how HIV-1 affects proteins of the human host. Currently available tools for predicting cleavage by HIV-1 protease can be improved. Results: The linear support vector machine with orthogonal encoding is shown to be the best pre-dictor for HIV-1 protease cleavage. It is considerably better than current publicly available predictor services. It is also found that schemes using physicochemical properties do not improve over the standard orthogonal encoding scheme. Some issues with the currently available data are discussed. Availability and implementation: The datasets used, which are the most important part, are available at the UCI Machine Learning Repository. The tools used are all standard and easily available.
IntroductionGlobally, an estimated 35 million people were living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection at the end of 2012, and roughly as many have died of HIV-related illnesses since the beginning of the epidemic (). HIV-1 protease, also known as HIV-1 retropepsin (EC 3.4.23.16), is an aspartyl protease belonging to the retroviral protease (retropepsin) family. The protease plays a crucial role in the life cycle of HIV, the causative agent of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS); it cleaves the HIV-1 polyproteins in multiple sites to create mature protein components of the virions, the infectious HIV particles (). Because the formal discovery of HIV in the early 1980s and the ensuing characterization of HIV-1 protease, successful attempts have been made to create drugs that inhibit the protease (). These slow down or even stop the progression of HIV infection to AIDS (however, the effectiveness of the treatment can decrease with time due to mutations in the virus). Today, combinations of drugs with different mechanisms of action are often used to achieve high efficacy against the virus but as low toxicity as possible to the patient. Although HIV therapy is one of the most successful pharmacotherapeutical achievements in the history of medicine it is not curative, but rather transforms a deadly infection into a chronic one, often with a prolonged asymptomatic phase if properly treated. A reliable predictor of cleavage by HIV-1 protease can be used to aid in the identification of novel HIV-1 protease substrates in human host cells (cf.) and aid in the understanding of the specificity and the development of even more tightly fitting and more potent HIV-1 protease inhibitors in the future, but hopefully with less severe side effects, such as metabolic syndrome and gastrointestinal symptoms. The work may also be of help in prediction and understanding of other viral proteases in the future. The HIV-1 protease specificity is considered to be both broad and specific; it cleaves a variety of sequences but also processes the HIV-1 gag and gag-pol polyproteins accurately ().There are two different approaches to predicting cleavage by HIV-1 protease: molecular modeling and sequence analysis. It has been argued that the HIV-1 protease recognizes shape rather than a specific amino acid sequence (), which supports aiming for the molecular modeling approach. However, the method is cumbersome and no large scale study has been done on the accuracy of molecular modeling approaches so it is very unclear if the approach is, or will be, competitive with the sequencebased approach. This article demonstrates the current state-of-theart prediction, which uses the sequence-based approach. Several bioinformatics researchers have attacked this problem during the last 20 years, using a diversity of methods (for the most recent review see R gnvaldsson et al., 2007). It was early on claimed that the problem required non-linear methods. However, 10 years ago it was demonstrated that the relatively few experimental data (362 octamers at the time) did not support a non-linear model (R gnvaldsson and). Five years later, when more experimental data were available, linear methods [linear support vector machines (LSVMs)] still performed better than non-linear ones (). This was when the methods were evaluated through out-of-sample testing on a large dataset from human proteins (). It was therefore speculated (seefor the discussion) that linearity could be a characteristic for the HIV-1 protease cleavage problem. (Note that linear and non-linear relate to when the standard orthogonal encoding is used.) A number of papers have been published on the subject over the last 5 years. The most common theme in them is to introduce new features plus a feature selection scheme and show that this yields slightly better prediction accuracy when evaluated with cross-validation. Surprisingly few studies have used the experimental data from the article by, which is more than double the size of any other available dataset. Og  ul (2009) used variable context Markov chains () to construct a generative model for the HIV-1 cleavage specificity. He reported the highest ever prediction accuracies with this method, evaluated with cross-validation.created a number of different features and fused classifiers, among others using genetic programming (GP). Their proposed classifiers performed better than a non-optimized LSVM with standard encoding, when evaluated using cross-validation. Their software is available. Jaeger and Chen (2010) suggested new biophysical features and fused several classifiers [neural networks, support vector machines (SVMs) and decision trees]. They reported that they often achieved better performance than just using a single classifier from this, when evaluating with cross-validation.suggested a feature selection method where a multilayer perceptron was trained and then used to compute the effect of the different inputs so that the best inputs were selected. They reported that this gave a much smaller feature set and better prediction accuracy. They tested this on a small dataset with cross-validation.mapped the amino acid sequences to a local kernel space and reduced the dimensionality together with a LSVM classifier. They reported that this was better than other methods when evaluated using cross-validation.studied the specificity using cascade detection on two larger datasets and concluded that favorable cooperativity between sites is weak. Newell used the larger dataset from Schilling and Overall in his study. G k and O  zcerit (2012) studied several encoding schemes and suggested the OETMAP encoding scheme, based on amino acid features, together with a linear classifier. This encoding improved the prediction performance significantly compared with standard amino acid encodings when evaluated on two larger datasets using crossvalidation. G k and O  zcerit used the larger dataset from Schilling and Overall. Their encoding schemes are available on a web server (http://yufes.yalova.edu.tr/).presented a web server for predicting cleavage by many different proteases, using support vector regression together with many different features. Features were encoded with bi-profile Bayesian feature extraction and selected using a Gini score. They used the larger dataset from Schilling and Overall plus other published data on cleavage of full proteins. Their methods are available (https://prosper.erc.monash.edu.au/).used a correlation-based feature subset selection method combined with genetic algorithms to search for the best subset in a large set of features. This gave better performance than the standard methods when evaluated with cross-validation. O  zt rk et al. (2013) used a sequence representation and introduced a feature selection method (that removed features). They reported improved prediction results with this when tested with cross-validation on a small dataset with only cleaved octamers. Their software is designed to work with the Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis (WEKA) () and is available by email. In summary, many have claimed improvements over the LSVM using standard orthogonal encoding. However, few have taken the effort to check if their new features, feature selection method or model combination method really does better on out-of-sample data or if they are better than improvements suggested by others. This is a significant weakness since there is a real risk of being overly optimistic about one's own algorithm if one has access to the data that it is tested on. There are two motivations for mining HIV-1 protease cleavage data: one is to describe the available experimental data, e.g. with sequence motifs or cleavage rules, the other is to design a method for predicting new cleavage sites. In the latter case, which is by far the most common motivation, the test data must be different from the data used to train the algorithm. A correct evaluation of methods must be done on test data that have not in any way been involved in the training of the algorithms. This is typically not done.
MethodsThe HIV-1 cleavage problem is described in detail in () together with discussions on different encoding schemes. Only a concise description is given here. The classification task is to tell whether a given octamer (sequence of eight amino acids) will be cleaved or not between the fourth and the fifth position. The octamer is represented using an orthogonal encoding where each amino acid is represented by a 20-bit vector with 19 bits set to zero and one bit set to one (other encodings have been suggested, see later). This maps each octamer to an 8 by 20 binary matrix that is transformed into a 160-dimensional vector. However, the dimensionality of the problem is 152 since there are eight linear constraints (each position must be occupied by one amino acid). The inputs were centered so that the zero bits were set to 1 before presenting them to the classifier. The outputs were similarly coded as {1,1}: minus one for uncleaved octamers and plus one for cleaved octamers. The OETMAP encoding (G k and O  zcerit, 2012) and the GP1 encoding () were also tried, in addition to the standard orthogonal encoding. The OETMAP was used by calling the web server mentioned earlier. The GP1 encoding was created by using the scripts provided by the authors, the inputs were centered to {1,1} before presented to the classifier. The software and feature selection from O  zt rk et al. (2013) was tried but crashed and is therefore not included in the comparison. The libsvm 3.18 library () was used, with the multi-class C-SVC method, to train SVMs and called from within the MATLAB (MATLAB, 2013) environment. Both linear and radial basis kernels were tried. The hyperparameters C and c (the latter for the non-LSVM) were optimized by search and 10-fold cross-validation. For the LSVM, the C parameter was varied over the set log(C)  {5, 4.75, 4.5, 4.25,. .. , 5}. For the nonLSVM the C parameter was varied over the set log(C)  {0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75,. .. , 7} and the c parameter was varied over the set log(c)  {5, 4.75, 4.5, 4.25,. .. , 0}. The final values were selected by looking at the mean and median area under the receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve (this area is called AUC). The goal was to select them to maximize the cross-validation AUC. Sometimes the median and mean were not maximal for the same value(s) of C (and c) and then a subjective choice was made. One final SVM model was trained with the full training dataset and the optimal hyperparameter values. Two predictors on the web were used as comparison: HIVcleave (), at http://www.csbio.sjtu.edu.cn/bioinf/HIV/ #, and PROSPER (), at https://prosper.erc.monash. edu.au/. The HIVcleave predictions were done by concatenating the peptides and octamers in the datasets and submitting them in suitable chunks to the web server. This does not present any problem for the HIVcleave predictor since it cuts up the sequence into octamers. PROSPER is designed to predict cleavage in full proteins. The comparison with PROSPER was therefore done on full protein sequences, which were submitted to the PROSPER server. Algorithm performances were, when possible, compared using the full ROC curve and the test with correlated data described in
Results
The HIV-1 PR datasetsFour different datasets were used in our experiments: one with 746 octamers; one with 1625 octamers; one with 3272 octamers and one with 947 octamers. The 746 dataset was presented in 2005 (). The 1625 dataset was presented in 2007 (). The third and largest dataset was collected from the work of. There are a few interesting observations. First, three of the datasets can be dichotomized by a linear classifier when the standard orthogonal encoding is used. Second, the rank of the data covariance matrix, which is the dimension of the subspace occupied by the data, is equal to the full 152 dimensions for three of the datasets, but the fourth has less variation. Third, using the OETMAP encoding (G k and O  zcerit, 2012) does not change the data dimension, which indicates that the OETMAP encoding (which is binary and 240-dimensional) does not add information compared with the standard orthogonal encoding. Some of the datasets overlap and there are some conflicts as listed in. The 746 and the 1625 datasets overlap a lot since they were collected from almost the same sources. There are seven conflicts between the 746 and the 1625 dataset. Two of the conflicts (AEAMSQVT and FRSGVETT) are between inferred cleavage sites () and experimental data (). Three conflicts (GRINVALV, SGVFSVNG and SGVYQLSA) are different interpretations of weak cleavage (). Two conflicts (AAAMSSAI and ARVLAQAM) originate from conflicting. Corrections done to Supplementary Tables S19 and S20 (). The asterisk (*) marks the HIV-1 PR cleavage site). The 1625 and Schilling data share 20 octamers, which all come from vimentin (VIME_HUMAN). There are two conflicts:report two cleavage sites in places wheredid not find any cleavage. The Schilling and Impens datasets overlap a bit. There is one conflict, VEEGIVLG, which is a cleavage site according to Schilling and Overall (2008) but not according to. The octamer comes from a heat shock protein (CH60_HUMAN).
Orthogonal encoding and LSVMA LSVM was trained on each one of the HIV-1 PR datasets and tested on the other HIV-1 PR datasets (the training procedure is described in the Methods section). The results are shown in.shows that the cross-validation result (underlined) on the training data is better than the out-of-sample result when the same data is used as test data, except if there is a large overlap between the training and test sets. Thus, the cross-validation result is a poor indicator of out-of-sample test performance. Another observation is that the two datasets derived from human proteins, the Schilling and Impens data, seem to be more similar to each other than to the 746 and 1625 datasets, which contain mostly octamers generated by varying single amino acids in cleaved sequences. The 746 and 1625 datasets have large overlaps.also shows that it is of great importance what data one uses, both for training and test. The 1625 dataset seems to be the worst to use for training if one desires to model cleavage in human proteins.shows the ROC curves for the case when the LSVM models are tested on the Schilling data and trained on any of the other three datasets. The differences between the three curves are all significant with P-values < 0.05. The smallest difference is between the LSVM trained with the 746 data and the LSVM trained with the 1625 data. The P-value for this difference is 0.02. The test datasets were kept the same for all training sets into be able to compute the P-value for the differences when the test data are correlated (). However, there are overlaps between the dataset (see), some of which are in conflict, and this can affect the results. The results when the overlapping sequences have been removed from the test data are shown infor reference. Clearly, the overlaps have little or no effect on the results, except for the 746 and 1625 data that share many octamers.
LSVM and Radial Basis Function SVM (RBFSVM)The Schilling dataset is the only dataset that is not linearly separable when using the orthogonal encoding. A non-LSVM with radial basis kernel was therefore trained on this data and the test results are listed in, compared with the results with LSVM. There are no significant differences between the prediction results achieved with non-LSVM and LSVM (except for the crossvalidation result on the Schilling data itself). This finding is also confirmed in Section 3.7.
OETMAP encodingG k and O  zcerit (2012) suggested the OETMAP encoding, after having tried several other encodings, and claimed that it gave slightly better results. LSVMs (and non-LSVMs) were trained using this OETMAP encoding instead of the orthogonal encoding. The results for LSVM are listed in, which should be compared with. There are few significant differences between results with the orthogonal encoding and the OETMAP encoding, and none of them are in favor of OETMAP (except the cross-validation result when the training and test data are the same).
GP encodingNanni and Lumini (2009) try several encodings and also combine models with different features. Two of their best encodings for single LSVM models are denoted GP1 and GP2, which were found using GP. They claim that these new features are better than the standard orthogonal encoding but the differences are small and most likelyinsignificant. For example, the GP1 and GP2 features are identical when only one LSVM model is used (this is at least how their code works). However, the performance difference between GP1 and GP2 with one LSVM are similar to those between GP1/GP2 and the orthogonal encoding (), i.e. the difference is probably due to random fluctuation.lists the AUC results when the GP1 features are used as encoding. The results are significantly worse than the orthogonal encoding in five cases and significantly better in one case. The significance level is set to 0.05 and it is not unlikely that there are occasional 'significant' results when doing several comparisons as in this case. Hence, there is no evidence that the features selected with GP are better than the standard orthogonal encoding, rather the opposite. It is worth noting that Nanni and Lumini (2009) used LSVMs 'without any kind of parameter optimization' (sic), i.e. they used the same default C value all the time, regardless of input encoding.
Comparison with HIVcleaveThe four HIV-1 PR datasets were submitted to the cleavage server HIVcleave (). The AUC values for the HIVcleave predictions were: 0.929 (on the 746 data); 0.891 (on the 1625 data); 0.753 (on the Schilling data) and 0.687 (on the Impens data). These results are not competitive with the best prediction results for any of the datasets. The 746 dataset overlaps significantly with the data used to construct the HIVcleave server.
Combining datasetsThe factor that influences the prediction accuracy the most is the data used for training. The four HIV-1 PR datasets were therefore combined in the following seven ways: 1. The 746 data and the 1625 data were joined. The conflicts AEAMSQVT and FRSGVETT were set to cleaved. The conflicts GRINVALV, SGVFSVNG, SGVYQLSA, AAAMSSAI and ARVLAQAM were removed as 'uncertain'. This gave a dataset with. Results that are significantly different from the results with orthogonal encoding, i.e. with P-value < 0.05, are marked with an asterisk (does not apply to the cross-validation results). The underlined numbers on the diagonal (i.e. when training and test data are the same) are the cross-validation AUC valuesThe test results when training LSVMs and non-LSVMs with these datasets are listed in, which should be compared with. The results show two things. First, they confirm that there is no need to use a non-LSVM instead of a LSVM. Secondly, adding the 746 data to the Schilling or Impens datasets tends to improve the out-of-sample prediction, whereas adding the 1625 data tends to deteriorate the out-of-sample prediction. The problem with the 1625 dataset is visible also inand. The main difference between the 746 and the 1625 data are the non-cleaved octamers so this is probably where the problem lies.
Cleaving human proteinsThe cleavage server PROSPER is designed to handle full-length proteins. The majority of the human proteins inare not in the Schilling dataset and are not referenced in the PROSPER publication, these proteins could therefore serve as out-of-sample test for PROSPER. The proteins listed inwere submitted, in FASTA format, to the PROSPER cleavage server (in September 2014). The same proteins were also cut up into octamers and submitted to the LSVM predictors described earlier: one trained with the 746  Schilling data and another trained with the 746  1625  Schilling data. The predictions were then compared. The PROSPER server is restrictive with predicting cleavage. For a fair comparison were the LSVM predictors thresholded to yield a lowest specificity that equaled the PROSPER lowest specificity on the Impens dataset, i.e. they should have specificities above 0.89. The results from predicting cleavage in the 148 cleaved peptides listed inare shown in. The LSVM predictor trained with the 746  Schilling data is better than the other two. This model predicts the peptides to be cleaved in 29% of the cases and gets the cleavage position perfectly right in almost 20% of the cases; it is also less off than the other methods in those cases when the cleavage position is not perfectly right. The PROSPER server is second best. Combining the 1625 data with the other data worsens the performance.
Conclusions and discussionThe experiments show that the LSVM with standard orthogonal encoding is the hitherto best model for predicting cleavage by HIV-1 protease. They also show that the training data is the most important factor for the performance, and that there seem to be some problems in the 1625 data published bythe Schilling and the Impens data. No evidence was found that more advanced feature encoding and selection schemes yield better out-of-sample results than using the standard orthogonal encoding without feature selection. Unfortunately, many published results on this topic are difficult to reproduce. Software was downloaded or requested in the cases this was offered but it turned out to be problematic to reproduce the results also in some of those cases, for various reasons. In two cases, the OETMAP and the GP1 encodings, the methods were available for straightforward use. In those cases, using the new feature encoding was not better than the standard orthogonal encoding. The facts that the feature selection papers build on cross-validation, which is shown to be a poor indicator of out-of-sample performance in this case, and the observed differences are small, also supports the conclusion that standard orthogonal encoding is at least as good as other schemes. There may be significant effects from using different feature encodings and feature selection methods when evaluated on a particular dataset. However, these effects are then small and drown in comparison with the effect of using a different dataset that has been collected in a different way. The data used in this study are available at the UCI machine learning data repository (http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/) and researchers are recommended to use this data when doing proper outof-sample testing and method development for this problem.. AUC test values when the combined datasets are used for training. The second column shows whether a LSVM or a nonLSVM was used. The AUC values should be compared with those in
State of the art prediction of HIV-1 protease cleavage sitesThe prediction from the LSVM with standard orthogonal encoding was compared with the best currently available cleavage servers: HIVcleave and PROSPER. The LSVM outperformed HIVcleave by a wide margin. The comparison with PROSPER was done using only full-length substrates, since this is what it is designed for, but also in this case was the LSVM better. The finding that the LSVM is the best predictor is in line with the discussion in R gnvaldsson et al. (2007). The character of a protease cleavage problem agrees well with a linear classifier with orthogonal encoding. This could also mean that other viral and nonviral protease cleavage problems are linear (or close to linear) when orthogonal encoding is used.
Conflictof interest: none declared.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
T.R gnvaldsson et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
