Motivation: The article presents results of the listing of the quantity of amino acids, dipeptides and tripeptides for all proteins available in the UNIPROT–TREMBL database and the listing for selected species and enzymes. UNIPROT–TREMBL contains protein sequences associated with computationally generated annotations and large-scale functional characterization. Due to the distinct metabolic pathways of amino acid syntheses and their physicochemical properties, the quantities of subpeptides in proteins vary. We have proved that the distribution of amino acids, dipeptides and tripeptides is statistical which confirms that the evolutionary biodiversity development model is subject to the theory of independent events. It seems interesting that certain short peptide combinations occur relatively rarely or even not at all. First, it confirms the Darwinian theory of evolution and second, it opens up opportunities for designing pharmaceuticals among rarely represented short peptide combinations. Furthermore, an innovative approach to the mass analysis of bioinformatic data is presented.
fastaUniqAASeq.pl (Fasta Unique Sequences Amino Acids Search Script) descriptionFASTA is a linear format for the description of proteins and DNA/RNA. Files in the FASTA format contain information about the types of amino acids in a protein. The format is very useful for searching for similar proteins in databases (BLAST, CLUSTALW projects). The largest FASTA databases are AS follows: UNIPROT, Sprot () and Protein Data Bank (PDB). Owing to the software developed (fastaUniqAASeq.pl), we can search for recurring sequences of any length in FASTA files in two modes:@BULLET Normal search (precise search, searching sequences one by one amino acid). @BULLET Offset search (search with jumps by a defined sequence length).The precise search involves the listing of all amino acid sequences with a defined length (shift by one amino acid). The offset search, in turn, involves shifting by a defined length (offset) with fragments at a distance of the offset being included. This is best explained by an example in. Furthermore, the script can filter results (w, withoutIgnored option) to avoid situations when unknown amino acids (X) occur in the listing. One of the options is to generate sequences which do not occur in a group of sequences. This is useful for statistical analysis. The programme can sort results of searching for unique amino acid sequences in various ways: @BULLET key-ascalphabetic sorting, ascending by the amino acid name. @BULLET key-randomno sorting.@BULLET key-usrsorting by a user-defined sequence (changed in the programme source code). @BULLET val-countsorting by the frequency of an amino acid, descending.The programme visualizes results using three methods. The most important is to count the physical number of sequences. In addition, it provides normalized quantity and percentage of a sequence. The programme has been used on the UNIPROTTREMBL database. The sequences for species and selected enzymes were obtained using fastaGrep.pl. FastaGrep.pl is a programme used to retrieve respective protein or enzyme types or any combinations of characters in the description of a sequence (following the '>' character) from large FASTA files. When analyzing the whole UNIPROT TREMBL file, fastaSplit.pl (a programme which splits FASTA files while retaining their structure, according to the number of entries in the resulting FASTA file or size of the resulting file) was also used; the programme was developed to enable the analysis of large protein sets using computers without sufficient memory by fastaUniqAASeq.pl. When processing files resulting from the splitting of large FASTA files, fastaStatResultsMerge.pl is used to merge the results. The available UNIPROTTREMBL database (Release 40.0 of 24 March 2009) was used for the global count analysis and a global histogram of amino acid triplets was generated (3).
CALCULATIONThe calculation was performed for the whole UNIPROT TREMBL sequence database by counting amino acids, dipeptides and tripeptides. Histograms for percentage values were generated and the results of theoretical calculation were correlated with the counting results. Subsequently, species (Arabidopsis thaliana, Danio rerio,
RESULTSAccording to the theory of independent events (), the change of an observed quantity with respect to the reference quantity is proportional to the observed quantity. The theory is reflected for example in thermal conductivity, statistical thermodynamics, chemical kinetics and the LambertBeer law. In mathematical terms, this means logarithmic decay of the observed quantity, dx. In our computational experiment, the distribution of dipeptides and tripeptides represented in the TREMBL database is logarithmic with the regression coefficient R 2 higher than 0.9. The percentage correlation between the theoretical number of di-() and tripeptides () and values calculated using the programme shows a linear relation with the regression coefficient R 2 higher than 0.9. The theoretical number of di-and tripeptides was calculated from the formula:Page: 2935 29332935where: %AApercentage amino acid content in the whole TREMBL database (), %nAAtheoretical content of a dipeptide (n = 2) or a tripeptide (n = 3). The major reason for the discrepancy of correlation between the theoretically calculated number of di-or tripeptides is that a lot of sequences with unknown amino acids ('X' or Alx 'B' and Glx 'Z'), not included in the analysis, occur in the UNIPROTTREMBL database. The programme deletes all di-or tripeptides which contain X, B or Z amino acids. Amino acid and di-and tripeptide counting was performed for selected species similar to that for the whole TREMBL database.6 shows amino acid, di-and tripeptide distribution for H.sapiens and its selected enzymes. The distribution for the other species from the Table is available in the Supplemental Material. When the TREMBL database is divided into species and enzyme classes, amino acid distribution close to theoretical number is obtained. It is noted that amino acid content in a species decreases with the length of its biosynthesis pathway. Due to this, certain sequences occur more frequently, while other very rarely or not at all. A number of natural toxins, metabolites and protein inhibitors are composed of polypeptides or their natural modifications. It can be then argued that processed and highly hydrolyzed food was the first source of inhibitors and natural medicines which protected species against fungi, bacteria and viruses. Many authors claim that food processing (heat treatment) contributed to the rapid brain development ().
Statistical distribution of amino acid sequences
SUMMARYOur calculation results prove that the number of di-and tripeptide sequences is consistent with their theoretical number calculated based on the amino acid content in the TREMBL database. This results from the fact that amino acids have similar or even identical biosynthesis pathways in different species. Therefore, the number of amino acids and their combinations (polypeptides) is generally similar. Short sequences do not occur or do so only rarely and this opens up new opportunities for searching for natural protein inhibitors based on polypeptide structures and their modifications. Many toxins, immunosuppressants and inhibitors have a welldefined polypeptide fragment in their structure. Our calculations provide a new strategy for inhibitor design based on short natural amino acid sequences ().
INTRODUCTION According to the evolution theory of life development on Earth (Darwin, 1859; Kaplan et al., 2000), the process of species' assimilation to the environment has generated genetic changes leading to optimum acclimatization. As a result, the 20 standard amino acids encoded by nucleic acids, which form proteins found in all species, occur in precisely defined quantities in each protein. The distribution of polypeptides is a good measure of the randomness of changes in the environment (Lenski, 1998, Bennett et al., 1990) for respective species and it also represents the statistical distribution of selected polypeptides. Homology-based methods for designing protein tertiary structures are a useful consequence of this. 2 METHODS A script was developed which counts the number of polypeptides with a defined length. Due to software limitations, only the listing of all the available di-(400) and tripeptides (8000) could be visualized. The script sorts polypeptides according to the number of polypeptide occurrences for the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Table 1. Example for searching for three amino acid long sequences (sorting by the number of occurrences) >Sample Fasta File; ATAATTTAGGATTTAC Normal search Offset search TTT 2 ATA 1 ATT 2 TTT 1 TTA 2 AAT 1 GAT 1 TAG 1 TAG 1 ATT 1 GGA 1 GGA 1 AGG 1 TTA 1 ATA 1 TAA 1 AAT 1 TAC 1 defined amino acid sequence or totally at random. The counting is performed by single amino acids or by a defined polypeptide length.
The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org 2933 at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [15:56 3/11/2010 Bioinformatics-btq571.tex]
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
