Motivation: A growing body of literature has demonstrated the potential for non-invasive diagnosis of a variety of human genetic diseases using cell-free DNA extracted from maternal plasma samples in early gestation. Such methods are of great significance to the obstetrics community because of their potential use as clinical standard of care. Proof of concept for such approaches has been established for aneuploidy and paternally inherited dominant traits. Although significant progress has recently been made, the non-invasive diagnosis of monogenic diseases that segregate in a recessive mendelian fashion is more problematic. Recent developments in microfluidic digital PCR and DNA sequencing have resulted in a number of recent advances in this field. These have largely, although not exclusively, been used for the development of diagnostic methods for aneuploidy. However, given their prevalence, it is likely that such methods will be utilized towards the development of non-invasive methods for diagnosing monogenetic disorders. Results: With this in mind, we have undertaken a statistical modeling of three contemporary (digital) analytical methods in the context of prenatal diagnosis using cell free DNA for monogenic diseases that segregate in a recessive mendelian fashion. We provide an experimental framework for the future development of diagnostic methods in this context that should be considered when designing molecular assays that seek to establish proof of concept in this field.
INTRODUCTIONDuring the past few decades, there has been great interest in the search for definitive, yet minimally invasive, low risk procedures for the prenatal diagnosis of fetal genetic disease. Although sophisticated evolution of serum-based screens has occurred, in which concentrations of specific protein markers associated with fetal malformations are determined in combination with ultrasonography; these do not achieve definitive diagnosis (). Recently, there has been rapid development of non-invasive and potentially definitive diagnostic approaches that utilize circulating * To whom correspondence should be addressed. cell-free fetal DNA as a substrate. This circulating fetal DNA is thought to be of trophoblast origin and is present in maternal plasma at a genome equivalent frequency of between 310% (). Practical applications of the analysis of fetal DNA in maternal plasma are growing and are perhaps best exemplified by successful non-invasive prediction of fetal Rhesus D blood group status (), the diagnosis of other paternally inherited mutations causing, for example, thalassemia and achondroplasia () and the detection of trisomy 18 via methylation-specific PCR of polymorphic fetal alleles. Despite the rapid progress towards the development of diagnostic methods for fetal disease using cell-free DNA in maternal plasma, there are still a number of obstacles to overcome before this can be used in routine clinical practice. Most significant is the fact the maternally inherited fetal alleles are identical in primary sequence to their endogenous maternal counterparts. One approach to overcome this has been to exploit the fact that the nucleated portion of the maternal hematopoietic system and apoptotic bodies derived from the placental villus are the primary sources of the maternal and fetal components of cell-free plasma nucleic acids, respectively. Therefore, functional genomic differences between these tissues can be exploited to identify biomarkers for the selective enrichment of fetal nucleic acids () and it has been shown that differentially transcribed and/or methylated loci on informative chromosomes can be used for the diagnosis of aneuploidy (). Recently it has been demonstrated that microfluidic digital PCR approaches have utility for the diagnosis of aneuploidy using functional biomarkers (). Digital PCR has also been used for the diagnosis of monogenic disease () in which allelic ratios are quantified in maternal plasma DNA samples. In the context of a recessive mutation that segregates in a Mendelian fashion, an affected fetus would be distinguished from a heterozygous carrier by deviation from a 1:1 allelic ratio to a state in which the recessive allele is over-represented as a consequence of its increased fetal contribution and concomitant absence of the wild type fetal counterpart. It has also recently been shown that high-throughput wholegenome DNA sequencing can be used for the detection of fetal aneuploidy (). This is an exciting development with great potential because it is a direct method that requires no gene or chromosomespecific biomarkers and provides chromosome-wide insight into karyotype. Significantly, high-throughput DNA sequencing allowsPage: 2864 28632866
T.Chu et al.massively parallel quantitative analysis of multiple loci. Therefore, this approach has the potential to provide quantitative insight into allelic ratio changes at multiple loci for the simultaneous analysis of, for example, multiple recessive Mendelian diseases. In light of these, the above developments, we have undertaken a statistical modeling of DNA sequencing and digital PCR in the context of the non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of recessive Mendelian disease in maternal cell-free DNA. The resulting data provide valuable insight into experimental parameters and study design for the enablement of these methods for future clinical diagnosis.
METHODS AND RESULTSConsider a recessive Mendelian disease in which the two possible alleles are designated A and B and an affected individual will have the genotype BB. The purpose of the prenatal diagnostic test is to determine whether the fetus has genotype BB and, therefore, to determine whether it is affected by the disease. Throughout this article, we assume that the maternal genotype is known. Suppose that a small percentage, say, P < 0.5, of the cell-free DNA from maternal plasma originates from fetal tissue. The ratio of number of DNA fragments carrying allele A to the number carrying allele B can only have one of the following values. When the maternal genotype is AA, we do not need to test the fetal genotype, because it can only be AA or AB. When the maternal genotype is BB, it is straightforward to test whether the fetal genotype is BB too: if we can detect allele A from the maternal plasma, the fetal genotype must be AB; otherwise, the fetal genotype is BB. The more challenging problem is to determine the fetal genotype when the maternal genotype is AB. Clearly, from the table above (), the fetus has the disease causing genotype BB if and only if the ratio of allele A to B is less than or equal to (1p)/(1+p), and the fetus carries genotype AB or AA if and only if the ratio is greater than or equal to 1. The principle behind our method is that we can test the null hypothesis H 0 that the ratio of allele A to allele B is greater than or equal to 1, against the alternative hypothesis H 1 that the ratio is equal to or less than (1p)/(1+p), by counting the allele frequency of A to B in the cellfree DNA from maternal plasma. Note that there is a 'gap' of size 2p/(1+p) between the null hypothesis and the alternative hypothesis, and the gap is an increasing function of p for 0 < p < 1. The size of this gap affects the power of the test of H 1 against H 0. Below we consider three different approaches to test the hypothesis H 0 against H 1 , depending on three different ways to estimate the allele count ratio of A to B. In all three approaches, we assume that the percentage of the fetal DNA component of the total cell-free DNA in the maternal plasma sample is known. This piece of information is critical to calculate the power of the tests, which is essential for the tests to be used as diagnostic tools. We described in another paper a sequencing-based highly accurate method of estimating the percentage of fetal DNA in cell free maternal plasma sample (submitted for publication).
Sequencing without PCR (Seq)Emerging technologies allow the direct sequencing of DNA substrate libraries without any pre-amplification (), enabling direct counting of the number of DNA fragments carrying alleles A and B, respectively. Ignoring the bias and noise introduced by the sequencing procedure, let X A and X B be the counts of A and B in the sequenced library respectively, then conditional on the sum N = X A +X B , the count X A of allele A has a Binomial distribution with parameters (N,q), where q is the percentage of DNA fragments carrying allele A out of all DNA fragments carrying either A or B. Clearly, we have q  0.5 if the hypothesis H 0 is true (that is, fetus has genotype AB or AA), and q = (1p)/2 if the hypothesis H 1 is true (that is, fetus has genotype BB). Fisher's exact test and twoproportion z-test can be used to test H 0 against H 1. In, we show the total number of alleles A and B need to be sequenced for the Fisher's exact test of H 0 against H 1 , at a significance level of 5% to have a power of 95%. (The high power is desirable because we are developing a diagnostics tool, which requires high sensitivity.)
Sequencing with PCR (Seq-PCR)Most contemporary sequencing technologies, such as Illumina () and ABI SOLiD (), require DNA substrate libraries to be amplified by PCR before being sequenced. Let X A and X B be the counts of A and B in the sequenced library, respectively, conditional on the sum N = X A +X B , the distribution of X A is no longer Binomial. However, ignoring the bias of the PCR and the bias and noise introduced by the sequencing procedure, based on the asymptotic results of the Sampling, Amplification, and Resampling (SAR) model () (See Appendix in Supplementary Material), it can be shown that there is a parameter c  1 such that the distribution of the proportion of allele A X A /N is approximately Normal with mean q and variance q(1q)/(cN), where q is the percentage of DNA fragments carrying allele A out of all DNA fragments carrying either A or B in the original (pre-PCR) sample. It is interesting to note that the mean and variance of X A /N is the same as X'/(cN), where X has a Binomial distribution with parameters (cN, q). Therefore, we can use the approximate proportion test to test the hypotheses about Ewhere 0    1 is the efficiency of PCR, which is defined as, in each cycle of PCR, for each DNA template the average number of new DNA templates to be produced. The parameter M is the number of DNA fragments carryingalleles A or B in the sample before PCR. The value of c can be estimated preferably conservativelybased on information about the PCR efficiency as well as the number of copies of DNA fragments in the original (the value of the efficiency should be between 0 and 1). As mentioned above, after multiplying the allele count by c, we can use the two-proportion z-test to test hypothesis H 0 against H 1 for the ratio of the modified allele counts. Like in the case where the DNA sample is sequenced without PCR, the parameter q  0.5 if the hypothesis H 0 is true (that is, fetus has genotype AB or AA), and q = (1p)/2 if the hypothesis H 1 is true (that is, fetus has genotype BB). It should be noted that, since c < 1, the variance of the proportion X A /N for the tags sequenced from a sample amplified using PCR is higher than if it were obtained from tags sequenced without amplification. Thus, if we use Seq-PCR method, more tags need to be sequenced to achieve the same performance as the Seq method.shows the number of sequenced tags needed for the Seq-PCR method to achieve the same performance of the Seq method without PCR. For example, in a sample containing 40 000 genomic copies (equivalent to the 20 000 genome equivalents), with a PCR efficiency of 0.5 and 20 000 tags from the Seq-PCR method, the performance of the mutation test will be the same as using 12 000 tags from the Seq without PCR method (). Also, it is easy to see that cN < M. Therefore, even if we can use Seq-PCR method to generate a large number of tags such that N >> M, the performance of the Seq-PCR method still cannot exceed using the Seq method to sequence all the M copies of DNA fragments in the origin DNA sample.
Digital approaches to non-invasive fetal genotyping
Digital PCR (Dig-PCR)An alternative method for estimating allele count ratio is digital PCR. Here the sample is diluted into N wells so that some of the wells will contain neither allele A nor allele B, and PCR is performed for each well to detect the presence of either allele A or allele B. The counts of alleles A and B in each well are independent and both follow the Poisson distribution. Let  A and  B be the parameters of the Poisson distributions for alleles A and B, respectively. Under the hypothesis H 0 , we have A  B, while under the hypothesis H 1 , we have  A / B  (1p)/(1+p), where p is the percentage of fetal DNA. To test H 0 against H 1 , we note that the probability that allele A is absent in a well is exp( A ), and the probability that allele B is absent in a well is exp( B ), thus the number of wells where allele A is present has a Binomial distribution with parameters (N,1exp( A )), the number of wells where allele B is present has a Binomial distribution with parameters (N,1exp( B )). Then we can test H 0 against H 1 by testing if the proportion of wells where allele A is present is the same as the proportion of the wells where allele B is present. Assuming that about 25% of the wells contain neither allele A nor allele B, we calculate a table () for the number of wells needed to test H 0 against H 1 with significance level at 5% and power 95%. The column 'Total copies of DNA' gives the number of DNA fragments carrying either allele A or allele B needed in the sample.
DISCUSSIONThis article provides a statistical background to three approaches for the non-invasive prenatal genetic analysis of fetal disease usingIt should be noted that our analyses are based on statistical models of allele counts under the assumption that the experiments are performed perfectly without the introduction of any bias and extra noise. In practice, this assumption is always more or less violated. In particular, the difference in the sequences between two DNA fragments may lead to slightly different PCR efficiency and noticeable difference in the number of copies generated from each DNA fragments after many PCR cycles. Therefore, we suggest that a large number of experiments should be performed to establish empirically, after PCR, the ratio of the number of copies generated from a DNA fragment carrying allele A, to the number of copies generated from a DNA fragment carrying allele B. Call this ratio the A/B bias factor. We can drive a new allele count ratio table corrected by this factor, and design statistic tests based on the new table (). Finally, we would like to point out that, while the focus of this article is the diagnosis of recessive Mendelian diseases, the methods discussed in this article can be easily applied to other the diagnosis of other type of Mendelian diseases. For example, suppose a dominant Mendelian disease is caused by the presence of allele A. When the maternal genotype is AA, the fetus must be affected. When the maternal genotype is BB, the fetus is affected if and only if allele A can be detected from the maternal plasma. (Note that this is also true for the diseases caused by de novo dominant mutation.) When the maternal genotype is AB, the fetus carries the benign genotype BB if and only if the ratio of allele A to B is less than or equal to (1p)/(1+p), the fetus has the disease causing genotype AB or AA if and only if the ratio is greater than or equal to 1. Thus, we can determine if the fetus is affected when the maternal genotype is AB by testing the null hypothesis that the ratio of allele A to allele B is less than or equal to (1p)/(1+p), against the alternative hypothesis that the ratio is greater than or equal to 1. For diseases caused by compound heterozygous mutations, our methods can be used to determine the fetal genotype at all relevant loci. Of course, when multiple tests are conducted simultaneously, we need to use the Bonferroni correction to control the family-wise error rate. In conclusion, we provide a statistical foundation for the development of digital methods including PCR and DNA sequencing for the non-invasive diagnosis of recessive Mendelian human disease. The methods we provide should guide the future design of studies in this realm and be considered when establishing proof of concept for such methods. Funding: Magee-Womens Research Institute and Foundation (to D.G.P.).
Conflict of Interest: none declared.
The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org 2863 at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Total copies of DNA: The total number of copies of DNA fragment carrying the locus of interest. contemporary methods for quantitative analysis of DNA including sequencing and digital PCR. The development of these statistical methods is inspired by our interest in developing accurate noninvasive diagnostic tests for fetal genetic disease. Our interest spans a range of scenarios including common aneuploidy and simple mutations that segregate in a Mendelian fashion. In this context, it is likely that high-throughput DNA sequencing will be of great utility because it affords the potential for multiplexed or massively parallel quantitative analysis of multiple genetic loci. Also of interest is the recently developed method of microfluidic digital PCR, which has been successfully used for the detection of trisomy 21 via the use of an mRNA-based placental biomarker. Our statistical methods address each of these approaches with specific focus on the diagnosis of recessive Mendelian disease. Significantly, our investigation of the digital PCR approach reveals that many thousands of sequence-specific DNA target molecules are required to be present before amplification. Although promising preliminary results relating to the diagnosis of monogenic disease using digital PCR have recently been published by Lun et al. (2008) this study utilized far fewer positive reaction wells than would be recommended based upon our model (Lun et al., 2008). It is possible therefore that the routine and reliable use of this technique will require far higher numbers of end point measurements for accurate allelic ratio determination in a clinical context. Furthermore, our results may explain why allelic ratios in plasma DNA samples containing <10% fetal DNA could not be determined in this previous study. Significantly, when examined in the context of a previously published analysis of fetal and total genome equivalents in maternal plasma (Chiu et al., 2001), our data (Table 4) suggest that digital PCR probably performs at borderline levels in terms of the optimal conditions required to detect a single recessive mutation. Despite the obvious promise of the digital PCR method, we have concern that it may be limited by its inability to allow parallel amplification of multiple target loci. This is largely due to the fact that fetal genome equivalents are scarce in maternal plasma, limiting the potential for running multiple assays. For example, the parallel amplification of multiple disease loci, such as in a cystic fibrosis [CFTR] mutation panel, and simultaneous determination of fetal DNA frequency is likely to be challenging. Based on the above limitations and the data we present in Tables 2 and 3, it is reasonable to postulate that DNA sequencing, with its high throughput and inherent potential for massively parallel analysis of multiple loci, is likely to provide a practical approach for the non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of recessive Mendelian disease. However, a dramatic increase in throughput and a reduction in associated costs for such approaches are required before these approaches can become routine standard of care.
