Motivation: Knowledge-based and co-expression networks are two kinds of gene networks that can be currently implemented by sophisticated but distinct tools. We developed stringgaussnet, an R package that integrates both approaches, starting from a list of differentially expressed genes. Contact: henri-jean.garchon@inserm.fr Availability and implementation: Freely available on the web at http://cran.r-project.org/web/pack-ages/stringgaussnet.
IntroductionAnalysis of genes differentially expressed (DE) depending on a condition has become a standard procedure in current biology. However, identification of biologically relevant DE genes is far from being trivial. Yet efficient prioritization of DE genes is an essential step before undertaking rate-limiting wet lab experiments (). In this regard, the network theory appears as a powerful framework. The aim is to connect genes (the nodes) by means of their interactions, the edges (). These interactions may be based on prior knowledge, curated and stored in databases, or extracted from the experimental dataset, e.g. using coexpression information (). Sophisticated but distinct tools are available to implement either one of these approaches separately. We introduce stringgaussnet, an R package that allows inferring gene networks starting from a list of DE genes by integrating both of these approaches with ease and flexibility.
Initial objects and example dataStringgaussnet requires two data frames that store, one the expression measurements, the other DE gene statistics. They are combined to create an object of class DEGeneExpr. Expression data are usually normalized for efficient correlation computation. In the example data, we provided transcriptomic profiles of monocyte-derived dendritic cells from nine patients affected with ankylosing spondylitis and 10 healthy controls. Transcriptomic data were obtained using microarrays. Gene expression levels in patients and in controls were then compared with LIMMA (). We limited the number of DE genes to 75.
String network constructionStringgaussnet allows constructing a proteinprotein interaction network using the DE gene names (Ensembl IDs or HGNC symbols) with the use of the STRING API with specific URIs (). The number of additional nodes can be set by the user, and these are useful to detect indirect relationships between input genes. The default value is twice the number of initial DE genes. Different species can be curated, the default being Homo sapiens. This process generates an object of class STRINGNet, a network with multiple edges depending on sources and combined scores. One can select specific sources of interactions and filter on the scores given by STRING. Stringgaussnet can calculate a new combined score, based on the algorithm provided for STRING version 8 (http://string-stitch. blogspot.fr/2010/03/combining-scores-right-way.html).
Short paths from string networksThe generated network can be large and dense. As a STRINGNet object, it can be reduced by computing shortest paths between genesof a user's list. To this aim, combined scores S are converted to distances D for each node pair i with D i  max(S i )  1  S i , where max(S i ) is the maximum of S over all interactions. Shortest paths between each pair of nodes are computed with the Dijkstra's algorithm. This method creates an object of class ShortPathSTRINGNet, with unique edges giving distances and intermediates as attributes. It is also possible to filter edges on D.
SIMoNe network inferenceAlternatively, stringgaussnet can help infer Gaussian networks from expression data, using the R package SIMoNe (). Default parameters are set for easy use. The number of edges that is selected is the mean of the number of edges corresponding to maximal AIC and BIC scores. By default, the algorithm computes a network under two models, with or without clustering constraints, and picks edges common to both models. Stringgaussnet performs a Spearman's test for each inferred edge. This generates an object of class SIMoNeNet, a network of unique edges including theta, Spearman's rho and P-value as attributes. One can filter on edge attributes, notably on Spearman's rho.
WGCNA approach to compare resultsSIMoNe is a powerful tool to infer unsupervised Gaussian networks. For comparison, we also propose the use of the popular WGCNA package (). Stringgaussnet performs a Spearman's test between all pairs of genes. The respective rho coefficients are converted to similarity scores r  (1  q)/2 that are then converted to adjacency scores A  1/(1  e  a*(r  0.5)) where a is the soft power threshold; its default is set to 8. A method helps adjust this parameter by plotting relationships between A and rho. Then a filtering step is done using a threshold t, A being superior to t or inferior to 1  t. Dissimilarity and module computation are not implemented, because the main purpose is to compare with SIMoNe results. The network is saved in a WGCNANet class object. A function is provided to compare networks inferred by SIMoNe and WGCNA, with a Venn diagram displaying the numbers of shared and specific edges, and a series of plots showing correlation coefficients of selected interactions.
Adding annotations to genesWhile networks are being generated, it is possible to add gene annotations as node attributes. They are of two kinds, including genomic localization and brief gene description, using the biomaRt R package, and cellular component terms, using the GO.db package. In addition, genes are ranked depending on the localization of their protein product, from nuclear, the most relevant, to extracellular, to plasma membrane and last to cytoplasm.
Automatic network creations in one stepAn overlay of functions allows the user to create multiple networks in only one step, with all options configurable in the same method. One can create multiple Gaussian networks from the same DEGeneExpr object, depending on a grouping factor and for a given list of genes. The package then allows comparing networks inferred for multiple levels of the factor, and for the same DE genes list. One can create an object of class MultiDEGeneExpr, a list of DEGeneExpr objects. Then, both kinds of networks, semantic or Gaussian, can be generated for each data set and stored in a MultiNetworks object.
Automatic export to CytoscapeIn addition to be exported in standard file formats, generated networks can be imported automatically from R objects into Cytoscape, without requiring an intermediate language (). This is performed in an operating-system independent manner through the plugin cyREST (http://apps.cytoscape.org/apps/cyrest). Stringgaussnet proposes predefined styles for displaying the exported networks; they can be easily customized in Cytoscape or directly in the package.stringgaussnet: from DE genes
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
E.Chaplais and H.-J.Garchon at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
