Motivation: Bacterial luciferases are heterodimeric enzymes that catalyze a chemical reaction, so called bioluminescence, which causes light emission in bacteria. Bioluminescence is vastly used as a reporter system in research tools and commercial developments. However, the details of the mechanisms that stabilize and transform the reaction intermediates as well as differences in the en-zymatic kinetics amongst different bacterial luciferases remain to be elucidated. Results: Amino acid sequences alignments for 21 bacterial luciferases (both a-and b-subunits) were analyzed. For a-subunit, containing the enzyme active center, 48 polymorphic amino acid positions were identified. According to them, the sequences fell into two distinct groups known as slow and fast based on the decay rate of the bioluminescence reaction. The differences in the enzyme active site induced by structural polymorphism are analyzed. Availability and implementation: Three-dimensional models of Photobacterium leiognathi lucifer-ase and Vibrio harveyi luciferase (with reconstructed mobile loop) are freely available at PMDB database: PM0080525 and PM0080526, respectively.
IntroductionLuminous bacteria are known as the most abundant and ubiquitous bioluminescent organisms. Their traditional classification was rooted in the morphological peculiarities, metabolism and ecological distribution of light emitting species. Currently, according to the sequence analysis of 16S rRNA and gyrB genes, all known luminous bacteria are assigned to three Gammaproteobacteria families: Vibrionaceae, Shewanellaceae and Enterobacteriaceae (). In spite of several studies, many details about the mechanism of bacterial bioluminescence including the differences in reaction kinetics are yet to be known. Although the investigations has identified the sequence of about 21 bacterial luciferases, but could only solve the crystal structure of luciferase from Vibrio harveyi (). Bacterial luciferase consists of a-and b-subunit folded into the same type of (b/a) 8 or TIM barrel structure and encoded by luxA and luxB genes. In addition to the structure similarities, a-and b-subunits share about 32% of sequence identity, indicating that luxB gene might have evolved as a result of luxA gene duplication (). However, a-subunit is larger due to additional 29 amino acid residues, which constitutes a mobile loop flanking the active site of the enzyme and playing an important role in binding to the substrates (). All known bacterial luciferases catalyze the same oxidative reaction (), where R-CHO and R-COOH are a long-chain aliphatic aldehyde and corresponding carboxylic acid, FMNH
Bioinformatics Advance Access published July 17, 2016reduced and oxidized flavin mononucleotide respectively. Interaction of luciferase with the substrates causes the electronically excited species formation and following light emission. The emitted light then slowly decays in a first-order kinetics manner (and C). The maximum light intensity of the reaction is proportional to the amount of the enzyme, and the decay depends on the rate constant of the enzyme and the aldehyde chain length. Light intensity and decay kinetics vary among luciferases from different species. However, two types of luciferases slow and fast, can be distinguished by the decay patterns (enzyme turnover time) () (). Luciferases from Photobacterium species are fast decay enzymes (the rate is within 0.641.0 s 1 ), while the luciferase from Vibrio and Photorhabdus are slow (0.12 s 1 ) (;). The reasons for the kinetic differences are associated with binding to the substrates (), duration of time that it takes to form the intermediates in the reaction (), and the decay rate of the hydroperoxy flavin intermediate upon stabilization by the binding pocket environment (). So far only a few luciferases from limited range of bacterial species are studied. However, analysis of new luminous bacterial genomes can assist to better understand the bacterial bioluminescence. The current research aimed to identify the conservative motifs that are involved in the active site formation of bacterial luciferases. We analyzed the phylogenetic relationship of luciferase amino acid sequences from 21 luminous bacteria. Our data showed two clades of the luciferases that relate bacteria, which share similar reaction kinetics. We also identified the residues that are important to form the bacterial groups and discussed the structural differences between the enzymatic active sites as well as the mechanisms to stabilize the flavin intermediates between two groups.
Materials and methodsWe studied amino acid sequences of luciferases from 21 luminous bacteria: A.fischeri ES114, A.logei KCh1 and A.salmonicida NCMB 2262 from Aliivibrio genus; Candidatus Photodesmus katoptron Akat1; P.aquimaris NBRC 104633, P.damselae BT-6, P.kishitanii NCMB 844, P.leiognathi lnuch.13.1, P.l. subsp. mandapamensis ATCC 27561, P.phosphoreum MIE from Photobacterium genus; Ph.asymbiotica and Ph.luminescens ATCC 29999 from Photorhabdus genus; S.hanedai NCIMB 2157 and S.woodyi ATCC 51908 from Shewanella genus; V.albensis VL 426, V.azureus NBRC 104587, V.campbellii ATCC BAA-1116, V.chagasii SB-52, V.harveyi NBRC 15634, V.orientalis ATCC 33934 and V.vulnificus ATCC 43382 from Vibro genus. We performed the phylogenetic analysis on the amino acid sequences of a-and b-subunits using the Jalview program package (version 2.8.1, (). The dataset was analyzed with the multiple sequence alignment software MAFFT () and BLOSUM 62 as substitution matrix, a gap open penalty of 1.53 and a gap extension penalty of 0.123 were used. ProtTest () enabled to identify LG  G as the best-fit amino acid replacement model for the evolution of both subunits. This model was used to build phylogenetic trees with the PhyML software (). To find the roots of reconstructed trees we added an outgroup. Moreover, the ape package (version 3.1-4, ()) enabled us to perform other analysis in an open source environment R/Bio-conductor (). In order to build the tertiary structure of other bacterial luciferasesusing the Swiss-MODEL server ()we applied the crystal structure of V.harveyi luciferase (PDB ID: 3FGC) as a template. Then we optimized the obtained structures for 1 ns at 300 K and a constant pressure of 1 atm, using a model of explicit water SPC/E and CHARMM27 force field in GROMACS (version 5.0.3, ()). We also analyzed the enzymatic active sites by using VMD (). The tertiary structures for other slow luciferases in vicinity of active center were found unchanged if compare with that of V.harveyi luciferase. The enzymes among the fast group also demonstrated very similar architecture of the binding pocket, but different from the V.harveyi one.
Results and discussion
Conservative regionsThe amino acid sequence analysis revealed that the pairwise sequence identity among 21 species is 5399% for a-subunit and 4398% for b-subunit (Supplementary). This finding is in a good agreement with previously reported amino acid identity levels that were obtained for 6 species of Photobacterium, Photorhabdus and Vibrio genus (). a-subunits were found to have highly conserved amino acid sequences with 138 identical positions. Eight of them: aGlu 43 , aHis 44 , aHis 45 , aArg 107 , aTyr 110 , aAsp 113 , aArg 125 , aGlu 175 are known to be critical for catalytic activity of the enzyme (). According to the crystal structure of V.harveyi luciferase, the active center (a cavity within 6 A  distance from FMN binding site) consists of 35 amino acid residues where 20 of them are conserved. Such conservative amino acids gathering allows forming the proper structure of the substrate-binding pocket. Another substantial part of a-subunit conserved residues were found on the a/b-interface: 25 identical amino acids can be observed within 4 A  distance from the b-subunit surface. More than a third of b-subunit conserved regions are also contacting with a-subunit (25 positions). That confirms a proposed important function of the b-subunitthe stabilization of the a-subunit active conformation ().
Two groups of luciferasesPhylogenetic analysis of a-subunit amino acid sequences revealed two clades of luciferases with 65.01 and 53.99% identity within each group (). These groups significantly correspond to the previous classification of luciferases as slow or fast according to their kinetic properties. Phylogenetic analysis of luciferase a-subunitsequences helped to predict the type of enzyme with unknown kinetics. According to the tree the luciferase from Candidatus Photodesmus katoptron probably belongs to slow type, as well as the rest of luciferases from Vibrio species, while luciferases of Aliivibrio and Shewanella are of fast type. Exact and partial matches found in specific positions of the studied sequences characterize two observed clades (Supplementary). Exact match refers to a residue that is strictly conserved among a group. For instance, all fast luciferases contain Leu, while all slow luciferases have Ala at position 183 without an exception (aLeu 183 versus aAla 183 ). Partial match refers to less than four residues of the same type (according to polarity, side-chain group type, etc.) in one position showing the tendency for the same clade formation. For example, all fast luciferases have Arg in contrast to Asn of slow luciferases at a position 26 except for Ph.asymbiotica and Ph.luminescence having aLys 26. We have identified 22 exact matches on the a-subunit, which constitute an inherent feature of the found clades. Vicinity of the active site (the area within 6 A  distance from FMN molecule bound to the active site and close to it) contains 11 out of 22 exact matches. Four of them (aAla 74 , aAla 75 , aCys 106 , aVal 173 were previously described as critical for proper functioning of slow V.harveyi luciferase (). In addition to 22 exact residue matches specific for two groups of a-subunit sequences, 26 partial residue matches were found. Two of them were experimentally identified as important residues for luciferase functioning: aSer 227 () and aLys 286 (). The latter is located on the enzyme mobile loop and stabilizes the reaction intermediates. aSer 227 is important to form the tertiary structure of the enzyme. Inspecting the crystal structure, we observed that residues meeting partial residue matches spread across the structure unlike the residues identified as exact matches. The observed tendency can indicate that residues with partial matches are necessary to preserve the tertiary structure. A number of previous studies have tried to convert a slow luciferase into fast type by changing a sequence of segment (residues 166 233) near the active center with a template sequence from fast luciferase () or site directed mutagenesis of aGlu 175 residue (). Valkova et al. recorded changes in the kinetic properties of luciferase, but simultaneously observed a substantial loss in the enzyme activity (up to 0.03% of the wild type activity). According to our findings, the substituted part (67 a.a.) consists of 24 conservative residues, 6 amino acids that meet exact matches (i.e. are supposed to define slow or fast type of kinetics) and 3 residues that are described here as partial matches. However, the rest of the substituted residues (34 a.a.) are different from the wild type enzyme. This difference might have caused tertiary structure distortion and less enzymatic activity. Regarding aGlu 175 , we found that it is conserved among all studied luminous bacteria; therefore, this residue is unlikely to be responsible for the type of kinetics. Mutation of aGlu 175 induced higher structure flexibility and destabilized the reaction intermediates. These changes intensified the dark pathways of the reaction and finally increased the kinetics of the enzyme. It is noteworthy that natural fast luciferases are highly active, and some of them even more active than the slow ones (). The b-subunit of bacterial luciferase is assumed to stabilize the asubunit active conformation through hydrogen bonds and a number of specific hydrophobic interactions. Experiments revealed an important role of interaction between aPhe 272 and bTyr 151 for the activity of V.harveyi luciferase (). We found that aPhe 272 meets the exact residue match: aTyr in all fast luciferases versus aPhe in slow ones. Interestingly, the b-subunits also undergo bTyr-bPhe substitutions, that probably indicates a similar stabilization mechanism conserved among all luminous bacterial species including aromatic stacking interaction between amino acid side chains. Phylogenetic tree for b-subunit exhibit distinct clades for slow and fast luciferases as well as for a-subunit (Supplementary). However only 7 exact and 19 partial matches were identified through b-subunit sequences alignment analysis (Supplementary). The mechanisms for origin of fast and slow luciferases from the only ancestor are poorly understood yet. Some correlation of kinetics type could be found only with ecological niches. Species having slow luciferases are mostly free-living, while fast decay luciferases are typical for symbiotic luminous bacteria (). However, it was shown that phylogenies of luminous bacteria and their host organisms exhibited no meaningful topological congruence (). To address functional evolution of bacterial luciferases an investigation of changes on the lineages with consensus tree reconstruction should be done ().
Analysis of luciferases active centersThe fact that many of a-subunit exact matches are located in the active site or close to it allows examining all differences that might appear in the structure of this part of the enzyme. We have reconstructed 3D-structure for P.leiognathi luciferase as the representative of fast group and made structure optimization with molecular dynamics. Mapping of active centers revealed TIM barrel structure preservation for both fast and slow luciferases. Moreover, the structure of the binding pocket varied due to distinctions in amino acid composition. Additionally we have identified two significant differences in the active center structure for slow and fast enzymes caused by four exact amino acids substitutions. We observed the phenylalanine shifting (aPhe 6 $ aIle 6 , aLeu 8 $ aPhe 8 ) (). aPhe 6 (in V.harveyi slow luciferase) and aPhe 8 (in modelled P.leiognathi fast luciferase) are found at the si-face side of the isoalloxazine moiety. In both cases they form the active site essential for protein-ligand binding which involves hydrophobic and stacking interactions. Substitution to hydrophobic residues such as leucine and isoleucine is also very common and preserves the hydrophobic surfaces in the active site. Furthermore, we studied the utilization of alternative sulphurcontaining amino acid (aAla 74 $ aMet 74 , aCys 106 $ aVal 106 ) that
Fast and slow luciferasesstabilize the flavin derivatives (). Bioluminescent reaction includes a step where the addition of O 2 molecule and deprotonation of N 1 results in hydroperoxy flavin formation in complex with enzyme (). Abu-Soud et al. showed that aCys 106 is involved into this reaction step, because its mutation to aVal 106 leads to extremely unstable complex of luciferase with hydroperoxy flavin intermediate and reduces the bioluminescence activity (). However, a double mutant luciferase with aGly 75 and aVal 106 instead of aAla 75 and aCys 106 showed high enzyme activity and a stable intermediate, but fast luminescence decay (). This is in good accordance with our findings that aAla 75 and aCys 106 refer to exact matches of slow group, whereas aGly 75 and aVal 106 belong to exact matches of fast group. Inspecting the modeled active sites of fast luciferases for sulfurcontaining residues that could manage the same function as aCys 106 , we observed aMet 74 residue. It is one of highly conserved amino acids among fast luciferases group (exact match). Therefore we can conclude that aMet 74 roles as a substitute to aCys 106 in fast luciferases which is also able to form a hydrogen bond through its sulphur group. It is likely that aMet 74 interacts with N 5 atom, while aCys 106 probably contacts with N 1 (). Consequently aMet 74 , aGly 75 and aVal 106 probably form an important part of the active site that stabilizes the intermediates in fast luciferases, similar to aAla 74 , aAla 75 and aCys 106 in slow ones. To our knowledge the existence of two evolutionary conserved binding platforms could not be related with all variations in metabolism and luminous system regulation. The important physiological role of luminescence reaction is proposed to be as a secondary respiratory chain that is active when oxygen or iron levels are too low for the cytochrome system to operate (). It permits cells to continue growing even under microaerobic conditions, such as in animal gut tracts. Previously it was obtained some correlation between type of kinetics and sensitivity of bacterial strains to hydrogen peroxide (). But causal relationship in this observations and connection with the luciferase polymorphic forms is had to be understood on the basis of whole picture on luminous bacteria evolution and metabolism. The occurrence of two binding platforms probably plays an important role relying on the whole picture of luminous bacteria phylogeny and metabolism.
ConclusionStudy of the conservative motifs critical for the interaction of the bacterial luciferase with substrates and intermediates stabilization is far reaching in terms of understanding the mechanism of bioluminescence. In this study, we presented a phylogenetic analysis of amino acids important for light emitting reaction. Our data suggested the conservative positions in structure of all known bacterial luciferases, and amino acids causing the division into fast and slow types of this enzyme. We found two sets of critical amino acids exactly matching each types of luciferases and probably responsible for kinetic decay rate. Through protein structure homology modelling, we observed the formation of two different binding platforms that probably stabilize the reaction intermediates. Two evolutionary fixed types of reaction kinetics could indicate the appearance of two different functions carried by bacterial luciferases that never been discussed before from the structural point of view.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
A.A.Deeva et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
