Motivation: Measuring evolutionary conservation is a routine step in the identification of functional elements in genome sequences. Although a number of studies have proposed methods that use the continuous time Markov models (CTMMs) to find evolutionarily constrained elements, their probabilistic structures have been less frequently investigated. Results: In this article, we investigate a sufficient statistic for CTMMs. The statistic is composed of the fractional duration of nucleotide characters over evolutionary time, F d , and the number of substitutions occurring in phylogenetic trees, N s. We first derive basic properties of the sufficient statistic. Then, we derive an expectation maximization (EM) algorithm for estimating the parameters of a phylogenetic model, which iteratively computes the expectation values of the sufficient statistic. We show that the EM algorithm exhibits much faster convergence than other optimization methods that use numerical gradient descent algorithms. Finally, we investigate the genome-wide distribution of fractional duration time F d which, unlike the number of substitutions N s , has rarely been investigated. We show that F d has evolutionary information that is distinct from that in N s , which may be useful for detecting novel types of evolutionary constraints existing in the human genome. Availability: The C++ source code of the 'Fdur' software is available at http://www.ncrna.org/software/fdur/
INTRODUCTIONAlthough the number of sequenced genomes is increasing rapidly, the technologies that extract biological information from them are still in their infancy. Finding evolutionarily constrained elements in a target genome sequence is among the most successful uses of those massive genomic sequences (). In those studies, the researchers estimated the level of the substitution rate for each genomic region and tested whether it was significantly lower or higher than an estimated rate of neutral evolution. The substitution rates were computed from a given species tree and genome-wide alignments by using variants of continuous time Markov models (CTMMs), which have been used in the maximum likelihood (ML) method of phylogenetic tree construction (). While the relations between the likelihoods of CTMMs and possible topologies of the phylogenetic trees have been extensively studied for many years, their probabilistic structures for a fixed tree topology, which are very important for the genome-wide studies mentioned above, have been less frequently studied. In this article, we investigate a sufficient statistic for CTMMs that is composed of the fractional duration of each nucleotide over evolutionary time, F d , and the number of substitutions that have occurred in a phylogenetic tree, N s. The sufficient statistic naturally appears in expectation maximization (EM) algorithms for finding the local maximum of the likelihood function (). However, previous studies treated them only as intermediate variables for parameter optimization and did not investigate their properties or their genome-wide distributions.developed a dynamic programming algorithm for computing the null distribution of N s , corresponding to neutral evolution which was then used for computing P-values for constrained elements. However, no investigation of the distribution of F d has appeared in the literature. In the following sections, we first derive basic properties of the sufficient statistic, such as its behaviors in the limiting cases at the time where the parameter is close to zero or infinity. We derive an EM algorithm () for estimating the substitution matrix and the branch lengths, which iteratively computes the expectation values of the sufficient statistic, then we explain how the branch lengths used in parsimony methods are related to those in the ML method. Many previous studies of the EM algorithm optimized only some of the phylogenetic model parameters, which means that some of the expectation values required for a full parameter optimization are lacking.;derived an EM algorithm for substitution matrices, but did not optimize branch lengths. Consequently, the expected durations defined by them are not appropriate expected values when the branch lengths are optimized.did not optimize the stationary distribution of the general time reversible model and thus missed the expectation n () (i) defined in our article.derived a partial EM algorithm for phylogenetic models but the hidden variables of their EM algorithm only included the nucleotide states on ancestral nodes, instead of considering all the possible substitution histories along tree branches, which are the random processes described by the models.
Sufficient statistics in phylogenetic tree modelsIwasaki and Takagi (2007) presented a complete derivation of an EM algorithm for a special kind of gain-and-loss model for gene family evolution, but they explicitly used a specific parametrization for their transition matrices, so it was not possible to apply it to nucleotide substitution models. Furthermore, previous studies, except for that of (), did not compare the run times of their EM algorithms with that of gradient descent methods of likelihood maximization. We derive a complete description of the EM algorithms for the general unrestricted (UNREST) model and the general time reversible (GTR) model (). We also derive a stationary equation method for the M step in the algorithm for the GTR model. We show that the EM algorithm converges much faster than other optimization methods that use numerical gradient descent algorithms. We also show that the EM algorithm and the stationary equation method for the M step optimization have the nice property that the objective functions monotonically approach the optimal values in every iteration ()a property which the gradient descent methods do not possess. Finally, we investigate the genome-wide distribution of the KullbackLeibler divergence D F between fractional durations F d and the stationary distribution of the CTMM, . We show that the non-conserved promoter regions of human genes related to anatomical structure development have higher D F values than those of other genes. We also show that the non-conserved third codon positions of human genes have higher D F values than the background. These indicate that the fractional duration F d contains evolutionary information that N s does not have, which may be useful for detecting novel kinds of evolutionary constraints existing in the human genome.
ALGORITHMS AND IMPLEMENTATION
Sufficient statistic on a single branchA continuous time Markov model for nucleotide evolution can be defined by a differential equation that determines the time evolution of the probability of observing each nucleotide:where P(a|b,t) is the probability of observing base a at time t conditioned upon base b being observed at time zero, Nuc ={A,C,G,T }={1,2,3,4} is the set of nucleotides,  ij is the Kronecker delta which is 1 if i = j and is 0 otherwise and R ={R ij } is the substitution rate matrix, which satisfies the conditionsThis differential equation can be solved by using the matrix exponential of tR:Here,ij is the (i,j) element of matrix A and I is the unit matrix. Equation (1) guarantees that the transition matrix has positive matrix elements P(a|b,t) > 0 for t > 0, and that it satisfies the probability conditions P(a|b,t)  0, and i P(i|b,tR) = 1 for all t  0. (A proof is presented in the Supplementary Material.) Since it is difficult to handle matrix exponentials directly, we use an infinite product representation:By applying this formula to P(a|b,t), the continuous Markov model can be considered as a limit of a discrete time Markov model with transition matrix Q = (I +tR/N), as follows.where N (a,b) is the set of all paths X along discrete time points 0,...,N such that X ={X k  Nuc|k = 0,...,N,X 0 = a,X N = b}. Q satisfies the probability conditions for a transition matrix, Q ij  0 and i Q ij = 1, if N is sufficiently large (N  max i t|R ii |). In the following, we derive a few formulas for fixed N, then take the continuum limit N . The likelihood P(X|tR) of path X can be rewritten aswhere N X ij is the number of i  j transitions that occurred in X, F d (i,X) = N X ii /N is the fractional duration of base i, N s (i,j,X) = N X ij is the number of substitutions i  j (i = j), and N s0 (X) = i =j N s (i,j,X) is the total number of non-trivial substitutions in X. We have used the Taylor expansion log(1+x) =  k=1 (1) k+1 x k /k to derive the final equation. (The derivation of the last equation is described in the Supplementary Material.) The equation above indicates that the probability of each path X decreases as  N N s0 (X) in the limit N . On the other hand, the number of paths with the same number of non-trivial substitutions N s0 (X) increases as  N N s0 (X) , since the number of positioning patterns of substitution events in the time course increases roughly as the combination N N s0 (X) . Thus, the paths with a positive number of substitutions give finite contributions in the continuum limit. Since the likelihood function depends on X only through F d (i,X) and N s (i,j,X), these form a sufficient statistic for the model (). The expected value of F d (i,X) is F d (a,b,i) = 1 Z N (a,b,tR) X N (a,b) F d (i,X)P(X|tR) ,P(X|tR) = P N (a|b,tR) .
As shownin the Supplementary Material, the continuum limits of F d (i,X) and N s (i,j,X), which are denoted by F d (a,b,i,tR) and N s (a,b,i,j,tR), have integral representations:
Sufficient statistic for phylogenetic tree modelsThroughout this article, we assume that the topology of phylogenetic trees is fixed. In the following,  denotes the root node, m = 1,...,M denote node indexes other than the root node, in which m = 1,...,S represent the indexes of the leaf nodes, Pa(m) is the parent of node m, t m is the length of branch (m, Pa(m)), T ={t m |m = 1,...,M} is the set of the branch lengths, and  = (T ,R). The random processes in these models correspond to the set of all the substitution histories X over the phylogenetic branches. The log likelihood of X has the following form in the finite product approximation:Page: 2348 23462353
H.Kiryuwhere Fs (i,j,X) are the fractional duration and the number of substitutions at branch (m,Pa(m)) computed from history X. The number n () (i,X) is 1 if the base is i at the root in X, and is 0 otherwise. The ellipsis '' represents irrelevant terms that are independent of the model parameters T and R, or those that vanish in the continuum limit N . The equation implies that the sufficient statistic of the model consists of Fs (i,j,X) and n () (i,X). The expectation values of Fs (i,j,X) and n () (i,X) for an alignment column C are as follows:) is the posterior probability that the final and initial bases of branch (m, Pa(m)) are a and b, respectively. P () (a|C,) is the posterior probability that the base at the root node is a. These values are calculated by using insideoutside algorithms, which are described in the Supplementary Material. Finally, the fractional duration and the total number of substitutions over the entire phylogenetic tree are defined byd (i,C,) .
EM algorithmThe EM algorithm () is a method to find a local maximum of the likelihood function when there exist unobserved hidden random variables. The algorithm iteratively maximizes the likelihood function by alternately calling two distinct subroutines called the E step and the M step. In the E step, the expected values of certain statistical operators are computed by using current estimates of parameter values. In the M step, an expected log likelihood function Q EM is maximized with respect to the model parameters. In the present case, the unobserved hidden variables correspond to the substitution histories X over the phylogenetic tree. We define the Q EM function bywhere |A| is the number of columns in alignment A, and Fs,ij and nare, respectively, the means of F) averaged over all the columns C  A. We have omitted the irrelevant terms in Equation (3). In the E step, we compute the expectations Fs,ij and ni for the entire alignment data. This is very compute-intensive step for genome-scale multiple alignments. In the M step, we maximize the Q EM function with respect to  with fixed expectations. Then we set  to the optimized values. The E and M steps are repeated until the convergence of model parameters . The EM algorithm has the important property that the likelihood function always increases at each iteration (). This is not the case in the gradient descent method of parameter optimization, in which the likelihood usually undergoes several cycles of increasing and decreasing before the optimal value is reached. To maximize Q EM at each M step using the gradient descent method, we must compute the gradient of Q EM with respect to parameters. We define the UNREST model, which is the most general, timeirreversible substitution model, by the parametrization R ij = B ij (i = j), {B ij > 0, i =j B ij = 1}. Then, the derivatives of Q EM with respect to B and t m are given by Q EMThe derivatives of the stationary distribution are given byis the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of R (Ben). The proof of this equation is described in the Supplementary Material. In the above equations, B ij (i = j) are regarded as independent variables and the conditions B ij > 0 and i =j B ij = 1 are not taken into account. A simple method to deal with these conditions in gradient descent methods is described in the Supplementary Material. The GTR model is defined by the parametrization R ij1}, where  is the stationary distribution. The derivatives of Q EM with respect to  = (,B,T ) are given byThe derivatives Q EM /t m are the same as in the UNREST model. In the above equations, all the parameters  i and B ij (i < j) are regarded as independent variables. For GTR models, there is an alternative to the gradient descent method for solving the M step problem. In this method, we maximize Q EM by iteratively solving the stationary equations. The stationary equations are satisfied at any local maximum and can be obtained by setting all the derivatives to zero. The stationary equations can be formally solved in the GTR model and the solutions are given byHere,   and  B are the Lagrange multipliers that impose the probability conditions on  and B, respectively. The Lagrange multipliers can be efficiently computed by using a NewtonRaphson method (), which is described in the Supplementary Material. The above equations can be solved for each of , B and T , but not simultaneously. Therefore, we serially update those three types of parameters until convergence. Because Q EM is exactly maximized with respect to the currently updating parameter type, the method is guaranteed to converge (). This also indicates that the stationary method has the monotonicity property that Q EM increases at every iteration (). Since the stationary equations are satisfied at any local maximum of the log likelihood, it is possible to derive an interesting connection between the branch lengths in ML solutions and those in parsimony methods. The stationary equations also suggest that there is a natural definition of the posterior local tree, which has the same topology as that of the global tree but has different edge lengths, for each genomic region. A more detailed description of these issues is given in the Supplementary Material.
Sufficient statistics in phylogenetic tree models
Derivatives of the likelihood functionUsing the derivative formula of matrix exponentials presented in the Supplementary Material as well as the derivative formula of the stationary distribution [Equation(4)], we can find the derivatives of the log likelihood function with respect to parameters (T , R). We present the explicit formulas in the Supplementary Material. Those formulas are used in the gradient descent methods in the following sections. We have described the comparison of the EM algorithm of Siepel and Haussler (2004) and the gradient descent method and our EM algorithm in the Supplementary Material. We have also described the relationships between the stationary equations and the approaches that optimize a part of model parameters for each alignment column to detect signals of evolutionary selection ().
DATASET AND DATA PROCESSING
Training model parametersWe trained the phylogenetic model from the Multiz 44-way dataset, which is a large set of alignments created from 44 vertebrate genome sequences including the human genome (hg18) that is provided at the UCSC genome browser site (). We used a fixed tree topology that is also provided at the UCSC site and obtained the maximum likelihood estimates of the GTR model parameters and branch lengths. Because many of the alignments include only human and closely related monkey species, and partly because of limited computational resources, we used only a subset of the Multiz 44-way alignments, which was selected by the condition that fugu (fr2) is contained in each alignment. The number of alignment columns was 7410 6 and the data size of the alignment file in MAF format was 3.1 GB. The species that is least frequently aligned is petMar1 which is included in 38% (2810 6 ) of the alignment columns. Fugu was the best species for such filtering in the sense that the coverage of the species with the lowest coverage in the alignment was the maximal. For example, if we used petMar1 instead of fr2 for selecting the alignment subset, then the taeGut1 genome covers only 29% (1410 6 ) of the alignment columns.
Distance measure for F d (i)To measure the changes of fractional duration F d (i), we computed the KullbackLeibler divergence D F between F d (i) and the stationary distribution  i in the model:which is non-negative and zero if F d (i) =  i. Since the trained stationary distribution is very close to the uniform distribution, the maximal value of D F is reached when the distribution of F d (i) is close to a single-peak distribution  ia for some a  Nuc.
Comparison of gradient descent and EM algorithmsThe run time of numerical optimization depends on many factors, and the optimal implementation can be completely different for different alignment sizes and tree topologies. This means that it is, in general, difficult to judge whether differences of running time are caused by differences between the underlying algorithms or by differences at the implementation level. However, here we are interested in optimizing parameters for genome-scale alignments. In such cases, the most time consuming step is the computation of insideoutside variables, which is required for each computation of gradient in the gradient descent methods, and is also required for each E step in the EM method. Hence, the number of times that a program passes through the alignment data until convergence is an accurate measure for comparing the convergence properties of the algorithms themselves, at least when the input contains a large number of alignments. In the following section, we used 10 000 alignment columns sampled from the Multiz 44-way alignment and plotted the relative differences of likelihood or parameter values from the optimal values. The relative difference of log likelihood l from the optimal value l opt is defined by |l l opt |/|l opt |). Similarly, the relative difference of parameter vector x is defined by ||x x opt ||/||x opt ||, where |||| represents the Euclid norm. For gradient descent, we used a BFGS () routine implemented in the PHAST package () and the FORTRAN code of the L-BFGS-B () routine provided by the original authors.
Gene Ontology term analyses of promoter regionsWe collected the human RefSeq genes from the UCSC site and selected a representative RefSeq gene model with the longest transcript size for each Entrez gene. Then we collected a 1000 base sequence upstream of each transcription start site, and assigned the Entrez gene identity for it. To reduce the effects of possible overlaps with different gene isoforms, we masked the promoter positions that overlap with any of the putative gene models provided at the UCSC site (the UCSC genes). Then, the Entrez genes were sorted according to the conservation properties in their associated promoter regions. We considered three sorting criteria:(. Then, we divided the sites into 100 bins according to their N s0 values. For each bin, the upper 5% of the sites with high D F values are defined as the non-conserved, highly biased sites. These sites are characterized by their stronger nucleotide preference despite the lack of conservation (seeThe Entrez genes were divided into 100 bins by each sorting criterion. For each bin ID i, we performed gene ontology (GO) term enrichment analyses for the gene set with bin ID  i by computing hypergeometric P-values. The number of non-trivial GO terms was 8000 for our dataset, which indicates that the hypergeometric P-values with log 10 (P-value) > 5.2 correspond to Bonferroni corrected P < 0.05. The plots inare inspired by the ones proposed in vanto analyze the gene repression effects of miRNAs and siRNAs.
Evolutionary characteristics of 4-fold degenerate sitesThe 4-fold degenerate (4d) sites are the third codon positions where any kind of mutation does not cause a change of amino acid sequence. We collected the human 4d sites from the representative RefSeq genes. We divided the human genome into the first, second and third codon positions and the remaining positions. The third codon positions are subdivided into 4d sites and non4d sites. For each position, we computed the pair of statistics (N s0 ,D F ) and dropped the conserved positions which have a number of substitutions N s0 < N s0,median. We divided the data into 100 bins according to their N s0 values, and compared the D F distributions for each bin k. We consider the D F distribution f k (d) of bin k in the non-coding positions as the background distribution. We computed the upper quantile values q(for each D F value y of the coding sites in the same bin k. Then we plotted the distribution of quantile values q for all the non-conserved N s0 bins for each codon type (). The peaks of those distribution at small q indicate that the codon positions tend to have high D F values compared with the background at the same conservation level.shows a comparison of the convergence of log likelihood and model parameters between the gradient descent methods and the EM algorithm. The x-axes represent the number of iterations that the input alignments are traversed to compute the gradient vector or the expectation values. The y-axes are the relative distances from the optimal values. Although the differences of convergence of log likelihood values might appear small, the convergence rates of parameters are considerably different. The EM algorithm converges much faster toward the optimal value than the gradient descent methods. The figure shows the monotonic convergence of the EM algorithm () while the parameters of the gradient descent methods show oscillatory behavior before reaching the optimum.shows the convergence of the M step maximization. The x-axes represent the number of updates of model parameters. The y-axes represent the relative distance of the parameters from the optimal values. The stationary equation method converges more rapidly than the LBFGS method. At the 10-th EM iteration (), the stationary equation method makes almost no changes to the parameters since the initial parameters are already close to the optimal values. On the other hand, the gradient descent method alters them from the optimal values at least once since it needs to recognize the local landscape of the objective function.shows the comparison of run time of three optimization methods. The computation was performed on a Intel Xeon E5450 3 GHz with 32 GB memory. It is noted that the BFGS method is slower than the others since the optimization code requires additional log likelihood function evaluations other than at each gradient computation.shows the genome-wide distribution of D F and N s0. The genomic data are divided into equally sized bins according to D F or N s0 values. Then we compared the proportion of each type of genomic region (Repeat, Intergenic, Intron, UTR and CDS) in each bin with that in the entire distribution. The bars represent log 2 (fold enrichment) of each genomic region. The figure shows that CDS is enriched and Repeat is depleted in high D F or low N s0 regions. The repeat elements are depleted in both low and high N s0 regions, because most of them have small number of aligned species, and thus their N s0 values are close to the prior expectation N s0 = 5.28 for the alignment column filled with missing characters.shows the correlation between D F and N s0 in the human genome. Although D F and N s0 are roughly inversely correlated, a large variability of D F values for the same N s0 values is observed.illustrates how differences of D F can occur with the same number of substitutions N s0. Both (A) and (B) have a single substitution event, but (A) has a substitution only recently and (B) has a substitution in a deep ancestral branch. This difference results in an approximately single-peak F d (i) for (A) and a double-peak F d (i) distribution for (B), and hence D F of (A) is larger than thatThe back slashes indicate substitution events. The branches that remained as base G are represented by solid lines. Similarly, The evolutionary time courses that stayed as base C, A and T are represented by dot-dash, broken and dotted lines, respectively. of (B). Next, both (C) and (D) have three substitutions, but (C) has a strong bias which prefers base G or C, while (D) has no such a preference, which results in a larger D F value for (C) than for (D).shows GO term enrichment analysis of promoter regions. Positive values on the y-axes represent GO term enrichment and negative values represent depletion. The x-axes represent gene ranks (or bin identities) which are determined according to the sorting criteria: (i) high conservation (); (ii) high non-conservation (); and (iii) non-conserved but highly biased F d (or high D F ) values (), which correspond to the conservation pattern (C) of.shows that the genes with conserved promoters are enriched with the term 'regulation of transcription' (GO:0045449).is essentially an inversion of theand shows that the genes with non-conserved promoters are depleted of 'regulation of transcription'.shows that the genes with promoters that have highly biased F d values despite low level of conservation, which are not reported as constrained regions byshows the normalized N s0 distribution of each codon phase position. Large portions of the first and second codon positions are strongly conserved and have small N s0 values. Both the non-4d sites and the 4d sites have broader tails than the non-coding sites. The 4d sites have thick tail in the large N s0 values.shows the D F distribution of each codon phase position relative to the background distribution. As described in the Section 3, the data only include non-conserved sites. The sharp peaks around the zero quantile in theindicate that all the codon positions are subject to a strong bias that constrains F d to be far from the stationary distribution, unlike the background distribution at the same level of conservation N s0. The fact that this bias is prominent even in the 4d sites indicates that it might capture the selective pressures related to transcription and translation efficiency, such as codon bias and CpG islands. There is, however, another possible reason behind this bias for the 4d sites. Since the 4d sites are within coding regions, many species are aligned on those positions. On the other hand, non-coding regions which are used as Page: 2352 23462353the subtree which has human, rhesus, mouse and dog as the tree leaves, and the data only include the sites that have no ambiguous or gap characters for these four species. the background distribution generally have fewer aligned species, which might cause artificial differences between the distributions. To investigate this effect, we computed the fractional duration F d (i) on the subtree that has human, rhesus, mouse and dog as the tree leaves. Furthermore, we removed the data points that have any ambiguous or gap characters for these four species.shows the recomputed distribution. It still shows peaks at small quantile values, which indicates that the observed bias to the fractional duration F d is not caused by the difference of the number of aligned species. These figures indicate that the codon sites including the 4d sites show distinct behaviors from the non-coding sites in terms of D F distributions even in the extremely diverged sites.
Page: 2350 23462353
H.Kiryu
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
EM algorithm
Iteration
Genome-wide distribution of F d and N s
Sufficient statistics in phylogenetic tree models
GO term analysis of human promoters
D F distribution in coding regions
H.Kiryu
A B
CONCLUSIONWe have investigated the sufficient statistic, composed of the fractional duration time F d and the number of substitutions N s , for continuous time Markov models. We have derived EM algorithms for the general unrestricted (UNREST) model and the general time reversible (GTR) model. In the case of the GTR model, we have derived a stationary equation method for solving the M step optimization problem. Both the EM algorithm and the stationary equation method have a property which is not shared by the gradient descent methods: the objective functions monotonically approach to their optimal values (). We have also shown that the EM algorithm converges faster than the gradient descent methods. Although we did not describe EM algorithms for other phylogeny models with discrete gamma rate variations () and invariance sites (), the application of our method to such models is straightforward. There is a natural definition of local posterior trees which are derived from the stationary equations, and we have discussed the relationships between the branch lengths in the maximal likelihood method and those in the parsimony method. Finally, we have investigated the genome-wide distributions of the sufficient statistic. We have shown that the fractional duration F d has evolutionary information that is not contained in the expected number of substitutions N s0. In our experiments on the F d distributions, we have focused on only the point that the fractional duration F d contains information different from those contained in the expected substitution count N s0 , which is not obvious from the outset since conserved regions (N s0  0) naturally have biased distributions (larger D F ) and thus they are strongly anti-correlated. In order to establish a novel method for finding novel constrained elements based on statistics (N s0 , D F ), several additional factors should be considered and investigated. First, we need to explore at least 2D space (N s0 , D F ) of statistics. It means that we have to determine a threshold curve rather than a single threshold value to determine the constrained sites. Also, more precise characterization of the correlations between (N s0 , D F ) and the patterns of aligned species (i.e. the 01 patterns representing whether each species have an aligned nucleotide or not in an alignment column). We have touched on this issue in the codon sites experiment, but discarding most of the information from the 44 species alignments and keeping only four species for computing statistics is not a satisfactory method. It requires the genome-wide distribution of 2 44 possible patterns of alignment column types. To make any statistical statement on the level of constraint, computation of the theoretical distribution will be useful. We have only analyzed the empirical distributions of the sufficient statistic and have not analyzed the distribution determined by the phylogenetic model. There is a dynamic programming algorithm for computing the distribution of N s0 (). Although it seems difficult to compute the theoretical distribution of F d with similar methods, it can be computed by a sampling method as shown in the Supplementary Material. Furthermore, we must investigate other nuisance parameters such as the length scales of the constrained elements in order to decide if a consecutive segment is constrained or not. Lastly, we assumed that the genomescale alignments provided at the UCSC site are completely reliable. However, there are studies that suggest that the errors contained in the Multiz alignments may be considerable (). It will be interesting to investigate to what extent the computed statistics are sensitive to the errors of the alignments.
Sufficient statistics in phylogenetic tree modelsFunding: 'Functional RNA Project' funded by the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) of Japan; Grants-in-Aid for Young Scientists (21700330); Grantsin-Aid for Scientific Research (A) (22240031). Supercomputing resources were provided by the Human Genome Center, University of Tokyo (http://sc.hgc.jp/shirokane.html).
Conflict of Interest: none declared.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
