Motivation: In a typical gene expression profiling study, our prime objective is to identify the genes that are differentially expressed between the samples from two different tissue types. Commonly, standard analysis of variance (ANOVA)/regression is implemented to identify the relative effects of these genes over the two types of samples from their respective arrays of expression levels. But, this technique becomes fundamentally flawed when there are unaccounted sources of variability in these arrays (latent variables attributable to different biological, environmental or other factors relevant in the context). These factors distort the true picture of differential gene expression between the two tissue types and introduce spurious signals of expression heterogeneity. As a result, many genes which are actually differentially expressed are not detected, whereas many others are falsely identified as positives. Moreover, these distortions can be different for different genes. Thus, it is also not possible to get rid of these variations by simple array normalizations. This both-way error can lead to a serious loss in sensitivity and specificity, thereby causing a severe inefficiency in the underlying multiple testing problem. In this work, we attempt to identify the hidden effects of the underlying latent factors in a gene expression profiling study by partial least squares (PLS) and apply ANCOVA technique with the PLS-identified signatures of these hidden effects as covariates, in order to identify the genes that are truly differentially expressed between the two concerned tissue types. Results: We compare the performance of our method SVA-PLS with standard ANOVA and a relatively recent technique of surrogate variable analysis (SVA), on a wide variety of simulation settings (incorporating different effects of the hidden variable, under situations with varying signal intensities and gene groupings). In all settings, our method yields the highest sensitivity while maintaining relatively reasonable values for the specificity, false discovery rate and false non-discovery rate. Application of our method to gene expression profiling for acute megakaryoblastic leukemia shows that our method detects an additional six genes, that are missed by both the standard ANOVA method as well as SVA, but may be relevant to this disease, as can be seen from mining the existing literature. Availability: The R code for our method, SVA-PLS, is freely available on the Supplementary website http://www.somnathdatta.org/Supp/ SVPLS/ Contact:
INTRODUCTION
BackgroundDifferential gene expression analyses in microarray studies typically overlook the important aspect of subject-specific heterogeneity. Subjects in a microarray study can have certain plausible biological profiles which are not known to be connected with the primary outcome of interest and therefore, the subjects may not be matched with respect those profiles in a casecontrol study. For example, in an expression profiling study with cancer/non-cancer patients the main objective is to identify the genes that are differentially expressed between these two varieties, which can lead to the discovery of potential biomarkers related to cancer. But, this true picture of differential expression can be blurred by several hidden biological effects specific to the subjects recruited in the study. It may happen that some genes are very highly expressed in the subjects with a certain biological, environmental or demographic profile (say, with high blood pressure, regular smoking habits, persons living in rural environments, persons sharing some hidden racial, familial or cryptic pattern pertaining to some inherent structure in the population, etc). On the other hand, some other genes may be repressed because of a similar reason. These factors distort the true signals of differential expression and introduce spurious effects of expression heterogeneity. Thus, many genes which are truly differentially expressed between the two varieties can get rendered as silent, whereas many others may be falsely detected as positives.To complicate things further, we can have a multitude of such hidden confounders in the study and their effects can also vary over different clusters of potentially correlated genes. Thus, it is also not possible to get rid of them by simply modifying the arrays of gene expression measures using a standard normalizing method. These difficulties pose serious problems in analyzing a gene expression data and can lead to erroneous conclusions along with a substantial reduction in the power of the testing procedure.
Related worksOnly a limited number of studies are available in this area, which specifically address this issue of hidden variation in the context of gene expression profiling. With the exception of Leek and, Scheid and Spang (2007) and, most of the works in this area have considered specific types of confounding factors that can produce spurious signals of heterogeneity in the context of expression quantitative trait locus
S.Chakraborty et al.(eQTL) mapping.have devised methods to improve the power of eQTL studies under the presence of non-genetic confounders (unobserved cell culture conditions, batch effects, etc.).),discuss the use of linear mixed effect models to correct for confounders from some unknown experimental effects or some hidden population structure.proposed the use of principle component analysis (PCA) to correct for some hidden stratification in genome-wide association studies. Scheid andproposed a method using filtered permutations of the variety labels, which borrows information across the genes to identify and correct for unknown effects of the hidden confounders. Leek andintroduced the surrogate variable analysis (SVA) method and discussed its relevance in gene expression profiling analyses. This is treated as a benchmark technique in comparing the performance of our method. The method considers a singular value decomposition (SVD) of the residual matrix obtained after fitting a simple linear regression model to the log-transformed gene expression data. The significant eigenvectors from the SVD are then used to create a reduced residual matrix (containing statistically significant traces of residual expression heterogeneity). The eigenvectors of the original residual matrix that are maximally correlated with the eigenvectors of this reduced matrix are taken as the surrogate variables. These variables are then used in the original linear model to test for the truly differentially expressed genes. Overall, the method is fairly complex and uses a two step process for the construction of surrogate variables. Moreover, the method in its current form, is also limited in terms of model selection, as it uses a very simple regression framework without considering the effects of each gene and its possible interactions with the surrogate variable (containing effects of the hidden confounders on potentially correlated genes and the two sample varieties). This reduces its applicability to situations where the effect of the hidden confounders can be far more complicated. In essence, all existing techniques in the literature address certain specific patterns of residual expression heterogeneity and discuss relevant modeling techniques to compensate for their effects. In this article, we attempt to excavate the hidden sources of expression heterogeneity by the more generalized approach of partial least squares (PLS). Our method (SVA-PLS), due to its inherent principle, can perform the entire SVA from a more general perspective, by extracting the maximally correlated projections of the residual and original gene expression variables to two different latent factor spaces (connected by a linear relation), thereby ensuring an appropriate estimation of the hidden variables in terms of a set of orthogonal scores in the residual space. Also, our method considers a reasonably wide choice of models, which can potentially explain a large variety of confounding effects.
Summary of resultsThe rest of the article is organized as follows. The next section introduces our methodology in detail. Results from a performance study of standard analysis of variance (ANOVA), our method SVAPLS and the benchmark SVA technique on a variety of simulated gene expression profiling analyses, are reported in Section 3. Finally, a comparative evaluation of the three methods is performed on a real-life dataset from the gene expression profiling study of acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL). The article ends with a discussion in Section 5.
METHODSWe consider a gene expression profiling analysis with g genes and n subjects, distributed over two tissue types/varieties (like, normal and cancer cell lines or two different biological conditions). Let the first n 1 subjects be under variety 1 and the rest n 2 be under variety 2. We start by applying the standard ANOVA technique on the log-transformed gene expression matrix Y () and compute the fitted model residuals. Let Y ijk denote the logtransformed gene expression value for the gene i in subject k under variety j, i = 1,2, ,g, j = 1,2 and k = 1,2, ,n 1 for j = 1 and k = n 1 +1, ,n for j = 2. We fit the following ANOVA model to the data and get the residuals.where  denotes the general mean effect in the model, G i , V j , respectively, stand for the main effects of gene i and variety j and (GV ) ij defines their interaction (characterizing the expression effect of gene i on the subjects under variety j). ijk denotes the random error term which is assumed to follow a N(0, 2 ) distribution. The fitted residuals from the above model are then given byY ijk , A j being the set of individuals corresponding to variety j. These residuals may contain the traces of subject-specific expression heterogeneity, which is independent of the primary variable signal from the sample types and can confound the true effect behind many potentially positive genes or can overestimate many silent genes as positives. In order to extract these spurious differential expression signals, we employ the PLS technique);. We construct two ng matrices Y and E, whose i-th column contains, respectively, the original log-transformed gene expression levels Y ijk s and the residual gene expression levels e ijk s for all the n individuals corresponding to gene i (i = 1,2,...g). Thus, E = ((E rc )) ng and Y = ((Y rc )) ng , r = 1,2,...n and c = 1,2,...g. Conceptually, these matrices can be characterized as two sets of n observations on two g-dimensional random variables E and Y , where each dimension corresponds to a certain gene. Our approach is to regress E on Y by PLS, in order to extract the hidden sources of gene expression heterogeneity. PLS, by virtue of its dimension reduction and covariance maximizing property extracts the additional signals from those groups of genes, whose expression levels, contained in the original gene expression matrix Y , are influenced by the hidden subject-specific effects, contained in the residual gene expression matrix E. Let the matrices now stand for their respective mean zero versions, obtained by subtracting the respective column means from their initial versions. We assume that E T Y is non-null. The statistical regression model for PLS can be written aswhere U =[u 1 : u 2 :  : u m ] is an nm matrix, containing the m latent factors u 1 ,u 2 , : u m in the space of the response matrix E. Similarly, T =[t 1 : t 2 :  : t m ] is another nm matrix, containing the m latent factors t 1 ,t 2 ,t m in the space of the covariate matrix Y. Q =[q 1 : q 2 :  : q m ] is an gm matrix, consisting of the loadings q 1 ,q 2 ,q m , which measure respectively, the importance of the latent factors u 1 ,u 2 ,u m in the response (E)'s space. Similarly, P =[p 1 : p 2 :  : p m ] is a gm matrix, consisting of the loadings p 1 ,p 2 ,p m , which measure, respectively, the importance of the latent factors t 1 ,t 2 ,t m in the covariate (Y )'s space. Further, for each i = 1,2,m,Here, 1 and 2 are the random error matrices characterizing the residual terms in the regression models for E and Y , respectively. Now, the basic idea of PLS is to estimate the set of latent factor pairs, one by one, along with the corresponding deflation Page: 801 799806
SVA-PLSof the matrices E and Y at each step. This is executed by a process of alternating regression. For each latent factor pair (u i ,t i ), i = 1,2,...m, this procedure finds weight vectors c and w in such a way that the covariance of u i and t i is maximized. Specifically, c and w are such thatWe initialize E 1 = E and Y 1 = Y. Now for i = 1,2,...,m, we successively estimate the i-th latent factor pair (u i ,t i ), by the PLS algorithm presented below. In this algorithm, we use a  b, to mean a = b/b, for any vector b. We start by setting u i = E i,.v , where(0,0, ,0) and repeat Steps (i) to (iv) till convergence(i) Regress Y i on u i to obtain w i  Y T i u i .(ii) Compute the updated i-th, Y-space latent factor t i = Y i w i .(iv) Compute the updated i-th, E-space latent factor, STOP; otherwise let t i,old = t i and go back toStep (i). Throughout, we have used = 10 8. Next deflate the matrices E i and Y i to obtainare now used in place of E i and Y i to extract the (i+1)-th latent factor pair (u i+1 ,t i+1 ). In this way, we find the m latent factors from the E and Y spaces. The use of t in deflating both the response (E) as well as covariate (Y ) matrices ensures orthogonality of the extracted latent factors t 1 ,t 2 ,.
..t min the Y-space, which in turn ensures their estimability in a linear model. From now onwards, we denote m by p max to define the maximum number of hidden(latent) factors (scores) that are needed to be extracted from the two spaces. The p max Y-space scores extracted by the above method can be characterized as a set of surrogate variables Z 1 ,Z 2 , ,Z pmax that are optimally associated with the latent factors from the E-space, containing the hidden sources of expression heterogeneity in the original gene expression data. The mutual covariances between the extracted latent factors from the two spaces decrease gradually from the first pair (u 1 ,Z 1 ) to the p max-th pair (u m ,Z pmax ). Thus, Z 1 contains maximum information on the residual gene expression heterogeneity compared the other factors. Now, we define a series of ANCOVA models M p indexed by p = 1,2, ,p max , where p denotes number the surrogate variables incorporated in the model, which capture effects of the residual gene expression heterogeneity.where  denotes the general mean effect in the model, G i ,V j and (GV ) ij denote the main effects of gene i, variety j and their interaction effect.jk , is incorporated in the model as the PLS-imputed estimate of the hidden residual expression heterogeneity in the data. Here,  l is the regression coefficient for Z l in the ANCOVA model (4). (GZ 1 ) i and (VZ 1 ) j define, respectively, the interaction effects of gene i and variety j with the first surrogate variable Z 1. These effects measure respectively, the variation in the impact of the hidden factors (captured by Z 1 ) over different groups of genes (which may be correlated) and over the two tissue types (which may affect the primary variable signal). As the first surrogate variable Z 1 contains maximum information on the residual expression heterogeneity compared with the other ones, we consider only its interactions with the gene and variety effects. The inclusion of these effects in the model ensures accurate estimation of the actual genevariety interactions, capturing the true expression effects of a gene over the two varieties, if potential hidden variables are embedded in the data structure. ijk denotes the random error term corresponding to Y ijk in the model, which is assumed to follow a N(0, 2 ) distribution. Here p max can be specified by the user, considering the corresponding situation under study and affording a reasonable degree of complexity along with a manageable computational intensity. As for our purpose, we have selected p max = 3, since from several empirical studies (details reported in the Supplementary Material) we have found that the first three surrogate variables (Z 1 ,Z 2 ,Z 3 ) explain a substantial proportion of the dispersion for the variable E. Thus, overall we consider three different linear models from which the best is selected by the Akaike's Information Criterion (AIC) () and is then used to test for the equality of genevariety interaction effects for identifying the truly differentially expressed genes. In the concerned multiple testing problem, we use the BenjaminiHochberg method () to control the false discovery rate. The entire algorithm for our method SVA-PLS is presented below:@BULLET Step 5: fit model M popt to estimate the actual genevariety interaction effect (GV ) ij for each gene i and variety j (i = 1,2, ,g and j = 1,2). For each gene i, test the null hypothesis of no varietyspecific differential expression H 0 : (GV ) i1 = (GV ) i2 versus alternative hypothesis of differential expression H 0 : (GV ) i1 = (GV ) i2 , using the statistic t i :which under H 0 follows a central t distribution with  = g * n3 * g p opt df and the corresponding P-value is 2 * (1F t) being the distribution function for a central t distribution with  df. (GV ) ij , j = 1,2 is the least squares estimate of (GV ) ij , Var() is the estimated variance of (GV ) i1  (GV ) i2 and  2 is the least squares estimate of  2 , all computed from the model M popt. @BULLET Step 6: perform a multiple testing with these P-values for identifying the truly differentially expressed genes at a prespecified level of the false discovery rate (FDR), using the BenjaminiHochberg method ().
SIMULATION STUDIESWe envisage a gene expression profiling study with 500 genes and 20 subjects, distributed equally over 2 varieties. The entire simulation study is broadly divided into two settings: (i) assuming the genes to be independent of each other (Independent) and (ii) assuming dependence within different groups of genes (Clustered). The log-transformed gene expression values (Y ) are generated by using a linear model with the gene (G) and variety/tissue type (V ) main effects, their interaction (GV ) and a hidden variable (W ). Thus, Y ijk , corresponding to the i-th gene, j-th variety and k-th subject, is obtained as:where i = 1,2,...,500 denote the 500 genes, j = 1,2 denote the two varieties and k  A j , denote the 20 subjects in the study. Here A 1 = {1,2,...10} and A 2 = {11,12,...,20} denote, respectively, the subsets of individuals corresponding to the two varieties 1 and 2. The error terms ijk s are assumed to be independently distributed as N(0, 2 ), where choice of  2 is described next.Page: 802 799806
S.Chakraborty et al.Let X denote the design matrix corresponding to the above linear model,  denote the corresponding vector of regression coefficients and denote the vector of the corresponding random error terms. Then we have Y = X +. Define the noise to signal ratio (). This quantity measures the relative intensity of the noise coming from the random error and the confounded primary variable signal depicting the expression effect of the genes over the two varieties. We consider three different values 0.1,0.5 and 1 for  to incorporate, respectively, the cases of strong, moderate and weak primary signal intensity. From these choices of the , we compute the corresponding values of  2 and use them to simulate the values of ijk s in the model (6). For data generation, we assume the effects of all terms except the genevariety interaction (GV ) and the hidden confounder (W ) to be zero. Overall we consider the first 70 genes to be truly differentially expressed among all the 500 genes. For 1  i  20, we take (GV ) i1 = 7.5, (GV ) i2 = 7.5, for 21  i  70 (GV ) i1 = 7.5, (GV ) i2 =7.5 and for genes 71500 we assume (GV ) i1 = (GV ) i2 = 0. For each gene i in 1500, j = 1,2 and subject k  A j , we generate a Bernoulli random variable s ijk with success probability of 0.4. It is used to generate effects of W over the two varieties, under both the independent as well as clustered settings. Biologically, this accounts for hidden confounding effects from certain specific subjects under each of the two varieties, which is typically expected in a reallife gene expression analysis. In addition, we consider two separate scenarios, depending on whether the effect of the hidden variable W is same or different over the two varieties.
Independent testsIn this setting, we consider the genes to be independent of one another. We generate their log-transformed expression levels under two scenarios of similar and varying effects of the hidden variable over the two varieties. The similarity in the effects of the missing variable over the two varieties is accomplished by simulating the latent variable W ijk from the same normal distribution for k  A 1 A 2 (covering subjects from both the varieties). This represents a case when the hidden variable W is orthogonal to the variety effect. The effect of W is varied over three different groups of genes by changing the mean parameter of its distribution. That is, we let W ijk = Z ijk I(s ijk = 1), where Z ijk is generated from N(3,0.01) or N(2,0.01) or N(10,0.01), depending on whether 1  i  20, 21  i  70 or i > 70. For generating different effects of the hidden variable over the two varieties, we simulate the latent variable W ijk for the subjects k  A 1 and k  A 2 , from two normal distributions with different means. This represents a case when the hidden variable W is confounded with the variety effect. Once again, the effect of the hidden variable is varied over the three gene groups. That is, we let W ijk = Z ijk I(s ijk = 1), where for k  A 1 , Z i1k is generated from N(3,0.01) or N(2,0.01) or N(10,0.01) and for k  A 2 , Z i2k is generated from N(3,0.01) or N(15,0.01) or N(20,0.01), depending on whether 1  i  20, 21  i  70 or i > 70. Next, we consider yet another simulation setting, where the hidden variable results in a complex confounding pattern with the varieties. In this case, for variety 1, we simulate the latent variable W i1k for the subjects k = 1,2,...5 and k = 6,7,...10, from two normal distributions with different means. Analogously, for variety 2, we simulate the latent variable W i2k for the subjects k = 11,12,...15 and 16,17,...20, from two normal distributions with different means. Similar to the previous settings, we vary the effect of W over the three gene groups. Thus, under the variety 1, we let W i1k = Z i1k I(s i1k = 1), where for k = 1,2,...5, Z i1k is generated from N(3,0.01) or N(2,0.01) or N(10,0.01) and for k = 6,7,...10, Z i1k is generated from N(3,0.01) or N(15,0.01) or N(20,0.01), depending on whether 1  i  20, 21  i  70 or i > 70. Similarly, under variety 2, we let W i2k = Z i2k I(s i2k = 1), where for k = 11,12,...15, Z i2k is generated from N(6,0.01) or N(2,0.01) or N(10,0.01) and for k = 16,17,...20, Z i2k is generated from N(5,0.01) or N(15,0.01) or N(15,0.01), depending on whether 1  i  20, 21  i  70 or i > 70.
Cluster-dependent testsNote that the usual statistical model for differential gene analysis by the ANOVA formulation assumes independent error terms. However, it is well known that in reality, certain groups of genes have correlated expressions. In this setting, we consider three clusters of correlated genes with the same genevariety interaction effects as for the case of independently expressed genes, with the hidden variable (W ) being generated according to the same set of simulation schemes as in Section 3.1. The underlying dependence among the genes is incorporated by generating the random error term ijk in model (6) as a weighted sum of two different errors 1 and 2 , simulated independently of each other, with the values of 1 being same for all the genes in the same cluster. Let C = (1,2,) denote the union of the three clusters. Then, mathematically the generation of e ijk in the simulation model (6) is expressed as:where, I(i) denotes the cluster containing gene i. The random error termsbeing determined from the desired noise to signal ratio, as before). From a biological perspective, this simulation setting captures the idea that genes in the same cluster act cooperatively, resulting in correlated expression measurements. The simulation study is concerned with a performance analysis of standard ANOVA, our method SVA-PLS and SVA (downloaded from www.bioconductor.org on November 29, 2011) with respect to four measures: sensitivity, specificity, FDR and false non-discovery rate (FNR).(1) Sensitivity: proportion among differentially expressed genes that were declared significant.(2) Specificity: proportion among non-differentially expressed genes that were declared non-significant.(3) FDR: proportion among genes declared significant that were not differentially expressed.(4) FNR: proportion among genes declared non-significant that were differentially expressed.The entire simulation study is performed 100 times under each scenario in order to compute the average values of the four performance measures. Under the clustered setting, the SVA software broke down at several iterations of the simulation study. Hence, for this setting we only report the performance of our method (SVA-PLS) and the standard ANOVA. From the performance analysis of the three methods on the independent gene expression levels, with similar, varying and complex effects of the hidden variable (Tables 1, 2 and 3, respectively), we see that SVA-PLS achieves the highest sensitivity compared with standard ANOVA and SVA. Interestingly, the margin of sensitivity for our method is very high in the case of complex confounding (), followed by the case of varying effects of the hidden variable over the tissue types (). This observation demonstrates that our method is most useful for the relatively complicated situations, when the missing variable is in fact a statistical confounder affecting the primary variable signals from the two tissue types. In addition, our method produces a comparatively impressive performance with respect to the other two methods inof the high specificity and reasonably small FDR and FNR. Under the clustered setting with dependence inside several clusters of genes (Tables 4, 5 and 6 for the moderate case of  = 0.5), SVA-PLS performs really well compared with standard ANOVA by detecting a larger number of truly positive genes with its high margin of sensitivity, at the cost of a slightly increased FDR, which is an obvious price to pay for achieving a higher performance in terms of detection power. For the other choices of the  too, SVA-PLS shows higher sensitivity compared with standard ANOVA (we refer to the Supplementary Material). Under this setting also, our method yields a reasonably high specificity in comparison to standard ANOVA along with an impressively small FDR and FNR. Specifically, the margin of sensitivity for SVA-PLS under both the simulation settings is the highest in the best case with very strong primary variable signal ( = 0.1), closely followed by the moderate ( = 0.5) and worst cases ( = 1). Thus, overall the results demonstrate that our method, byvirtue of its high sensitivity in a wide variety of situations can potentially discover many truly differentially expressed genes that are masked by the effects of hidden factors and can simultaneously maintain acceptably small error rates. We further illustrate the efficacy of our method by comparing the actual (mean centered) values of the hidden variable W ijk (simulated in the model under the setting of independently expressed genes with serious confounding of the hidden variable W ), with the PLSimputed values W imp ijk , incorporated in the ANCOVA model (4). We observe a strongly linear relationship between the two sets of values with a very high positive correlation (0.95) (). We have noticed a similar effect in the other simulation settings as well. This demonstrates that our method SVA-PLS is effectively imputing the hidden variable (W ) on the actual expression levels of the genes.
Page: 803 799806
SVA-PLS
S.Chakraborty et al.
ANALYSIS OF LEUKEMIA DATAWe now explore the performance of our method on a dataset generated from a gene expression study of AMKL, which is a subtype of the disease acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The dataset was featured in. It contains the expression levels of 22283 genes on two types of AMKL patients, 23 with down-syndrome and 38 without down-syndrome.In general, down syndrome patients are more prone to AMKL compared those without it and treatment outcomes are also much more favorable for them. From an exploratory analysis of the dataset (), it was found that the non-DS AMKL patients can be further subdivided into two groups using the expression profiles of the HOX/TALE family members. This latent grouping inside one tissue type can generate hidden confounders, which may in turn perturb the actual signals of variety-specific differential gene expression. Thus, it is important to search for the traces of residual gene expression heterogeneity in this dataset for ensuring a more accurate inference on the truly positive genes, which is built into our method. Indeed, we investigated whether the PLS-imputed values W imp of the three genes, HOXA9, HOXA10 and MEIS1, belonging to the HOX/TALE family, contain a subgroup signature.shows a heat map for the normalized values of the estimated PLS contributed part W imp , corresponding to the 38 individuals in the non-DS AMKL group. This W imp is free from the primary signal of variety-specific differential expression and is expected to contain the traces of residual expression heterogeneity corresponding to the hidden factors in the data. From, we can observe a subgroup structure among these individuals. Clearly, the differential pattern is strongest for the MEIS1 gene, followed by HOXA9 and HOXA10. The three methods SVA-PLS, standard ANOVA and SVA were applied to the log-transformed expression matrix of the 22 283 genes in the dataset. Overall, SVA-PLS detected 1585 genes followed by 1407 genes from standard ANOVA and 280 genes from SVA (). Our method detects a total of 427 genes, that are missed by others, of which at least six genes deserve special mention. These genes are MLF1, BRCA2, TNF, c-MPL, CD44 and MAGE-D4. The gene MLF1 is actively involved in the development of AML. A chromosomal derangement associated with this gene is a cause of the myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) (). Patients with this syndrome often develop acute anemia, which in most cases lead to low blood counts. In almost one-third of the patients, this syndrome causes progressive bone marrow failure, which in turn develops the disease into AML. Also, delayed bone marrow transplantation for patients with low risk of the MDS has been found to be connected with the improved outcome (). The gene BRCA2 is an important caretaker gene (), whose inactivation initiates a tumor and the resulting genetic instability causes accelerated mutation in all genes, which in turn, may lead to the rapid progression of the tumor. Germline mutations in this gene play a dominant role in the onset of breast and ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, prostate cancer, Fanconi anemia and pre-B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (). The apoptosis-inducing ligand TRAIL related to the gene TNF, plays an active role in the development of different types of cancers. Downregulation of TRAIL-R2 inhibits the TRAIL-mediated apoptosis in AML (). Monoallelic deletion of the tumor-suppressing genes TRAIL-R1 and TRAIL-R2 can inactivate the TRAIL-induced apoptosis in B-cell lymphoma (). In the development of colorectal cancer, there is a substantial increase in sensitivity to TRAIL-induced apoptosis, with the progression from benign to malignant tumors ().Expression of the gene c-MPL has been found to be involved in the progression of CD34+ and M2FAB subtypes of AML (). Ligation of the gene CD44 with specific anti-CD44 antibodies (or with its natural ligand hyaluronan) can reverse the blockage in the differentiation of several subtypes of AML, thereby improving the survival of patients using differentiating agents (e.g. retinoic acid) (). The 8:21 chromosomal translocation is commonly observed in AML. Acute myeloid leukemia-1 transcription factor AML1-ETO and its splice variant AML1-ETO9a are capable of modulating the expression of CD44, thereby connecting the abnormal translocation 8:21 to the regulation of a cell adhesion molecule, that is involved in the nurturing of AML blast/stem cells (). In the acute promyelocytic leukemia cell line NB4, overexpression of the gene CD44 receptor results in apoptosis (). In addition, downregulation of this gene has been found to be conducive to keratoacanthoma and squamous cell carcinoma (). Upregulation of the gene MAGE-D4 results in the proliferation of tumor cells in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) (). Thus, we find that a number of the additional genes selected by our method are connected to AML or some other related type of carcinoma. These genes being found to be differentially expressed between the subjects with and without down syndrome, can serve as important candidates for research on leukemia and down syndrome.
DISCUSSIONHidden array-specific (subject-specific) factors in microarray analyses may constitute a substantial source of gene expression heterogeneity. The effects of these factors are not detectable from outside and also cannot be removed by any standard normalizing method. But they can perturb the primary signals of differential gene expression and lead to erroneous conclusions on the detection of differentially expressed genes. This problem is relatively unexplored in gene expression studies. In this article, we have developed a novel technique for identifying these latent factors by using PLS and applied it to a wide variety of simulation settings characterizing different patterns of viable gene expression profiling studies. We have shown that the technique of PLS, by virtue of its basic principle of projecting to latent structures, can produce precise estimates of the hidden factors causing the spurious signal heterogeneity. These estimates (surrogate variables) when incorporated in the ANOVA model enhances detection of the genevariety interaction effects thereby leading to a large gain in sensitivity of the underlying bioinformatics screening procedure. The resulting method, SVA-PLS, also yields a reasonably high specificity for a wide range of data structures, thereby ensuring an efficient control over the incorrect detection of many silent genes. The FDR is marginally higher for our method, but is sufficiently well compensated by a substantially large gain in the margin of sensitivity. Overall, SVA-PLS emerges as the winner when compared with two other competing methods in a range of controlled settings. The utility of our method in detecting potentially interesting genes missed by other methods is also demonstrated by an analysis of a real dataset on AMKL patients. Unaccounted sources of variation (hidden variables) in a model can adversely affect the outcomes of statistical tests. This is particularly true if the unmeasured variables are confounders, i.e. correlated with the variables in the model whose effects on the outcomes are being tested. In a simple two group comparison, a standard assumption for the validity of the commonly used two sample pooled t-test is that the error variances in the two groups (populations) are equal. A departure from this model assumption is known as the BehrensFisher problem and has received a great deal of assumption in the statistics literature [see e.g.. A common solution to this problem is to use separate variance estimates for the error distribution in two groups and resort either to an approximate t-distribution () or to a large sample normal approximation of the distribution of the test statistics. Indeed, if one assumes (as in our formulation) the existence of an unmeasured factor contributing to the outcome in a linear model formulation of the two sample problem that is equated with the model errors, one gets a model with unequal variances in the two groups. Thus, our method may provide an alternative solution to Page: 806 799806
S.Chakraborty et al.the BehrensFisher problem. We plan to explore this connection in greater details elsewhere.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [19:00 25/2/2012 Bioinformatics-bts022.tex]
