Motivation: Riboswitches are cis-regulatory elements in mRNA, mostly found in Bacteria, which exhibit two main secondary structure conformations. Although one of them prevents the gene from being expressed, the other conformation allows its expression, and this switching process is typically driven by the presence of a specific ligand. Although there are a handful of known ribos-witches, our knowledge in this field has been greatly limited due to our inability to identify their alternate structures from their sequences. Indeed, current methods are not able to predict the presence of the two functionally distinct conformations just from the knowledge of the plain RNA nucleotide sequence. Whether this would be possible, for which cases, and what prediction accuracy can be achieved, are currently open questions. Results: Here we show that the two alternate secondary structures of riboswitches can be accurately predicted once the 'switching sequence' of the riboswitch has been properly identified. The proposed SwiSpot approach is capable of identifying the switching sequence inside a putative, complete riboswitch sequence, on the basis of pairing behaviors, which are evaluated on proper sets of configurations. Moreover, it is able to model the switching behavior of riboswitches whose generated ensemble covers both alternate configurations. Beyond structural predictions, the approach can also be paired to homology-based riboswitch searches. Availability and Implementation: SwiSpot software, along with the reference dataset files, is available at
IntroductionGene regulation is essential to achieve organism versatility, giving cells control over structure and functions and being the basis for cellular differentiation, morphogenesis, and adaptability. Since the discovery of ribozymes, it has become more and more evident that RNA molecules are also actively involved in regulatory mechanisms, including the regulation of gene expression (). Riboswitches are RNA elements, mainly found in bacteria, that are embedded in 5 0-untranslated regions of mRNA (). They are able to sense cellular metabolites with no involvement of protein factors, and consequently modulate either mRNA transcription or translation by adopting one out of two possible structures (), known as 'ON' and 'OFF' conformations. Riboswitches are usually built around an aptamer domain, which binds to the ligand, and an expression platform domain, which undergoes a structural rearrangement upon the ligandaptamer binding (). Furthermore, a central role in regulation has been recognized to an overlapping region between these two domains, referred to as switching sequence (or 'SwSeq' for short hereafter). From an evolutionary standpoint, aptamers are typically highly conserved, as a consequence of its recognition specificity towards the ligand. In contrast, expression platforms are usually far less conserved (). Previous works have shown that riboswitches can regulate gene expression via three main mechanisms: (i) transcription termination, through the formation of a terminator hairpin or a competitive antiterminator structure, (ii) translation inhibition, by sequestering or releasing the Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence and (iii) alternative splicing regulation, via sequestration/release of alternative splicing sites (). Understanding the mechanisms of riboswitch structural switching is of broad interest and applicable to a wide range of scientific fields, such as systems biology or drug design, e.g. to design novel engineered genetic circuits (), or develop riboswitch-targeting drugs (). Previous computational efforts targeting riboswitches can be categorized in riboswitch gene finders, and conformational switch predictors (). The former category includes several tools, such as Infernal, the founding component of the Rfam database (), and more specific tools such as RibEx (Abreu) or RiboSW (). Such methods are primarily used for genome-wide analyses, and are based on machine learning approaches. The second category encompasses various methods based on a structural classification of alternative structures, such as paRNAss (), RNAshapes () and RNAbor (). Family-specific approaches for ON/OFF structure prediction have been employed as well (). Here we present a novel computational method that can predict the two functional conformations of riboswitches, using merely as input the plain RNA nucleotide sequence. Importantly, this developed procedure can also be coupled with a classifier to identify putative riboswitch sequences, i.e. to uncover riboswitches based on its potential to generate two alternate configurations.
System and methodsThe presented work stems from investigations initially carried out to answer a simple question: Is it possible to computationally predict the two functional conformations of a riboswitch once the SwSeq has been identified? By imposing loose constraints on the pairings of the SwSeq bases, the RNAfold tool in the ViennaRNA package () was able to closely approximate the two reference alternative structures in ten out of twelve case studies, while only minor errors were present in the outcomes for the other two (Supplementary; further details in Section 3.2). Such results suggest that spotting out the switching sequence may represent the basic step for the prediction of the two functional RNA conformations. Throughout this work we used the ViennaRNA package, ver. 2.1.9, (), which is based on a validated set of thermodynamic parameters () and produces precise energy models.
Overall approachAlthough it has been found that tertiary structural arrangements affect the riboswitch functionality (), their influence can hardly be captured by a simple, handy computational model. Instead, secondary structures can be investigated and analyzed in a much more efficient way. For these reasons, we shall focus on RNA secondary structures and their representations. Let r  r 1 r 2. .. r lr be the RNA sequence of length l r over the ordinary RNA alphabet; a secondary structure can be indicated by the integer row vector p(r) (a 'pairing') whose jth element prj holds either the index of the element the jth base is paired with, or j in case of no pairing. An ensemble of structures for r is a multiset of N pairing vectors pr i ; i  1. .. N, not necessarily distinct, stacked in the N  l r matrix E r. Thus, E r i indicates the i-th conformation in E r , whose j-th element is E r i; j. In this context, SwSeqs in the two alternate conformations show alternate pairing patterns (towards either upstream or downstream bases), thus suggesting a pattern-based method to identify and locate SwSeqs whenever they are not known. The processing flow that leads from the input RNA sequence down to the possible alternate conformations and the evaluation of a riboswitch-like behavior can be structured as shown in. It comprises three main functional modules indicated as SwSeq Extractor, Constrained Folding, and Classifier, respectively aimed at identifying the switching sequence, at deriving the alternate configurations, and at evaluating their potential to support a typical riboswitch behavior. Their implementations can be separately modified to improve their accuracy and/or efficiency. The proposed method has been assessed against a set of wellknown riboswitches, whose functional structures have been carefully described. Hence, a reference dataset has been defined for this purpose.
DatasetCurrently, riboswitches have been classified in more than 20 distinct classes (), according to significant structural and/or sequence similarity. At present, hundreds or thousands of representatives per class exist in the current RNA databases such as Rfam (). However, a proper evaluation of the proposed approach requires a complete knowledge of both the ON and OFF conformations, and this is available only for a very small number of cases. For the sake of our investigation, both the aptamer and the expression platform domain have to be precisely located in the riboswitch sequences. Unfortunately, in literature and in databases such as Rfam often only the expression platform is given. Thus, thesequence, a putative switching sequence is identified by the SwSeq Extractor. Such result is exploited by the Constrained Folding module to derive the two alternate structures. Finally, a classifier decides if a switching behavior can be associated to them complete sequence and the missing details must be obtained through a systematic review of studies on single riboswitches, whenever available. The riboswitch records used as our reference dataset and reported inhave been defined carrying out this reviewing work and, to the best of our knowledge, they can be regarded as one of the most comprehensive riboswitch dataset to date, at least in terms of the complete sequence set (aptamer + expression platform). It covers the main riboswitch families and the major regulatory mechanisms. Our complete reference dataset contains 40 records, divided in three groups. The first two groups include 20 riboswitches from 16 families (). The first group encompasses twelve sequences (some already used in previous studies ()) with reliable SwSeq information (first part of). For each record in the group, whenever not explicitly reported in the literature, the switching sequences have been identified by comparing the two known alternative secondary structures. The second group contains eight riboswitches whose SwSeq has not been identified yet (second part of); despite this lack of information, they can be used to validate the overall method, but not the SwSeq Extractor. The twenty elements in the last group (shown in) have been used as negative controls; they are not riboswitches, and consist of ncRNAs, in the same length range of the previous groups, selected from the Rfam database (version 12.0, see http://rfam.xfam.org) to be representative of heterogeneous secondary structures. Among them, we have taken care to include RNAs that exhibit other types of switching behaviors.
Algorithms
SwSeq extractorA central question in the proposed approach is how to spot the switching sequence out of an RNA sequence r, using no additional information. This task is assigned to the SwSeq Extractor module. Scarceness of accurate structural data on riboswitches makes it impossible to follow a typical machine-learning approach. Moreover, recent studies on entropy contents of riboswitch sequences () do not focus on SwSeqs. Thus, we propose to use an ensemble (a multiset) E r of conformations, which will likely contain conformations close to the two alternative structures. Once E r has been defined, base pairings across different conformations in E r must be analyzed to identify the SwSeq. These two tasks, named " Ensemble Builder " and " Ensemble Analyzer " , are integral parts of the SwSeq Extractor module (). The actual content of E r determines the effectiveness of the whole SwSeq extraction procedure. An implicit choice for E r can be taken by referring to the McCaskill algorithm () to compute the frequency of all possible base pairings at equilibrium at a given temperature, subsumed in the matrix P. In this case, the ideal reference E r accounts for all the conformations and their specific stability. We shall derive results according to this choice first, and then we shall compare them with results from a stochastic approach in building E r. The SwSeq is identified by the 'Ensemble Analyzer', which searches for the subsequence in r that most frequently shows alternative basepairing (upstream or downstream) across structures in E r. We propose to capture this behavior by means of a proper scoring method; the predicted SwSeq would then be the one with the maximum score. The corresponding pseudo-code is shown in Algorithm S1. In defining the scoring method, we make use of the basic promoting score s p > 0, and the basic penalty s n < 0. Let us consider the subsequence rj. .. j  l of length l starting at index j; its mean frequency of upstream/downstream base-pairing, indicated respectively by F up j; l and F do j; l, can be calculated through the McCaskill pairing probability matrix P (the probability for base pair (x, y) is indicted here as Px; y):Boltzmann coverage has been evaluated with the extended sampling approach described in text. List of ncRNA used as negative controls are shown in Supplementary Table S2. Full description of the reference dataset, including the annotated switching sequences, can be found in Supplementary Table S1.
Modeling riboswitches by spotting out switching sequencesA synthetic way to express the tendencies of rj. .. j  l to pair upstream and downstream is pairUpj; l  s p  F up j; l  s n  F do j; l pairDownj; l  s p  F do j; l  s n  F up j; land the propensity for rj. .. j  l to show both of them can be indicated by scorej; l  pairUpj; l  pairDownj; lAccording to the proposed scoring model, the pair of indices j  ; l   yielding the maximum for score(j, l) indicates the putative switching sequence. The actual values chosen for for s p and s n may affect the overall classification performance. Thus, according to tests performed on the reference dataset and discussed in Supplementary Material, they have been set to s p  1 and s n  0:9, yielding the most satisfying classification performance (Supplementary).shows how base pairing frequencies can be exploited to build the described score. The upper chart reports the plain per single base upstream/downstream pairing frequencies. The middle chart reports the mean frequencies per target subsequence, referred to its starting position. Finally, the lower chart shows the overall score, as per Equation (4). The starting position of the putative SwSeq corresponds to the base index yielding the maximum score (indicated by a small circle). It might be argued that working with the overall pairing probability matrix P would account also for very unlikely conformations, loosing the focus on the most representative ones for our goal. Thus another possibility is to make use of an actual E r , populating it via specific sampling methods. In this regard, the baseline option in our work was a Boltzmann-based sampling through a well-known algorithm (). For E r to be representative of the real energy landscape, a very accurate energy model is required. It must be underlined that the Turner energy model is inherently unable to account for the ligand contributions in one of the structures. Moreover, the influence of kinetic phenomena in the formation of some native structures cannot be easily captured. As a consequence, as shown in, by using a plain Boltzmann sampling not in all cases E r covers the neighborhoods of the two alternate functional conformations: for thiM_TPP (a), both neighborhoods are encompassed, while for xpt_Guanine (b) one conformation is completely out of the E r landscape. In practice, whenever conformations similar to one of the two alternatives are not adequately represented in E r , it is unlikely to identify the SwiSeq by analyzing pairing frequencies. In an attempt to partially address this limitation, we have chosen an ensemble size of 1200 structures and, to increase the representativeness of samples in E r , we have applied an artifice proposed also in (), by performing the sampling at different temperatures. By using the RNAsubopt tool, we sampled 300 structures at the default value of 37 C and we added 150 structures per each temperature value at six decile intervals towards the melting temperature of the RNA strand. Once the reference ensemble has been built, we can refer to the same scoring method previously described. Thus, we can express F up and F do on the basis of actual structures in E r. Using the step function H(x) (defined as H(x)  0 for x 0, H(x)  1 otherwise), these values can be calculated as:This possible approach is intrinsically stochastic, thus not reproducible in principle. Although a small variance exists across predicted SwSeqs from different runs, its effect on the two predicted conformations is minimal, with a negligible variance of the normalised bp-distance between conformations predicted in different runs (values are reported in Supplementary Table S3).
Constrained foldingThe Constrained Folding module predicts the two alternate configurations, given a putative riboswitch sequence and its corresponding SwSeq. The founding idea is that SwSeq bases should pair with upstream bases in one case, and with downstream bases in the other: This can be forced as a (soft) constraint within the RNA folding algorithm. We have chosen RNAfold from the ViennaRNA package, because of its ability to accommodate the required constraint,. In the upper two panels, upstream/downstream base pairing frequencies (respectively per single base, and over subsequences of length l  5), are shown in the neighborhood of the actual SwSeq (indicated by the shaded band) for E. coli thiM_TPP. In the lower panel, the corresponding score (Equation 4) with the indicated maximum point. Sampled and clustered structural ensembles for two different riboswitches. Different symbols are used for elements of different clusters. The placement of ON/OFF conformations is indicated by the /D symbols. In the right panel, the ensemble does not cover both of them (for sampled structural ensembles for the full reference dataset, see Supplementary) specifying via a mask string, where a base may be paired upstream ('<'), downstream ('>'), or not constrained at all ('.'). The implementation of this module was tested on the first group of our reference dataset, i.e. containing riboswitches with experimentally validated SwSeqs. We have been able to closely predict the two alternate configurations in $80% of the cases, and reconstruct the remaining ones with very minor errors (Supplementary). Notably, this was the result that pushed us to shape the whole approach. In a nutshell, we can conclude that the plain knowledge of the switching sequence is generally sufficient to predict the two functional structures of the riboswitch (Supplementaryfor further considerations on switching sequences).
ClassifierOur method derives two alternative structures for a target RNA sequence and it is up to the Classifier module to determine whether they may be associated to a typical riboswitch behavior. The proposed solution relies on the identification of secondary motifs known to be related to specific gene regulation mechanisms in riboswitches. The extent to which such motifs are present in the input conformations is quantified by means of specific indices, namely i SD for SD sequestering, and i TT for transcription termination. Because of its complexities and subtleties, alternative splicing has not been directly addressed. In its current form, the Classifier can be sensibly applied only to prokaryotic sequences. To quantify translation inhibition, we first locate the SD pattern in the sequence, and then count the fraction of unpaired bases n ub in the found SD sequence interval () in each of the two alternate structures. The greater n ub , the lower the sequestering of the SD site. Our search consisted on the following consensus sequence: AGGAGG, followed by a start codon (AUG), separated by 510 bases from the SD site. If a given sequence does not possess a terminator (see Equation 7 below), it is searched against one of the patterns in the database of small SD, located within a small distance from the end of the sequence. Once found the SD, we measure the difference between the unpaired fraction of the found SD in the two predicted structures. The index i SD ; 0 i SD 1 can be defined as the absolute difference of n ub in the alternative conformations, over the SD length. Transcription termination is typically determined by a 'terminator hairpin' (), which can be detected as a stem-loop-like motif, followed by a run of 'U's. In practice, this can be performed by substituting dots in the dot-bracket notation with the symbols of the corresponding bases, and then looking for matches of one of the following patterns: The first, of the form '(f3,gf3,8g)f3,gUf3,g.f,20g$' to identify long hairpins, and the other, ')f8,gUf3,g.f,20g$', to catch terminators with a more complex topology. Although unlikely, this pattern might introduce false positives in the case of a stem loop within a multiloop that is followed by a run of 'U's and is close to the sequence end. We recall that typically in regexes '(' and ')' are used as group delimiters; thus, in practice parentheses symbols should be indicated by '\(' and '\)' instead. A termination-based riboswitch is correctly predicted if at least one of the patterns is matched only in one of the alternative structures. In this case, we set i TT  1; i TT  0 otherwise. It has been proposed that an RNA switch could be predicted by analyzing its energy landscape (). According to this hypothesis, an RNA switch ideally shows two distinct clouds of points in the conformational landscape. This feature, although not exclusively held by riboswitches, could indeed be used to strengthen the classification procedure. For this reason, to quantify how well two separate clusters can be spotted in E r , we perform a 2-medoids clustering on the ensemble, based on pairwise bp-distances (other possible metrics would derive similar results (). We then characterize the result with the silhouette index i sil , i.e. by computing the mean of the silhouette coefficients for all the elements in the set (). This is one of the most popular indexes to quantify clustering quality, and it approaches 1 for increasing quality. The overall classification outcome can be based on a global index that comprises the previous ones:A riboswitch behavior will be foreseen in all cases if I r is beyond a given threshold value I t .), with N as the ensemble cardinality. In practice, in the ordinary ranges for such parameters, the runtime shows a linear dependence on input sequence length (Supplementary), and it takes a few seconds per sequence, thus allowing this method to be applied on large datasets in a genome-wide fashion.
Implementation
ResultsThe method presented here is capable of predicting the presence of a riboswitchincluding its two alternate conformationsusing as input only its nucleotide sequence. The procedure consists in three major steps, including: (i) prediction of the switching sequence (SwSeq), (ii) prediction of the alternate secondary structure conformations and (iii) scoring, and consequent classification, of the sequence as a putative riboswitch (). The proposed approach has been tested on the reference dataset, obtaining the results reported in Supplementary Table S4; moreover, it has been used to investigate a complete set of annotated putative riboswitches from the Rfam database (Rfam 12.0). Our method is fully applicable to any prokaryotic organism at a genome-wide level, targeting single sequences up to 300 nt each.
Application to the reference datasetThe ability to spot out the SwSeq depends both on the analysis procedure applied to the ensemble, and on the ensemble representativeness of the two functional conformations. Indeed, considering the computational steps in the SwSeq Extractor and the formulation of Equation (4), the sampling procedure itself, whenever used, affects the reliability of the outcomes in this module (). We first tested the SwSeq Extractor module on the first group of our reference dataset, obtaining 10 exact SwSeq predictions out of 12 cases. We then predicted SwSeqs also for sequences in the second group, obtaining the putative alternative structures for all sequences Modeling riboswitches by spotting out switching sequencesin both groups;shows an example of such predicted conformations for tenA_TPP, highlighting the SwSeq location. It should be noted that, even in those cases in which an exact SwSeq prediction could not be made, the located subsequence is similar enough to the true SwSeq, thus allowing the Constrained Folding module to correctly identify the alternate conformations (as it happens for xpt_Guanine). Therefore, although SwSeq predictions may not exactly match SwSeq annotations from the literature, they are accurate enough to be effective in revealing the switching behavior. Considering the complete reference dataset, the classifier module performance is summarized as a ROC curve, where sensitivity and specificity are respectively formulated as TPR  TP=TP  FN and SPC  TN=TN  FP; true positives TP are the correctly predicted riboswitches, true negatives TN the correctly predicted nonriboswitches.reports the curves obtained using the McCaskill method and the ensemble-based analysis. We have observed that a good trade-off between accuracy and true positive rate (TPR) is obtained choosing a threshold value I t  0:45. Hence, predictions using the McCaskill method exhibit an accuracy of 0.6 and a TPR of 0.83, while the stochastic method on average yields an accuracy of 0.6 and TPR  0.7. All the outcomes of the Classifier module on the reference dataset are reported in Supplementary Table S4. We then proceeded to quantify the influence of the ensemble coverage on the classification outcomes. For this aim, we compared the classification outcome of all the riboswitches in the reference dataset, with the outcome of selected riboswitches that have E r coverage.clearly shows that the proposed approach is more effective whenever E r coverage is present.
Application to Rfam putative riboswitchesCurrently, several motif search methods exist to uncover riboswitches in genomes. However, they typically identify riboswitches on the basis of the aptamer region only (). Other methods search for conformational switches, avoiding specific aptamer considerations. Our methodology can complement both of them, providing further structural insights. We applied our method upon a set of putative Rfam-annotated riboswitches, to illustrate how homology-based riboswitch searches can be coupled with our algorithm to obtain a higher confidence set of putative riboswitches. In practice, not only sequence similarity has to be taken into account, but also the potential of generating two alternative structures with a SwSeq. For this aim, we first gathered the sequences included in the seed alignment for each of such families. We then used MAFFT () to obtain a structure-based alignment of the seeds. Each alignment was assigned the relative 'RNAz P-value' (), accounting for both structural conservation and thermodynamic stability. The top-ranked families based on RNAz P-value were selected for further analysis; they included also some of the prokaryotic sequences described in our reference dataset. The target sequences were elongated downstream (to include the first occurrence of a start codon ATG) to assure the inclusion of(b). Example of predicted alternate conformations ON (a) and OFF (b) for the tenA_TPP riboswitch. Both the switching sequence and the terminator are highlighted and labeled. ROC curve of performance on the complete reference dataset. The upper ROC curve has been obtained using base-pairing probability matrix, while the dashed curve represents the mean of 10 runs per ensemble. Influence of ensemble coverage on effectiveness, evaluated in the case of ensemble sampling. The upper ROC curve refers to the set of only riboswitches with E r coverage, while the lower curve considers all the riboswitches both aptamers and switching sequences. We finally ran our algorithm on these sequences, spotting the switching regulatory behavior by checking either the SD sequestering/releasing or the presence of a terminator hairpin. A list of classified riboswitches has been obtained (downloadable from the SwiSpot website). The histogram insummarizes per-family results: for each Rfam family, the percentage of sequences with a spotted switching regulatory behavior is shown (see also Supplementary). The low percentage of potential riboswitches actually spotted may be due to the presence of other types of switching mechanisms, an inaccurate sequence framing around the aptamer regions, or misannotations in Rfam, which may be in part due to ignoring the presence of expression platforms for their annotation.
Comparison with other approachesAlthough other approaches for riboswitch prediction exist, none of them performs the two tasks that our method does, i.e. predicting if a sequence is a riboswitch, as well as identifying its switching sequence and its alternative conformations. Nevertheless, even if RNAbor does not produce an actual classification step, we have performed a general comparison with SwiSpot: by applying RNAbor to our reference dataset, peaks in the probability density profiles can be coarsely compared with SwiSpot results (see Supplementaryand Supplementary). In general, multiple peaks in RNAbor profiles lead to interpretation problems, while Swispot provides clear outcomes. Considering the five RNAs with known ON/OFF structures in our dataset, that show also two distinct, welldefined RNAbor peaks, the structural predictions by SwiSpot are more accurate than those provided by RNAbor (average normalized bp-distance from reference structures: 0.319975 vs 0.467507). In, we consider the particular case of thiM_TPP, previously used in the RNAbor validation (). In the secondary structure diagrams, bases belonging to SD and to the SwSeq are highlighted. The density plot for the complete sequence displays only one larger peak corresponding to the OFF structure, and a smaller peak for a partially formed ON structure; both conformations do not exactly match the reference ones. SwiSpot provides better results, with relative distances from the two annotated conformations-based on literature-of (0.00, 0.00), while RNAbor peaks structure show less similarity with the reference: (0.28, 0.09). This suggests that SwiSpot is capable of predicting existing alternative conformations regardless of the presence of distinct peaks in the probability density profile.
DiscussionSeveral methods for riboswitch prediction have been proposed, which are based either on predicting the presence of conformational switches, or on predicting riboswitches using homology-based searches (). However, none of the current methods is focused on predicting the two riboswitch conformational structures. Such a capability would be extremely useful in driving riboswitch engineering and for synthetic biology. For this reason, we propose SwiSpot, a novel computational method to directly address conformational prediction of riboswitches. The scarceness of precise data on riboswitch conformations makes it impossible to build a riboswitch predictor that merely uses a statistical or machine learning approach. Despite the mentioned data shortage, a reference dataset has been defined to properly assess the proposed approach. The proposed modeling effort stems from the first significant result presented in this work: we find a strong computational evidence of the role of the switching sequence in the characterisation of the whole riboswitch system. Moreover we find that the switching sequence incorporates most of the information required to drive the switching mechanisms. The novelty of our approach relies on the ability to locate switching sequences, which are then used to predict the alternative conformations, and to finally classify the target RNA sequence as a riboswitch or not. Notably, previous genome-wide methods to search for riboswitches only looked for aptamer motifs (), thus completely ignoring structural predictions. On the other hand, we show that SwiSpot can be paired to these methods, leading to more reliableRNAbor results, run on the same sequence, show only one peak for the OFF structure. A smaller peak with partially free SD is present predictions of putative riboswitches. Importantly, from this experience we observe that the quality of results depends on the capability of selecting the proper subsequence to analyze, around the aptamer, down to the expression platform, and not beyond. Lessons learned in using the proposed algorithms indicate possible future improvements, although apparently difficult to apply. Neglecting the energy contribution of the ligand and kinetic/cotranscriptional aspects of the folding process can likely lead to biased samplings of the energy landscapes, where conformations similar to both the alternative structures are not adequately represented. This issue could be addressed by introducing additional, diverse forms of sampling. Unfortunately, the lack of real structural data prevents any solid assessment of this kind of improvement. Furthermore, the limitation of excluding pseudoknots could be removed, devising new algorithms for the SwSeq Extractor and the Constrained Folder (). Future work will investigate possible improvements within each single module, as well as the provision of new functionalities in additional modules.
Funding
M.Barsacchi et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
