Motivation: Deciphering the modus operandi of dysregulated cellular mechanisms in cancer is critical to implicate novel cancer genes and develop effective anti-cancer therapies. Fundamental to this is meticulous tracking of the behavior of core modules, including complexes and pathways across specific conditions in cancer. Results: Here, we performed a straightforward yet systematic identification and comparison of modules across pancreatic normal and cancer tissue conditions by integrating PPI, gene-expression and mutation data. Our analysis revealed interesting change-patterns in gene composition and expression correlation particularly affecting modules responsible for genome stability. Although in most cases these changes indicated impairment of essential functions (e.g. of DNA damage repair), in several other cases we noticed strengthening of modules possibly abetting cancer. Some of these compensatory modules showed switches in transcription regulation and recruitment of tumor inducers (e.g. SOX2 through overexpression). In-depth analysis revealed novel genes in pancreatic cancer, which showed susceptibility to copy-number alterations (e.g. for USP15 in 17 of 67 cases), supported by literature evidence for their involvement in other tumors (e.g. USP15 in glioblastoma). Two of the identified genes, YWHAE and DISC1, further supported the nexus between neural genes and pancreatic carcinogenesis. Extension of this assessment to BRCA1 and BRCA2 breast tumors showed specific differences even across the two sub-types and revealed novel genes involved therein (e.g. TRIM5 and NCOA6).
INTRODUCTIONCancer is the outcome of an intricate interplay of dysregulated mechanisms that are otherwise responsible for maintaining the genomic integrity of the cell. Although our current knowledge of these mechanisms is inadequate to fully understand cancer, immense efforts are underway to identify novel 'cancer genes' (oncogenes) and implicate known ones for novel roles in cancerfor example, the recent implication of SOX2 as a frequently amplified gene resulting in fusion and amplification of transcription factor MYCL1 involved in small-cell lung cancer (). Methods for computational identification of disease genes look mainly for genes that are differentially expressed, have similar expression profiles with known disease genes, are 'central' or 'reachable' in disease molecular networks or have disease associations in literature (reviewed in). Some examples include ENDEAVOUR () and GeneRanker (). A crucial distinguishing factor of cancer genes is that they belong to core mechanisms responsible for genome stability and cell proliferation (e.g. DNA damage repair and cell cycle) and function as highly synergetic or coordinated groups. Therefore, critical to implicating novel genes is the identification of core modules including pathways and complexes dysregulated in cancer. For example,identified disease complexes and used them in a Bayesian predictor to rank genes involved in epithelial ovarian cancer.traced back paths through the human protein interaction (PPI) network from differentially expressed genes (target) to genes harboring mutations (causal) and successfully applied this approach to identify disrupted pathways in glioblastoma multiforma. On the other hand,used an interaction enrichment analysis to identify pairs of genes whose relationships differed between normal and cancer. Through their Gene Interaction Enrichment and Network Analysis (GENIA), the authors categorized interaction profiles as cooperative (expressions correlated), competitive (expressions anti-correlated), redundant (suppression of both causes dysfunction) and dependent (expression of one is dependent on the other), and then mined these profiles in breast and pancreatic cancers to identify dysregulated pathways.incorporated gene expression into annotated pathways to quantify 'pathway activity' patterns in cancer. Subsequently, the authors extracted these patterns using a feature-selection model on a PPI network to construct a 'pathway interaction network'. Sub-networks in this pathway network represented distinct pathways and their cross-talk in cancer. Apart from identifying modules, it is necessary to understand the modus operandi or the underlying 'program' driving these disruptions, and this requires systematic tracking of the behavior of these modules under cancer conditions. For example,mined tightly connected gene co-expression sub-networks across 430 cancer networks (cell lines) and tracked aberrant modules as frequent sub-networks appearing across these cancers. However, studying multiple cancers simultaneously makes it challenging to discern clearly the intricate underlying *To whom correspondence should be addressed. mechanisms; different genes are involved in different cancers and even different cancer sub-types, and their roles across these cancers are also different. What is required, therefore, is a systematic method to track gene and module behavior across specific conditions in a controlled manner (e.g. between normal and a cancer type or between specific cancer sub-types). In addition, it is important to effectively integrate 'multiomics' data into such an analysisfor example, from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA): http://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/. Multi-omics data integration as such has attracted attention during the past few yearsfor example, Chu and Chen (2008) combined PPI and gene expression data to construct a cancerperturbed PPI network in cervical carcinoma to study gain-and loss-of-function genes as potential drug targets.correlated somatic mutations and gene expression to identify novel genes in glioblastoma multiforma (e.g. SYNE1, KLF6, FGFR4 and EPHB4).integrated DNA methylation, gene expression and microRNA expression data in 385 ovarian cancer samples from TCGA and performed 'multi-dimensional' analysis to identify disrupted pathways.combined PPI and gene expression data to construct tissue-specific PPI networks for 60 tissues and used them to prioritize disease genes. Finally,proposed an iterative model to combine mutation and expression data and used it to identify mutated driver pathways in multiple cancer types. Putting all these findings together, we note (i) it is crucial to study the behavior of modules across specific conditions in a controlled manner to understand the modus operandi of cancer mechanisms and to implicate novel genes; and (ii) although most existing methods concentrate on 'mountain' genes that show distinct aberrant behavior in cancers, there are many more 'hills' that often do not display such drastic changes (). These 'hills' are contours, and they may not be identifiable through their own behavior, but their changes are quantifiable when considered in conjunction with other genes (e.g. as modules); these genes may not be differentially expressed, but they are differentially co-expressed with other genes. These points are substantiated further in the following analyses.
An initial analysisWe performed an integrated analysis combining 29 600 interactions among 5824 proteins from Biogrid () and 39 paired normal and tumor gene expression samples from pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) patients () to study the behavior of genes and their modules in the tumor vis-a-vis normal (more details later). We computed the gene expression correlationwise distribution of physically interacting gene (protein) pairs for normal and tumor conditions (co-expression is measured as Pearson correlation; we use the terms genes and proteins interchangeably) (). We noticed a significant reduction in correlation of gene pairs in tumor vis-a-vis normala reduction in 8701 highly correlated interactions (of absolute correlation ! 0:50). This comprised a possible loss of positively correlated 'accelerators' (interactions driving normal cellular processes) and negatively correlated 'brakes' (interactions suppressing tumor inducers and genome instability). Interestingly, the analysis of 'jumps' (increase or decrease) in correlation revealed two interactions, RBPMSRHOXF2 and SMN1TMSB4X, displaying extreme jumps [from AE(0.9,1) to AE(0.9,1)] (Supplementary Files). Among these, RHOXF2, with no noticeable change in expression level (mean of 4.67 and 4.34, respectively), has been recently implicated as a cancer promoter (). We next extracted 529 modules of interacting genes from the PPI network, and we computed a correlationwise distribution of these modules for normal and tumor (). We noticed a reduction in correlation for 79 modules (of correlation ! 0:4), two of which included the cancer-promoter SOX2 contributing to the reduction. Taking these findings into account, we hypothesize that modules displaying differential behavior constitute cancer modules, and they harbor cancer genes. We devise a systematic method to identify these modules and genes by tracking their behavior across specific conditions. We apply our method to two case studiesnormal versus PDAC and BRCA1 versus BRCA2 breast tumors. We call our method CONTOUR [Cancer (Onco) geNes from disrupTed mOdUles and their Relationships].
METHODSUsing the human PPI network as a backbone, we infer two tissue condition-specific PPI networks, one for normal and one for tumor, by incorporating expression and mutation profiles of genes in the two conditions). Next, adopting a maximal clique-merging approach, we extract distinct modules from the two conditional networks. We then match normal and tumor modules to identify key ones displaying changes in gene composition or co-expression, and we isolate genes involved therein. We evaluate these genes for potential roles in cancer.
Inferring normal and tumor PPI networksUsing human protein interactions, we first construct the generic PPI network H  V H , E H , where V H is the set of proteins and E H is the set of interactions. Every interaction e  p, q 2 E H has a weight rp, q (between 0 and 1) reflecting the reliability of the interaction.
Expression profiles By integrating gene expression and mutation profiles, we construct two tissue condition-specific PPI networks from Hthe normal H N and tumor H T networks as follows. Let E be the set of all possible gene pairs. First, consider the normal (N) condition. We compute the correlationwise frequency distribution EH for the interacting gene pairs E H E: we construct bins of size 0.10 in the rangeby including all gene pairs p, q 2 E H into bin x EH if x jPCCp, q, Nj5x  0:10, where jPCCp, q, Nj is the absolute Pearson correlation of (p,q) under the normal condition (the last bin also includes pairs with correlation 1). Similarly, we calculate a second distribution EnEH , for the non-interacting gene pairs, EnE H. Now, given these two distributions, the probability that a pair (p,q) with correlation in x, x  0:1 coinciding with an interaction is, P p, q  Prp, q 2 E H j  j x EH j j x EH j  j x EnEH j , 1 where j x EH j and j x EnEH j are the frequencies of the bins containing (p,q) in the two distributions, respectively (for derivation, see Supplementary Files).
Mutation profilesFor every gene, p 2 V H , let l(p) (between 0 and 1) represent the likelihood of p to be involved in tumorigenesis by undergoing mutations. We expect this likelihood to be related to the interactivity of p. So, we infer the mutation coefficient for every pair p, q 2 E as MCCp, q  maxflp, lqg. As aforementioned, we compute the mutation coefficientwise frequency distributions EH and EnEH for the gene pairs in E H and EnE H , respectively. We infer the probability that any pair (p,q) with mutation coefficient in x, x  0:1 coinciding with an interaction as,where j x EH j and j x EnEH j are the frequencies of the bins containing (p,q) in the two distributions, respectively. We then infer the weight r N p, q in H N by scaling rp, q with a combined navenave Bayesian probability (see Supplementary Files for derivation) as, r N p, q  rp, q P p, q  P p, q P p, q  P p, q  1  P p, q  1  P p, q : 3The weights in the tumor PPI network H T are inferred similarly. We reflect the expression and mutation 'landscapes' of genes onto their interactions in the two conditions. We capture these landscapes through the expressionwise and mutationwise frequency distributions of gene pairs. So, by re-weighting the interactions in the generic PPI network based on these distributions, we infer the two conditional PPI networks. We do not change the topology of the network, only re-weight the interactions. Note here that (i) we assume independence between expression and mutation profiles of genes, although this is not necessarily the case (see); and (ii) in the normal condition, mutation profiles may not be available; therefore, setting MCCp, q  0, Equation (2) evaluates to a constant jE H j=jEj for every p, q 2 E H. But, in general, this formulation covers conditions where mutation profiles are available.
Identifying modules from the PPI networksOur module-identification algorithm is based on clique-merging, similar to the ones previously proposed for identifying complexes from PPI networks (). Our algorithm works in two steps: in the first step, it finds all maximal cliques from the PPI network and ranks them in non-increasing order of their weighted interaction densities, and in the second step, it merges highly overlapping cliques to build modules. We identify the set C of all maximal cliques of size at least k in the PPI network using a fast depth-first search with pruning-based algorithm (CLIQUES) by. Next, for every clique C 2 C, we calculate its weighted interaction density d w C as,We rank these cliques in non-increasing order of their weighted densities, fC 1 , C 2 , ::: , C m g, and go through this ordered list repeatedly merging highly overlapping cliques to build modules. Specifically, for every clique C i in the list, we repeatedly look for a clique C j (j4i) such that the overlap jC i \ C j j=jC j j ! t o , a predefined overlap-threshold. If such a C j is found, we calculate the weighted inter-connectivity I w between the non-overlapping proteins of C i and C j as follows,rp, q jC i nC j j:jC j nC i j 5 If I w C i , C j  ! t m , a predefined merge-threshold, then C j is merged into C i forming a module, else C j is discarded. We capture the effect of differences in interaction weights between normal and tumor through the weighted density-based ranking of cliques. Weighted density assigns higher rank to larger and stronger cliques. Therefore, we expect cliques with lost proteins or weakened interactions (expected in tumor) to go down the rankings resulting in altered module generation, thereby capturing changes in modules between normal and tumor.
Comparing modules across conditionsLet S  fS 1 , S 2 , ::: , S n g and T  fT 1 , T 2 , ::: , T m g be the sets of modules identified from the networks H N and H T , respectively. For each S i 2 S, we calculate its module correlation density as follows,. The CONTOUR workflowPCCp, q, NThe correlation densities for tumor modules T are calculated similarly. We identify the set S, T  of disrupted or altered module pairs by modeling it as a maximum weight bipartite matching () as follows. We first build a similarity graph M  V M , E M , where V M  fS [ T g, and E M  S fS i , T j  : JS i , T j  ! t J ,  cc S i , T j  ! g, where JS i , T j   jS i \ T j j=jS i [ T j j is the Jaccard similarity and  cc S i , T j   jd cc S i   d cc T j j is the differential correlation density between S i and T j , and t J and are thresholds. Every edge S i , T j  is weighted by JS i , T j . We next identify the disrupted module pairs S, T  by finding the maximum weight matching in M, and we rank them in non-increasing order of their differential density  cc. Finally, we infer genes involved in cancer as O  fg : g 2 S i [ T j , S i , T j  2 S, T g ranked in non-increasing order of  cc S i , T j . To identify altered modules, we match normal and tumor modules by setting a high t J , which ensures that the module pairs either have the same gene composition or have lost or gained only a few genes (e.g. if jS i j  8, jT j j  9, then t J  2=3 requires at least an overlap of 7). Among these, the module pairs showing higher differential correlation are ranked higher. Further, we expect cancer genes to be harbored within these module pairs and rank them likewise.
Preparation of experimental dataWe gathered Homo sapiens PPI data inferred from multiple low-and high-throughput experiments deposited in Biogrid v3.1.93 (). To minimize false-positives, we used a scoring scheme, IterativeCD (. These authors identified four kinds of mutations, viz. somatic, homozygous deletion, amplification and driver mutations, of which genes with somatic and driver mutations were assigned mutation scores (between 0 and 1) that reflected the likelihood of these mutations in driving tumorigenesis. We collated these scores and assigned a score of 1 to all deleted and amplified genes to construct mutation profiles for 1169 genes in pancreatic cancer.
RESULTS
Experimental settings and initial validationsWe first tested our module-extraction procedure on the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae PPI network, as the available 'gold standard' set of complexes in yeast is reasonably complete and well-defined. After testing a range of parameters, setting k  4, t o  0:50 and t m  0:25 resulted in the best recall (sensitivity) of 72% and precision (specificity) of 83% and a Gene Ontologybased functional coherence of 76% for the modules. Therefore, we maintained these settings for our experiments. We also note that by relaxing the parameters to t o  1=3 and t m  1=10, the functional coherence was maintained at 61%, indicating the modules corresponded to larger complex-groups and pathways (details in Supplementary Files).
Analyzing disruptions in tumor PPI networkThe normal H N and tumor H T networks displayed roughly equal numbers of interactions, as well as average scores (weights) 27 277 and 27 266 interactions with average scores of 0.208 and 0.210, respectively.shows no significant differences in the score distributions of the two networks (Kolmogorov Smirnov test: D NT  0:15565K 0:05  1:36). However, examining these interactions more carefully, we found 3746 interactions that showed changes in scores. Of these, we extracted those with score changes ! 0:10, which included 176 interactions showing decrease (weakening) and 135 interactions showing increase (strengthening) of scores from normal to tumor. Similar analysis using expression correlations () identified $8700 interactions showing lower correlations and $2100 interactions showing higher correlations in tumor than normal (KolmogorovSmirnov test: D NT  23:114K 0:05  1:36). DAVID-based () functional analysis of genes involved in these 311 ( 176  135) interactions showed significant enrichment (P510 20 ) for the following biological process terms: mitotic cell cycle, cell division, DNA repair, chromatin modification, anaphase-promoting complex-dependent mechanisms and ubiquitin-protein ligase activity during cell cycle. We found key DNA damage repair (DDR) and cell cycle players, including BRCA1 (homologous recombination during DDR), RAD21 (DDR and cell cycle), FANCA (part of Fanconi anemia group, closely related to BRCA1-pathways), INO80 (chromatin remodeling) and MCM2 (DNA replication) involved in these interactions. The pair TGFBR1-TGFBR2, showing an increase from 0.34 to 0.56, is involved in transforming growth factor (TGF)-signaling and is implicated in pancreatic cancer (). RAD21, involved in at least four of the rescored interactions, is a key player in DDR and has been implicated in breast cancer ().
Analyzing disruptions in tumor modulesWe next performed a comparative analysis of normal S and tumor T modules to understand disruptions at the module level. Overall we noticed that the total number of modules, as well as average modules sizes, were almost the same across the two conditions (). The reason is that the interaction scores were roughly the same (), resulting in similar module generation in both conditions. But Table 1 also shows an overall decrease in correlation in tumor modules, which was not entirely unexpected given our analysis in Section 1.1. Further, this decrease had affected mainly the highly correlated modules (). In particular, there was a reduction in 45 (of 66) modules with correlation ! 0:4 from normal to tumor. DAVID-based analysis of these 45 modules () showed significant enrichment (P510 03 ) for core signaling pathways, including KRAS signaling, TGF-signaling, Wnt-signaling, P53-apoptosis, cell cycle and DNA repair; these pathways are genetically altered in 80% of pancreatic tumors (). Next, we computed the set of matching modules S, T , giving jS, T j  452, for t J  0:67 and  0:10. We further divided S, T  into  0 S, T  S, T  of module pairs showing higher correlation in normal than tumor, and  00 S, T  S, T  of module pairs showing lower correlation in normal than tumor, giving j 0 S, T j  240 and j 00 S, T j  212. We computed the absolute differential correlation  cc of these subsets, as shown in. Interestingly, this demonstrated a marginal increase in correlation for 212 modules in tumor vis-a-vis normal, with a maximum increase of 0.353. However, DAVID-based analysis showed enrichment for similar terms in both  0 S, T  and  00 S, T , which was not specific enough to differentiate the roles of the two subsets and, therefore, whether compensatory or tumor-driving mechanisms coming into play. This prompted further in-depth analysis of the modules.
In-depth analysis of disrupted modulesOf the 452 module pairs in S, T , 431 had the same gene compositions, and of these, 226 showed decrease and 205 showed increase in their correlations in tumor.
Modules with the same gene compositions Among the 205strengthened modules, we noticed a few interesting cases of modules in tumor being strongly (positive and negative) regulated by different transcription factors from the ones in normal. For example, the module (RUVBL1, RUVBL2, HJURP and CENPA) showed a weak correlation density of 0.086 in normal, indicating inactivity of the module. We found this module was (weakly) regulated by the transcription factor-complex TAL1TCF4 with the gene correlations with TAL1 being (0.34, 0.21, 0.31 and 0.64) and with TCF4 being (0.48, 0.41, 0.34 and 0.47). However, in tumor, the correlation of the module had strengthened to 0.758, a steep increase of 0.844. Further, the gene correlations with TAL1 had decreased to (0.35, 0.06, 0.64 and 0.50), whereas with TCF4 had increased steeply to (0.89, 0.69, 0.87 and 0.91), and TAL1 and TCF4 had themselves become anti-correlated (0.25). This indicated an increase in activity of the module with strong positive regulation by TCF4. Interestingly,identified TCF4, a component of the Wnt/Notch signaling pathway, as an altered gene in 100% of pancreatic tumors.
Modules with changes in gene compositions Analysisof the remaining 21 module pairs that changed gene compositions revealed an interesting swapping phenomenonnew genes hadreplaced existing genes, forming physical interactions with the remaining ones in these modules in tumor. For example, the normal module (HDAC2, HDAC1, MTA2, MTA1, CHD4 and BCL11B) had changed to (HDAC2, HDAC1, MTA2, MTA1, CHD4, SIN3A and SOX2) in tumor with BCL11B replaced by SIN3A and SOX2, and the module correlation had increased by 0.137. SOX2 regulates transcriptional network of oncogenes () and is implicated in small-cell lung cancer (); SIN3A is a transcriptional repressor implicated in breast cancer (Ellison), whereas BCL11B is involved in lymphoid malignancies (). We hypothesize that these gene-swapping events in modules were indicative of tumor disruptions; therefore, they are relevant to understand cancer. In our computational model, modules change gene compositions only when the ranking of constituting cliques changes, resulting in altered clique-merging between conditions (Section 2.2). The cliques are re-ranked only when their constituting interactions are rescored. A total of 311 interactions were re-scored between normal and tumor (Section 3.2), and these constituted 53 cliques (of sizes 57) of the total $5470 cliques present in each network. The jumps in ranks (average 4) noticed for these 53 cliques were higher than the jumps (average 1) noticed for the remaining cliques. These 53 cliques contributed to modules that showed changes in gene compositions. DAVID-based functional analysis of the 311 rescored interactions showed significant (P510 20 ) enrichment for key genome-stability mechanisms, including DDR and cell cycle (revisit Section 3.2). The 21 altered modules showed significant (P510 66 ) enrichment for these mechanisms, and also for the following Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways (P510 03 ): cell cycle, DNA replication, Wnt-signaling, TGF-signaling and P53-based apoptosis, all of which have been implicated in thestudy on pancreatic cancer. In addition to this, of the 31 genes that had swapped, six (TP53, KRAS, SFN, SMAD4, CDKN2A and ARID1A) are implicated in pancreatic cancer, and 19 are included in KEGG pathways in cancer (Supplementary Files). These observations provide evidence that the gene-swapping events in our model are strongly indicative of genes and modules relevant to cancer. We next describe an example of a gene-swapping event to aid interpret its relevance to cancer mechanisms.shows a normal-tumor module pair in which FAM175B was replaced by TP53. This was the consequence of a weakened FAM175Bclique displaced in ranking by a strengthened TP53 clique. It is known that the expression level of TP53 is low in normal cells, whereas DNA damage triggers increase in TP53 expression, which is responsible for activating transcription of DNA repair proteins. FAM175B is a member of the BRISC complex, responsible for recruitment of BRCA1BARD1 heterodimer to sites of DNA damage at double-strand breaks. We noticed the TP53expression level had increased from 5.86 (normal) to 6.56 (tumor) (), and the correlation of the module (RAD51, BRCA1, TP53, SUMO1 and UBC) had increased from 0.123 (normal) to 0.352 (tumor). This indicated activation of DNA repair proteins, RAD51 and BRCA1 in the presence of TP53, which are components of the homologous recombination double-strand break repair pathway. The correlation of the module (FAM175B, BRCC3, BRE and BARD1), which represented the BRISC complex, had reduced from 0.381 (normal) to 0.144 (tumor). This indicated possible impairment of DDR mechanisms observed in cancer cells.
Evaluating predicted genes in PDAC3.5.1 Evaluation against 'gold standard' We evaluated our predicted genes against three gold standard (benchmark) lists for pancreatic cancer, namely, OMIM (pancreatic #260350) (), COSMIC Classic () and thestudy. We gathered our predicted genes from module pairs showing differential correlation ! 0:10, giving 143 genes. We calculated recall (sensitivity) values as the fraction of benchmark genes covered by the top R-predicted genes. When R  143 (taking all predicted genes), the recall values were OMIM: 78% (7/9), COSMIC: 67% (12/18) and Jones: 43% (37/86) (). When R  25, the recall values were OMIM: 78% (7/9), COSMIC: 55% (10/18) and Jones: 19% (16/86). The top 7 genes (R  7) belonged to all the three benchmarks. Finally, five of our predicted genes, coding for transcription factors JUN, SMAD3, CEBPA, FOS and STAT3, were confirmed recently as biomarkers in PDAC ().
Assessment using differential expression of genesThere were 2559 differentially expressed genes in the PPI network (adjusted P 50:001) of which 1362 (or 53.23%) belonged to at least one module. The top three-enriched terms for these 1362 genes were the biological processes (P510 20 ): cell cycle, DNA repair and chromatin modification, and the KEGG pathways (P510 03 ): KRAS signaling, Wnt-signaling and P53-based apoptosis; these processes and pathways are genetically altered in at least 80% of pancreatic tumors (). The top three enriched terms for the remaining 1197 differentially expressed genes were the biological processes (P510 10 ): cytoskeleton organization, actin filament-based process and intracellular transport, and the KEGG pathways (P510 03 ): regulation of actin cytoskeleton, focal adhesion and endocytosis; these are relevant to cancer cell migration and metastasis (). These genes were failed to be drawn intoNote:  0 S, T  S, T ,  00 S, T  S, T . modules because of lack of sufficient interactions, in particular the membrane interactions; these interactions are involved in intracellular transport, response to cell migratory stimuli and metastasis. On the other hand, there were 39 genes that did not show significant differential expression, yet belonged to modules that showed differential correlation of at least 0.10, and participated in cell cycle and DNA repair which are relevant to cancerfor example, BRE and BRCC3 (). This reiterates our motivation to track differentially co-expressed modules to identify genes in cancer.
Evaluation of novel genesWe next evaluated our top-ranking novel genes for potential involvement in PDAC.at the loci are enriched by selective pressures, and focal events affect relatively small regions of genomic DNA, spanning a few hundred kilo base pairs to a couple of mega base pairs. These two factors together are strongly indicative of presence of cancer genes (). For example, USP15 showed CNA in 17/67 (25.37%) donors with a significant Q-value of 0.0255. FAM175B, encountered earlier in, showed CNA in 7/64 (10.94%) donors with a significant Q-value of 0.00318. ZWINT showed 9/27 (33.34%) CNA, and recentlynoted that RNAi-based depletion of ZWINT impaired homologous recombination (HR). We found literature evidence for five of the genes, PSMA4, SF3A2, PCNA, PSMC2 and EEF1A1. These were among the top 25 identified copy-number alterations yielding to cancer liabilities owing to partial loss (CYCLOPS) genes studied by. These authors noted that copy-number losses that target tumor suppressor genes often involve multiple neighboring genes that may not contribute directly to cancer development, but their loss renders cancer cells highly vulnerable to further suppression of those genes. These genes form the weak links supporting cancer cells, and their targeted inhibition can be an effective anti-cancer therapy. Interestingly,also found significant enrichment for 'proteasome' and 'splicesome' among CYCLOPS genes, which supported our enrichment analysis (Supplementary Files). Further, the gene YWHAE was also found by two popular gene-prioritization methods, ENDEAVOUR () and GeneRanker () (). YWHAE is involved in many vital cellular processes, such as metabolism, protein trafficking, signal transduction, apoptosis and cell cycle regulation. It acts as a tumor suppressor and its expression is upregulated coordinately with p53 and BRCA1, and it belongs to neurotrophin signaling pathway required for neurogenesis (GeneCards: http://www.genecards.org/) (). One of our predicted genes DISC1 is a regulator of multiple aspects of neurogenesis, and it participates in Wnt-mediated neural progenitor proliferation. The identification of DISC1 and YWHAE further supports the nexus between neural genes and pancreatic carcinogenesis (). Finally, PCNA is a known biomarker for cell proliferation in several cancers, and EEF1A1 has been recently implicated as a biomarker in prostrate cell transformation and a possible hallmark of cancer progression ().
Differential genes in BRCA1 and BRCA2 tumorsWe extended our investigation to one more case study involving breast cancer conditions between BRCA1 and BRCA2 tumors. Although at the onset one might not expect to see drastic differences between the two sub-types like in the case of normal versus PDAC, surprisingly our analysis revealed some interesting quantifiable differences between modules in the two tumors.We obtained gene expression data from 19 BRCA1 and 30 BRCA2 familial breast tumor samples from the study by. The application of our method generated 541 and 537 modules in the two tumors, respectively, with 22 module pairs showing changes both in gene composition and expression correlation. We list here top five novel candidate genes from these modules () along with their proportion of somatic mutations from ICGC 'breast cancer' cases (note that ICGC is not restricted to only these two tumors; therefore, the actual proportion might be higher) and also the Q-value significance from Tumorscape.
CONCLUSIONModules including complexes and pathways work in additive, compensatory and alternative ways to counter genome destabilizing agents. Cancer is an outcome of coordinated dysfunctioning of these very modules; therefore, countering it necessitates an even more coordinated and systematic approach. The considerable differences in module behavior between normal and cancer and even between two sub-types of the same cancer depict the complexity and specificity of roles that genes undertake in these conditions. In this context, the point highlighted in Section 1, viz.it is critically important to study cancer in a systematic and controlled manner so as to precisely measure and characterize the roles of genes in cancer, makes even more sense.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
S.Srihari and M.A.Ragan at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Dysregulated modules and novel genes in cancer at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
