The usage of current sequence search tools becomes increasingly slower as databases of protein sequences continue to grow exponentially. Tachyon, a new algorithm that identifies closely related protein sequences ∼200 times faster than standard BLAST, circumvents this limitation with a reduced database and oligopeptide matching heuristic. Availability and implementation: The tool is publicly accessible as a webserver at http://tachyon.bii.a-star.edu.sg and can also be accessed programmatically through SOAP.
Sequence analysis
ALGORITHM AND WEB SERVERThe continuous exponential growth of sequence databases creates new challenges for bioinformatics tools where a simple BLAST search () of one protein against NCBI's NR () taking minutes can become too long to be practical. Careful study of the features and natural sampling of sequence space allows further optimization of peptide-indexing based look-up methods as oligopeptides reaching a database-specific critical length can become characteristic for a protein and its family of related sequences (see Supplementary Material). We have developed Tachyon, a peptide-indexing based lookup method that identifies sequences similar to a user-defined query protein at unprecedented speeds and look-up times of a few hundred milliseconds, rather than minutes on a single dualcore processor. Fast peptide-indexing is not new but is in fact the underlying basis of commonly used methods such as BLAST (), BLAT (), etc. However, Tachyon achieves a substantial speed advantage by reducing the searched sequence space as a result of associating each entry in the database (e.g. NR) only with representative oligopeptides whichload-balancing algorithm makes it possible to match large protein sets at high speeds. For example, searching the whole human proteome including isoforms (IPI, v3.78 and 86 702 entries) against NR on 30 Dual-Core AMD Opteron 2220 processors took only 13 min. Results obtained using SOAP can be either zipped FASTA sequences of the hits or, fastest, only the accession numbers of the best hits, which allows quick cross-connection of a query sequence to popular databases and other SOAP services.
J.Tan et al.
BENCHMARK AND DISCUSSIONWe benchmarked Tachyon against key methods with searches of 500 representative human proteins against NR andshows the clearly unique application spectrum arising from the speed versus sensitivity profile (detailed benchmark information in Supplementary Material). For example, at default settings, Tachyon is 200 faster than BLASTP+ but finds 14 less hits when searching NR. Similarly, it is 120 faster than the recently developed fast method RAPSearch2 () while finding 11 less hits. In absolute numbers, each Tachyon search took on average 0.6 s and returned 260 hits with the last significant hit having on average 74% identity to the query. The considerable gain of speed despite the loss of sensitivity has many practical applications where BLAST searches would take too long or the usual sensitivity of BLAST may not be needed. These scenarios include commonly needed tasks like accessionindependent linking up of a sequence to its most closely related entries in well curated databases such as GenBank (), UniProt [(The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) inor diverse pathway and interaction databases. Our approach of fast sequence matching can also be used to rapidly connect any sequence to precalculated BLAST search results such as in BLink (). Therefore, to allow sequence similarity searches with Tachyon-speed and BLAST-sensitivity, users can simply click in one step from the best Tachyon-hit against NR to the respective BLink entry with the corresponding full BLAST result. Additional links are available to GenBank, PDB, UniProt and to the ANNIE sequence annotation web tool. In summary, we developed Tachyon to very quickly connect a query protein sequence to highly similar sequences and selected associated resources. It is available as a SOAP service and on-line at http://tachyon.bii.a-star.edu.sg.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. are defined as the most frequent peptides of a defined length within the indexed database, excluding low-complexity regions [SEG 12 2.2 2.5 settings (Wootton and Federhen, 1996)]. Through extensive empirical testing of different parameters including peptide length, we have found that representing database entries by using five pentapeptides was a good compromise between search space reduction (speed) and correct sequence retrieval (sensitivity) for the large NCBI NR database. Database hits sharing a specified number of pentapeptides (default: 3 out of the 5 indexed peptides) with the query are then subjected to a more detailed search over the full length sequences to evaluate the significance of each hit. For this second step, Tachyon uses an internal default algorithm based on a quick pairwise L-mer overlap score (e.g. for L = 5, the number of pentapeptides shared between query and subject sequences over the total number of pentapeptides present in both sequences). The user has the additional option of running classical methods such as BLAT (Kent, 2002), FASTA and SSEARCH (Pearson, 2000) instead. The basic algorithm steps are illustrated in Figure 1. The fastest implementation of this algorithm is achieved on hardware where the indexed database can be kept in the working memory (e.g. 2 GB for the reduced index and 20 GB for the full length sequences considering the current NR). To relieve users from special hardware requirements and the burden of constantly updating and indexing the huge NCBI NR database, we make Tachyon searches against NR available as a web service (database updated monthly) at the URL: http://tachyon.bii.a-star.edu.sg. Users can paste single sequences or small sets as well as upload FASTAformatted files. The web interface shows hit sequences with associated scores/E-values and includes an optional hit alignment using MAFFT (Katoh et al., 2005) with subsequent display in Jalview (Waterhouse et al., 2009). Additional links to the FASTA sequence of hits and other databases such as GenBank, BLink, NCBI Taxonomy, PDB UniProt, as well as to ANNIE, an integrated sequence annotation suite (Ooi et al., 2009), are provided. Different filters, such as limiting the display of the results to specific source databases (PDB, RefSeq and SwissProt/UniProtKB), to a number of sequences or by using keywords are available on-line. Tachyon is also accessible programmatically through SOAP and permanently connected to a compute cluster, which, together with a length-based
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
