Motivation: In proteomes of higher eukaryotes, many alternative splice variants can only be detected by their shared peptides. This makes it highly challenging to use peptide-centric mass spectrometry to distinguish and to quantify protein isoforms resulting from alternative splicing events. Results: We have developed two complementary algorithms based on linear mathematical models to efficiently compute a minimal set of shared and unique peptides needed to quantify a set of isoforms and splice variants. Further, we developed a statistical method to estimate the splice variant abundances based on stable isotope labeled peptide quantities. The algorithms and databases are integrated in a web-based tool, and we have experimentally tested the limits of our quantification method using spiked proteins and cell extracts. Availability and implementation: The TAPAS server is available at
INTRODUCTIONHigher eukaryotic proteomes have greatly expanded during evolution by the variation created by alternatively spliced forms of the same gene, duplication into orthologous genes and differentially processed proteins (). These multiple protein isoforms play significant roles in differentiation, development and disease (). High-throughput genomic, transcriptomic and mass spectrometry (MS) technologies have facilitated the genome-wide identification of alternative splicing (). It was shown that shifts in the relative splice transcript abundance between different cells and tissues are more frequently observed than all-or-none switch-like behaviors (). Thus, knowing the amount of an expressed splice variant is highly desirable to understand cellular functions. Peptide-centric high-throughput shotgun MS approaches have achieved remarkable detection coverage (). However, inferring protein isoform identities and estimating their abundances by peptide-centric shotgun MS is not straightforward, as many peptides are shared between isoforms (). Recently, statistical methods have addressed these problems by using both unique and shared peptides (). While these methods have improved protein quantifications from peptide intensities, they were not specifically designed for a targeted MS approach of isoform analysis. In this work, we developed efficient computational optimization techniques to infer a minimal list of unique and shared peptides needed to accurately quantify a set of isoforms. This algorithm is integrated in a web-based tool (TAPAS) that assists in the design of stable isotope labeled (SIL) peptides for targeted MS experiments. experiments. It uses a numerical optimization method implemented in the Stan's C++ framework to find the desired solution, i.e. the quantities of splice variants, by minimizing the gaps between the estimated and observed abundances of peptides (Equation 1).where A i is the abundance of peptide i and k is the estimated amount of splice variant k. i,k is indicator function that gives 1 when peptide i belongs to splice variant k, otherwise it gives zero. N(xj, 2 ) represents probability of x from normal distribution function with mean , and SD. To estimate the protein abundances of selected splicing variants, TAPAS requires the observed abundance of peptides, identification of peptidases and splice variant sequences as inputs. Validation of the quantification method: We tested our method with a simulation dataset modeled by lognormal distributions. TAPAS quickly converged to a solution and gave robust results on different simulations conditions. Moreover, we found that TAPAS accurately estimated amount of splice variants from experimentally measured peptides amounts. The average percentage of error in the estimated amounts of splice variants was 24.0%. We validated our computational approach by purifying and mixing two Grb2 splice variants and performing absolute quantitation of both splice variants using selected reaction monitoring (SRM) based on SIL reference peptides (Supplementary Material). Estimation of quantifiable splice variants: Through a systematic analysis of databases with MS-detected peptides (mostly of trypsin origin;), we theoretically estimated that 50% of the human isoforms and splice variants could be quantifiable. This number goes up to 92% if multiple specific proteases are independently used and the results are combined (Supplementary Material).
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONTAPAS is a framework that brings together experimental design and computational analysis for the absolute quantification of splice variants. It designs experiments by selecting the minimal combination of shared and unique peptides needed to analyze a specific set of splice variants. By taking advantage of quantitative SIL-based proteomics, TAPAS can estimate the quantities of splice variants. Our method also allows users to query protein family members with homologous sequences. We tested TAPAS with SRM-based MS approaches, but we anticipate that this splice variant quantification strategy can be applied to other targeted MS approaches, such as multiplexed MS/MS (MSX) and Sequential Window Acquisition of all THeoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH), which would enable numerous splice variants to be quantified in a single experiment.
METHODS AND IMPLEMENTATION TAPAS has been implemented using Django, a web framework based on the Python programming language. With this software, the user will be able to retrieve the optimal experimental design and estimates for absolute protein abundances for a selected set of splicing variants of interest motivated from a specific biological problem (Fig. 1). Experimental design: TAPAS generates lists of unique and shared peptides that can be used in SIL-based targeted proteomics approaches to quantify selected alternative spliced variants. The peptides are specific for one or more input genes, but are not shared with other genes to avoid non-specificity. TAPAS uses two complementary algorithms, recursive set subtraction and Gaussian elimination to generate a minimal combination of peptides required for quantifying each splice variant or a group of splice variants (Supplementary Material). Furthermore, TAPAS provides additional information to the user such that suitable peptides can be chosen: TAPAS warns if a peptide has a possible posttranslational modification or an incomplete peptidase digestion, which could lead to an underestimate of the peptide quantity. Furthermore, it prioritizes peptides based on previous experimental evidence obtained by MS. To perform its function, TAPAS requires inputs for the query genes, the query databases (Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL) and/or the user-defined splice variant sequences. Absolute quantification of splice variants: TAPAS estimates the amounts of alternative splice variants by considering the abundance of peptides measured from SIL-based targeted MS *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
J.S.Yang et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
