Motivation: Discovering the relevant therapeutic targets for drug-like molecules, or their unin-tended 'off-targets' that predict adverse drug reactions, is a daunting task by experimental approaches alone. There is thus a high demand to develop computational methods capable of detecting these potential interacting targets efficiently. Results: As biologically annotated chemical data are becoming increasingly available, it becomes feasible to explore such existing knowledge to identify potential ligand–target interactions. Here, we introduce an online implementation of a recently published computational model for target prediction , TarPred, based on a reference library containing 533 individual targets with 179 807 active ligands. TarPred accepts interactive graphical input or input in the chemical file format of SMILES. Given a query compound structure, it provides the top ranked 30 interacting targets. For each of them, TarPred not only shows the structures of three most similar ligands that are known to interact with the target but also highlights the disease indications associated with the target. This information is useful for understanding the mechanisms of action and toxicities of active compounds and can provide drug repositioning opportunities.
IntroductionAn emerging avenue that brings system biology to drug discovery is polypharmacology, which hypothesizes that most drugs exert their effects via multi-target interactions (). Such drug promiscuity has also led to unwanted and unexplained drug reactions. It is therefore in high demand to develop in silico approaches for identifying potential biological targets for chemical compounds, which can be used to: (i) obtain small molecules with optimum therapeutic effects, (ii) explore ligandtarget interactions and their related biochemical mechanisms and (iii) increase research productivity towards valid drug repositioning. Recently, the rapid growth of bioassay data volume has brought new opportunities to in silico target prediction. A plethora of ligand-based target prediction models has been proposed (). For example, the) is a featured one among them that quantitatively estimates pharmacological relationships of targets by the set similarities of their respective ligands. These relationships have led to the discovery of many new uses and side effects for drugs. By compiling a large reference library containing 533 drug relevant target families, 179 807 individual ligands and a total of 246 053 binding data between them, we initially developed an efficient and accurate target fishing scheme using K Nearest Neighbor (KNN)-based data fusion with molecular similarity searching (). Compared with SEA, the proposed approach exhibited superior performance on predicting both therapeutic and 'off' targets for the approved drugs from DrugBank and Therapeutic Target Database (TTD). It also showed excellent results on other external validations that try to identify newly reported ligandtarget interactions or to predict side effect targets for drugs withdrawn due to human Ether-a `-go-goRelated Gene (hERG) toxicity. To bring more benefits of this approach, we here present a user-friendly web application that permits easy and effective drug targets prediction.
Approach and implementation
Data organizationIn addition to target prediction, we also provide associated diseases information for each target, which can in turn be used to validate the predictions, or to discover potential novel usages of drugs. The Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD) () was used for data integration (which provides genedisease relationships extracted from the literature), with the following steps: 1. The target families of TarPred cover 1703 individual protein sequences, which were used to perform Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) search for their corresponding genes and Uniprot gene IDs. 2. Among the 533 target families, 359 were able to find their associated diseases with direct evidences, where a target is considered related to a disease if the corresponding genes are biomarkers of or are in the etiology of the disease.3. In addition to direct target-disease relationships, diseases predictions for 417 targets using CTD-curated chemical-gene interactions were also provided, where each predicted disease has an inference score indicating confidence.shows a screenshot of the landing page of TarPred, which exposes the access to all major functionalities. TarPred allows users to input a compound in SMILES format or to draw one using Marvin JS (http://www.chemaxon.com/products/marvin/) (). The compound is then sent to the server for 3NN fusion score calculation using JChem command line tools (http://www.chemaxon. com/products/jchem-base/). The computation takes around 7 min to complete due to the size of our library, and users can always track the process of their tasks at results page.
Inputs
OutputsAfter the computation is completed, users can view an interactive ranking list containing the top 30 predicted targets with 3NN scores. For each target, detailed information about its Binding DB and DrugBank names, Gene IDs, predicted diseases and the pictures of three nearest compound neighbors to the query compound in the target ligand set are available. Users can also download the results in tsv format for post processing and analysis.
Funding
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Case study Entecavir is a nucleoside analog drug that was used in the treatment of chronic hepatitis B virus infection by inhibiting DNA polymerase (Levine et al., 2002). Recent studies revealed that Entecavir also inhibits human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 infectivity at clinically relevant concentrations, as shown by the temporal association of Entecavir therapy with approximately 1-log 10 reductions in HIV-1 RNA levels in vivo and in vitro studies (McMahon et al., 2007). These on-target and off-target interactions of Entecavir can be successfully captured by TarPred. As shown in Figure 1C, the DNA polymerase beta is ranked the third, and HIV-1 reverse transcriptase RNAse H is identified at the 10th ranking place. The output target profile for DNA polymerase beta is shown in Figure 1D. Fig. 1. (A) Screenshot of TarPred. (B) The chemical structure input interface. (C) Predicted target profile for Entecavir and the most similar structures for two potential targets. (D) Detailed target profile for DNA polymerase beta
X.Liu et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
