In plants, many transacting small interfering RNA (ta-siRNA) regulatory pathways have been identified as significant components of the gene networks involved in development, metabolism, responses to biotic and abiotic stresses and DNA methylation at the TAS locus. To obtain a more comprehensive understanding on the nature of ta-siRNA regulatory pathways, we developed a freely accessible resource, tasiRNAdb, to serve as a repository for the sequences of ta-siRNA regulatory pathway-related microRNAs, TASs, ta-siRNAs and ta-siRNA targets, and for the cascading relations among them. With 583 pathways from 18 species, tasiRNAdb is the largest resource for known ta-siRNA regulatory pathways currently available. tasiRNAdb also provides a tool named TasExpAnalysis that was developed to map user-submitted small RNA and degra-dome libraries to a stored/input TAS and to perform sRNA phasing analysis and TAS cleavage analysis. Availability: The database of plant ta-siRNA regulatory pathways is available at
INTRODUCTIONIn plants a classical '' phase-initiator!TAS transcript & ta-siRNA!target gene '' cascade model for the ta-siRNA regulatory function has been well determined (). Briefly, a phase-initiator (usually a miRNA, but sometimes a siRNA) cleaves the transcript of ta-siRNAs-producing locus (TAS) by binding argonaute (AGO) proteins 1/7. Then, RDR6 (RNA-dependent RNA-polymerase 6)-dependent conversion of the resulting cleaved fragments into dsRNA and subsequent cleavage by dicer-like 4 (DCL4) at every $21 nucleotides (nt) relative to the phase-initiator cleavage site generates a tasiRNA. The ta-siRNA further cleaves its target RNA to regulate gene expression by binding AGO1 proteins. The ta-siRNA regulatory pathways have been identified as important elements in the gene networks involved in development, metabolism, response to biotic and abiotic stresses and DNA methylation at the TAS locus (). Recently, the cascade system has also been used as a valuable tool in functional genomics studies (). Until recently, only a few ta-siRNA regulatory pathways were characterized; but now, with the development and application of integrative genome-wide approaches, including the genome-wide computational identification of TASs and the cleaved validation of miRNA/ta-siRNA-targeting site based on degradome analysis or 5 0 RACE, about 600 ta-siRNA regulatory pathways have been reported in different plants. However, no comprehensive and integrated ta-siRNA-related database is currently available. Here, we present a database called tasiRNAdb of known plant ta-siRNA regulatory pathways, which can serve as a repository for the sequences of ta-siRNA pathway-related miRNAs, TASs, ta-siRNAs and ta-siRNA targets, and for the cascading relation among them. tasiRNAdb also offers a tool named TasExpAnalysis, which has been developed to map user-submitted RNA and degradome libraries to a TAS and to allow users to perform TAS cleavage analysis and sRNA phasing analysis within tasiRNAdb.
DESCRIPTION OF THE DATABASE
Data acquisitionWe obtained a list of publications from the NCBI PubMed database using the keywords '"tasirnas"OR ''tasiRNAs"OR ''trans-acting sirnas"OR ''tasirna"OR ''ta-siRNA"OR ''transacting sirna""'. We manually extracted each tasiRNA regulatory pathway from each publication, and added these ta-siRNA regulatory pathways to tasiRNAdb.
The tasiRNAdb interface and data processingThe tasiRNAdb currently contains 583 ta-siRNA regulatory pathways from 18 plant species (Supplementary), which cover 120 pairs of phased initiators and their targeted sites, 77 TASs, 457 pairs of ta-siRNAs and their targeted sites and 296 ta-siRNAs target genes. 'Home' page and 'tasiRNAdbpage are two entry points to these pathways. The database is implemented on a Unix platform. All user interfaces and scripts are written in CGI-Perl, JavaScript and HTML and are integrated with an Apache web server. In the present version, users can submit new ta-siRNA regulatory pathway(s) to tasiRNAdb via 'Submit new pathway' page, and view the submitted content via 'Check submitted new pathway' page. After the submitted pathway passes administrator check in tasiRNAdb, it will be processed by a background script and automatically added to tasiRNAdb database. All the archived ta-siRNA regulatory pathways can be displayed on 'tasiRNAdb table' page, where the *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com information for each pathway is showed in six sections: species, phase initiator, TAS, ta-siRNA, targeted gene and reference(s), and the basic information for each section is further hyperlinked to a dynamic page (Supplementary). To only show the data that meet the criteria that users specify, the contents of the table can also be sorted and/or filtered by species, phase initiator, TAS, tasiRNA, targeted gene, and references. 'tasiRNAdbSearch' and 'TasExpAnalysis' are two online tools developed to use the archived data. They can respectively search the tasiRNAdb and evaluate whether a TAS of interest is transcribed and cleaved to produce ta-siRNA in user-sequenced sRNA dataset.
The TasExpAnalysis toolFor researchers who have generated sRNAs sequence libraries, a major challenge is to evaluate whether an interesting TAS among the sRNA reads is cleaved by a phased-initiator and sliced by DCL4 at every $21 nt relative to the phase-initiator cleavage site to produce functional ta-siRNAs. To meet this need, we developed the TasExpAnalysis tool (Supplementary) and integrated it into tasiRNAdb. TasExpAnalysis maps the sRNA and degradome reads submitted by the user to a selected/input TAS, and checks whether the 5 0 end of the RNA degradome fragment overlaps the TAS cleavage start position. When an overlap is detected, TasExpAnalysis searches the sRNA dataset to find a phased initiator. Next, the numbers of phased/non-phased positions with a sRNA hit on the TAS are counted (phased positions refer to those arranged in $21-nt increments relative to the cleavage start position; nonphased positions are all other positions that are not phased positions or the start position). The P value of the detected configuration is calculated based on a random hypergeometric distribution using the following equation ():where L is the length of TAS; k 1 is the number of phased positions having sRNA hits; k 2 is the number of non-phased positions having sRNA hits; and s is the maximum allowed offset from the phase position The TasExpAnalysis counts the number of unique sRNA and sRNA reads on different phasing registers and the number of different length reads in the user-submitted sRNA dataset. All the detected results are reported in a result page (Supplementary).
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
DISCUSSION tasiRNAdb is an integrated database comprising a large number of known ta-siRNA cascade pathways. Our aim in developing tasiRNAdb was to collect known plant ta-siRNA cascade pathways and integrate them in such a way that the data could be freely accessed and mined by users. tasiRNAdb is different from other similar resources because it includes all plant species for which such information is available. For example, ASRP currently collects Arabidopsis TAS genes and aims mainly to provide a public resource for genome-wide sRNA data from Arabidopsis (Backman et al., 2008). MPSS aims to provide a signature-based transcriptional resource for analyses of mRNA and sRNA (Nakano et al., 2006) and currently contains Arabidopsis TASs and rice TASs. CSRDB is a database of rice and maize sRNAs, which aims to identify miRNAs and other functional sRNAs, map miRNA transcription units, during development and as a function of biotic and abiotic stress (Johnson et al., 2007). Our tasiRNAdb currently contains 583 known ta-siRNA cascade pathways from 18 plant species, comprising 120 pairs of phased initiators and their targeted sites, 77 ta-siRNA-generating loci, 457 pairs of tasiRNAs and their targeted sites and 296 ta-siRNAs target genes. Consequently, tasiRNAdb provides more ta-siRNAs cascade pathway information than ASRP, MPSS or CSRDB. Moreover, web-based tools for evaluating whether a known/input TAS is cleaved by phased-initiator and sliced by DCL4 at 21-nt intervals to produce functional ta-siRNAs in user-sequenced sRNA datasets are unavailable. We have developed TasExpAnalysis to meet this need. We evaluated the performance of TasExpAnalysis with an RDR sRNA MPSS library (Lu et al., 2006) and default parameters. All six atTASs previously reported in the sample, including atTAS1a, atTAS1b, atTAS1c, atTAS2, atTAS3a and at1g63130, were successfully identified by TasExpAnalysis (Supplementary Table S2). They all have a significant P value of 50.005. In addition, the other two known atTASs stored in tasiRNAdb, including atTAS3b and atTAS3c, were also identified by TasExpAnalysis. TasExpAnalysis could be a useful tool for characterizing sRNAs from deep sequencing data. Funding: This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China (31171273). Conflict of Interest: none declared.
C.Zhang et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
