Motivation: Modern biomedical and epidemiological studies often measure hundreds or thousands of biomarkers, such as gene expression or metabolite levels. Although there is an extensive statistical literature on adjusting for 'multiple comparisons' when testing whether these biomarkers are directly associated with a disease, testing whether they are biological mediators between a known risk factor and a disease requires a more complex null hypothesis, thus offering additional methodological challenges. Results: We propose a permutation approach that tests multiple putative mediators and controls the family wise error rate. We demonstrate that, unlike when testing direct associations, replacing the Bonferroni correction with a permutation approach that focuses on the maximum of the test statistics can significantly improve the power to detect mediators even when all biomarkers are independent. Through simulations, we show the power of our method is 2–5Â larger than the power achieved by Bonferroni correction. Finally, we apply our permutation test to a case-control study of dietary risk factors and colorectal adenoma to show that, of 149 test metabolites, docosahex-aenoate is a possible mediator between fish consumption and decreased colorectal adenoma risk. Availability and implementation: R-package included in online Supplementary Material.
INTRODUCTIONMediation analysis or causal inference offers numerous methods for testing if a single variable mediates the relationship between a known exposure and an outcome (). These methods assume that a known exposure, E, affects an outcome, Y, and aim to test whether this effect is at least partially transmitted through a mediator, M. For example, in biology, these methods have suggested that the negative impact of lead exposure on cognition is mediated by a decrease in the volumes of specific brain regions (), and that the association between certain variants in the FTO gene and increased body weight is mediated by a lowered response to satiety cues (). With new technologies, such as microarrays (), next-generation sequencing () and highthroughput metabolomics (), it is possible to simultaneously test whether 100 or 1000s of biomarkers mediate a known relationship. In our motivating study, investigators aim to identify metabolites that mediate the association between increased fish consumption and a reduced risk of colorectal adenoma (). Our current objective is to define a testing procedure that accounts for 'multiple comparisons' and maintains a desired family wise error rate (FWER). Guided by the methods developed for testing direct associations, we develop a permutation approach for testing multiple mediators. Specifically, we design a permutation method that tests whether any biomarker meets a common definition of a mediator (). We say that M is a mediator if it is both associated with the exposure, E, and, conditional on E, associated with the outcome, Y. Our first step is to define a permutation method for testing a single mediator. Our defined method uses the Freedman andapproach for testing the conditional association between M and Y, in contrast to previous methods () that use the Manly (1997) approach, and will therefore be more robust to outliers (). Unfortunately, as has already been noted (), there can be no exact permutation method for testing a conditional association. In addition to having its own value, our presentation of the single mediator test aims to illustrate the inherent difficulty in designing a permutation test for a composite null hypothesis. When testing mediation, the null hypothesis allows for either an association between E and M or a conditional association between M and Y. Approaches designed for testing direct associations, which permute only the exposure or outcome, cannot simulate such a composite null hypothesis. This article is structured so that methods for testing mediators can be described by comparing and contrasting them with methods for testing associations. We begin by describing permutation tests for a single association and the extensions needed for testing multiple associations. Then, we introduce permutation methods for testing a single mediator and the extensions for testing multiple mediators. The following simulations demonstrate that the potential increase in power from replacing the Bonferroni correction with a joint correction is greater when testing for mediation than when testing for direct association. Finally, we apply our method to our motivating example and offer a brief discussion. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
METHODS
Testing a single associationFor testing a single association, we assume that there are two normally distributed variables, X and Y, related by Equation (1)where $ N0, 2 . The null hypothesis can be stated as either H 0 : b  0 or H 0 : X, Y  0, where X, Y is the correlation between X and Y. Although less common, the latter framework facilitates comparisons with testing mediators. The null hypothesis can be tested by:Test 0:. We declare X to be significantly associated with Y if p b 0:05 (or j ^ X, Yj ! t 1 ), where ^ X, Y, is the sample correlation coefficient, p b is the P-value and t 1 is the 95th percentile for the null distribution of j ^ X, Yj. Both p b and t 1 can be calculated by asymptotic theory or permutation. For the latter, we can permute values of Y to obtain Y, where  indicates a permutation of an original variable, and calculate j ^ X, Yj for each permuted dataset. Then, p b is the proportion of permuted values greater than or equal to the observed value and t 1 is the 95th percentile of the permuted values. The tests discussed in this article are summarized in.
Testing multiple associationsWhen we test the association between Y and multiple variables, X 1 , :::, X K , we calculate j ^ X i , Yj and its corresponding P-values, p bi for i 2 f1, :::, Kg. To maintain a FWER of 0.05, we have two options. First, we can estimate the threshold by Bonferroni correction, where t i B is the 100  1  0:05=Kth percentile of the null distribution estimated for j ^ X i , Yj and consider the test: Test 0B: We declare X i to be significantly associated with Y if p bi 0:05=K (or j ^ X i , Yj ! t i B ). For the permutation estimates of t i B to converge to their true quantiles, we depend on the inherent assumption in Equation (1), that the full joint distribution of X is determined by the marginal distributions, or that the joint distribution of X is constant for all Y under the null hypothesis (). Similar assumptions are required for tests described here and elsewhere. The second option, which uses the max correction (), is to estimate the 95th percentile of the distribution of ^ max max i j ^ X i , Yj by permuting Y. Here, we use the term 'joint correction' because the distribution of the maximal test statistic depends on the joint distribution of the multiple variables. We let t J be the 95th percentile of this permutation distribution and consider the test: Test 0J:. We declare X i to be significantly associated with Y if j ^ X i , Yj ! t J. Note that we only permute Y once for each dataset, as opposed to once for each X i for Test 0J.
Testing a single mediatorFor testing a single mediator, we start by assuming that the exposure, putative mediator and outcome are normally distributed and related by Equations(2) and (3). The directed acyclic graph (DAG) inillustrates this relationship.where E $ N0, 2 E , M $ N0, 2 M  and Y $ N0, 2 Y . Therefore, Y can also be described byWe can describe two general approaches for testing if M is a mediator (). We can either evaluate whether both 6  0 and 6  0 or whether their product 6  0. For interpretation, we note that   , which is the difference between the total and direct effect of E. To facilitate comparison across metabolites, with concentrations that vary by orders by magnitude, we prefer normalized versions of and. Therefore, we replace and by EM and MYjE , respectively, where EM is the correlation between E and M and MYjE is the conditional correlation between M and Y. The sample correlation coefficients, ^ E, M and ^ r MjE , r YjE , offer estimates of these parameters. Here, r YjE and r MjE , are the residuals from regressing Y on E and M on E, respectively. The first test we consider is as follows:Test 1:. We declare M to be significant if p 0:05 and p 0:05 (or j ^ E, Mj ! t 1  and j ^ r MjE , r YjE j ! t 1 ),where p is the corresponding P-value and t 1  is the 95th percentile for the null distribution of j ^ E, Mj. p and t 1  are defined similarly for j ^ r MjE , r YjE j. All values can be calculated by asymptotic theory or permutation. An overall P-value for Test 1 can be defined as maxp , p . The exact steps are presented in Algorithms 1 (for ) and 2 (for ). Freedman and Lane () offer the rationale for Algorithm 2, even though, like all permutation tests for a conditional association, it is not exact ().(1) Permute E to obtain E.(3) Repeat steps 1 and 2 to obtain a distribution of j ^ E, Mj. p is the proportion of j ^ E, Mj exceeding j ^ E, Mj and t 1  is 95th percentile of the distribution.Note: The rows indicate whether single or multiple testing is performed and the type of adjustment for multiple testing, Bonferroni (Bonf) or joint. The columns indicate whether the test evaluates associations or mediations, and among mediation methods, whether and are each evaluated separately (, ) or as a product (  ).(The second test uses the statistic S  j ^ E, M ^ r MjE , r YjE j:(1) If j ^ E, Mj5j ^ r MjE , r YjE j, then calculate ^ E, M as in Algorithm 1 and S  j ^ E, M ^ r YjE , r MjE j.(2) If j ^ E, Mj ! j ^ r MjE , r YjE j, calculate ^ r MjE , r YjE  as in Algorithm 2 and S  j ^ E, M ^ r MjE , r YjE j.(3) Repeat steps 1 and 2 to obtain a distribution of S. Calculate P-value and threshold as usual.
Testing multiple mediatorsFor testing multiple mediators, we start by assuming that the exposure, putative mediators and outcome are normally distributed and related by Equations(5) and (6). The DAG inillustrates this relationship:Therefore, Y can also be described byWhen we test multiple mediators, M 1 , :::, M K , we calculate ^ E, M i , ^ r MijE , r YjE  and S i for each metabolite individually. We can maintain a FWER across all tests by using Bonferroni corrected thresholds: Test 1B:. We declare M i to be significant if p i 0:05=K and p i 0:05=K (or j ^ E, M i j ! t i B  and j ^ r MijE , r YjE j ! t i B ).Here, t i B , t i B  and t i B S are the 100  1  0:05=Kth percentiles of the appropriate null distribution. Again, the quality of the permuted estimates of t i B , t i B  and t i B S depends strongly on our assumption that the joint distribution of Y and M, conditioned on E, is uniquely determined by the marginal distributions defined in Equations (5) and(6) (). We can also maintain a FWER by using a joint correction through taking the maximal test statistics. First, letting ^ max, we define test 1J:To define the permutation algorithm for p J i and t J S, we consider the following partition of the possible mediators:We then go through the steps in Algorithm 4.Algorithm 4: Permutation algorithm for p J i and t J S.(4) Repeat steps 1, 2 and 3 to obtain a distribution of S joint. Calculate the P-value, p Ji , for each mediator as the proportion of S joint exceeding S i and the threshold t J S as the 95th percentile of this distribution.
Beyond normalityOur framework only needs to be slightly modified for the scenario where the outcome is not normally distributed. For example, mediation for binary outcomes can be tested using the same algorithms. We continue to let r YjE be the residuals after fitting a linear regression with Y as the dependent variable and let ^ r MijE , r YjE  be the sample correlation. A scenario with K possible mediators between exposure and outcome coefficients. Then, we will still assume that the DAG inis true, but we will replace Equation (6) with:However, we will need to slightly modify the algorithms in case/control studies, where the data are collected retrospectively. Thus, for ^ E, M to consistently estimate the correlation between E and M in the overall population, it is necessary to weight each case by =q and each control by 1  =1  q, where represents the prevalence of the outcome in the overall population and q represents the proportion of cases in the sample, as in VanderWeele and Vansteelandt (2010). We note that for this analysis to be performed, one must have prior knowledge of , as this cannot be estimated from the data. The distribution of E is taken to be normal only out of convenience, and the same analysis can be performed for other distributions. In the case where E is discrete and each possible value is represented multiple times in the dataset, an exact permutation test exists for testing the conditional associations between the mediators and the outcome, instead of the FreedmanLane approximation. ().
SimulationsWe simulate studies where all the variables are normally distributed and follow Equations (3) and (4) () for the single mediator case and Equations (5) and (6) () for the multiple mediator case. The marginal variance of all variables was fixed to be 1. We also simulate casecontrol studies with a binary outcome Y following Equation (8) and a population prevalence  0:2. The sample size, n, for each study was either 100 or 1000 individuals. For studies with a binary outcome, n was equally divided among cases and controls. For each simulated study, 20 000 permutations were performed to obtain the permutation distributions. All methods were implemented in the R programming language (R Core).
Single mediatorWe first consider the scenario where E, M and Y are normally distributed. To estimate the type I error rates, we set ,  to be either (0, 0), (es, 0) or (0, es), where es is the sample size dependent effect size. As with all simulated studies, we take  0. Supplementary Material shows that letting 6  0 does not qualitatively affect the results. We then simulate 10 000 studies and define the observed type I error rate to be the fraction of studies where M is declared to be statistically significant. To estimate power, we set ,  to (es,es), (0.5es,1.5es) or (1.5es, 0.5es). We then simulate 1000 studies and define power to be the fraction of studies where M is significant. So that all marginal variances equal 1,We consider es  0.2 for n  100, and es  0.08 for n  1000. Next, we consider the scenario where Y is binary. The general design is similar, but for type I error, we set ,  to either (0, 0), (es 1 , 0) or (0, es 2 ), where now refers to 1 in, and for power we set ,  to (es 1 , es 2 ), (1 , 0.5es 2 ). We consider es 1  0.2, es 2  0.5 when n  100 and es 1  0.08, es 2  0.2 when n  1000. The combinations of n, and we consider are listed in(for normally distributed outcome) and Supplementary Table S1 (for case-control study, in Supplementary Materials).
Multiple mediatorsThe simulations are similar to the single mediator scenario. However, here we must not only define effects sizes but also the proportion of mediators with each effect size. Again, we first consider the scenario with normally distributed variables. To obtain the FWER, we consider either K  10 or K  100 null mediators. We set K 1 , K 2 and K 3 mediators to have ,   0, 0, 0, es, and es, 0, respectively. Here, we consider K 1 , K 2 , K 3   (10, 0, 0), (7, 3, 0), (7, 0, 3)and (6, 2, 2) for K  10 and K 1 , K 2 , K 3   (100, 0, 0), (70, 30, 0), (70, 0, 30) and (60, 20, 20) for K  100. We then simulate 10 000 studies and define the observed FWER to be the proportion of the studies where at least one mediator is declared to be statistically significant. To obtain the power, we also add a single mediator with ,   (es, es). We discuss the scenario of multiple mediators in Supplementary Section S3 of the Supplementary Material. We then simulate 1000 studies and define power to be the proportion of studies where this true mediator is declared significant. When K  10 or 11 mediators, we consider 100 subjects and es  0.3. When K  100 or 101, we consider 1000 subjects and es  0.1. So that all marginal variances equal 1, we let 2In the Supplementary Material, we also consider simulations with more than one true mediator, including scenarios where one is 'screening' mediators. The DAG inimplies that the putative mediators are independent conditional on exposure. We also want to explore the benefit of Test 2J when the mediators are conditionally dependent. Specifically, we consider the scenario with one true mediator (es  0.1) and 100 null mediators (n  1000), each with i  i  0 and divided into five correlated blocks of equal size. Two mediators in the same block have a correlation of , which varies from 0 to 1, whereas any mediators in two different blocks are independent. We calculate the power based on 10 000 simulated studies. Next, we consider the scenario where Y is binary. The design is similar, but we now set  i , i  to either 0, 0, (es 1 , 0), (0, es 2 ) or (es 1 , es 2 ), where i now refers to Equation (8). When K  10 or 11, we consider n  100, es 1  0.3 and es 2  0.6, whereas for K  100 or 101, we take n  1000, es 1  0.1 and es 2  0.2. The combinations of K 1 , K 2 , K 3 and K 4 we consider are listed in Tables 3 and 4, with K 4 being the number of true mediators (and therefore, just 0 or 1.).
Navy Colorectal Adenoma studyThe original Navy Colorectal Adenoma case-control study () was a study of colorectal adenoma risk factors. A follow-up study was conducted to investigate circulating metabolites in relation to selfreported diet and colorectal adenoma in 129 cases and 129 controls. Serum metabolites were measured by Metabolon Inc., whose methods have been previously described (). For this analysis, the exposures of interest were the daily intake ofred meat and the daily intake of fish (g/day), inferred from dietary questionnaires and the outcome of interest was the presence of colorectal adenoma. The prevalence of colorectal adenoma within this age group at the time of the original study was assumed to be 0.228 (Dr Brooks Cash, personal communication). Of the 446 known metabolites measured, we considered only the 149 metabolites present in all study participants. The metabolite values were batch normalized and log transformed. We normalized the exposure, mediators and outcome by using the residuals from regression analyses that included gender, age, current smoking status and body mass index.
RESULTS
Simulations: single mediatorThe type I error rates for Test 1 and Test 2 depend on the values of and. When both  0 and  0, both tests are extremely conservative, with type I error rates close to 0:0025  0:05 2. When either ( ) 0 and  0) or (  0 and ) 0), type I error rates are closer to 0.05 (and Supplementary). Note three features. First, similar trends are observed for normal and binomial outcomes. Second, although permutation methods for testing conditional associations are not exact, the type I error rates are below or close to 0.05 (data not shown). Third, Test 1 and Test 2 produce essentially identical results for both type I error and power. When running simulations under the alternative hypothesis, we found that the threshold for significance for Test 2, t 1 S, increased with effect size. Therefore, when  was set to be 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 and 0.5, we found the corresponding thresholds to be 0.032, 0.050, 0.068, 0.086 and 0.103. Because we are testing a composite null hypothesis, each permuted statistic still uses the observed ^ or ^ and therefore increases with the observed values.
Simulations: multiple mediatorsThe FWER depends on the values of i and i. When all the mediators have i  i  0, all four tests are extremely conservative (Tables 3 and 4). In these simulations, where all mediators were conditionally uncorrelated, we found that power for Test 2J was larger than the power for Tests 1B, 1J or 2B. In general, all three tests (1B, 1J, 2B) performed nearly identically, so we only report test 2B here and in Tables 3 and 4. The results from tests 1B and 1J are provided as part of Supplementary Tables S2 and S3. For example, with 1000 subjects, 100 null mediators and   0:1 for the true mediator, we found the power for detecting an association by Test 2J to be 0.657, 0.268, 0.277 and 0.243 when K 1 , K 2 ,). In contrast, we found the power from Tests 1B, 1J or 2B, which again are essentially equivalent, to be between 0.13 and 0.14. Importantly, note that the power is greatly improved by the joint test here, whereas if we generated independent variables when testing associations, the joint test could offer no improvement (data not shown). Similar improvements wereobserved when considering the scenario with multiple true mediators (Supplementary). Tables 3 and 4 show that as K 1 decreases, the power for Test 2J decreases, whereas its FWER increases. Both trends can be explained by the fact that the expected value of S i is higher when the null variable has one association, with either E or Y. For example, assume that M i is associated with E. The result is that variable i will likely be included in group B and the expected value of S i  2 will be approximatelywith neither E nor Y. S i   2 should only be slightly larger than var ^ r YjE , r M  i jE   var ^ E, M  i , a comparatively small number. Because S i increases with K 2 and K 3 , the threshold for significance increases which, in turn, leads to a decrease in statistical power. Furthermore, note that when E, M i  6  0, jE, M i j is more than likely to be comparatively large, and S i only requires a single chance event, namely, for j ^ r YjE , r MijE j to be large, to be statistically significant. Hence, lowering K 1 increases the FWER toward 0.05. The improvement by the joint Test 2J, as compared with 2B, is a result of the fundamental difference between the Bonferroni and joint corrections. The Bonferroni correction fixes a percentile, 100  1  0:05=K, and therefore lets t i B vary across mediators. The joint correction fixes t J and lets the corresponding percentile, 100  PS i ! t J  vary across all mediators. When testing associations, t i B is effectively independent of the underlying truth and t i B % t J when all variables are independent. In stark contrast, as we observed in our previous simulations, when testing mediators, t i B is strongly dependent on the true values of and. Moreover, t i B will tend to be larger for true mediators, when both 6  0 and 6  0, resulting in the Bonferroni correction being especially tough on the true mediators. The improvement by Test 2J, as compared with 1B or 1J, results from the fact that the thresholds for significance for each association are likely driven by two different metabolites. As with testing associations, the Bonferroni correction is increasingly conservative as the correlation between variables increases.shows that, as the correlation within the five sets of null mediators increases, the power for the joint correction increases from 0.670 for  0 to 0.768 for  1, an increase of 15.9%. However, the power for Test 2B stays approximately constant. In particular, as increases, the power of the joint correction gets closer to the power of the 'limiting scenario' (0.760), where there are six independent mediators, one of which is true; this does not hold for the Bonferroni correction.
Navy Colorectal Adenoma studyIn the Navy Colorectal Adenoma Study, red meat consumption was associated with an increased risk of colorectal adenoma (P  0:010), whereas fish consumption was associated with a decreased risk (P  0:075), adjusting for gender, age, current smoking status and body mass index. Although no metabolite could be identified as a potential mediator for the association with red meat, Test 2J suggested that increased docosahexaenoate (DHA, fish oil) may link fish consumption with a decreased risk of colorectal adenoma (p J  0:062,). DHA was positively associated with fish consumption (P50:001) and negatively associated with adenoma (P  0:013). This result agrees with previous research () and supports ongoing studies like the seaAFOod Polyp Prevention Trial (http://www.seafood-trial.co.uk/). DHA also had the smallest P-value by Test 2B (0.006), but this evidence would not have appeared convincing after adjusting for 149 tests.
DISCUSSIONWe developed permutation methods for testing multiple putative mediators. Although such methods can be applied in a variety of settings, we considered the specific application of a modern epidemiological study that measures 100 or 1000s of similar biomarkers (e.g. gene expression, protein or metabolite levels). We show, via simulations, that testing putative mediators by using the joint correction has substantially higher power over Bonferroni correction even when all biomarkers are conditionally independent. We apply our approach to the Navy Colorectal Adenoma study and find evidence suggesting that DHA may mediate the protective effect of fish consumption on adenoma risk, which would not have been found using Bonferroni. We first defined a permutation method for testing a single mediator. This method was used to lay the groundwork for describing our tests of multiple mediators, but is also novel in the single mediator literature. Whereas prior permutation methods () used the Manly (1997) approach for testing the conditional association between M and Y, we used theapproach which, in general, appears to be a more robust approach (). We then extended this method to testing multiple mediators, using either the Bonferroni correction or a joint correction. The key component of our methods, required to handle the composite null hypothesis in both the single and multiple mediator scenarios, is to use two sets of permutations. A simpler, but incorrect, alternative to our approach would be to repeatedly permute Y to obtain one null distribution of S joint. Then, repeatedly permute E to obtain another null distribution, and let p S be the maximum of the two P-values. However, if aTest 2B (limiting case). The solid lines illustrate the power for Test 2B (light) and Test 2J (dark) as a function of (within block correlation) when there are 100 null mediators and 1 true mediator. Mediators in different blocks are uncorrelated. The dashed lines show the limiting power, when the 100 null mediators are replaced with 5 independent null mediators subset of metabolites was associated with the exposure and a different subset was associated with the outcome, then the observed S joint would appear extreme as measured by either simple null distribution. As with any approach for testing mediation, our method presumes that the causal paths considered inare correct. Thus, we assumed that the only causal paths that may exist are from the exposure to the biomarkers, from the biomarkers to the outcome and from the exposure directly to the outcome. Unmeasured confounders might also lead to incorrect inferences. Such a confounder might, for example, induce a relationship between M and Y, causing to appear to be non-zero. If this same metabolite were associated with E, the result would be a false positive. Despite this limitation, causal analysis still offers one of the best methods for testing putative mediators. Given the popularity of high-throughput technologies, investigators will soon require methods for testing multiple putative mediators. This manuscript is one of the first to introduce possible options. Funding: Support was from the Intramural Research Program of the Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health (NIH). Computation was performed using the Biowulf Linux cluster at the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland (http://biowulf.nih.gov). Conflict of Interest: None declared.Note: For each dietary intake of interest, we list the most likely mediator, as suggested by Tests 2B and 2J. For the top mediator, we report p S for Test 2B (i.e. compare with 0.05 divided by 149 tests) and p J for Test 2J (i.e. compare directly with 0.05). 1-SGPA (1-stearoylyglycerophosphoethanolamine) and DHA (docosahexaenoate).
Published by Oxford University Press 2013. This work is written by US Government employees and is in the public domain in the US. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Testing multiple mediators at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Test 2:. We declare M to be significant if p S 0:05 (or S ! t 1 S), where p S and t 1 S have their usual meaning. The exact steps are presented in Algorithm 3, which is described so that it can be adapted for testing multiple mediators. Otherwise, we would have performed two sets of permutations and let t 1 S be the maximum of two thresholds, the 95th percentile for the distribution of j ^ E, M ^ r YjE , r MjE j and the 95th percentile for j ^ E, M ^ r MjE , r YjE j. In this format, Tests 1 and 2 would be equivalent. To obtain t 1 S, we could perform Algorithms 1 and 2 and then let t 1 S  t 1  ^ E, M if j ^ E, Mj ! j ^ r MjE , r YjE j and t 1 S  t 1  ^ r MjE , r YjE  if j ^ E, Mj5j ^ r MjE , r YjE j. However, we choose to formally describe the steps for Test 2 by Algorithm 3. In this form, the algorithm can be easily adapted for multiple mediators. When considering non-normally distributed variables, Test 2 could, at least in theory, produce inflated type I errors. The test and algorithm described in Supplementary Section S5 offers a more conservative alternative.
S.M.Boca et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
