Motivation: Uncovering mechanisms underlying gene expression control is crucial to understand complex cellular responses. Studies in gene regulation often aim to identify regulatory players involved in a biological process of interest, either transcription factors coregulating a set of target genes or genes eventually controlled by a set of regulators. These are frequently prioritized with respect to a context-specific relevance score. Current approaches rely on relevance measures accounting exclusively for direct transcription factor–target interactions, namely overrepresentation of binding sites or target ratios. Gene regulation has, however, intricate behavior with overlapping, indirect effect that should not be neglected. In addition, the rapid accumulation of regulatory data already enables the prediction of large-scale networks suitable for higher level exploration by methods based on graph theory. A paradigm shift is thus emerging, where isolated and constrained analyses will likely be replaced by whole-network, systemic-aware strategies. Results: We present TFRank, a graph-based framework to prioritize regulatory players involved in transcriptional responses within the regulatory network of an organism, whereby every regulatory path containing genes of interest is explored and incorporated into the analysis. TFRank selected important regulators of yeast adaptation to stress induced by quinine and acetic acid, which were missed by a direct effect approach. Notably, they reportedly confer resistance toward the chemicals. In a preliminary study in human, TFRank unveiled regulators involved in breast tumor growth and metastasis when applied to genes whose expression signatures correlated with short interval to metastasis. Availability: Prototype at http://kdbio.inesc-id.pt/software/tfrank/.
INTRODUCTIONTranscription is the first step in the flow of biological information from genome to proteome and its tight regulation serves as a crucial * To whom correspondence should be addressed. checkpoint in most biological processes. Transcriptional control often results from the concerted action of diverse transcription factors (TFs), acting alone or as interacting partners, regulating or being targeted, and participating in complex feedback loops (). Genome-wide studies have been unveiling intricate regulatory networks with increasing layers of complexity as the hierarchy is amplified, empowered by the rapid accumulation of regulatory data in public repositories. Namely, YEASTRACT () contains TFtarget links for Saccharomyces cerevisiae, while JASPAR () and TRANSFAC () collect binding sites and position-specific scoring matrices for diverse eukaryotes including human. These data provide information on the topology of the regulatory network, which is static and thus not sufficient per se to determine whether a given association is relevant or not in a specific biological context. In fact, binding of a given TF to the promoter region of its target(s) is rather an intermittent event triggered by biochemical stimuli and ultimately leading to changes in expression. Insight on the mechanisms underlying the stimulusresponse effect can only be achieved through an integrated study of control and behavior, where three challenges often arise: (i) identification of regulators of genes involved in a similar, related biological process; (ii) identification of genes coregulated by a group of TFs of interest; and (iii) prioritization of regulators, target genes or regulatory interactions with respect to a measure of relevance expressing their contribution within the regulatory network under study. Diverse strategies have been proposed to address the first challenge. A popular one is to rank TFs based on the ratio of genes targeted in the dataset under analysis. This score can be normalized by the relative number of targets in the genome to avoid excessive bias toward TFs controlling very large regulons (). Alternatively, methods may rely on a statistical framework to discover enriched target binding sites by calculating their overrepresentation in the test sequences against a background model estimated from a collection of (randomly) selected sequences (), eventually considering cross-species conservation (). A drawback of such procedure is that results are highly susceptible to the choice of the background model and variations on the statistical parameters. Other strategies have overcome this limitation by computing the genome-wide overrepresentation of binding sites (Page: 3150 31493157), improved through comparative analysis with orthologous sequences based on phylogenetic footprinting. Regulatory associations have also been uncovered from expression data alone () by searching for correlation of expression profiles under the assumption that TFs tend to express coherently with their targets. However, this is often not the case. In addition, these techniques tend to ignore physical binding and thus generate a larger number of false positives (). The issue was recently mitigated by incorporating binding, expression data and three types of control: regulation, activation and inhibition (). Most methods for the second challenge are experimental, relying on ChIP-chip and DNA microarray assays to find putative targets. Computationally, the problem has been addressed by computing the genome-wide enrichment of binding sites (), or the correlation between the expression of each gene with the composite expression of sets of genes pertaining identical binding sites (). All revised approaches include some form of prioritization based on a relevance score and most are able to test largescale data. Nonetheless, they restrict to direct neighbors in the network, disregarding overlapping control and systemic effects of utter importance in gene regulation, where cascade responses proliferate. This systemic perspective was supported in recent work by, suggesting that evolution might lead to the introduction of new layers of control between TFs and their targets. Embedding this knowledge into the relevance score would likely increase informativeness and accuracy in determining key regulatory players, particularly when coupled with the ability to direct the search toward wider-purposed or more specific regulators (). Another characteristic of the methods reviewed herein is that they are mostly sequence driven and thus not tailored for the study of higher level hypothesis on gene regulation. Notably, their ability to predict TFtarget affinities can be exploited in a first step to derive regulations and build large-scale regulatory networks for methods based on graph theory, known to deliver effective and efficient network analysis. Notably, network motif mining has been successfully applied to the identification of regulatory modules (). This technique aims to partition the network in coherent groups and is thus more appropriate for finding subgroups of activity rather than studying the composite effect generating a particular response. In this article, we present TFRank, a method to prioritize regulatory players, involved in a process of interest, considering all known regulatory paths of a given organism. The most common use case is to rank the TFs controlling a set of genes responsive under specific conditions, according to a score calculated as follows. Each gene in the network is given an initial weight indicative of its presence (or absence) in (from) the gene set. Expression values or any alternative measure of importance may be used. A personalized ranking strategy is then applied to propagate the weights through the network graph in the targetTF direction. For the prioritization of targets of a set of regulators, the diffusion is performed in the TFtarget direction instead. TFRank is independent from network construction and may be applied to any organism with available TFtarget interactions. TFRank provides: (i) full topology analysis including alternative regulatory paths with intermediate layers of control; (ii) ability to regulate preference for more global or local players; (iii) integrated stimulusresponse analysis of (static) binding and (dynamic) response; (iv) potential incorporation of interaction confidence scores; and (v) normalization to mitigate bias toward TFs with a large number of targets or genes acted upon by a large number of regulators. We evaluate the contribution of each TFRank parameter to the ranking on real data. We test the effectiveness of TFRank to unravel regulators potentially involved in the transcriptional control of biological processes in yeast and human. For yeast, we examine the TFs output by TFRank for two sets of genes upregulated in response to stress induced by the antimalarial drug quinine and the food preservative acetic acid. For human, we present a preliminary study of the TFRank-suggested regulators of genes whose expression signature has been previously associated with short interval to metastasis in breast cancer.
J.P.Gonalves
METHODSThis section introduces TFRank, a framework to: (i) prioritize TFs of a set of genes responsive under particular conditions; and (ii) rank the genes controlled by a group of regulators involved in a biological process of interest (). Application of the method to one setting or the other is straightforward and depends exclusively on the representation devised for the regulatory network, whether using reverse directed regulatory interactions from target genes to regulators (first problem) or the original regulations from TFs to their targets (second problem). Our description focuses mainly on the solution for the first problem, more frequently addressed. Answering the reverse question should also become clear from the following exposition. We first outline the definitions and formulate the problem. Next, we introduce TFRank's personalized ranking strategy based on the heat kernel. Finally, we describe the contribution of each parameter.
TFRank prioritization frameworkA regulatory network is defined as a directed graph G = (V ,E), where V denotes the set of vertices, comprising regulators and target genes, and E is the set of edges representing regulatory associations between elements in V. Let A and D denote the adjacency and diagonal matrices of G, respectively, where A uv = w(u,v) expresses the weight of the edge between a source vertex u and an end vertex v and D uu = d(u) is the outdegree of vertex u (or the sum of weights of the outgoing edges). Note that, for the first problem, the direction of each regulatory interaction is reversed, meaning that edge sources correspond to target genes and end vertices represent regulators. This is equivalent to using the transpose of the original regulatory network graph. Given a set T  V of target genes, the first problem aims at defining a relevance score and thus obtaining a ranking on R  V , where R is the set of TFs regulating directly or indirectly the target genes in T. Personalized PageRank () is a widely known solution for the above formulation, related to local clustering on graphs (). Personalized PageRank involves a preference vector p 0 , which can be regarded as the probabilistic distribution of the genes in T , and a jumping constant  denoting the probability of returning back to initial nodes. For an input p 0 , the ranking p  is given by the following equation and equivalent recurrence, respectively,This is also equivalent to the lazy definition of PageRank, using matrix M = 1 2 I +D 1 A instead of D 1 A, up to a change in . TFRank uses the heat kernel rank, which was shown recently to perform better () than PageRank. The heat kernel is a fundamental solution for the heat equation describing the diffusion of heat and related temperature variation through a bounded region over time. In physics, the Page: 3151 31493157. Diagram of the TFRank framework for prioritizing TFtarget interactions. TFRank uses the whole regulatory network and a preference vector accepting two kinds of input: a list of genes, containing for example genes whose expression was significantly altered in a given condition; or a list of genes together with their expression levels or any measure of importance. Based on the input, each gene is initialized with a given score as follows: in the first case, the score can be either 1 or 0 depending on whether the gene is in the input list or not; in the second case, the score is set as the absolute value of the given measure. These scores, expressed in the form of a preference vector, are then propagated through the network to compute a TFRank relevance score for every regulatory player, involving two additional properties: regulation weights and diffusion coefficient. Regulation weights can be used to express a degree of confidence or intensity on each regulatory interaction, taking into consideration the nature of the underlying experiments. The diffusion coefficient allows to control the extent of intermediate regulatory layers considered. Finally, genes are ranked based on the computed TFRank scores. Normalization can be applied to balance the final scores and avoid bias toward regulators targeting many genes or genes acted upon by many TFs. In this figure, nodes are generally represented in light green (standard node or target) or red (regulator). Dark green is used to denote a gene present in the input list. The bottom figure highlights a ranking obtained with TFRank using YEASTRACT regulations (). The intensity of the red nodes indicates the relevance of the corresponding TF upon prioritization: the darker the color, the more relevant the regulator. Prefuse () was used to generate the bottom network from custom code.
TFRankPage: 3152 31493157
J.P.Gonalves et al.diffusion is defined by a partial differential equation of the formwhere t is the thermal conductivity or heat diffusion coefficient and W = D 1 A. The solution of the heat equation is given by an exponential kernel (the heat kernel), defined in Equation (4), where p 0 is again a preference vector.Analogously, in graph theory, W denotes the transition probability matrix of a typical random walk on G defined as W = D 1 A. In this case, W holds the weights of TFtarget interactions between pairs (u,v) normalized by the sum of weights of the outgoing edges of u. Other matrices can be used, such as the Laplacian DA or its normalized form I D  1 2 AD  1 2. Let us define L = I W. The heat kernel rank in Equation (4) is then rewritten asThe discrete version of the heat kernel, first introduced in Chung and Yau (1999), is a symmetric version of e tL. Several approximations have been proposed for the heat kernel rank, namely an additive version by taking a finite sum [cf. Equation(4)], or a sum of two infinite products as given by Euler (). We rely on the discrete approximation ofto compute the vector of ranking scores p t as in Equation (6)where N is the number of iterations, and t, p 0 and L are as previously defined. For an error threshold , N can be determined such that Equation (7) holds,for any p 0 whose entries sum one. Solving Equation (7) is difficult, thususe a heuristic motivated by the following. When L = I W ,with 1, 2 ,... being the eigenvalues of W. Note that the eigenvalues of the above matrix are. Thus, the heuristic method to determine N considers the difference between positive eigenvalues and a given threshold. For instance, for t = 1 and <1, thenfor N  100. Usually, it is possible to obtain satisfactory ranking results even for small values of N, being sufficient to consider N 10.
Customizing TFRank: parameter contributionTFRank is a flexible integrative prioritization framework allowing for some degree of customization. In particular, parameters may be tuned by experts to guide the method's search according to the problem under study (). We describe the effect of each parameter to the output below.
Diffusion coefficientThe heat diffusion coefficient parameter, t, plays an important role in the heat kernel as it controls the diffusion rate. A large value causes heat to diffuse rapidly, giving preference to regulators located farther away in the network. Conversely, a small value promotes a slow diffusion, thus favoring nearby TFs.
Preference vectorBiological context is introduced by the preference vector, p 0 , which defines the initial scores for vertices. Distinct initialization schemes can be used, aiming at differentiating the set of target genes of interest from the remaining genes in the network by attributing them a larger score and therefore greater importance. In general,if u  T , 0 otherwise.Common practice is to assume that p 0 follows a uniform distribution over the set of target genes T , with p 0 T (u) = 1/|T |, or an equal scoring setting with p 0 T (u) = 1. Alternatively, genes in T may yield distinct initial scores based on experimental measurements such as expression levels, or based on a correlation with a particular outcome. Input scores may also follow a degree-based distribution with p 0 T (u) = d(u)/ zT d(z).
Regulation weightsRegulation weights, or edge weights in the network graph, can be used to define the extent of contribution of each TFtarget interaction to the diffusion. Typically, there is little information available in this regard, but we believe that incorporating measures of confidence or intensity on these associations is likely to improve the ranking accuracy. The weight w(u,v) of every edge (u,v) can be set as the binding affinity between the TF and the binding site in the promoter region of the target gene, derived by ChIP-chip assays or computational TF target prediction methods. Note that when using normalized weights, the entries of matrix W in Section 2.1 acquire the form w(u,v)/ (u,z)E w(u,z). Specifically for yeast using YEASTRACT, w(u,v) can be defined aswhere predefined constants w D , w I and w U denote the weights attributed to regulations pertaining direct (D), indirect (I) and undefined (U) evidence, respectively. Binary function   (u,v) evaluates to 1 when edge (u,v) yields evidence of type , or to 0 otherwise, where  {D,I,U}. When all edges are equally relevant, w  = 0 and Equation (11) is then w(u,v) = w.
Score normalizationIn order to attenuate the bias toward genes with a large number of regulatory associations, the final ranking can be refined by degree normalizing the scores: r t (u) = p t (u)/n(u). The normalization factor, n(u), can be chosen to be the outdegree, indegree or the sum of both out and in degrees of vertex u. When applied to the original network graph, these will mitigate the effect of TFs regulating many genes, genes regulated by many TFs or both, respectively. Weight may be used instead of degree and logarithmic normalizations can also be considered. We note that normalization penalizes only TF first-level regulations.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONIn this section, we evaluate the ability of TFRank to provide informative rankings of TFs underlying response to stress in yeast or controlling gene markers of complex diseases in human. We also assess the contribution of each parameter to the output.
Case studies in yeastWe retrieved yeast regulatory data from YEASTRACT (), yielding 184 regulators and over 48 000 documented TFtarget interactions. TFs were mapped to their encoding genes and all TF-encoding and target genes identifiers were mapped to the same Saccharomyces genome database (SGD) nomenclature set. The regulatory graph was built by adding an edge per TFtarget association from the node representing the TF-encoding gene to the node representing the target gene. Edges were then reversed and their weights calculated
Page: 3153 31493157TFRank using Equation (11). We processed datasets containing genes upregulated in response to two chemical stresses: the first imposed by the antimalarial drug quinine (dos); and the second induced upon exposure to the food preservative acetic acid (). Both were submitted to TFRank analysis using identical input parameters. The diffusion coefficient t was set to 0.25 to promote a moderate number of layers of transcriptional control. A larger value (closer to 1) would cause TFRank to rapidly reach the TFs at the top of the regulatory network, those exhibiting a considerable amount of known target genes, eventually masking proximal regulators more specifically related to the biological process under study and thus likely to be more relevant to the regulation of the responsive genes. No score normalization was applied, as the selected diffusion coefficient was already expected to attenuate the bias toward TFs with a large number of targets. We decided not to differentiate edge weights and score all regulatory associations equally, irrespective of the underlying experimental evidence. Although the opposite could theoretically generate more reliable results, diminishing the importance of less well-studied interactions could reduce the network to associations supported by TFpromoter binding experiments. More importantly, this would certainly bias the analysis toward prior knowledge by setting aside the least studied TFs and targets. The transcript levels of the TFs or the target genes were not considered relevant in neither of the case studies. This is reasonable, as the activity of a TF is not exclusively based on its transcript levels, and it may also depend on the occurrence of post-translational modifications or on the alteration of its subcellular localization. In fact, experimental evidences gathered so far show that there is a weak correlation between the ratio of induction level of a particular gene in response to a given stress and its contribution for maximal yeast tolerance to such stress. This was reportedly the case for acetic acid, where the genes exerting the strongest protection against the chemical were those less transcriptionally activated (2-fold) (). Results are summarized in Tables 1 and 3 and Figures 2 and 3, while complete rankings are provided in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2. We analyze them throughout the text.
Yeast response to quinine-induced stressTFRank reported Adr1, Hap4, Mal33, Gal4, Cat8 and Gis1 as the top six presumable,Nrg1,Pdr1,Pdr8,Pho4,Pip2,Put3,Tec1, Uga3,Usv1,Yap6) Hap4 23.8 32.5 (Cat8,Gcn4,Mig2,Ndt80,Phd1,Put3,Yox1) Mal33 2.5 35.0 (Abf1,Gln3,Hcm1,Met32,Otu1,Swi4,Xbp1) Gal4 5.0 10.0 (Mga1,Mth1,Rds1,Sfl1,Zap1) Cat8 12.5 25.0 (Dal81,Hap4,Sip4) Gis1 6.3 37.5 (Cin5,Mig3,Mss11,Nrg1,Rds1,Tos8,Usv1,). This list significantly differs from the top six ranking sorted by the percentage of documented regulatory associations targeting the set of quinine-induced genes (). It is noteworthy that some TFs highlighted by TFRank exert documented control over a relatively low number of responsive genes. For example, Mal33, ranked in third, is described as a documented regulator of 2.5% of the activated genes (). However, these TFs regulate other TFs with large percentages of documented targets among the quinineinduced genes, suggesting that indirect control may also present an important contribution (). The group of top six TFs obtained with TFRank sets aside the top six TFs ranked by the percentage of documented targets, each of them being predicted to control the expression of >35% of genes in the dataset (Tables 1 and 2). In particular, Msn2, Sok2, Rpn4 and Yap1 are known to be involved in the regulation of yeast response to several environmental stresses and consequently exert control over a large number of genes. In this context, their classification at the top of the ranking by percentage based on the YEASTRACT network likely reflects a generic, rather than more specific, regulatory role played by these TFs in the yeast transcriptional response to quinine stress. Notably, the single elimination of MSN2, SOK2, RPN4 or YAP1 genes from the yeast cell was found not to increase the susceptibility of yeast). All these TFs are involved in yeast adaptation to carbon sources alternative to glucose. Adr1 and Cat8 participate in the regulation of genes required for the metabolism of non-fermentable carbon sources (), whereas Gis1 controls the reprogramming of carbon metabolism during transition to stationary phase () and genes involved in the adaptation to nutrient limitation (). In turn, Hap4, Mal33 and Gal4 control the transcript levels of genes required for respiration (), and maltose () and galactose () catabolism, respectively. Quinine has been shown to competitively inhibit glucose uptake in yeast cells presumably leading to a state of intracellular glucose limitation, even if glucose is present in the growth medium at saturating concentrations (dos).
Yeast response to acetic acid-induced stress TFRank andthe method ranking by target percentage of induced genes agreed in the first two TFs for the acetic acid set, Haa1 and Sfp1 (Tables 3 and 2, respectively). Haa1p has been identified as the main regulator of the yeast transcriptional response to this stress (). The participation of Sfp1 was examined but no detectable effect on cell protection against acetic acid could be attributed to SFP1 expression (). TFRank further ranked Msn4, Nrg1 and Fkh2 on top (). These four TFs target a low percentage of acetic acid-induced genes and therefore appear lower in the list ranked by such criterium (). Less importance was given by TFRank to Ste12, Msn2, Yap1 and Aft1 regulators, each of them predicted to control the expression of >45% of the acetic acid-responsive genes (Supplementary Table S2 and, respectively). Microarray experiments revealed upregulation of MSN4, FKH2 and NRG1 in response to acetic acid stress (). This is surprising, as the expression was not embedded and thus did not contribute to the TFRank analysis. It suggests that, in some cases, the list of genes could, by itself, hold sufficient information to uncover key TFs. MSN4, FKH2 and NRG1 genes were also found to confer protection against acetic acid, although at distinct levels (). Their upregulation in response to acetic acid stress was shown to be dependent on Haa1p () (). This tight regulatory scheme seems to be confirmed by the ranking and is an interesting example of the perspective through which TFRank interprets a transcriptional response: as the result of whole-network control rather than isolated action of TFs. Indirect regulation becomes evident in this study, where the topranked TFs exert control over other major regulators (). Sfp1 was also highlighted by TFRank and appears to be linked to the remaining players as a target of Fkh2 (). Nevertheless, the elimination of SFP1 was not found to increase yeast susceptibility to acetic acid stress ().
Evaluation of parameter contributionWe assessed the contribution of each TFRank parameter as follows. We observed the impact produced by its variation on the ranks of TFsRegulator DT PT Haa1 60.4 23.4 (Dig1,Fkh2,Msn4,Mth1,Nrg1,Stp3) Sfp1 53.2 42.3 (Ace2,Adr1,Aft1,Aft2,Arr1,Ash1,Bas1, Cad1,Cin5,Cup9,Gcr1,Gln3,Gzf3,Hac1,Hap1, Hap5,Hms1,Hms2,Hsf1,Ifh1,Ime1,Kar4,Met4, Mga2,Mot3,Nrg2,Otu1,Pdr1,Pdr3,Pho4,Rme1, Rph1,Rpn4,Srd1,Stb5,Stp3,Sut1,Swi4,Swi5, Thi2,Tos8,Uga3,Ume6,Xbp1,Yap1,Yhp1,Yrr1) Msn4 38.4 44.1 (Adr1,Fhl1,Gat1,Ime1,Imp2,Mss11,Rox1, Rpn4,Yap1) Nrg1 21.6 55.0 (Cup9,Gat3,Gat4,Hap4,Hms1,Ime1,Imp2, Mga1,Mig3,Mot3, Mth1,Nrg2,Pdr1,Pdr8,Rsf2,Sfl1,Sok2,Usv1,Xbp1, Yap6,Yap7) Fkh2 11.7 62.2 (Ace2,Cup9,Fkh1,Gat1,Kar4,Rsf2,Sfp1, Sut1,Swi5,Yap6,Yhp1)whose importance would change, in line with the effect described in Section 2 (details in Supplementary Material). For the diffusion coefficient, we used a large or small t value, expected to promote
Page: 3155 31493157TFRank distal and proximal TFs, respectively, and two distinct edge weight and seed score schemes. We determined the positions of the 46 TFs with outdegree above the 75th percentile and observed that these (farthest) TFs tended to rank higher when a larger coefficient was used, as expected. We also observed that TFs with reduced outdegree (proximal) ranked higher with the lower t, while TFs controlling large regulons (distal) were favored by the larger t value. For the edge weights, we relied on two different schemes expected to benefit indirect and direct evidence, and two distinct diffusion coefficients and two seed score settings. We assessed the ranks of the 16 TFs for which >90% of its TFtarget interactions yielded indirect evidence. These explicitly ranked higher with the scheme favoring indirect evidence, confirming our hypothesis. For the preference vector, we compared the rankings obtained using expression values versus equal initial scores, with high and low t and two distinct edge weight schemes. We verified the ranks achieved by the 7 and 8 TFs whose encoding genes were upregulated in the quinine and acetic acid sets, respectively. In the quinine set, the group reportedly ranked higher with t = 0.75 when using expression relative to equal scores, but it ranked equivalently with t = 0.25 using both preference vector settings. The group contained TFs which were also the most proximal and were thus favored by the lower t independently of the initial scoring. In the acetic acid set, most of the eight TFs yielded lower upregulation levels than the remaining genes and therefore could not compete with TFs targeting many genes in the set. We performed an additional test in which we artificially boosted the initial scores of the TFs. These undoubtedly ranked on top, supporting the effect described in Section 2. Finally, for normalization we analyzed the rankings obtained using the regular against normalized score, with two distinct edge weight and two seed score settings. We observed the ranks of the 26 and 13 TFs yielding no targets in the quinine and acetic acid sets, respectively. They achieved higher ranks when sorted based on the normalized score, showing that TFs controlling more genes were effectively penalized.
Preliminary study in humanFor human, we collected JASPAR position-specific scoring matrices (PSSMs) and UCSC Human Genome (hg19) sequences made available by. Each matrix identifier (UniProt) was mapped to its encoding gene (NCBI Entrez) using the official UniProt ID conversion service completed with manual search on databases. RefSeq sequence accession numbers (NCBI GRCh37, February 2009) were converted to Entrez using a file from the NCBI repository. Matrices and sequences with unmapped identifiers were filtered. Sequences were further processed to select the stretches 200 bp upstream and 0 bp downstream the transcription start site. We used the PoSSuM software () to match the PSSMs against the sequences and filtered results below a P-value cutoff of 110 4. Edge weights w uv , for edge (u,v)  E (Section 2), were computed from the raw matching scores output by PoSSuM by rescaling the original score interval of each PSSM to. To avoid multiple matches, we selected only the match of highest score for every PSSMsequence pair. This procedure yielded a network containing 50 386 unique TFtarget interactions between 18 088 genes, from which 65 acted as TFs. Finally, we selected two gene sets concerning the study of time to distant metastasis in primary breast cancer (van't).These contained 70 and 76 genes, respectively, whose expression signature was considered predictive of short interval to distant metastasis in lymph node-negative patients. Gene identifiers were first mapped to official HGNC symbols (using a HGNC file or the GeneAnnot service at GeneCards for Affymetrix chip U133A probe set identifiers, respectively) and then converted to Entrez. Duplicates were removed, resulting in 44 and 64 unique genes, respectively. TFRank was applied to the human network with t = 0.25, N = 100 and no normalization, similarly to the studies in yeast. We took as initial preference vector values: the absolute correlation between the expression signature of each gene and the prognostic category in the case of the van'tset, or the absolute standard Cox coefficient in the case of the Wang et al.
Regulation of <5 year-to-metastases biomarkers in humanAlthough the gene sets overlapped minimally (one gene), the top six lists output by TFRank shared two TFs, SP1 and CREB1 (). SP1 was first in both studies. SP1 is known to activate multiple genes involved in tumor cell growth and metastasis (). EWSR1-FLI1, a fusion protein linked primarily to bone tumor (Ewing's sarcoma), was second for the van't Veer et al.set. Interestingly, a subset of the gene markers from this set has been reported as an indicator of primary breast cancer to osteolytic bone metastasis (). MZF1, ranked in third, is an important transcriptional regulator in hematopoietic development. Unregulated MZF1 expression has been presented as oncogenic and its overexpression seems to induce metastasis through AXL gene expression (). FOXL1, fourth, is a mesenchymal TF with a key role in gastric and colorectal carcinogenesis (). Notably, it has been found overexpressed in low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma (), a condition affecting bone, muscular and hematopoietic Page: 3156 31493157
J.P.Gonalves et al.tissue. CREB1, fifth, has been associated to cancer development and poor prognosis. Recently,have reported CREB1 to be overexpressed in advanced breast cancer cells and to influence the expression of several genes involved in metastasis to bone. IRF1, sixth in the list, mediates interferon as well as other cytokine activity, and it has been appointed as a tumor growth inhibitor (). In thedataset, ELK1 ranked second. This factor participates in the chemokine signaling pathway, whose disruption has been implicated in tumor proliferation. ELK1 expression has been found to increase in breast cancer tissue relative to normal cells and to correlate with poor prognosis (). NFATC2, third, is a nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) that integrates the NFAT complex, an inducer of gene transcription during the immune response. NFATC2 is believed to act as a tumor suppressor, but NFAT factors have also been shown to promote breast cancer cell invasive migration by activating COX-2 (). The fourth TF was CREB1, ranked in fifth in the van'tset. Upregulation of TFAP2A, ranked in fifth, has been associated with favorable prognosis in breast cancer which conflicts with its role in the positive regulation of the ERBB2 oncogene. Notably, low expression of TFAP2A may cause the loss of tumor suppressor KISS1 and thus increase the risk of metastasis (). FEV, sixth, is the second ETS oncogene in the list for theset. ELK1 and FEV share approximately half of each other targets, including POLQ, whose upregulation presumably correlates with poor prognosis in early breast cancer ().
TFRank versus PASTAATFRank results were compared with those obtained by PASTAA () for the same input. PASTAA was selected due to its ability to also consider weighted TFtarget links and gene relevance scores. It was previously compared with alternative methods, including PAP () and an approach based on z-score statistics similar to oPOSSUM (). In such study, PASTAA and the z-score both yielded superior results, except for one dataset in which only PASTAA seemed to outperform the competing techniques (). In our study, TFRank and PASTAA agreed in placing CREB1 among the top six TFs for the van'tset (). Aside from the TFAP2A and CREB1 factors, and E2F1 whose low expression strongly determines low risk of breast cancer metastasis (), the relation of the remaining TFs in the PASTAA list with breast cancer (and metastasis) was less evident in the literature, where NFKB1, NHLH1 and TAL1-TCF3 were primarily involved in ovary and colorectal (), brain () and thyroid () cancer, respectively. For theset, both methods ranked SP1 and ELK1 in the top 6 TFs. Other TFs promoted by PASTAA included: SRF and YY1, involved in breast cancer cell migration () ; ELK4 related to prostate cancer (); and JUN-FOS, implicated in tumor differentiation and progression (). Overall, TFRank seemed to unravel TFs more specifically related to breast cancer and its metastastatic forms. Particularly considering the van'tdata, TFRank highlighted a number of TFs presumably involved in breast cancer metastasis to bone, in accordance with the hypothesis that the 70-gene signature predicted bone as an occurrence site (). TFRank also recovered PASTAA key TFs better than vice versa ().
CONCLUSIONWe presented TFRank, a graph-based framework to identify relevant regulators mediating specific transcriptional responses through whole-network analysis of gene activity. TFRank successfully highlighted regulators potentially involved in the yeast response to quinine-and acetic acid-induced stresses. In a preliminary study in human, TFRank revealed TFs presumably controlling genes related to metastasis in breast cancer. We observed that by assuming a systemic rather than isolated TF action perspective, TFRank captured valuable information about the regulatory mechanisms that would not have been unveiled otherwise. We showed that this strategy provides adequate parameters to effectively control the level of regulatory specificity for the problem under study, fine tune TFtarget association scores and incorporate expression levels or alternative measures of relevance into the input gene list. TFRank relies on an additive model to compute the relevance score, which requires additional care when mixing positive and negative input values. A potential workaround is to analyze genes in two distinct groups or to use absolute values. The presented case studies supported TFRank as a promising tool to unveil important TFs, despite the real set of regulations active in the process under study remained undisclosed (all known TFtarget interactions were used).
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
