Motivation: The automated functional annotation of biological macro-molecules is a problem of computational assignment of biological concepts or ontological terms to genes and gene products. A number of methods have been developed to computationally annotate genes using standardized nomenclature such as Gene Ontology (GO). However, questions remain about the possibility for development of accurate methods that can integrate disparate molecular data as well as about an unbiased evaluation of these methods. One important concern is that experimental annotations of proteins are incomplete. This raises questions as to whether and to what degree currently available data can be reliably used to train computational models and estimate their performance accuracy. Results: We study the effect of incomplete experimental annotations on the reliability of performance evaluation in protein function prediction. Using the structured-output learning framework, we provide theoretical analyses and carry out simulations to characterize the effect of growing experimental annotations on the correctness and stability of performance estimates corresponding to different types of methods. We then analyze real biological data by simulating the prediction, evaluation and subsequent re-evaluation (after additional experimental annotations become available) of GO term predictions. Our results agree with previous observations that incomplete and accumulating experimental annotations have the potential to significantly impact accuracy assessments. We find that their influence reflects a complex interplay between the prediction algorithm, performance metric and underlying ontology. However, using the available experimental data and under realistic assumptions, our results also suggest that current large-scale evaluations are meaningful and almost surprisingly reliable.
INTRODUCTIONAssigning function to gene products is of primary importance in biology, yet with the overwhelming abundance of sequence data in the post-genomic era, only a small fraction of gene products have been annotated experimentally. Therefore, it has become important in computational biology to predict function based on sequence, structure and other data when experimental annotations are unavailable (). With the development of a large number of function prediction methods, there is a need for unbiased assessment of these methods. Community-based challenges, such as MouseFunc () and the Critical Assessment of Functional Annotation (CAFA) (), have emerged to address this problem through the prediction of ontological annotations. The objective in the CAFA challenge, for example, is to predict a set of Gene Ontology (GO) terms associated with a given protein, where GO is a hierarchical knowledge representation of functional descriptors (terms) organized in a large directed acyclic graph (). To evaluate the performance of function prediction methods properly, a set of metrics needs to be established. At the same time, an important challenge we face when assessing the performance of these methods is that because of the incremental nature of scientific discovery, our knowledge of any given protein's function is likely to be partial. Therefore, a function prediction that is originally assessed as a false positive may be discovered to be a true positive at a later stage, and similarly, a prediction that is initially assessed as a true negative may later be discovered to be a false negative. This problem of incomplete data has led to doubts regarding the reliability of evaluations of protein function prediction algorithms (). The problem of incomplete data in the training and assessment of classifiers has been recognized both in computational biology () and machine learning (). Huttenhower et al. have concluded that the effect of missing annotations can produce misleading evaluation results because the classifiers are differentially impacted. This results in the re-ranking of classifiers upon reevaluation at a time when more experimental annotations are available. Similarly,studied the problem in the framework of asymmetric class-label noise, in which negative examples contain some mislabeled data points. However, both studies only considered a binary classification scenario, e.g. when a predictor is developed for a particular term in the ontology. Here we study the effect of incomplete experimental annotations on the quality of performance assessment of protein function prediction methods. To that end, we consider protein function prediction as a structured-output learning problem in which a classifier is expected to output a totality of (interdependent) GO terms for a given sequence. We consider both topological and information-theoretic metrics and analytically derive under what conditions the initial performance evaluation will underestimate or overestimate the true accuracy. Then, we provide simulations to characterize the impact for different types of predictors. Finally, we analyze experimental protein function data by simulating the CAFA experiment. Our results regarding the potential impact of incomplete data on correctness of evaluation largely agree with previous studies. However, under *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com realistic assumptions, we provide evidence that the impact of missing data on reliable evaluation is surprisingly small. As a result, this study provides confidence that large-scale performance evaluation of protein function predictors is useful. In addition, our study raises concerns about potentially different conclusions that can be reached when protein function is studied as a series of binary classifiers versus using a structured-output learning formulation.
METHODS
Protein function prediction formulationWe consider protein function prediction within a structured-output learning framework. Given a training set of labeled input objects xwhere each x 2 X and y 2 Y, the objective is to infer a relationship f : X ! Y that minimizes some loss function. The input space X consists of proteins, whereas the output space Y is a set of all consistent subgraphs of some underlying directed acyclic graph such as GO. Here, by saying 'consistent', we mean that if any term v from GO is used to annotate a protein x 2 X (either experimentally or computationally), all the ancestors of v up to the root(s) of the ontology must also be included as an annotation of x.
Evaluation of prediction accuracyTo understand how the incomplete functional annotations influence accuracy estimation, we first review two representative evaluation schemes in this domain. For simplicity, we shall consider that the evaluation set, either through a hold-out set or cross-validation, consists of a single protein with its experimental annotation T and a prediction P created by some classifier. This single protein can be considered to be an average case when a larger evaluation set is available. We use V to refer to the entire set of terms in the ontology; thus, with a minor abuse of notation, we write that T V and P V. Typically, V is a large graph with tens of thousands of nodes, T is a small graph with about 10100 nodes, whereas P depends on a particular classifier under evaluation. F-measure. Given a protein with its non-empty consistent annotations T and P, the precision (pr) and recall (rc) are calculated as prP; T= jP \ Tj jPj and rcP; T= jP \ Tj jTj ;where jPj is the number of predicted terms, jTj is the number of experimental terms, and jP \ Tj is the number of correctly predicted terms by the model. We will also refer to these quantities using the following notation: tp=jP \ Tj as true-positive findings, fp=jP  Tj as false-positive findings, tn=jP \ Tj as true-negative findings and fn=jT  Pj as falsenegative findings. Here, P=V  P is the complement of P, and T is the complement of T. The F-measure of the predicted annotation is defined aswhere is a positive number. Here we only consider =1, which results in the F-measure that represents a harmonic mean between precision and recall. Semantic distance. Semantic distance is based on an assumption that the prior probability of a protein's experimental annotation can be modeled by a Bayesian network in which the conditional probability tables are calculated from data (). Here, we calculate misinformation (mi) and remaining uncertainty (ru) aswhere v 2 V is a vertex in the graph, Pv is a set of its parents, PrvjPv is the probability that a protein is experimentally annotated by v given that all its parents are a part of the annotation, and iav=  log PrvjPv  is information accretion. Semantic distance between two consistent graphs P and T is defined asHere we only consider k = 2; thus, S 2 is the Euclidean distance between the point ruP; T; miP; T and the origin of the coordinate system. It is important to mention that both evaluation schemes are applied at the protein level. That is, they provide prediction accuracy on each test protein and are typically averaged over a set of proteins. A different group of metrics, those that evaluate a predictor's performance for a particular term v in the ontology (e.g. 'catalytic activity'), may also be used. In this case, an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve and the term-based F-measure are routinely used (). However, these metrics are reliable only if a test set contains a sufficiently large number of proteins experimentally annotated by term v. In addition, it is not clear how to average term-based evaluations over all (interdependent) terms in the ontology to rank two classifiers on a given set of proteins. Thus, term-based metrics are not considered in this work.
The problem of incomplete annotationsThe process of functional annotation of proteins starts with experimental research in which a protein is revealed to be involved in certain biochemical and cellular activities. After the publication, this information is further processed by biocurators who then assign functional annotation toexperimental annotations become available (). We assume that there are =jT 0  Tj new annotations; of those, terms were predicted as negatives by the predictor, whereas terms were predicted as positives. The incomplete-data precision (pr) and recall (rc) are defined as pr= tp tp+fp and rc= tp tp+fn ; whereas the F-measure can be written asOn the other hand, as illustrated in, the complete-data precision (pr 0 ) and recall (rc 0 ) can be expressed asThe complete-data F-measure (F 0 1 ) then becomesWe first observe that pr 0 ! pr because ! 0. The change of precision " pr =pr 0  pr==tp+fp. On the other hand, the relationship between rc 0 and rc is less obvious. We express the change in recall " rc =rc 0  rc asBy recognizing that rc ==+ is the recall on the new annotations, it follows that the originally estimated recall increases if rc 4rc. Similarly, for the change in F-measure, we derive thatwhere c=2tp+fp+fn. The above equation leads to the following unexpectedly simple resultWe see that to maintain the performance upon receiving new annotations, the predictor must have a recall on T 0  T greater than one half of the original F 1 .
The impact of new annotations on S 2We illustrate the analysis of information-theoretic metrics in. Analogous to the analysis of F 1 , we introduce three non-negative quantities to describe the impact of new annotations on the semantic distance asHowever, without further assumptions, the difference in semantic distance can either be positive or negative depending on the performance of a predictor on the new experimental annotations.
SimulationsHere we show the simulation results for both topological and information-theoretic metrics under reasonable assumptions. For the simulation related to F-measure, we assume that the recall on new data equals the recall on complete data as well as statistical independence between tp+fn and , which together define the level of incompleteness. Values of these two variables were sampled from a distribution estimated using new experimental annotations from Swiss-Prot provided between January 2011 and January 2014; see next section. The parameter was generated from a binomial distribution Bin; rc. The simulation for semantic distance was conducted in an analogous way. Here we sampled = P v2T iav and independently and generated the ratio = using a Beta distribution B  ru; ru. While the beta distribution was chosen out of convenience, it allowed us to control that E==  ru=ru, i.e. that the fraction of information content of T that was correctly predicted was unchanged on the new annotations. Note that in both cases, trials were discarded if the generated values were invalid, i.e. if 4fp () or 5ru ().show the impact averaged over 10 000 trials for each GO classification. Simulation results under several other conditions are provided in Supplementary Materials.
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTSTo analyze the impact of new annotations on accuracy estimates of protein function predictors, we designed a hypothetical A B. Illustration of the changes of remaining uncertainty and misinformation after the set of experimental annotations changes from T to T 0 , where T T 0. P is a set of predicted terms determined by leaf annotation nodes p 1 and p 2 ; T is a set of incomplete-data experimental terms determined by t 1 and t 2 ; T 0 is a set of complete-data experimental terms determined by leaf annotation nodes t 1 , t 2 , t 3 and t 4. The changes are illustrated (A) using a Venn diagram and (B) using a directed acyclic graphprediction challenge similar to CAFA (), with three methods as virtual participants: GOtcha, BLAST and Swiss-Prot computational annotation (evidence codes: ISS, ISO, ISA, ISM, IGC, IBA, IBD, IKR, IRD, RCA and IEA). SwissProt experimental annotations (EXP, IDA, IMP, IPI, IGI, IEP, TAS and IC) were used as gold standard. The evaluation was performed as follows:
A B(. We refer to the performance evaluation on the 2011 data as initial evaluation. Similarly, the evaluation on the data from subsequent years is referred to as re-evaluation. Each re-evaluation was performed as if the data at that point was complete. Finally, we note that all proteins for which the Swiss-Prot curators removed any GO terms at any point between 2011 and 2014 were ignored in this experiment. This excluded 2323 (53%; of those, 1899 were related to the removal of term 'protein binding') proteins in the Molecular Function category, 1088 (22%) in the Biological Process category and 672 (15%) proteins in the Cellular Component category.
Participating methodsBLAST This method assigns a score to a sequence-term association according to the highest sequence similarity between the target sequence and any of the training sequences that are experimentally associated with that term. More formally, the score for the target sequence q and term v was computed as B v q=max s2Sv log eq; s   , where e;  denotes the E-value between two sequences as returned by the BLAST alignment (), and S v is a set of training sequences experimentally annotated with term v. The cutoff for E-value was set to 1.0 such that all scores were non-negative. GOtcha Instead of assigning the maximum similarity among all sequences associated with a particular term v, GOtcha aggregates the evidence collected from multiple similar sequences (). A normalization step is subsequently taken to enforce that the final score is within the range. That is, G v q=r v q=r root q, where r v q=  P s2Sv log eq; s is called the r-score for the sequence q and term v. Swiss-Prot As the third method for comparisons, we simply retrieved all non-experimental annotations from the January 2010 version of Swiss-Prot.
Evaluation metricsThe first set of evaluation metrics was identical to those used in the CAFA challenge (). Because BLAST and GOtcha output soft scores, their performance is visualized using precision-recall curves. As a single number to rank the methods, we calculate F max , which is the maximum F-measure over the entire range of decision thresholds (). Similarly, we calculate misinformation and remaining uncertainty over the range of possible decision thresholds and use the minimum semantic distance to rank methods (). We note that Swiss-Prot experimental annotations do not have confidence scores; thus, the Swiss-Prot computational annotations can be presented as a single point in the pr-rc or the ru-mi plane.
ResultsFigures 6 and 7 show the performance of each method in the prrc and ru-mi planes, separately for each of the three classifications in GO. Here, the incomplete-data evaluations (2011) for each method are shown as solid gray curves. On the other hand, color-coded curves are used to visualize the performance on incomplete data (solid curves, full circles) and complete data (dotted curves, empty circles) on the subsets of proteins that acquired new annotations in the periods from 2011 to 2012 (green), 2011 to 2013 (blue) and 2011 to 2014 (red). Note that the complete-data evaluations on the entire set of proteins are not shown as the curves would overlap solid gray curves. Tables 14 summarize the performance evaluation using F max and S min after a 3 year period during which new annotations were allowed to accumulate in the Swiss-Prot database. The results shown inand 7 and Tables 14 provide evidence that the effects of incomplete annotations are ontologyspecific, metric-specific and algorithm-specific. The impact on F max was relatively small; within 2 percentage points on the entire dataset () and within 5 percentage points when the evaluation was restricted to the proteins that accumulated new annotations (). The impact on S min , on the other hand, was larger and suggests that the initial evaluations are consistently overestimating the quality of performance. The overall change of S min in the 3 year period was within 1 bit of information for Molecular Function and Cellular Component classifications, and within 3 bits for Biological Process (). When the evaluation was restricted to the subset of proteins that accumulated new annotations, this difference became more significant: within 6 bits for Molecular Function and Cellular Component and within 12 bits for Biological Process ().
CONCLUSIONSIncomplete experimental annotation of protein function affects both the development of computational function prediction methods and their unbiased evaluation. In this work, weThe impact of incomplete knowledge on the evaluation of protein function prediction addressed the evaluation problem, both theoretically and empirically, by considering function prediction within a structuredoutput learning framework. We find that the nature and level of incompleteness in the data, types of classification models and performance evaluation metrics are all contributing factors to the complexity of understanding evaluation bias.
A. GOtcha
B. BLAST
C. Swiss-ProtBoth simulations and empirical evaluation suggest that the influence of incomplete annotations on topological metrics, 3 years after the initial assessment, may result in either overestimated or underestimated performance, but the effect is generally small. The reason for this can probably be found in the cancellation of effects of increasing precision and potentially decreasingrecallresulting, surprisingly, in relatively stable F-measure estimates. On the other hand, information-theoretic metrics appear to be more sensitive to data incompleteness. Here we find that the semantic distance generally increases on real data, which is likely a consequence of the fact that the newly added experimental annotations are typically deep in the ontology and thus contribute significantly toward the overall performance measurements. The classification algorithms are differentially impacted by data incompleteness as well. In particular, we observe that those tools that operate in the low-precision high-recall region of the pr-rc plane are the most significantly impacted by missing annotations. Finally, we find that the level of incompleteness in Swiss-Prot is not large enough to seriously impact accuracy assessments. The data available to us, however, were only analyzed 3 years after the initial evaluation, therefore not significantly eliminating the possibility for larger changes in light of novel biological discoveries. In summary, evaluation of function prediction methods at any given time is not error-free. When there is an interest in specific functions for specific gene products, predictions that are discovered at a later time to be true-positive predictions or falsenegative predictions because of missing data may be problematic. However, when comparing methods on large datasets, assessing the performance of protein function prediction methods provides meaningful information about their accuracy and usefulness, with a quantifiably low error rate.
A. GOtcha
B. BLAST
C. Swiss-Prot
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
the protein using standardized vocabularies such as GO. Each proteinterm association is further assigned a set of evidence codes that document the nature of the experiment used to interrogate a protein's activity. Although this process has several layers of control, there are a number of challenges that influence the quality of annotation. For example, proteins may be multifunctional and display different types of activities under different biological and experimental contexts. Similarly, owing to the technical limitations the assays used to determine their function may not provide sufficiently detailed evidence. For those reasons, while the experimental annotations assigned to a protein are generally reliable, they are unlikely to be complete. Two important questions, both theoretically and empirically, emerge: (i) How useful are these available annotations for training of computational models? (ii) To what extent can these partial annotations be reliably used to estimate the accuracy of computational models before the complete experimental annotation is available? We focus on the problem of evaluation. To formalize our approach, we consider two evaluation scenarios: the original evaluation on incomplete data and another evaluation at a later point in time when additional experimental annotations become available. For simplicity, we shall refer to the latter scenario as evaluation on complete data. We will use T to denote a protein's incomplete experimental annotation, T 0 to denote the complete annotation, where T T 0 , and refer to T 0  T as new annotation. Predicted annotations P are generated only once, at the time of original evaluation. Applying the same naming convention, we use pr, rc, etc., to refer to precision, recall, and other incomplete-data metrics, respectively, whereas we use pr 0 , rc 0 , etc., for their equivalents on complete data. Our goal is to study and understand the relationship between corresponding metrics, such as pr and pr 0 , rc and rc 0 , F 1 and F 1 0 , etc. 2.4 The impact of new annotations on F 1 We analyze the impact of incomplete annotations on accuracy estimation using two confusion matrices, one provided at the time of original evaluation and the other at a later point in time when additional i610 Y.Jiang et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
