Motivation: We propose a novel method for scoring the accuracy of protein binding site predictions—the Binding-site Distance Test (BDT) score. Recently, the Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC) has been used to evaluate binding site predictions, both by developers of new methods and by the assessors for the community-wide prediction experiment—CASP8. While being a rigorous scoring method, the MCC does not take into account the actual 3D location of the predicted residues from the observed binding site. Thus, an incorrectly predicted site that is nevertheless close to the observed binding site will obtain an identical score to the same number of non-binding residues predicted at random. The MCC is somewhat affected by the subjectivity of determining observed binding residues and the ambiguity of choosing distance cutoffs. By contrast the BDT method produces continuous scores ranging between 0 and 1, relating to the distance between the predicted and observed residues. Residues predicted close to the binding site will score higher than those more distant, providing a better reflection of the true accuracy of predictions. The CASP8 function predictions were evaluated using both the MCC and BDT methods and the scores were compared. The BDT was found to strongly correlate with the MCC scores while also being less susceptible to the subjectivity of defining binding residues. We therefore suggest that this new simple score is a potentially more robust method for future evaluations of protein–ligand binding site predictions.
INTRODUCTIONThe prediction of a protein's ligand binding site location and potential interacting residues is important in the elucidation of protein function, de novo drug design, mutagenesis studies and ligand binding specificity (). The CASP experiment included a function prediction category for the first time in CASP6 (), where the aim was to predict the Enzyme Commission number (EC) and Gene Ontology (GO) terms. Due to the difficulty in assessing these terms, the CASP7 () assessors decided that CASP was not the best place for this format of function prediction. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.Thus, for CASP8, function prediction was included in a different format, with the assessment of observed ligand binding site residues, as many CASP targets were shown to crystallize with biologically interesting ligands (). In CASP8, function predictions were assessed using the Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) (). The MCC is a statistical metric that utilizes the number of true positive, false positive, false negative and true negative residues, giving a score between 1 and 1. A score of 1 indicates a prefect prediction and a score close to 0 indicates a random prediction. The MCC provides a good assessment statistic, because it heavily penalizes both over and under predictions and is appropriate for biased datasets, such as binding versus non-binding residues (). In order to assess binding residue prediction accuracy, the observed binding site residues must be defined. However, defining which residues are in contact with a ligand can often be subjective, particularly if we consider the inherent flexibility of protein backbones, side chains and many large ligands. The distances used to define residueligand contacts can be adjusted; nevertheless, once a cutoff has been set all 'non-binding' residues are treated as incorrect by the MCC score, regardless of their distance from the site. The top methods in the function prediction category of CASP8 were methods by the Lee group () and the Sternberg group (). Both groups assessed their own predictions by two additional metrics: accuracy and coverage. However, these metrics also penalize close predictions to a similar extent as the MCC statistic (). In this article we are proposing a simple new metric, the Bindingsite Distance Test (BDT) score, which addresses the problems associated with the MCC while maintaining the advantages. The score is highly correlated with the MCC, and it appropriately penalizes both under and over predictions, while also considering the distance of predicted residues from the observed binding site.
METHODSThe BDT score was calculated by considering: the list of residue numbers in the protein predicted to be binding to a ligand, the list of residue numbers observed to be binding to a ligand, the PDB file of the observed structure (with residue numbering matching that of the sequence) and a distance threshold. The Euclidean distance was calculated between each residue in the predicted set and each residue in the observed set. The distance was then converted to an S-score using the standard equation:Results for all predictions and all targets have been pooled. The BDT score has been calculated using different values for d 0 , the optimal values are from 1 to 3 .) the MCC score is 0.046 and the BDT score is 0.017 (with d 0 = 3). For the second prediction on the right (75, 79, 82, 84), again the MCC score is 0.046; however, the BDT score is 0.384 (with d 0 = 3).
Binding site distance test scoreWhere S ij was the S-score between a predicted residue i and an observed residue j, d ij was the Euclidean distance between the C-alpha coordinates of residues i and j and d 0 was a distance threshold (values between 1 and 3  are recommended, see). The maximum S ij score, max(S ij ), was then determined for each predicted residue. The final BDT score was simply the sum of the maximum S ij scores normalized by the greater value of the number of predicted residues (N p ) and the number of observed residues (N o ):
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONA potential problem with relying on the MCC is illustrated in, where two hypothetical binding site predictions are shown for CASP8 target T0453. The prediction on the right hand side of the figure) is closer to the observed binding site than the prediction shown on the left hand side of the image (32, 33, 34, 35); however, both predictions are assigned identical MCC scores (0.046). Conversely using the BDT score with d 0 = 3, the prediction close to the site on the right is assigned a higher score (0.384) compared with that of the more distant prediction on the left (0.017). Using the MCC, all 'non-binding' residues in a prediction are considered equal, no matter how close they are to the actual site. Thus, small changes to the list of observed binding site residues can greatly affect the MCC score of close predictions. Further examples using real CASP8 predictions are shown in Supplementary. The BDT score ranges between 0 and 1, where perfect predictions achieve scores of 1 and distant predictions are assigned scores closer to 0. If we consider the flexibility of both ligands and proteins as well as the possibility of alternative ligands binding to the same site, the BDT score is a more appropriate score than the MCC. The BDT score takes into account the actual structure and distances between predicted and observed binding residues. Residues deemed false positives that are nevertheless close to the binding site score higher than distant predictions using the BDT score. The distance threshold d 0 in the S i score alters the range of BDT scores; however, BDT scores with different cutoffs are highly correlated with conserved ranking. The BDT scoring method maintains the penalty for over and under predictions, using the normalization max(N p , N o ), it is appropriate for biased datasets and the scores are highly correlated with the MCC scores (, Supplementary), even though the metrics are conceptually different. There is an approximately linear dependence between the BDT scores at each cutoff and the MCC scores; however, the Spearman's  and Kendall's  also show that the ranking of predictions is also maintained. The value for d 0 may be adjusted to vary the stringency of the score (). Outliers in plots of MCC scores versus BDT scores (Supplementary) are illustrated by the example in. Finally, the BDT score is relatively easy to calculate and because the actual PDB file is required for calculation there is no ambiguity concerning the missing residues (i.e. disordered regions) (for this article, all missing residues were also excluded from the calculation of MCC scores). Furthermore, the BDT score minimizes the penalty for ambiguous predicted residues that might be considered to be in the active site, or are considered to be in contact with an alternative ligand, but are nevertheless excluded from the observed subset (Supplementary).
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from [16:04 20/10/2010 Bioinformatics-btq543.tex]
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
