
Gut March 2010 Vol 59 No 3 283Leader of the cancer itself but the histology of the stomach well clear of the cancer. Gastric cancers are strongly associated with mucosal atrophy, intestinal metaplasia and body-predominant H pylori gastritis. 9 11e17 In contrast, oesophageal adenocarcinomas occur in subjects with healthy non-atrophic gastric mucosa. 18 19 It is important not only to biopsy a junctional carcinoma itself but, whenever possible, also to biopsy the gastric antrum and corpus for atrophy, intestinal metaplasia and body-predominant gastritis, the presence of which will strongly suggest that an adenocarcinoma is of gastric origin. The other readily available information which may further help determine whether an intestinal-type adenocarcinoma at the gastro-oesophageal junction is gastric or oesophageal in origin is the history of reflux symptoms. A significant reflux history points to oesophageal adenocarcinoma, for which reflux symptoms are a risk factor, 35 whereas patients with gastric cancer associated with H pylori atrophic gastritis are protected from acid reflux. 36 37 Unfortunately, the gender of the patient is unlikely to be helpful as recent studies indicate a similar male predominance of intestinal-type adenocarcinoma of the stomach and oesophagus, in both due to a 15e20 year lag in cancer development in females. 10 In summary, recent evidence indicates that adenocarcinomas of the gastro-oesophageal junction have two distinct aetiologies, one shared with oesophageal adenocarcinoma and the other with non-cardia gastric adenocarcinoma. Despite morphological and histological similarities, these two cancers arising at the gastro-oesophageal junction differ profoundly in their aetiology and origin, one being oesophageal and one gastric. It is important to separate oesophageal from gastric junctional cancers to allow meaningful epidemiological analysis and to guide surgical management. The two cancers may also respond differently to other treatment modalities such as chemotherapy and endoscopic mucosal resection, and studies of such treatments should be analysed by the likely origin of the lesion treated. Appropriate classification of most junctional cancers can be achieved by examining key indicators (). The terms " gastro-oesophageal junction " , " junctional " and " cardia " adenocarcinoma should be discarded, with all adenocarcinomas arising around the oesophogastric junction being classified as " oesophageal " or " gastric " and their location in the relevant organ given.Updated information and services can be found at:
Division of Cardiovascular & Medical Sciences, University of Glasgow, UK 2 Cancer Sciences & Molecular Pathology, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, UK Correspondence to Professor Kenneth E L McColl, Division of Cardiovascular & Medical Sciences, University of Glasgow, Gardiner Institute, 44 Church Street, Glasgow G11 6NT, UK; k.e.l.mccoll@clinmed.gla.ac.uk
Gut March 2010 Vol 59 No 3 Leader group.bmj.com on August 30, 2016-Published by http://gut.bmj.com/ Downloaded from In a further study, we examined the association of junctional adenocarcinoma with serological evidence of atrophy as well as with reflux symptoms, comparing it with that seen in patients with oesophageal adenocarcinoma and with noncardia gastric cancer. 20 In keeping with previous observations, oesophageal adenocarcinomas showed a strong association with reflux symptoms but not with gastric atrophy, while non-cardia gastric cancers showed a strong association with atrophy but not with reflux symptoms. In contrast, junctional adenocarcinomas were positively associated with severe gastric atrophy and severe reflux symptoms, but importantly the association with reflux symptoms was confined to those without evidence of gastric atrophy. We believe this observation is again indicative of junctional adenocarcinomas having two distinct aetiologies, with some resembling oesophageal adenocarcinoma and others resembling non-cardia gastric cancer. A third study performed by Ren et al further supports junctional adenocarcinomas being of two distinct aetiologies. 21 This study examined the association of gastric atrophy with junctional versus non-cardia gastric cancers The study was performed in China where Barrett's oesophagus and oesophageal adenocarcinomas are extremely rare. If cancers of the gastro-oesophageal junction are either oesophageal adenocarcinomas or gastric adenocarcinomas aetiologically similar to non-cardia gastric cancer then in a part of the world where oesophageal adenocarcinoma is extremely rare, all junctional cancers should show the same positive association with atrophy as non-cardia gastric cancers.
group.bmj.com on August 30, 2016-Published by http://gut.bmj.com/ Downloaded from
Gut March 2010 Vol 59 No 3 Leader group.bmj.com on August 30, 2016-Published by http://gut.bmj.com/ Downloaded from
