The studies of chromatin 3D structure help us to understand its formation and function. Techniques combining chromosome conformation capture and next generation sequencing can capture chromatin structure information and has been applied to several different species and cell lines. We built 3DGD (3D Genome Database), a database that currently collected Hi-C data on four species, for easy accessing and visualization of chromatin 3D structure data. With the integration of other omics data such as genome-wide protein–DNA-binding data, this data source would be useful for researchers interested in chromatin structure and its biological functions. Availability and implementation: The 3DGD v1.1, data browser, downloadable files and documentation are available at: http://3dgd.
INTRODUCTIONThe 3D conformation of chromosome in nucleus is relevant with several important biological processes such as gene expression, regulation and replication (). Understanding these relationships would provide a new perspective to the studies of chromatin (). In recent years, the development of chromatin conformation capture techniques, such as Hi-C, allows us to identify the chromatin interactions across the whole genome unbiasedly (). The technique has been applied to several species such as human, mouse, Drosophila and yeast (). These datasets have been shown useful in studying the property and function of chromosome organization (). However, there is still a lack of an integrative data source of these kind of data for easy accessing and visualization. Besides, integrating additional information such as genome annotation and protein binding information could be useful for studying chromatin structure's function (). Recent studies have shown that some important DNA-binding proteins are extremely relevant to the chromosome organization and its function. For example, CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is of importance in the formation of chromatin structure (). Combining DNA-binding affinities of these proteins together with Hi-C data may help us to understand the formation and the functions of the chromatin structure. Here, we present 3D Genome Database (3DGD), a novel database that collected published 3D structure of genome (currently mainly based on Hi-C experiment) of four different species. We organized and displayed the interaction data in an easy way for accessing, while integrating genome annotation data and some important DNA-binding protein information. To our knowledge, 3DGD is the first database collecting and displaying chromatin 3D structure data.
METHODS AND USAGEThe original Hi-C datasets are collected from four published papers (Supplementary) (). Previous studies pointed out the potential bias in the original Hi-C dataset and described four normalization methods to reduce bias (). We applied the four normalization methods to the original datasets of human, mouse and Drosophila with default procedures and parameters. Owing to the different experimental protocols that may introduce additional circularization bias, only the SCN method was applied to yeast data. These datasets are converted to a unified format as follows. Chromosomes are segmented into several bins and the bin size is the minimal resolution of the original dataset. Interaction matrixes or other file formats in the original dataset are then unified formatted as the interaction value between the bins. Then, we built a browser to display interaction data between any regions of the genome. Interactions between chromosome regions are computed as the weighted sum of the interaction value (raw or normalized Hi-C observed value) of different bins in that region; the weight is the ratio between the length of the region and the minimal bin size. Thus, the interaction value I of Regions R1 and R2 is defined as follows:*To whom correspondence should be addressed. yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors.Where i and j are the number of bins in R1 and R2 separately, and w is the ratio between the length of ith bin overlapped with the selected region and the dataset's bin size. This weighted sum approach assumes that the chromosome interaction distributes uniformly along one bin. We use human GM06990 dataset to test this assumption. The published datasets contain interaction matrix of 100 kb and 1 Mb. We randomly chose 1000 regions of 1 Mb, which consists of 10 100-kb bins, and test whether the interaction value between this region and the other bin is uniformly distributed along the 10 100-kb bins with 2 goodness-of-fit test. Only a small percentage (4.7%) of the interactions in one bin is not uniformly distributed (P50.05), indicating the method works well for most of the occasions. For those non-uniformly distributed interaction pairs (Supplementary), bias would be introduced if the search region contains segment smaller than that of the minimal bin. For each dataset, we calculated the value generated by weighted sum approach and compared them to the value calculated by sum of 100-kb data. The median difference is 24.2%. To avoid this potential bias, we suggest the search region should be set as the integer times of the bin size of each dataset, which is listed in a table in the Browse page. Protein binding datasets are then integrated into the browser. The proteins we selected are annotated or reported relevant to the chromosome structure formation or function. Data mainly comprised CHIP-seq data downloaded from GEO or ENCODE project (Supplementary). Besides the pre-selected proteins, users can also upload their own protein binding data to be visualized in our browser. The binding intensities of the proteins are averaged to the chromosome bins. Thus, we can display the interaction number and the protein binding intensity at the same time in one browser. Data browsing and downloading can be done via 3DGD Web site. The original and normalized Hi-C datasets can be downloaded from the download page. Browse page is used to visualize Hi-C and other data. One can view the interactions between the two chromosome regions, the query region and the target region. Query and target regions can be input as either a chromosome region or a gene symbol. The query region is treated as a single part, and the interactions between the bins in the target region and the query region itself are displayed. For example, select Human Gm06990 from the sidebar, then select one region as a query region by chromosome position (e.g. chr8:2000000 5000000), then specify the target chromosome region (e.g. chr8:10000006000000) and press SEARCH to show the interaction graph. To show protein binding information, select one protein (e.g. CTCF) or upload a protein binding data and press SEARCH, and the protein binding intensity in the target region will be displayed (). All these data in the current selected region will be displayed in a UCSC genome browser by clicking 'Display in UCSC genome browser' button.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CONCLUSION The 3DGD collects Hi-C data of four species and integrates them with other omics data such as genome-wide protein binding information. As the studies of the chromatin structure accumulated, more structure information can be added into this data source and more reported relevant omics data can be integrated as well. Researchers from wide research areas can benefit from this data source to study the fundamental role of chromatin structure functions in biological processes.
The 3DGD at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
C.Li et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
