Motivation: Fixed nitrogen is an essential requirement for the biosynthesis of cellular nitrogenous compounds. Some cyanobacteria can fix nitrogen, contributing significantly to the nitrogen cycle, agriculture and biogeochemical history of Earth. The rate and position on the species phylogeny of gains and losses of this ability, as well as of the underlying nif genes, are controversial. Results: We use probabilistic models of trait evolution to investigate the presence and absence of cyanobacterial nitrogen-fixing ability. We estimate rates of change on the species phylogeny, pinpoint probable changes and reconstruct the state and nif gene complement of the ancestor. Our results are consistent with a nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterial ancestor, repeated loss of nitrogen fixation and vertical descent, with little horizontal transfer of the genes involved.
INTRODUCTIONThe cyanobacteria are a biochemically and morphologically diverse clade of Gram-negative bacteria with major environmental and economic roles and effects, including global primary productivity (), potential uses in biofuel production () and in presenting water-borne health hazards via toxin production (). Cyanobacteria are key biocatalysts in the N 2 cycle (). The rice paddies of Asia, which feed over half of the world's population, depend upon cyanobacterial N 2 fixation (). The cyanobacterial genus Trichodesmium is responsible for 42% of the total global nitrogen fixation of 240 Tg N 2 y 1 (). Cyanobacteria may have existed for 2.72.9 billion years or more (). A question of primary importance to our view of the biological environment of the early Earth, and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. to cyanobacterial evolution, is whether the last cyanobacterial common ancestor (LCCA) could fix N 2 (reduce N 2 to NH 3 ). Snchezconcluded that LCCA was not N 2-fixing. A study of 13 cyanobacterial genomes agreed with this conclusion (). A study of a greater number of genomes, including basal N 2-fixers Synechococcus sp. JA-3-3Ab (Cyanobacteria bacterium Yellowstone A-Prime) and Synechococcus sp. JA-2-3B'a(2-13) (Cyanobacteria bacterium Yellowstone B-Prime), reconstructed the status of LCCA as ambiguous (). But due to use of parsimonious ancestral state reconstruction, the relative support for presence versus absence of N 2 fixation could not be quantified. Where present in cyanobacteria, N 2 fixation is performed by proteins encoded by nif genes. The central enzyme is nitrogenase 1 (N 2 ase), a molybdenum-dependent ATP-hydrolyzing complex of two metalloproteins: a dinitrogenase  2  2 heterotetramer that contains the active site for the reduction of N 2 (its  and  subunits are coded by the nifD and nifK genes, respectively) and a dinitrogenase reductase  2 homodimer (coded by nifH) that transfers high-energy electrons to dinitrogenase. N 2 ase is inactivated upon oxygen binding, suggesting an origin prior to the Great Oxygenation Event () at the start of the Proterozoic eon between 2400 and 2200 million years ago. There are about 16 nif genes in cyanobacteria, of which 8 are regarded as core to the N 2 fixation pathway, or 9 including the crucial non-nif transcriptional regulator patB (included the nif genes nifEHDKUB and patB in the LCCA genome that they predicted using parsimony reconstructions, though they state that this reconstruction is ambiguous. nif genes have been highly evolutionarily conserved despite being present in a wide range of bacterial and archaeal taxa (). A vanadium-dependent system, nitrogenase 2, is found in addition to nitrogenase 1 in the cyanobacterium Anabaena variabilis. Iron-dependent nitrogenase 3 is known in other groups (). On a phylogeny of 49 cyanobacterial genomes, we perform empirical Bayes ancestral state reconstructions for the ability to fix N 2 and for the presence/absence of 27 nif orthologous groups. Empirical Bayes ancestral state reconstruction quantifies ambiguity by giving a posterior probability for each state at each ancestral node (). We address the question of whether there has been any gain of N 2 fixation within the cyanobacterial
N.Latysheva et al.clade, using a likelihood ratio test (LRT). To reduce the influence of phylogenetic uncertainty, we perform these analyses of trait evolution on a bootstrap sample of phylogenies (Felsenstein, 1988; c.f.). We also use stochastic mapping to estimate the number of gains and losses of the ability to fix N 2 within cyanobacteria and the position of these evolutionary events on the phylogeny ().
METHODSProtein sets for all 49 cyanobacterial genomes in release 108 of integr8 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/integr8) and a proteobacterial outgroup (cf.) were downloaded (; Supplementary). Orthologous groups predicted using OrthoMCL 2.0 () with MCL 09-308 (van) on BLAST results with 'm S' masking and an E-value cutoff of 10 5 (). From trial inflation parameters 1.2, 1.6, 2, 2.8, 3.6, 4.4, 5.2, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17 and 20, the final value, 1.6, was chosen to maximize the number of orthologous groups in a single copy in each of the 65 species (cf.). A maximum likelihood (ML) species phylogeny was estimated, and 50 bootstrap replicates obtained, as described in Supplementary Material S1. For main analyses, trees were rooted using the outgroup, which was removed to leave a rooted tree of the 49 cyanobacterial species (). For trait model selection and ancestral reconstructions, additional analyses were performed with the outgroup retained and the tree rooted at the midpoint of the branch between the ingroup and the outgroup (). Data indicating presence or absence of the ability to fix N 2 in the species or strains were compiled from the literature (Supplementary). Parameters of continuous time Markov processes representing evolution of this binary trait were estimated for the phylogeny of species and these data using ML in the StochChar package (version 1.1) of Mesquite (version 2.74; W.P. Maddison and D.R. Maddison, http://mesquiteproject.org). Model selection (Asymm.2 or Mk1) was performed with an LRT. Empirical Bayes marginal ancestral state reconstructions were obtained in Mesquite using the 'global' approach of Pagel (1999) but with equilibrium state frequencies (Yang, 2006: 124). To test for N 2 fixation gain within the cyanobacterial clade, the Asymm.2 model with free parameters was compared with Asymm.2 with the rate of gain fixed close to zero, i.e. 110 10 (LRT). To estimate the number of gains and losses of N 2 fixation and their positions on the phylogeny, Mesquite's stochastic character mapping was performed 100 times on the ML tree. The distribution of each nif gene across extant genomes was obtained by text searches of sequence headers in the integr8 database and the assumption that all sequences in an orthologous group containing a nif gene were also products of that nif gene. Where a gene was represented by two or more orthologous groups, it was regarded as present where at least one of these groups was present, and absent where all the orthologous groups were absent. Exceptions were nifS and nifU for which, to avoid masking major differences in orthologous group distribution, ancestral state reconstructions were performed for the orthologous groups separately. Also, nifD was assumed present in Nostoc punctiforme (). Ancestral state reconstructions of presence/absence of each nif gene on the ML tree were carried out as above.
RESULTS
Supplementary Table S2shows the orthologous groups predicted by OrthoMCL (with species/strain abbreviations shown in Supplementary). The ML phylogeny based on a concatenation of the 147 universal, single-copy orthologous groups is given inand (with outgroup) in Supplementary, and in Nexus format in Supplementary Material. nif genes and their
Cyanobacterial N 2 fixationorthologous groups and cross-species distribution patterns are given in Supplementary Table S3. Within cyanobacteria, nifHDKTEXWZ have a pattern of presence and absence identical to that of the N 2 fixation trait. For the N 2 fixation trait, the Asymm.2 model was selected in preference to Mk1 whether the outgroup was excluded (ML tree, likelihood ratio statistic 2 = 2.70, 1 d.f., P = 0.0202; bootstrap sample, n = 48, maximum 2 = 2.755, P = 0.0189, minimum 2 = 2.63, P = 0.0218) or included (ML tree, 2 = 6.47, P = 3.2210 4 ). On the ML tree, the accepted Asymm.2 model gave a posterior probability for N 2 fixation in LCCA of 0.61 () and the rejected Mk1 model gave a posterior probability of 0.42. Including the outgroup changed the Asymm.2 posterior probability only slightly, to 0.64. Across the outgroup-excluding bootstrap sample, the mean posterior probability of N 2 fixation at LCCA was 0.60 (n = 48, SD = 0.050, range 0.3630.636; Supplementary). The ratio of rate of gain of N 2 fixation to rate of loss was 0.15 on the ML tree, and across the bootstrap sample had a mean of 0.15 (n = 48, SD = 0.00108, range 0.1490.153). The rate of trait gain is significantly different from 110 10 (ML tree, 2 = 11.38, 1 d.f., P = 1.8410 6 ; bootstrap sample, maximum 2 = 20.59, P = 1.3810 10 , minimum 2 = 20.52, P = 1.4910 10 ). The mean number of gain events across stochastic mappings on the ML tree was 0.64 (n = 100, SD = 0.75, range 03), of losses was 7.97 (n = 100, SD = 0.95, range 511) and the total number of evolutionary events (gains + losses) was 8.61 (n = 100, SD = 0.69, range 811), excluding changes occurring in both directions on the same branch (Supplementary). The locations of the trait gains most often seen in stochastic mappings suggest most probable positions for the horizontal gene transfer (HGT) of nif genes (; Supplementaryfor the nif orthologous group distributions). The posterior probability of nif genes at LCCA, with and without the outgroup included and at the cyanobacterialproteobacterial ancestor, is shown in Supplementary. Stochastic mapping of nif genes largely suggests the same pattern of gain and loss as N 2 fixation, with a few deviations (see Section 4).
CONCLUSIONSOur phylogeny of species is broadly congruent with others (e.g.). The reconstruction for presence versus absence of N 2 fixation in LCCA favours N 2 fixation, but only weakly (probability = 0.61). This contrasts with Snchez;), but do not expect N 2 fixation in LCCA to be ruled out. An N 2 fixing LCCA would imply that N 2 fixation and nif genes had arisen by 3 billion years ago. It is thought that fixed N was a limiting resource in the early Earth environment (). The early Earth appears to have featured a mildly reducing atmosphere, in which fixed nitrogenous compounds would have been stable (). A dramatic decrease in atmospheric CO 2 in the early Archaean (3.5 billion years ago) may have led to a fixed N crisis by limiting the amount of NO x formation from N 2 and CO 2 (), creating evolutionary pressures for biological N 2 fixation at an early stage of prokaryotic evolution (), despite the high energetic cost of this process (at least 16 ATP molecules per N 2 fixed;). Alternatively, the origin of N 2 ases may pre-date the origin of biological N 2 fixation. The first N 2 ases may have been N 2-using respiratory enzymes or cyanide detoxification centres (). The means of the spread of N 2 fixation after its appearance has been another outstanding question. It has been unclear whether N 2 fixation has spread by HGT, or if vertical descent has had a larger impact. The rate of gain of N 2 fixation within the cyanobacterial clade was found to be significant, but much lower than the rate of loss. Consistent with this, stochastic character mapping most frequently suggested zero trait gains (51% of mappings; 35% showed one gain) and always suggested a higher number of trait losses than gains. In the 35% of instances in which the N 2 fixing trait was not ancestral and was gained only once, the most common position (86% frequency) of trait gain occurred very close to the root, just after the split between Gloeobacter violaceus and all remaining cyanobacteria (). This may be a site of HGT. There is very slight support for additional potential HGT events: 6% of mappings showed gain of N 2 fixation in the branch leading to Cyanothece sp. PCC 7425; 12% showed a gain in the ancestor of Synechococcus sp. JA-3-3ab and Synechococcus sp. JA-2-3B'a(2-13). Additionally, 9% of mappings included at least one instance of a gain of N 2 fixation, followed by loss on the same branch, manifested as absence in the extant descendant(s), which usually occurred amidst recent Prochlorococcus ancestors; 4% showed a single branch lose and subsequently gain N 2-fixing ability.suggested that any HGT in cyanobacterial N 2 fixation would have happened early, and our results indeed suggest the most probable HGTs have occurred near the root of the phylogeny (), aside from the case of the potential HGT event in the terminal branch culminating in Cyanothece sp. PCC 7425. Stochastic character mapping suggests that one loss of N 2 fixation occurred either just before (in 44% of mappings) or after (44%) the split between the Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942/Synechocococcus sp. ATCC 27144 clade and its sister group. Most other losses occurred recently in independent strains (). Our phylogeny supports both the monophyly of heterocyst-forming cyanobacteria () and their evolution within an N 2-fixing lineage, dated at 24502100 million years ago (). Ancestral state reconstructions on nif genes are broadly similar to the N 2 fixation results (Supplementary; Supplementary Material S2). Our reconstructions for LCCA (posterior probability > 0.5) agree within the presence of nifEHDKU and potentially nifB. Our results also predict nifT, nifN, nifX, nifS, nifV, nifW, nifZ, and have finer resolution of nifS and nifU orthologous groups.suggest that the N 2 ase gene family has evolved as a unit, with a highly conserved operon structure. Our analysis has shown that loss of N 2 fixation has been more prevalent than HGT in cyanobacteria, despite evidence for HGT of N 2 ase in other systems (). Our results are consistent with a pre-cyanobacterial origin of N 2 fixation, perhapsPage: 606 603606
N.Latysheva et al.even in the Last Universal Common Ancestor, followed by repeated independent loss (). We conclude that trait loss has been the predominant agent in sculpting the modern distribution of N 2 fixation in cyanobacteria.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
