Many important data in current biological science comprise hundreds, thousands or more individual results. These massive data require computational tools to navigate results and effectively interact with the content. Mobile device apps are an increasingly important tool in the everyday lives of scientists and non-scientists alike. These software present individuals with compact and efficient tools to interact with complex data at meetings or other locations remote from their main computing environment. We believe that apps will be important tools for biologists, geneticists and physicians to review content while participating in biomedical research or practicing medicine. We have developed a prototype app for displaying gene expression data using the iOS platform. To present the software engineering requirements, we review the model-view-controller schema for Apple's iOS. We apply this schema to a simple app for querying locally developed microarray gene expression data. The challenge of this application is to balance between storing content locally within the app versus obtaining it dynamically via a network connection. Availability: The Hematopoietic Expression Viewer is available at http://www.shawlab.org/he_viewer. The source code for this project and any future information on how to obtain the app can be accessed at http://www.shawlab.org/he_viewer.
R.A.James et al.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. visualization of individual gene and probe measurements. In cases where such analysis is required, either complex commercial enduser software or massive spreadsheets are the only currently viable methods of interacting with data. Our team has previously generated a large database of gene expression patterns across 10 cell types in the hematopoietic system (Chambers et al., 2007). Hematopoietic stem cells are the adult stem cells that continually regenerate all constituents of the blood and represent the best studied adult stem cells. However, the genes and processes regulating hematopoiesis have not been completely defined. Based on feedback from our experimental collaborators, we wished to provide a means of querying the data in a variety of non-traditional situations, such as the auditorium seating of a seminar, unplanned discussion of gene expression patterns with colleagues or other 'on the go' situations remote from the main computing environment. We developed a novel application, the Hematopoietic Expression Viewer, for use on the Apple iPhone. Although common in the general community, biomedical technical 'apps' are relatively rare. A literature search reveals two published examples, the TimeTree2 app (Kumar and Hedges, 2011) and the Immunological Genome Project app (Heng, 2008), which includes microarray results but is centered on the immunological mouse community. The iOS (Apple's mobile operating system) Hematopoietic Expression Viewer allows ready access to the hematopoietic expression data, enhancing our ability to analyze and to identify genes that may be important in hematopoiesis, stem cell biology or blood malignancies among other uses. The iOS 'model-view-controller' (MVC) software architecture was used to construct this app using the Apple development environment (Fig. 1). MVC is designed to increase modularity by separating tasks into separate constructs that interact in a highly stereotyped manner. The model helps ensure that modifications of one section will not break functionality in another area. MVC distributes responsibilities into the three distinct but related components for which it is named. The model holds the application state, the view handles presentation of the application state to the user, and the controller mediates between the two and alters the application's state in response to input that flows through the view. Communication between these elements requires a separate paradigm, the 'event-listener' (Fig. 1). An event is a predefined condition often resulting from user action, such as  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
