Motivation: A metabolic graph represents the connectivity patterns of a metabolic system, and provides a powerful framework within which the organization of metabolic reactions can be analyzed and elucidated. A common practice is to prune (i.e. remove nodes and edges) the metabolic graph prior to any analysis in order to eliminate confounding signals from the representation. Currently, this pruning process is carried out in an ad hoc fashion, resulting in discrepancies and ambiguities across studies. Results: We propose a biochemically informative criterion, the strength of chemical linkage (SCL), for a systematic pruning of metabolic graphs. By analyzing the metabolic graph of Escherichia coli, we show that thresholding SCL is powerful in selecting the conventional pathways' connectivity out of the raw network connectivity when the network is restricted to the reactions collected from these pathways. Further, we argue that the root of ambiguity in pruning metabolic graphs is in the continuity of the amount of chemical content that can be conserved in reaction transformation patterns. Finally, we demonstrate how biochemical pathways can be inferred efficiently if the search procedure is guided by SCL.
INTRODUCTIONGraph representation of a metabolic network connectivity map provides a simple representation of certain relationships among the network's entities. Analyses of such graphs have provided various insights into the properties of metabolic networks, yet not without controversy. For example, the finding of a short average path length in metabolic networks [e.g.;] has been challenged in that it was based on the 'raw' metabolic graphs, without first pruning them (). To illustrate the concept of 'pruning', consider the following reaction analyzed in Ma and Zeng (2003): N-acetylornithine+L-glutamate  L-ornithine+ N-acetyl-L-glutamateIn their network assembly, the authors only linked N-acetylornithine to L-ornithine and L-glutamate to N-acetyl-L-glutamate and omitted * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the link between L-glutamate and L-ornithine and the link between N-acetylornithine and N-acetyl-L-glutamate. Depending on the edge semantics of the network and the subsequent analyses, this pruning step may or may not make a difference. From the perspective of causality of biochemical transformation and pathway inference (), this pruning makes sense: no chemical content is conserved between L-ornithine and L-glutamate, and the acetyl group that is conserved between N-acetylornithine and N-acetyl-L-glutamate is not sufficiently representative for linking the two chemical compounds. However, if one is modeling the propagation of perturbation in the concentration of metabolites [e.g.], then not removing these last two edges makes sense, since they do capture how a perturbation to certain metabolites may spread throughout the metabolic system. Under this semantics, metabolic graphs are built by connecting all the metabolites that participate in a reaction (), and subsequently analyzed, without post-processing the connectivity (), to elucidate properties on information transfer, network robustness and resilience, etc. In this article, we focus on the first of the edge semantics, namely causality of biochemical transformation. To build metabolic graphs for pathway inference, all metabolites participating in a reaction are connected to form the raw graph, and then, via connectivity pruning, edges that may result in the inference of biochemically implausible pathways [are pruned [hypergraph-based pathway inference techniques, such as the network expansion (), require different treatment and are beyond the scope of this article]. Several methods exist for pruning metabolic graphs including hub deletion (), removal of currency metabolites (), manual curation () and RPair typing (). However, the ambiguity inherent in these ad hoc methods, and the lack of a systematic one, may confound analyses of metabolic graphs (). Here, we propose a simple criterion, the strength of chemical linkage (SCL), for systematic pruning of metabolic graphs. By analyzing the metabolic graph of Escherichia coli, we demonstrate the power of this criterion in yielding biochemically meaningful pathways. Further, we characterize the commonly used pruning heuristics in terms of the strength of chemical linkage, and discuss the ambiguity in these methods and the superiority of using the SCL criterion. Finally, we demonstrate the utility of the criterion in pruning the search tree used in pathway inference methods to gain in accuracy and efficiency compared with other graph-based search heuristics [e.g.].'Length' is the number of reactions from the source to the target compound in the reference pathway. 'Rank' is the place of the reference pathway as identified by Algorithm InferPathway.
W.Zhou and L.Nakhleh
METHODS
Reaction data and reference pathwaysThe 1383 reaction equations were obtained from KEGG Ligand database (). For each reaction with any gene in E.coli annotated to produce an enzyme that catalyzes the reaction, we assembled a graph connecting every pair of metabolites that sit on opposite sides of the reaction (the raw graph). Both reaction-enzyme mapping information and enzyme-gene mapping information were downloaded from KEGG. Following common practice (), we removed any reaction that appeared in the reference pathway and yet did not have a definite gene annotation; e.g. reaction R07765 has only the generic EC number 1.3.1.-even though there are genes in E.coli that are annotated for that EC number. For reactant pairs that exist in the KEGG RPair database, we used information on the molecule alignment. 'Markush structures' and groups with label 'R' were taken as one atom. For reactant pairs that do not exist in the database, we manually set the alignment number to 0. This treatment is dependent on the coverage of RPair database to all possible reactant pairs with nonzero alignments. We manually verified that the coverage is satisfactory. Out of 1383 reactions that exist in the E.coli network, 1104 reactions needed to be treated with additional specification to connections with alignment number 0. Out of 2642 connections with alignment number 0 added in these reactions, 98 connections have actual non-zero chemical linkage. The percentage of unsatisfactory connections was less than 4%. Moreover, from a closer inspection, many of these linkages are hard to process because of the use of generic compounds and unbalanced reactions in the KEGG Ligand database (). Reference pathways were obtained from the KEGG KGML pathway files. Reactions that exist in the reference pathways but are not validated by the presence of clearly defined enzymatic information, and thus do not appear in the total set of reactions from which the raw metabolic graph is assembled, were removed. Annotated pathways for the pathway inference validation were obtained from the aMAZE database (). We excluded those pathways that are duplicates in terms of using the same sequence of compounds and those that have fewer than two steps. Two other manually curated reference pathways were also included. The name of the pathways are listed in. The main metabolites and reactions of these pathways are listed in the Supplementary Material.
The SCL criterionWe define the strength of chemical linkage, or SCL, for two reactants as the proportion of chemical content conserved between them in a reaction, normalized by the maximum chemical content of either of the two reactants. If there is more than one mechanism that involve the same two reactants, SCL takes the maximum result computed over all such mechanisms. For example, in some rare cases, two reactants can be converted to one another via more than one mechanism even in one reaction; e.g. C00022-C00900 in R00006 [the C and R labels are standard indices used in KEGG (. Chemical content can be quantified in many ways; in this article, we use the absolute atom counting. Under this quantification, given the set C(A) of non-hydrogen atoms in molecule A (due to the fact that hydrogen is not generally considered the backbone of biochemical compounds), the chemical content of the compound is simply |C(A)|. Atoms are mapped in the reaction according to the true chemistry. While in this study we use the KEGG RPair database for molecule alignments, SCL depends only on the physics of the real chemical reaction and is independent of the data source. Formally, for a compound pair (A,D) that sit on two sides of a reaction (e.g. A+B  C +D), we define SCL self (A|D) =|C(A)C(D)|/|C(A)| SCL =|C(A)C(D)|/max(|C(A)|,|C(D)|) = min(SCL self (A|D),SCL self (D|A)).SCL self (A|D) measures the contribution of chemical content from D to A, or equivalently, how much chemical content of A comes from D. A high SCL self (A|D) value indicates a greater importance in chemical composition of D when A is produced/consumed in the reaction. When compound D is clear from the context (e.g. when there is only one reactant on the other side), we write SCL self (A). Further, in this context, we use the definition SCL other (A) = SCL self (D|A). High SCL is an indication of stronger chemical causality in terms of chemical content between the two reactants in a specific reaction.
A pathway inference methodIn order to demonstrate the quality of SCL-based pruning, we introduce a simple, SCL-based algorithm for identifying a set of pathways from a source to a target metabolite in a given metabolic graph; see Algorithm 1. The algorithm first identifies a set of candidate paths within a maximum length in a breadth-first manner (Lines 510), extending paths (Lines 910) only using edges with an SCL value higher than a certain threshold T (in our study, we use t = 0.4; see Section 3.1 for a discussion of this choice). After exploring all the valid paths of a certain length, all paths are reordered according to the minimum SCL self value of all steps along the path (Line 11). Only the top (if there are more than) N = 1000 paths are saved for further exploration in the next round (Line 12). Finally, the paths are ranked by the minimum SCL self value of any edge they contain, where paths with lower values are ranked higher (Line 13).. Similar results have been obtained on other pathway maps (see Supplementary Material). The right panel is based on a combination of pathways where the ROC curve of hub deletion and one based on random SCL assignment are also shown with up and down triangles, respectively. The ROC curve on hub deletion is obtained by tuning the degree threshold of the hub definition, thus changing the presence/absence of the network connections. positive rate (TPR) equals |TP|/|P| and the false positive rate (FPR) equals |FP|/|N|. Notice that when T = 0, TP = P and FP = N, giving TPR = FPR = 1. On the other hand, when T > 1, TP = FP =, giving TPR = FPR = 0. In each panel, T increases in the direction from the upper-right corner to the lower-left corner. The concave shapes of the ROC curves indicate that thresholding SCL has strong power of selection for connections that appear in pathways, as opposed to those that are missing. This further validates our implicit reasoning that conventional pathway connectivity is a reflection of the chemical linkage strength. While no SCL threshold seems to exist for perfect retrieval of established biochemical pathways, our detailed study of the Glycolysis/Gluconeogenesis pathway (with threshold T = 0.4) revealed two main reasons (beside the issue with KEGG's RPair database coverage) behind the false cases. The first reason is the presence of reactant pairs with special roles. Not all the reactant pairs actively participate in the mass circulation, but are required for, e.g. energy dependencies. For example, ATPADP drives a reaction toward a certain direction (). Many such reactant pairs have strong chemical linkage with each other, yet weak linkage with other reactants. They are commonly perceived as carriers of small chemical moieties, such as proton (NAD, NADH), phosphate (ATP, ADP; Proteinhistidine, Protein N-phospho-Lhistidine) and acetyl group (CoA, Acetyl-CoA). These reactant pairs with special roles usually cause false positives, i.e. reactant pairs absent from the reference pathways but with a high chemical linkage. Nonetheless, these false positives are completely tolerable and, in our view, are even better to be preserved in the network. For pathways where these reactant pairs are used for non-mass circulation reasons (e.g. eco00010), they are usually disconnected from the bulk network component due to a low SCL value with other reactants (see Supplementary Material). Therefore, their presence would not confuse the pathway inference by creating biochemically unintuitive shortcuts. Moreover, it makes sense to preserve these reactant pairs in the network and the reference pathways since they represent the way how energy is consumed. For example, when ADP is used to make ATP, such cycling would be unclear if the consumption of ATP is missing from the network. More importantly,
SCL-based pruning of metabolic graphs
W.Zhou and L.Nakhlehbeing a 'carrier' is in itself ambiguously defined, since all reactant pairs 'carry something'. In order to be a 'carrier', same reactant pair should appear in multiple reactions to 'load' and 'unload' chemical groups. We have observed that although there exist certain reactant pairs that participate in a large number of reactions, there is in general no clear-cut boundary for being a 'carrier' (see Supplementary Material). The second reason is the inappropriate quantification of chemical content by absolute atom counting. For example, in the following reaction [pyruvate + thiamin diphosphate  2-(alphahydroxyethyl)thiamine diphosphate + CO 2 ], reactant pair (CO 2 , pyruvate) is missing from the reference pathway and its presence in the thresholded network can potentially give rise to shortcuts between pyruvate and other irrelevant compounds via CO 2. The total number of non-hydrogen atoms of pyruvate is 6 and that of CO 2 is 3. Although they share three atoms in the reaction, two of them are oxygen and only one is carbon, which is traditionally considered to be the backbone of Pyruvate. Therefore, when all the non-hydrogen atoms are included SCL = 3/6 = 0.5. However, the value becomes SCL = 1/3  0.3 when only carbon atoms are considered, since Pyruvate has three carbons, CO 2 has one, and they share one carbon in the reaction. By counting only carbons, the false positive connection can be avoided. This not only reflects the fact that the atoms are treated as biochemically different, but also suggests that alternatives to absolute atom counting (e.g. by counting only carbons) might improve the performance of the criterion on certain (but not all) reactions. Further, a large collection of atoms may form some chemical group that functions as a single unit. In the context of one particular pathway, their detailed composition, creation and degradation is not relevant. But, again, if we count only the number of nonhydrogen atoms, the criterion might be biased. For example, in reaction [ATP + acetate + CoA  AMP + Diphosphate +, the reactant pair (CoA, acetyl-CoA) is falsely present (false positive) while the pathway reactant pair (acetate, acetyl-CoA) is missing (false negative). The 48 non-hydrogen atoms are conserved in the former reactant pair, while only 3 are conserved in the latter. Under absolute atom counting, the former reactant pair is stronger in chemical linkage while the latter is weaker. However, biochemically, all 48 atoms in the former comes from CoA which functions as a single unit in the context of glycolysis pathway, while the three atoms conserved in the latter contribute to three out of four non-hydrogen atoms in acetate. If we count all atoms in CoA as 1, we obtain SCL = 1/4 = 0.25 for the (Acetate, Acetyl-CoA) pair and SCL = 3/4 = 0.75 for the (CoA, acetyl-CoA) pair, which would avoid both false cases. However, to do this throughout the metabolic graph, finer delineation of functional groups for metabolites is needed, which we target as future work. By scanning the threshold from 0 to 1 with increment 0.01, we find that the range of threshold value that minimizes the false cases (both false positive and false negative) is from 0.38 to 0.39. Nevertheless, as shown in, when individual pathway is concerned, there does not exist a threshold value of SCL that suits all (see Supplementary Material). We found that the range of optimal threshold in different pathways varies not only in magnitudes, but also in lengths. Some pathways reach optimal pruning under a wide range of threshold values. Besides, the optimal threshold of some pathways can be explained by their biochemical function. For example, pathways involved in fatty acid metabolism have a lower threshold. This reflects the fact that links in these pathways are responsible for the extension of a long fatty acid chain by one small residue, which is weak in the sense of relative mass conservation.
Using SCL in pathway inferenceIn order to investigate the effectiveness of SCL in pathway inference, we applied Algorithm InferPathway (see Section 2) to source/target pairs of eight reference E.coli pathways obtained mostly from the aMAZE database (). Results are shown in. In, we show two of the reference pathways which are correctly returned by our method as the top result, namely, the Lysine Biosynthesis and Oxidative Pentose Phosphate Pathway, as well as the two pathways that differ from our top results namely, the Glycolysis and Methionine Biosynthesis pathways. For Glycolysis (iii of), the only difference between the reference pathway and our top result (ranked second; see) is the use of reaction R01827 instead of a combination of reactions R04779 and R01070. The shortcut is a documented step in the KEGG pathway map, but only in the Pentose Phosphate pathway map, indicating that the exclusion of the single reaction step is of manual, rather than biochemical, origins. For the Methionine biosynthesis pathway (iv of), our method fails to return the annotated pathway as the top result. The only step that is consistently missing from our inference is the shortcut from O-succinyl-L-homoserine to L-homocystein without passing through Cystathionine, as is the case in the annotated pathway. Two clarifications are in order here. First, the shortcut step is structurally valid but infeasible in terms of free energyinformation that is not incorporated into the reaction equation. The reaction's direction is to the left, as Hydrogen sulfide takes the gas form under room temperature and leaves the system quickly once formed:. This is because to add just an SH (mercapto group), a cysteine is recruited and pyruvate is released subsequently. However, when computing SCL self of the link from O-succinylL-homoserine to L-cystathionine, the entire cysteine contributes to the number of non-conserved atoms, although only SH (1 non-hydrogen atom) is preserved after the subsequent step. The major part of cysteine (6 non-hydrogen atoms) is released as pyruvate. This issue can be solved by tracking the identity of each atom and recording for each intermediate metabolite the set of its atoms that are conserved all the way to the target. We also studied the capability of the algorithm to find cyclic pathways by applying it to contiguous metabolites on the TCA cycle pathway (v in). The pathway connections corresponding to the top nine results returned are shown. Indeed, all intermediate metabolites, except for the Succinyl-CoA, in the TCA cycle are recovered as well as all other connections that are documented in the pathway maps of KEGG. The low SCL value (0.13) on one of the two missing steps involving Succinyl-CoA is due to a reason same as discussed above, namely that CoA contains many atoms yet functions as one unit. A satisfying consequence of this pruning strategy is its capability of not only getting pathways but also rejecting cases where inbetween the given source and target there is no linear unbranched pathway that is biochemically meaningful. If the synthesis of a metabolite requires contributions from many different sources, this advantage would be reflected in our method as a low minimum SCL self of all paths returned. To further illustrate the efficiency of pathway inference guided by SCL self , we compare the search efficiency by only considering non-zero SCL (or equivalently, the presence/absence of annotations for reactant pairs in the RPair database), by pruning of extension using the SCL self , by the pruning of exploration using minimum SCL self on the path and by a combination of both pruning. We found first that no matter how large the results, minimum SCL self always sorts out the reference pathway to a high rank (2 in case of glycolysis) while sorting using the path length does not (170 ties with the highest rank being 65). With the same accuracy of the reference pathway, the result set () and total number of node visits (see Supplementary Material) is greatly reduced when our pruning strategies are applied. Same observations have been obtained from other pathways. These results combined demonstrate the utility of SCL in not only sorting out the best pathway from the result set but also being effective in pruning the search tree of path finding.
SCL-based pruning of metabolic graphs
Existing pruning methods in the light of SCLHere, we compare existing pruning methods in terms of the SCL criterion, and discuss the necessity and superiority of) and currency metabolites ()shows that the average SCL value of a graph increases as hubs (nodes of high degree) arepruning. Only presence and absence of RPair is used. 3: Pruning of path exploration using minimum SCL on the pathway (see Methods). : Pruning of path extension using SCLself. +: Combination of both path exploration pruning and path extension pruning. In all cases, the reference pathway ranks the second in the result set (see). removed from the graph, which is in agreement with the rationale behind hub deletion (). Despite its similar effectiveness in pruning the network connection (red curve in), the degree of a metabolite depends only on the global layout of the network which has little meaning in the local chemistry of each reaction. Indeed, the lack of smoothness of the curves indicates a poor correlation between the node degree and the SCL [similarly shown by. Hub deletion is known to suffer from several issues ()), one of which is the coarse grainedness in the sense that connections are pruned by deleting metabolites as well as all their connections. Accordingly, wehave observed that not all the connections of these hub metabolites are of low SCL values. Along the same line, some metabolites, defined in an ad hoc fashion, and referred to as pool metabolites () or currency metabolites (), which largely coincide with the hub metabolites () are often defined for network pruning. A widely used example is ATP (). Although ATP in many cases serves as a carrier of phosphate groups and an energetic driver of reactions, and it is also actively involved in the mass circulation of nucleotide metabolism. The versatility of ATP can be demonstrated by a signature based on SCL self and SCL other (). The functionality of serving as a carrier of small chemical moieties is reflected in the signature by two groups of dots, one in the top-left corner and the other in the bottom-right corner. The others correspond to other functions of ATP. Some of these involve a high SCL other valuean indication of contribution to the mass circulation. For the same reason, we see inthat as more and more hubs are deleted from the graph, more connections of high SCL values are eliminated (the increase in the dashed curves) as well. This suggests that a graph with high SCL values is hard to obtain without losing important connectivity information of the graph. From, we also observe that some pool metabolites serve multiple functions (as indicated by multiple dots in the signature; e.g. ATP and pyruvate) while others are functionally specific (as indicated by a single dot in the signature; e.g. NAD + and H 2 O). Compounds that are usually released as part of other bulk metabolites have dot(s) only in the bottom-left corner of their signatures (e.g. H 2 O, CO 2 and NH 3 ).) In addition to being labor intensive and error prone, we show that pruning by manual curation may also be ambiguous. Consider reaction (1) above. The reactant pair N-acetylornithine and N-acetyl-L-glutamate is missing because the acetyl group is not sufficient to represent the link between the two compounds. Now, consider reaction Acetyl-CoA+formate  CoA+pyruvate
W.Zhou and L.Nakhleh
Manual curation (In this case, acetyl-CoA loses the acetyl group to formate to form pyruvate. The question is: should we eliminate the connection between acetyl-CoA and pyruvate? In this case, the acetyl group is important, as 2/3 of the carbon backbone of pyruvate comes from it. Hence, this connection should be kept in the network. Althoughon the other side), we make different decisions on whether to prune away the connection between acetylGroup I and acetyl-Group II. In fact, the intrinsic nature of chemical transformations implies that the amount of chemical moieties that are conserved in any reactant pairs is arbitrary (). A combination of the SCL pruning criterion with the objective quantification of chemical content can help ameliorate this problem.) Pruning methods also include filtering specific class(es) of reactant pairs inside a reaction (). The KEGG RPair database provides such classification by assigning reactant pairs to five different categories: 'main', 'cofac', 'trans', 'ligase' and 'leave " (). The categorization is reaction dependent: one reactant pair may be of different types in different reactions. The typing is based on the classification of the enzymes (e.g. oxidoreductase, transferase, etc.) that catalyze the reaction and the role of the reactant pair in the reaction. However, the five types are manually curated, thus resulting in the same problems as discussed above. In, we plotted the distribution of SCL values of reactant pairs in the five categories. Reactant pairs of 'main' and 'cofac' tend to have higher SCL values, while reactant pairs of 'leave' and 'trans' tend to have lower SCL values. Pathway connections are composed of reactant pairs belonging to different categories, although the dominant categories are 'main' and 'trans' (). This is in agreement with the previous practice of using only these two types for metabolic network assembly (
RPair types (Faust
SCL-based pruning of metabolic graphs
DISCUSSIONIn this article, we introduced the strength of chemical linkage, or SCL, as a criterion for pruning metabolic graphs. The use of the conserved chemical content according to the actual reaction mechanism in this work is in contrast to the previous approach where only structural similarity between the two reactants is considered (). Although we also use the RPair database, unlike (), whose pruning depends on the presence/absence of RPairs or the certain classes of reactant pairs annotated from KEGG based on the type of enzyme that catalyze the reaction (), we used only the information for molecule alignments. Such information can also be obtained from other sources, such as. We showed that the SCL criterion is biochemically intuitive and has power of selection for the conventional pathway connectivity when thresholded. False positive and false negative cases are caused mainly by improper quantification of chemical content as well as flaws in the data. The utility of using SCL on pruning the searching tree in pathway inference was evaluated. Biochemically meaningful pathways can be found by implementing a simple search program using the SCL criterion. Further, we compared several commonly used connectivity pruning heuristics and ad hoc methods, such as hub deletion and manual curation. We found that SCL values reflect the rationale behind these heuristics, yet the SCL is more objective, systematic and robust to annotation error. Many ambiguities of these heuristics are rooted in lacking an objective criterion and quantification of chemical content. Note that although, we focus here only on graphs whose nodes are compounds, SCL can also be adapted in the assembly of networks whose nodes are reactions or reaction-derived entities such as enzyme class or genes. This is done by considering nodes for linking reactions, only ones that appear in sufficiently strong reactant pairs. One potential improvement to the quantification of chemical content is to partition every chemical compound into functionally independent groups. The amount of chemical content is measured in terms of the number of such functionally independent groups, instead of the absolute number of non-hydrogen atoms. Further, the partition of a compound into functionally independent groups is flexible yet objective, relying on at most a delineation of a set of specific pathway-related reactions. Two atoms in a compound are considered in the same group if they are linked by covalent bond(s) that does not break in all the chemical transformations under that delineation.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
RESULTS To assess the quality of SCL, we conducted three tasks on E.coli's metabolic graph. First, we computed the distribution of SCL values for edges in the raw graph, categorized based on the presence/absence in the reference pathways to assess the power of SCL in selecting connectivities. Second, we explored pathway inference guided by SCL values to assess its power in finding compound-to-compound linear/cyclic biochemical pathways. Third, we studied existing metabolic graph pruning methods in the light of the SCL criterion. 3.1 The distribution of SCL values Figure 1 shows the distribution of SCL values of raw graph edges present/absent in the reference pathways. Most of the edges present in the reference pathways have high SCL values, whereas a great majority of those missing from the reference pathways have SCL values lower than 0.2. These results show that SCL is strongly correlated with the absence/presence in reference pathways; stated differently, SCL can be used as a selection criterion for deciding which connections to include in a reference pathway. Next, we studied whether pruning the raw graph based on thresholding the SCL values (keeping only edges with SCL values no less than a threshold T ) produces the conventional pathway connectivities. Pathway maps are organized into five categories according to the hierarchy provided by the KEGG pathway database: carbohydrate metabolism, nucleotide metabolism, lipid metabolism, amino acid metabolism and metabolism of cofactors and vitamins. In addition, we considered two higher level pathway unions provided by KEGG, namely eco01100 (Metabolic Pathways) and eco01110 (biosynthesis of secondary metabolites). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for some of the pathways in the carbohydrate metabolism and the pathway unions are shown in Figure 2. For a specific pathway, we count the number of edges from the raw metabolic network that are present in the reference pathway. Positives (P) [Negatives (N)] are defined as the connections that do (do not) exist in the reference pathway. For each value of the threshold T , only edges with SCL values  T are kept, and the rest are removed. The true positives (TP) are the positives that also exist in the thresholded network. The false positives (FP) are the positives that do not exist in the thresholded network. The true
