Motivation: High-throughput sequencing platforms are increasingly used to screen patients with genetic disease for pathogenic mutations, but prediction of the effects of mutations remains challenging. Previously we developed SAAPdap (Single Amino Acid Polymorphism Data Analysis Pipeline) and SAAPpred (Single Amino Acid Polymorphism Predictor) that use a combination of rule-based structural measures to predict whether a missense genetic variant is pathogenic. Here we investigate whether the same methodology can be used to develop a differential phenotype predictor, which, once a mutation has been predicted as pathogenic, is able to distinguish between phenotypes—in this case the two major clinical phenotypes (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, HCM and dilated cardiomyopathy, DCM) associated with mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain (MYH7) gene product (Myosin-7). Results: A random forest predictor trained on rule-based structural analyses together with structural clustering data gave a Matthews' correlation coefficient (MCC) of 0.53 (accuracy, 75%). A post hoc removal of machine learning models that performed particularly badly, increased the performance (MCC ¼ 0.61, Acc ¼ 79%). This proof of concept suggests that methods used for pathogenicity prediction can be extended for use in differential phenotype prediction. Availability and Implementation: Analyses were implemented in Perl and C and used the Java-based Weka machine learning environment. Please contact the authors for availability. Contacts
IntroductionMutations in proteins generally result in loss of function, but in some cases can lead to a gain of function. Generally this is not gain of a novel function, but an increased activity, often through loss of some type of control mechanism. In general, predictors of pathogenicity do not try to distinguish between loss-of-function and gain-of-function mutations, but simply predict whether or not there will be some effect on function leading to a pathogenic state. In some cases however, the situation is more complex, with mutations in a single protein leading to a number of distinct phenotypes. For example, inherited heart muscle diseases, or cardiomyopathies, which are a major cause of sudden cardiac death in the young and an important cause of heart failure at all ages () are, as a group, very heterogeneous in genotype and phenotype. Radically different phenotypes can result from mutations in the same gene (). The widespread application of Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) chips and high-throughput sequencing has generated an urgent need for informatics tools that can help predict the effects of the many sequence variants that these platforms identify. More than 20 groups have devised methods to predict whether a given mutation will have a deleterious effect (Al; Gonz alez-Prez and L opez-Bigas, 2011;), the best known methods being SIFT (), an evolutionary method which calculates a sophisticated residue conservation score from multiple alignment, and PolyPhen-2 (), which uses machine learning on a set of eight sequence-and three structurebased features. A more complete list of methods is provided on our web site at http://www.bioinf.org.uk/saap/methods/. However, these tools are generally not validated for individual diseases where most available datasets are too small to train machine-learning methods and tend to be heavily unbalanced. An additional problem is that it is often very difficult to obtain reliable validated data on neutral mutations. One of the few cases where a predictor has been produced for an individual class of proteins is the work on voltage-gated potassium channels by. Attempting to distinguish between mutations in a single protein that result in different pathogenic phenotypes is a difficult problem that, unlike pathogenicity prediction, has not been widely addressed. There have been a small number of attempts to distinguish loss-offunction and gain-of-function mutations at a molecular level, but (as stated above) typically gain-of-function mutations result from loss of regulation making the protein constitutively active. For example, mutations that cause the VAB-1 tyrosine kinase to become constitutively active cause severe axon defects (). Some of the challenges in the 'Comparative Assessment of Genome Interpretation' (CAGI) experiment have required the prediction of the level of enzyme activity (e.g. genomeinterpretation.org/content/4NAGLU) and some have been related to familial combined hyperlipidemia or channelopathies (genomeinterpretation.org/content/FCH, genomeinterpretation.org/content/scn5a), but, to our knowledge, there have been no clear cases where predictions have focused on mutations in the same protein resulting in different phenotypes other than through loss of function versus loss of regulation. Initially our own focus was on trying to understand the effects that mutations have on protein structure and then to use this information to compare the effects of non-pathogenic mutations and pathogenic deviations (). Our approach has been to map mutations onto protein structure and to perform a rulebased analysis of the likely structural effects of these mutations in order to 'explain' the known functional effect (if any) of the mutation. Since we map mutations to structure, we only consider mutations in proteins for which a structure has been solved. With the recent growth in the amount of mutation data, we have moved from updating a database of analysis of mutations, to providing a server (SAAPdapSingle Amino Acid Polymorphism Data Analysis Pipeline) for analysis of the effects of mutations (http://www.bioinf. org.uk/saap/dap/) (). The approach has been used to study structural differences between disease-causing mutations and neutral polymorphisms (Al), and to analyze mutations in glucose-6phosphate dehydrogenase () and in the tumour suppressor P53 (). While SAAPdap uses a combination of rule-based structural measures to assess whether a mutation is likely to alter the local structural environment, we have also developed SAAPpred (Single Amino Acid Polymorphism Predictor) which exploits the results of the structural analysis and uses a Random Forest machine-learning method to predict whether mutations are pathogenic (Al). SAAPpred is restricted to analyzing mutations in proteins for which a native structure is available, but appears to outperform methods such as SIFT (), PolyPhen-2 () and FATHMM (). In this paper, we investigate whether having predicted a mutation as being pathogenic, the approach that we developed for SAAPdap and SAAPpred can be used for differential phenotype prediction, specifically for mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain (Myosin-7, UniProtKB/SwissProt accession P12883, http://www.uni prot.org/uniprot/P12883), encoded by the MYH7 gene (OMIM *160760). Mutations in MYH7 lead to a number of phenotypes, the most common being hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM, OMIM #192600) and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM, OMIM #613426). The numbers of mutations available for other phenotypes are very small and consequently, for this proof-of-concept paper, we have attempted to distinguish just between HCM and DCM. Myosin-7 is part of the force-generating molecular motor of the sarcomere and parts of the structure have been solved. It is divided into three main domains as shown in Supplementary: a globular 'head', which includes the ATP-binding site and the actinbinding site; the 'neck' which is composed of an a-helical domain to which the myosin light chains bind and which is further subdivided into a converter region and a lever arm involved in the amplification of mechanical energy; and the 'tail' or 'rod' region. Together with MYBPC3 (the gene encoding myosin binding protein C), mutations in MYH7 are the major cause of HCM as well as being a cause of DCM and left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC) (). In contrast to MYBPC3, where most pathogenic variants cause mRNA and protein truncation, the large majority of MYH7 variants are missense () which often makes prediction of pathogenicity problematic ().
Materials and methods
Dataset of variantsA dataset of MYH7 variants was built from(i) disease-causing or likelypathogenic variants for which phenotypic data are available in the Human Genome Mutation Database (HGMD) (); (ii) variants found in a curated dataset extracted from the literature and used for commercial gene testing reports (Health in Code SL); and (iii) variants detected in a cohort of consecutively evaluated unrelated HCM/DCM patients at the UCLH Heart Hospital. Genetic analysis was approved by the UCLH review board (IRB) and informed written consent was obtained from all subjects (). Although there are no co-segregation data or functional studies that can 'prove' the causality of mutations, selected variants from all three datasets were rare as defined by a minor allele frequency (MAF) < 0.5% in the ESP6500 NIH Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) exome sequencing project database (). Consequently as it is not possible to know whether variants are truly pathogenic, we treat mutations associated with an HCM or DCM cardiomyopathy phenotype in the above-mentioned databases, or in the literature, as actual positives. This dataset is larger and more comprehensive than the data available from other sources and contains approximately twice the number of Myosin-7 mutations available in Swissvar/Humsavar. The complete dataset has been provided as SupplementaryFile1.xls. Proprietary data from HGMD, where the mutations are not available in other datasets, have been indicated solely by their HGMD accession code. The numbers of mutations for each phenotype are summarized in Supplementary Table S2. A total of 395 unique mutations (i.e. distinct mutations, different from one another at the protein level) were identified in the MYH7 gene. More than two-thirds of them have previously been published in the literature as being associated with disease and the others are novel variants. Since we map mutations to protein structure and therefore require a structure to be solved of the protein of interest, we are not able to analyze all mutations. Of the 395 mutations, 157 (39.7%) did not map to structure and therefore could not be analyzed (see Supplementary). This situation should improve as further structures become available. 382 of the 395 unique mutations had a recorded phenotype and of these 228 mapped to at least one Protein DataBank (PDB) chain. Supplementarylists the PDB structures that were identified for human Myosin-7. When preparing the dataset in 2014, five structures were available and three (PDB IDs: 2fxm, 2fxo and 4db1) were used in this work. The two other structures (IDs: 1ik2 and 3dtp) were eliminated since 1ik2 is a theoretical model and 3dtp is a human-chicken fusion protein. Preliminary experiments that included this fusion protein, which covers the same region as 2fxm and 2fxo, degraded the results. Since this dataset was built, a number of other structures have become available in the PDBsome very recentlyall but one of which map to the myosin tail (see Supplementary), but all are also chimeric fusion proteins (see Supplementary). Consequently none of these structures has been included at this stage. Most mutations were associated with HCM (n  290), whereas all other phenotypes were associated with fewer than 50 mutations each, including DCM with the next highest number of mutations (n  46). Of the unique HCM and DCM mutations, 190 and 21 respectively mapped to structure (see Supplementary). Since mutations related to these phenotypes were the most abundant, for this proof of concept, further analyses were restricted to HCM and DCM, grouping the remaining phenotypes as 'other'.
SAAPdap structural analysis and SAAPpredOur previous software, SAAPdap (Al) performs a set of 14 structural analyses (using software written in Perl and C), plus the calculation of solvent accessibility (). SAAPdap provides cutoffs for each of the analyses to suggest whether these are likely to be damaging (Al). To predict pathogenicity, a total of 47 features are derived from these analyses (Supplementary) and are used as input to SAAPpred, a machine learning method that uses Random Forests to predict whether a mutation is pathogenic (Al). In this paper, the same methodology is used but, rather than using a dataset of pathogenic and phenotypically silent mutations, a dataset of HCM and DCM mutations in Myosin-7 is used.
A machine-learning approach for MYH7 differential phenotype predictionAs described above, for machine learning, all mutations associated with multiple phenotypes, or causing phenotypes other than HCM or DCM, were discarded leaving 190 unique HCM and 21 unique DCM mutations which map to structure (Supplementary). Using the results of the SAAPdap structural analysis described above, of the 47 features used to describe the mutations, 14 were found to be redundant (i.e. they had the same value for all examples in the dataset: the 13 UniProtKB/SwissProt features and the disulphide (SSGeom) analysis), thus reducing the number of informative features to 33. Since multiple structures have been solved for MYH7, for a given mutation, the numeric values of the features derived for each version of the structure can be slightly different. Although a single structure was used with SAAPpred, because of the limited size of the available dataset for differential phenotype prediction, it was desirable to exploit the variability in multiple structures to expand and enrich the dataset. PDB files 4db1 and 2fxm contain two copies of the protein while 2fxo contains four copies. For each mutation, the feature vectors, defined from analysis of the structure, were described using the Weka Attribute-Relation File Format (ARFF). These data were then used to train Random Forest predictors implemented in WEKA version 3.6.7 (). The Weka Random Forest gives a classification based on a jury vote from the trees and produces a confidence score which is the fraction of trees that gave that prediction. Thus the confidence score is always between 0.5 and 1.0. In the prediction phase, the scores for the two classes are averaged separately and the higher average score is selected as the prediction. The confidence scores were then rescaled to run from 1.0 (DCM) to  1.0 (HCM). The parameter space described by the number of features used in each tree decision point (m try ) and the number of trees (T) was explored to find the best parameters for machine learning.
Cross-validationA given mutation has multiple feature vectors describing the mutation in different copies of the structure. From the machine-learning perspective, each is a separate data point. Thus the use of multiple structures for each mutation meant that cross-validation could not be performed within WEKA since it is possible that WEKA could select the same mutation (in a different structure) to be in both training and testing sets. To address the cross-validation problem and to deal with the severe imbalance of the dataset (there being many more HCM mutations than DCM), Perl code was written to limit the size of each class by selecting examples at random and to divide the 190 HCM and 21 DCM unique mutations with available PDB structures into sets of approximately the same size. For example, if the data were split into 21 sets, each of these 21 sets in turn (each containing one DCM mutation) was chosen as a test set and the remaining 20 sets (together containing the remaining 20 DCMs) were used for training. In each case, the datasets were enlarged with all the available PDB chain structures and balanced training datasets were generated by retaining all the DCM mutations and randomly drawing the same number of mutations from the HCM dataset. The random draws from the HCM dataset were taken 10 times over to provide a representative sample of the HCM class and the results from the trained predictors were averaged.
Structural clustering of mutationsAnecdotal evidence suggested that HCM-and DCM-associated mutations tend to be distributed differently across the Myosin-7 structure. This observation was exploited to provide additional features for the machine learning. Differential phenotype prediction of beta-myosin heavy chain variantsPDB files 2fxm and 2fxo, which represent the C-terminal region, contain only two DCM mutations compared with 35 HCM, indicating that DCM mutations are very rare in this domain. For the N-terminal domain (PDB file 4db1), the Ca positions of the mutated residues were clustered using single linkage hierarchical clustering. For each of 2.. .10 clusters, a v 2 test was performed to see how well the clustering separated HCM from DCM mutations. As described in the Results, three clusters have the best significance for the clustering. To use this information in machine learning, the centroid of each cluster was calculated and the feature vector for each mutation was expanded by the addition of the three distances from the C-alpha of the mutated residue to each of the three centroids. Mutations that were in the C-terminal domain (and mapped to PDB files 2fxm and 2fxo rather than 4db1) were given distances of 100.0, 100.0, 100.0 A  from the three clusters. To use this information in the Random Forests, these three additional features were added to the feature vectors in the ARFF files.
Optimizing the machine learning: feature selectionAs well as using the full set of 33 non-redundant features from SAAPdap (the 'All' set) with or without the three clustering features, five reduced feature sets were explored. The first two of these were chosen to change the way that voids are treated, while the remaining sets were generated using feature selection to identify the most informative features. @BULLET All is the full set of 33 informative features (47 from SAAPdap, but with the 14 redundant features, which were identical for all mutations, removed): BuriedCharge, Binding, CorePhilic, CisPro, Clash, Glycine, HBond, ImPACT, Interface, MutantLargestVoid1.. .MutantLargestVoid10, NativeLargestVoid1.. .NativeLargestVoid10, Proline, RelAccess, SurfacePhobic, Void. (See Supplementaryfor explanation of the feature names.) @BULLET Top 5 voids uses the top five largest voids (before and after mutation) instead of the standard top 10: BuriedCharge, Binding, CorePhilic, CisPro, Clash, Glycine, HBond, ImPACT, Interface, MutantLargestVoid1.. .NativeLargestVoid10 NativeLargestVoid1.. .NativeLargestVoid10 Proline, RelAccess, SurfacePhobic, Void. @BULLET Delta Voids uses the differences in the sizes of the top 10 voids in native and mutant structures rather than absolute values: BuriedCharge, Binding, CorePhilic, CisPro, Clash, Glycine, HBond, ImPACT, Interface, DeltaLargestVoid11.. . NativeLargestVoid1 Proline, RelAccess, SurfacePhobic, Void. @BULLET Set1 uses the three features from the 'All' set found, individually, to be most discriminatory together with the relative solvent accessibility. A v 2 test was performed applying the default 'damaging' threshold (Al) to each feature to determine how well the feature could separate mutations associated with HCM and DCM. See Supplementary Table S4. The three most informative features were found to be residue conservation, mutations affecting glycine residues and those affecting residues involved in specific binding interactions. Accessibility was also included since our observations of the clustering of HCM and DCM residues showed clear differences in accessibility within the clusters. Thus the feature set used was: Binding, RelAccess, ImPACT and Glycine. @BULLET Set2 was generated using the 'BestFirst' feature selection method within Weka. The 'BestFirst' algorthm searches the space of attribute subsets by greedy hillclimbing augmented with backtracking. The feature set based on feature selecting from the 'hemc set was: Binding, RelAccess, SurfacePhobic, CorePhilic, TotalVoidVolume, MutantLargestVoid, NativeLargestVoid, Clash, Proline, CisPro. @BULLET Set3 was also generated using the 'BestFirst' feature selection but on the 'Delta Voids' set. Selected features were: Binding, Interface, RelAccess, ImPACT, Hbond, BuriedCharge, DeltaVoidTotal, DeltaVoidLargest1,.. .NativeLargestVoid Clash, Glycine. Initially, the number of machine-learning models was tested using the full feature set ('All'), plus those feature sets that reduced the amount of void data ('Top 5 voids' and 'Delta voids'), with and without the clustering features. Having established that 11 models was the most effective, the reduced feature sets were explored using a smaller value of m try owing to the much reduced number of features.
Control experimentsThree control experiments were performed to ensure that the use of structural information in addition to sequence information or clustering was worthwhile. First, to demonstrate improved prediction over a simple sequence-based predictor, a set of control experiments was run using only features derived from sequence data. These experiments are described in detail in SupplementaryFile3.pdf. Briefly, two different amino acid encodings were used, with and without conservation score, residue number (since position in the sequence can be regarded as a proxy for domain information, given that it is known that some phenotypes correlate with certain domains) and contextual information (one, three or five amino acids either side of the mutated residue). In total, 10 feature sets were considered and for each, four experiments were performed using different machine learning approaches. Second, to ensure that the performance of the predictor does not come only from the structural clustering, we also tested the performance using the structural clusters alone. Using the 210 structural clusters described above, each cluster was assigned as a DCM or HCM cluster based on that phenotype having a higher observed/expected ratio in that cluster. An additional cluster was created to represent the mutations that map to the C-terminal domain (PDB code 2fxm or 2fxo) which has a very small number of DCM mutations. Each mutation was then predicted as DCM or HCM based on its cluster membership. For a real prediction problem, cluster membership would need to be assigned based on the distance to the closest cluster centre (average linkage) or closest cluster member (single linkage). Performance was then calculated for each level of clustering. Finally, as a control on the overall prediction, the testing was repeated using two of the test sets, but the labels were randomly shuffled five times over.
Results
MYH7 mutation data analysis and prediction of pathogenicityThe distribution of the variants amongst the structural and functionally-annotated domains of the beta-myosin heavy chain protein was analyzed. Supplementaryshows the regions for which structures are known and the distribution of observed mutations together with the domains of the Myosin-7 sequence as annotated by UniProtKB/SwissProt () (http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/P12883#section_features), Pfam () (http://pfam.xfam.org/protein/P12883), SMART () (http://smart.embl.de/smart/show_motifs.pl? IDP12883) and InterPro () (http://www.ebi.ac. uk/interpro/protein/P12883). All of the 238 unique variants that mapped to structure were located in the myosin globular 'head' domain or the 'neck' region with no mutations seen in the 'tail' or 'IQ motif' regions. 99.1% of mutations were in annotated domains or regions, while just two mutations (0.9%, at positions 82 and 838) were in un-annotated parts of the sequence. The numbers of HCM and DCM mutations seen in each of the annotated domains are shown in Supplementary Table S5. The individual structural effects for the 228 unique mutations which mapped to structure and for which a phenotype was also recorded (see Supplementary) were analyzed using SAAPdap. 175 variants (76.8%) had one or more individual structural effects classified as likely to be damaging by the individual SAAPdap analyses while for 55 variants, no significant individual structural effect was detected (see). The features affected most frequently were: mutation of a highly conserved residue (ImPACT) occurring in 138 variants; mutation of an interface amino acid occurring in 48 variants; and disruption of hydrogen-bonds occurring in 42 variants. Other significant mutation effects occurred less frequently, with no observed mutations causing voids. Before attempting to perform differential phenotype prediction, it would be necessary to predict that a mutation is pathogenic. The output from SAAPdap for the 228 unique mutations that mapped to structure was fed into SAAPpred (Al-Numair and Martin, 2013) and 93.0% of mutations were predicted as pathogenic (i.e. Sn  0.930). This compares with 69.51% predicted to be pathogenic using SIFT and 90% predicted to be pathogenic using PolyPhen-2. Other metrics such as specificity (Sp), accuracy (Acc), the F1-score and the Matthews' Correlation Coefficient (MCC) could not be calculated since no set of validated non-pathogenic single amino acid mutations is availableeven in the ESP 5K and 1000 Genomes data there are very few missense variants in MYH7 with a frequency >5% that could comfortably be classified as benign.
Initial machine learning results for differential phenotype predictionAs described in the Materials and Methods, machine learning was performed using random forests implemented in Weka with the 33 non-redundant features from SAAPdap structural analysis (Supplementary). Since each mutation mapped to multiple structures, cross-validation was performed outside Weka to ensure that the same mutation was not included in the training and testing sets (but mapped to different structures). The parameter space described by the number of features used in each tree decision point (m try ) and the number of trees (T) was explored and, as shown in, the best results were obtained using 1000 trees with 20 features (accuracy of 70% and MCC  0.41).
Structural clustering of mutationsAs described in the Materials and Methods, the Ca positions of the mutated residues were clustered using single linkage hierarchical clustering and a v 2 test was performed for each of 2.. .10 clusters, to see how well the clustering separated HCM from DCM mutations. Results are shown in. Apart from two clusters, these are all clearly significant at the P < 0.05 level. However, as the number of clusters gets larger, one needs to take care with the significance levels, because no more than 20% of expected values should be <5 and none <1 (significance will be over-estimated if either of these is true). For ! 4 clusters, the first of these fails and for ! 6 clusters the second also fails. However, between three and six clusters the significance is so good, that (while it will be over-estimated for 46 clusters) it is clearly still better than P < 0.05 with 3 clusters passing both of the validity criteria and giving a highly significant result even if a Bonferroni correction is made for multiple testing. Consequently we clearly have clusters of residues in the N-terminal region that are over/under populated with DCM and HCM mutations compared with what is expected.illustrates the three clusters in the N-terminal domain contained in PDB file 4db1. Cluster members are listed in SupplementaryFile2.txt and shown on the sequence in Supplementary. In particular, DCM is highly overrepresented in the third (blue/cyan) cluster. DCM mutations in clusters 1 and 2 (orange and yellow) are hardly visible and therefore mostly buried. On the other hand, the DCM mutations in cluster 3 (cyan) are largely on the surface.T is the number of trees; m try is the number of randomly chosen attributes in every split. Initially m try was explored using T  1000 and an optimum value of 20 was identified (shown in bold). T was then explored retaining the optimum value of 1000. Performance measures: accuracy (Acc) and Matthews' correlation coefficient (MCC). All scores are averaged over 10folds of 'manual' (non-WEKA) cross-validation.
Differential phenotype prediction of beta-myosin heavy chain variantsAs a control, to ensure that the significance of the clustering was not a random effect, we also permuted the labels randomly for the three clusters 1000 times over and calculated the average random Pvalue (P  0.5133, r n1  0:2859) from a v 2 test. This is clearly not significant and compares with the true labels which gave a P < 0.0003755. This p-value is 1.794 standard deviations away from the mean on the distribution of random P-values which is significant at the P < 0.05 level.
Optimizing the machine learningInitial training to explore the number of trees and features considered per decision point was performed as described in the materials and methods using 10 machine-learning models (equivalent to cross-validation folds, each with a random selection of the HCM data) with the prediction results averaged across the 10. After determining the optimum number of features considered per descision point and number of trees, the different feature subsets were explored together with different numbers of machine-learning models (5, 11 and 21 models). Addition of the 'clustering' feature described above was also explored. As shown in, the best performance was obtained using 11 machine-learning models with 'Set2' plus the clustering features. Cross-validation with 11 models used 19 of the 21 DCMs in each training set with 2 held back for testing. This gave an accuracy of 75% and MCC  0.531. By removing two machine-learning models that performed particularly badly and did not predict any DCM mutations (whether correct or incorrect), this increased to an accuracy of 79% and MCC  0.61. It appears that these particularly bad machine-learning models have failed to learn the characteristics of DCM mutations. To apply the method to novel mutations, we would remove these two bad machine-learning models and use the remaining nine to make predictions.
Control experimentsFirst, a set of 40 control experiments were performed to demonstrate improved prediction over a simple sequence-based predictor. Only five of the 40 experiments showed a mean MCC >0.1 with the best performance being a mean MCC  0.167 which is clearly considerably worse than our full predictor (MCC  0.53, or MCC  0.61 with the worst machine-learning models removed) See SupplementaryFile3.pdf. Second, a control experiment was performed to ensure that the performance of the predictor does not come only from the structural clustering, by assigning a prediction of DCM or HCM based purely on cluster membership. The best performance was achieved with three clusters (plus the C-terminal domain cluster): MCC  0.33, ACC  0.89, Sn HCM  0:95, Sn DCM  0:33. Clearly this performance is considerably worse than our full predictor as judged by MCC (full predictor MCC  0.53, or MCC  0.61 with the worst machine-learning models removed). This is also a good example to illustrate the well-known problem in machine learning that accuracy is a poor indicator of performance with unbalanced datasets (the cluster-only prediction gives ACC  0.89 while the full predictor gives ACC  0.75, or ACC  0.79 with the worst models machine-learning removed). However, simply predicting everything as HCM would give ACC  0.90 and, by definition, Sn HCM  1:00 and Sn DCM  0:00, while the MCC would be a much better indicator of overall performance giving a value of MCC  0.12 (adding 1 to TP,FP,TN,FN since TN  FN  0 results in a divide-by-zero error and treating HCM as positive and DCM as negative.). Finally, the overall prediction control experiment, shuffling the labels on two of the test sets randomly, as expected, gave essentially random prediction performance with an MCC  0.123 for the first test set and MCC  0.115 for the second test set.
DiscussionIt is logical to assume that the functional consequences of mutations in the same gene depend on the specific domain or region where theThe highest significance result is shown in bold. For the P-value to be reliable, there must be no more than 20% of expected counts less than five. Consequently the P-values for ! 4 clusters will be over-estimated.. Clustering Myosin-7 mutations in the N-terminal region using PDB file 4db1. For the three clusters, HCM mutations are shown in 1: red, 2: green and 3: blue, while DCM mutations are shown in 1: orange, 2: yellow and 3: cyan. DCM mutations are over-represented in cluster 3 (cyan); when they appear in clusters 1 and 2, (orange and yellow) they are mostly buried variant is localized (), but the hypothesis that the structural impact of a missense variant influences differential pathogenic phenotype or outcome has not previously been tested. In practice, a novel mutation would be tested for predicted pathogenicity before an HCM/DCM prediction was performed. We confirmed that the SAAPpred approach performs well in identifying pathogenic mutations in MYH7 and went on to test a machinelearning method that discriminated between pathogenic variants associated with an HCM or DCM phenotype (accuracy of 75% and MCC  0.531). This was achieved by averaging 11 machinelearning models using feature Set2 (Binding, RelAccess, SurfacePhobic, CorePhilic, Voids, MutantLargestVoid1, NativeLargestVoid1, Clash, Proline, CisPro and Clustering) and using 1000 trees with 5 features. These differential phenotype prediction results are surprisingly good considering the limited size of the dataset used in training. Indeed the results are as good as the overall performance of some methods used for general pathogenicity predictionfor example, our assessment (Al) of MutationAssessor showed an overall accuracy of 69.8% and MCC  0.453, while SIFT showed an overall accuracy of 76.3% and MCC  0.528. Clearly these results are comparable with what we are able to achieve for HCM/DCM differential phenotype prediction which is a more difficult problem owing to the small unbalanced dataset. By removing two machine-learning models that performed particularly badly, the performance was increased to an accuracy of 79% and MCC  0.61. Because the SAAPdap structural analysis relies on having a crystal structure of the protein in question, our predictions are limited to mutations in regions of the protein for which a structure has been solved. Consequently, we are only able to look at 190 of 290 unique mutations leading to HCM and 21 of 46 mutations leading to DCM. As structures become available for more of the protein, then this situation will improve and some new structures have become available since our dataset was built. However, for mutations that are present in disordered regions of structure, different methods of prediction will be required. It is also possible that the performance of the method may be further improved by taking into account missing parts of the structure. However, since all the structural parameters included in the prediction are the results of local interactions, this is unlikely to have a significant effect. Our analysis of the structural distribution of HCM-and DCMassociated mutations showed that there was a highly statistically significant difference in the locations of these mutations. Referring toand Supplementary, DCM is highly overrepresented in the blue/cyan cluster and largely on the surface, while DCM mutations present in the remaining clusters are mostly buried. The functional consequences of this distribution warrant further in vitro studies.
Conclusions and future directionsMissense single nucleotide variants in MYH7 lead to a dominant negative effect in which the mutated protein is not degraded but rather integrates into the sarcomere, leading to the disease phenotype. The various effects of individual variants on fibre contractile velocity, force and calcium sensitivity have been proposed as an explanation for the existence of dramatically different phenotypes arising from genetic variation in the same molecule. A paradigm has been proposed whereby mutations that increase motor activity and power output lead to HCM, while those that diminish motor function and decrease power output lead to DCM (). Our SAAPpred predictor currently relies on having a structure available for the protein in question, but planned enhancements include the use of modelled structures where no experimental structure is available and exploitation of structural information from homologues. In the same way, we plan to expand the data points for our differential phenotype predictor by including information from homologous proteins. In future work, we will also explore the newly available chimeric structures to see if they can be used for prediction of additional mutations. As more mutation data become available, we also intend to integrate a validated pathogenicity predictor with a three-class differential phenotype predictor (HCM versus DCM versus other) although there is no a priori reason to believe that all 'other' mutations will have shared properties, or indeed that they will have properties that are very different from HCM or DCM. As a preliminary experiment,Differential phenotype prediction of beta-myosin heavy chain variantswe selected 10 'other' mutations (some collected after the main dataset was built) at random and found that nine of them were predicted as pathogenic using SAAPpred. If the properties of these mutations are significantly different from HCM and DCM we might expect the confidence scores provided by the differential phenotype predictor to be very low. We analyzed all 10 mutations and found that eight were predicted as HCM and two as DCM. For two of the HCM predictions (including the one predicted as SNP by SAAPpred), the confidence score was indeed very low (<0.05), but for the others, the confidence was >0.3, typical of other predictions (see Supplementary). Nonetheless, we intend to explore this further. This work confirms the hypothesis that structural data can be used with machine learning to create a differential phenotype predictor, in this case able to distinguish between HCM and DCM mutations in MYH7. The performance exceeds that of the well-known SIFT program in the problem of predicting pathogenic versus neutral mutations. Differential phenotype prediction has all the challenges of pathogenicity prediction with the added complications of having a small unbalanced dataset. This work provides the basis for differential phenotype prediction and with further work could be used to guide clinical genetic testing strategies and further clinical investigations.Differential phenotype prediction of beta-myosin heavy chain variants
Funding
N.S.Al-Numair et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
