The FAF-Drugs2 server is a web application that prepares chemical compound libraries prior to virtual screening or that assists hit selection/lead optimization before chemical synthesis or ordering. The FAF-Drugs2 web server is an enhanced version of the FAF-Drugs2 package that now includes Pan Assay Interference Compounds detection. This online toolkit has been designed through a user-centered approach with emphasis on user-friendliness. This is a unique online tool allowing to prepare large compound libraries with in house or user-defined filtering parameters. Availability: The FAF-Drugs2 server is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONThe most established method for the identification of hit compounds modulating the functions of a target is experimental high-throughput screening (HTS). Alternatively or in parallel, screening can be performed in silico (virtual ligand screening or VLS) in order to prioritize compounds for in vitro screening. The screening process involves measurement/prediction of activities of sometimes millions of chemical compounds in vitro, on cells or in silico. The first two, in particular, are time consuming and costly, and as such, the preparation of the compound collections is critical. Analyses of past failures have led to a much better understanding of crucial properties that distinguish any chemical from an interesting drug-candidate or a relevant chemical probe. Thus, the concept of screening high-quality compound collections in terms of improved ADMET (absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, toxicity) properties and containing a reduced number of 'nuisance compounds' is gaining momentum. Hence, we decided to develop a user-friendly online tool dedicated to the preparation of compound collections. In fact, such a service, freely available and able to handle several thousands of compounds with either predefined filtering parameters * To whom correspondence should be addressed. or user-tuned parameters, assisting decision making has not been reported to date. Our online in silico filtering engine is based on a significantly improved version of a previously reported stand-alone package named FAF-Drugs2, standing for Free ADMET FilteringDrugs2 (), which was successfully employed for preparing compound datasets for different projects as in. While many free online services are available to compute molecular properties (), FAF-Drugs2 is the first free web-based package capable of preparing compound libraries through physicochemical rules, functional groups and Pan Assay Interference Compounds (PAINS) detection (). In the present application note, we describe the FAF-Drugs2 server highlighting the new functionalities introduced as compared with the original stand-alone package.
THE FAF-DRUGSSERVER
Improvements of FAF-Drugs2 in the web server versionFAF-Drugs2 client version requires as input the compound collection in SD or SMILES file format and two parameter files, one containing among others physicochemical thresholds and another one listing the chemical substructures that have to be investigated. Various output files are generated, e.g. SDF filtered files or a tabulated file reporting all the computed values/descriptors. The main improvements on the server version as compared with the FAF-Drugs2 stand-alone tool include: (i) a step before the filtering process to prepare and clean the electronic input molecular data file, with removal of empty structures, salts, counterions, inorganics, mixtures, duplicates. Further, we apply a standardization procedure on eight common chemical groups using SMARTS search and the ChemAxon Standardizer utility (see Supplementary Material). Yet, in order to compute some descriptors the way they were originally described, a rule-based protonation protocol is internally performed with OpenBabel (O')Finally, an intuitive visualization of the results through any web browser is now implemented. More explanations about our filtering engine protocol are detailed in the Supplementary Material and the online userguide.
ImplementationThe optimized FAF-Drugs2 engine has been embedded in the RPBS' Mobyle Portal (). Mobyle's features makes it the perfect solution for online toolkit implementation, because it offers: (i) a centralized workspace for the end-user (bookmarked results and parameters are stored on the server for further uses and backup); (ii) on-the-fly program results pipelining; and (iii) a userfriendly interface and a robust tool to interact with end users and control programs'execution on the server side (storage and resources quota, jobs tracking, etc.). The FAF-Drugs2 web server is organized as a toolkit composed of three services: (i) Bank-Formatter (e.g. converts SMILES input files to SD files format, see Supplementary Material); (ii) Filter-Editor (customizes user-defined filters); and (iii) the FAF-Drugs2 filtering service. The server has been validated and optimized: (i) on 10 000 molecules from the WEHI HTS library (see Supplementary Material); (ii) to be fully functional on popular operating systems and web browsers; and (iii) to run on our 800 nodes cluster (see Supplementary Material).
Interface featuresSD files, as long as they do not exceed 50 000 molecules, can be submitted to the FAF-Drugs2 either by uploading input files on the server or by pasting data in a dedicated window. Instead of using the Filter-Editor service, users can also choose among various physicochemical elsewhere-published pre-tuned filters; among others REOS () or ZINC (). Furthermore, users can decide to activate the PAINS and functional group substructures detection. When the process is terminated, while filtering result files can be downloaded, various analyses can be done directly in several internet browser windows, like a statistical analysis of the main descriptor distributions (), a pie chart summarizing the results for the substructures search (), a table detailing the results for each compound: the filtering options, the compound's 2D depiction via the ChemAxon molconvert tookit (), the compound projection (magenta) onto the first plan of the principal component analysis of the orally bioavailable (blue) DrugBank Small molecules () and a radar plot depicting some molecular properties important for oral absorption ().
SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVESThe FAF-Drugs2 web server is the first free web-based application devoted to compound library preparation and PAINS detection. The service can also be used to evaluate drug-like properties, the presence of an undesirable substructure and oral absorption of a small set of compounds before synthesis. This service should be of interest to both academic and private research groups.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
