Although translation initiation has been well studied, many questions remain in elucidating its mechanisms. An ongoing challenge is to understand how ribosomes choose a translation initiation site (TIS). To gain new insights, we analyzed large sets of TISs with the aim of identifying common characteristics that are potentially of functional importance. Nucleotide sequence context has previously been demonstrated to play an important role in the ribosome's selection of a TIS, and mRNA secondary structure is also emerging as a contributing factor. Here, we analyze mRNA secondary structure using the folding predictions of the RNAfold algorithm. We present a method for analyzing these results using a rank-ordering approach to assess the overall degree of predicted secondary structure in a given region of mRNA. In addition, we used a modified version of the algorithm that makes use of only a subset of the standard version's output to incorporate base-pairing polarity constraints suggested by the ribosome scanning process. These methods were employed to study the TISs of 1735 genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Trends in base composition and base-pairing probabilities suggest that efficient translation initiation and high protein expression are aided by reduced secondary structure upstream and downstream of the TIS. However, the downstream reduction is not observed for sets of TISs with nucleotide sequence contexts unfavorable for translation initiation, consistent with previous suggestions that secondary structure downstream of the ribosome can facilitate TIS recognition.
INTRODUCTIONIn the scanning model of translation initiation (), a small ribosomal subunit binds at the m7G cap of an mRNA transcript and scans in the 3 direction until it reaches the first AUG codon in an appropriate sequence context. The small subunit then assembles with the large ribosomal subunit and initiates translation of the open reading frame, terminating upon reaching the first in-frame stop codon. However, some instances of non-standard translational events such as leaky scanning (leaky initiation), alternative translation initiation and initiation at non-canonical * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(i.e. non-AUG) start codons fall outside the original model (). The recognition/initiation event depends partially on the nucleotide sequence context flanking the initiation codon. It has been noted previously that positions 3 and +4 relative to the initiation codon provide particularly strong cues (). Information-based measures of context based on sequence conservation surrounding aligned TISs suggest that other nucleotide positions also contribute to recognition. The translation relative individual information (TRII) score (Supplementary Material 1.1; M.Weir and M.Rice, submitted for publication) is a convenient and sensitive measure of sequence conservation in sets of aligned sequences. The TRII score of each sequence is the same as its individual information () but incorporates background nucleotide frequencies. By taking into account the relative frequencies of all four nucleotides at each position in an alignment of high-confidence functional start sites, TRII scores quantify an individual sequence's conformance to characteristic nucleotide preferences in the vicinity of the TIS. It has been shown that mRNA secondary structure can influence scanning and translating ribosomes. In various viruses, Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, pseudoknot secondary structures have been associated with frameshifting of translating ribosomes () and stop codon readthrough (). Secondary structure, including pseudoknots, can also influence the selection of a translation initiation site (TIS). Examples include functioning of viral internal ribosome entry sites (IRES) () and modulation through riboswitches characterized in prokaryotes; it is speculated that future studies may uncover analogous riboswitch regulation in eukaryotes (). Moreover, a hairpin positioned downstream of a TIS can increase the probability of initiation when the initiation codon is in an otherwise unfavorable nucleotide sequence context. It has been proposed that the effect of this hairpin is to slow the scanning ribosomal subunit, increasing the interaction between the initiation codon and the ribosomal machinery (). Conversely, a sufficiently stable hairpin upstream of a TIS can completely abolish initiation at that site, perhaps by interfering with the small ribosomal subunit before it reaches the TIS (). To evaluate further these roles of RNA secondary structure in TIS recognition, we applied the RNA folding algorithm RNAfold () to subsets of mRNAs selected based on TRII scores, proteome-scale protein expression studies () and ribosome-profiling studies (). Predicted RNA structures of TISs with high TRII scores (TRII high ) were compared with those of TISs with low TRII scores (TRII low ). Similarly, we compared RNA structures for TISs with higher and lower ribosome density (Ribosome high and Ribosome low , respectively) and genes with higher and lower protein expression. The trends revealed by these comparisons suggest how RNA secondary structure can influence both positively and negatively the functioning of the translation machinery.
METHODS
RNA folding simulationsRNAfold () was used to conduct folding simulations on various subsets of a set of 1735 S.cerevisiae genes. This HiConf set comprised annotated TISs in which we had high confidence (see Supplementary Material 1.1). The RNAfold program is based on an equilibrium partition function (). Rather than output only the minimum free energy structure of an input sequence, RNAfold considers the ensemble of all possible structures and weights each by its energetic favorability (). Based on the set of possible structures and their associated weights, RNAfold computes for each nucleotide in the input sequence the probability of base pairing with each other nucleotide in the sequence. The total base-pairing probability (TotalBPP) of a position in a nucleotide sequence is calculated by summing the individual probabilities of every possible pair involving that position. This metric was used to quantify a given mRNA region's overall potential to form secondary structure. The downstream base-pairing probability (DownBPP) of a nucleotide position is calculated by summing the individual probabilities of every possible base pair involving that position and any downstream position. The DownBPP metric may better reflect the probability that a nucleotide position is involved in a structure when a scanning ribosome encounters it, given that upstream nucleotides protected by the 30 nt ribosome footprint () may be less likely to be involved in mRNA secondary structure. Two approaches were used to interpret the RNAfold output. We examined base-pairing probabilities at the resolution of individual positions with the first approach, and we measured regional trends in base-pairing probability in the second approach to provide greater sensitivity when comparing sequence sets. The two approaches are described below.
Position-specific analysisTo investigate position-specific trends in predicted structure, sets of genes were aligned at their TISs and mean TotalBPP and mean DownBPP were calculated at each position. The position-specific approach was used to analyze aligned open reading frame (ORF) sequences. As a control, and to provide a benchmark for comparison, randomly generated sequences were subjected to the same analysis. For analysis of ORF sequences, we used randomly generated sequences with a frequency of 0.25 for each nucleotide (Random 0.25 ).
Rank-ordered analysisThe above position-specific approach has the disadvantage that unless positional base pairing is well aligned with the alignment landmark (TIS), high-probability base-pairing predictions in individual sequences will tend to be diluted in the computation of the mean. To address this problem, we used an alternative approach () that focused on the number and probability of base-pairing events (but not their specific locations) in a selected region of the sequence alignment. Sets of genes aligned at their TISs were analyzed for the overall degree of predicted secondary structure in a region chosen relative to the TIS. Positional TotalBPP values of each sequence in the alignment were sorted high-to-low (i.e. ranked) and equivalently ranked values were averaged (). This approach was used to analyze predicted secondary structure of 5 UTR sequences. Two sets of randomly generated sequences provided a baseline for comparison: Random 0.25 (see above) and Random UTR (which reflected nucleotide frequencies found in observed 5 UTRs () excluding the region from 40 to 1; see Section 3).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Upstream of AUG
Neighborhood assessment using TRII scoresThe eukaryotic consensus sequence surrounding a TISC C (A|G) C C AUG Gis typically considered to comprise a relatively narrow window of positions (). Similarly, the TIS in budding yeast has a narrow consensus sequence Consensus 0.5,0.5 = N A\U A\(C|U) N\G A\U AUG G C\(A|U)) defined by the frequency weight matrix for HiConf TISs (), where A\(G|U) denotes 'A and not G and not U' (M.Weir and M.Rice, submitted for publication). The consensus is dominated by excluded nucleotides which have negative weight matrix values (). Computation of TRII scores over the interval 5 to +5 reveals that the score distribution for 1735 HiConf start sites can be distinguished from the distribution for 2000 Random UTR artificial sites (). Although the distinction is more subtle, HiConf sites can also be distinguished from Random UTR sites by comparing the distributions of TRII scores computed over the interval 20 to 6 (). This suggests that there are characteristics upstream of functional start sites that may contribute to recognition and initiation.
Nucleotide frequency profilesTo investigate the upstream region and the nature of its apparent contribution to TIS recognition, positional nucleotide frequencies were calculated for an alignment of the 713 HiConf genes () having 5 UTR  100. A strong trend was noted for the HiConf subset beginning at approximately position 40. The frequency of A increases to about 42% while the frequency of U decreases to about 26%. In contrast, the frequencies of G and C remain fairly uniform over this region, although G is a little depressed compared to C. While the AU and GC content are fairly uniform, there is selection for A over U and for C over G in the coding strand of double-stranded DNA upstream of the TIS.. Each set was analyzed for secondary structure upstream of the TIS using the rank-ordering approach (see). The TRII high and Ribosome high subsets (unfilled circles) exhibited a significant reduction of predicted secondary structure while the TRII low and Ribosome low subsets (gray triangles) exhibited a slight reduction compared with sets of random sequences Random 0.25 (gray diamonds) and Random UTR (gray squares). (D) A nucleotide secondary structure (NSS) index of a position in an alignment was calculated by subtracting the frequency of A at that position from the sum of the frequencies of U and G. A higher NSS index indicates a greater propensity for secondary structure formation; shown is the NSS index profile of TRII high genes. A strong depression is evident over 40..+1, and a more subtle depression is evident in the critical region +10 to +20. (E) To examine secondary structure downstream of the TIS, mean DownBPP values were computed for each position in alignments of TRII high (black) and TRII low (gray), which in this case comprised the top 10% and bottom 515% of TRII scorers, respectively. Both subsets exhibit a depression in the critical region +10 to +20 compared to Random 0.25 (light gray), and TRII high exhibits a more pronounced depression than TRII low. Similar effects were observed monitoring TotalBPP instead of DownBPP (The base-pairing potential of U is higher than A. While A can base pair only with U, the U nucleotide can base pair with either A or G, the latter through non-canonical G:U pairing. Hence, we speculated that the observed elevated A and depressed U and G indicated that there is selection for reduced RNA structure in the region upstream of the TIS. To investigate this possibility, we examined predicted RNA structure upstream of the TIS.
Predicted RNA secondary structureGiven that the region 40 to 1 has been implicated in TIS recognition, we used the RNAfold algorithm to predict RNA secondary structures. Because the nucleotide frequency profiles () did not suggest that the precise positions of base pairing were likely to be important, we decided to use a rank-ordering filter to assess the predictions. This approach () indicates the number of high-probability base-pairings over a region. After running RNAfold on mRNA sequences from 60 to +60, we applied the rank-ordering filter to the set of output probabilities (TotalBPP; see Section 2) for positions 40 to 1. For analysis, we chose to compare TRII high with TRII low (see Supplementary Material 1.1;). As controls, RNAfold was run Page: 2654 26512655
A.Robbins-Pianka et al.on Random UTR and Random 0.25 sequences. Compared to both sets of controls, the TRII high set showed highly depressed predicted base pairing, whereas the TRII low subset has less pronounced depression (Figs. 2C1, S3A). An analogous assessment of positions 8 to 1 () similarly showed a negative correlation between TIS quality and TotalBPP. This result is consistent with the idea that the TRII score, which was applied to a window of 40 to +40 relative to the AUG, incorporates sequence preferences that tend to reduce RNA secondary structure. Indeed, the weight matrix used to compute TRII scores generally has small positive entries for A and small negative entries for U upstream of 6 (similar to, shaded weight matrix entries), consistent with this interpretation. These trends are also illustrated by the profile of a nucleotide secondary structure index, NSS = (freq U + freq G  freq A), which has a pronounced depression between 40 and 1 (TRII high ,; compare with TRII low ,), providing a striking delineation of the TIS. Since TRII scores indicate how well sequences conform to TIS consensus sequences, we wished to test whether genes with high protein expression similarly show depressed predicted secondary structure upstream of the TIS. Recent ribosome profiling analysis using deep sequencing () has suggested that ribosome tag densities are an excellent indicator of protein expression. Therefore, we selected from the HiConf set a subset of 165 genes with high ribosome tag densities (Ribosome high , see Supplementary Material 1.1). Compared to both sets of controls (Random UTR and Random 0.25 ), the Ribosome high set showed highly depressed predicted base pairing (Figs. 2C2, S3B) and NSS index (), suggesting that depression of RNA structure in the region preceding the TIS facilitates efficient initiation and translation. Equivalent depression of secondary structure was observed in transcripts that exhibited a high-density ribosome profile in only one of the two growth conditions tested, rich or amino acid-starved media (), suggesting that low RNA structure facilitates the potential for regulated high protein expression. We also tested a subset of the HiConf set with 165 genes with detectable but low ribosome tag densities (Ribosome low ). Ribosome low exhibited much less pronounced depression in predicted secondary structure () and NSS index (), suggesting that there is less selection against secondary structure for lower expression genes. Equivalent results were observed for subsets of HiConf partitioned based on protein expression () rather than ribosome densities. Based on proteome-scale western analysis of TAP and GFP tagged proteins (), we generated subsets of HiConf with high (Protein high ) and low but detectable (Protein low ) protein expression. Like the Ribosome high set, Protein high showed depressed secondary structure upstream of the TIS whereas Protein low had much less pronounced depression. Transcript sequences for genes with high-confidence TISs were also examined in Drosophila melanogaster and Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Depression of NSS index () and predicted secondary structure () were observed in the region upstream of the TIS and this was more pronounced for high-TRII score and high protein expression TISs; suppression of secondary structure was also observed downstream of the AUG start codon (; see Section 3.2). These effects were more pronounced in D.melanogaster than S.pombe, suggesting that the contributions of mRNA secondary structure to translation initiation may vary between species.
Downstream of AUGOur observations above indicate that genes with high TRII scores, high ribosome densities and high protein expression benefit from depressed RNA secondary structure upstream of the TIS. We were interested whether depression of RNA structure downstream of the TIS is also beneficial. This was of particular interest since previous studies () have suggested that elevated secondary structure in the region 1317 nucleotides downstream of the TIS can facilitate TIS recognition by the ribosome, particularly for poorer context TISs. We applied the RNAfold algorithm to the subsets TRII high and TRII low but in this case, the algorithm was applied to +1 to +60 relative to the TIS. We used a modified version of RNAfold in which we only collected the probabilities of base pairing downstream of each nucleotide position (DownBPP; see Section 2). In considering scanning of the ribosome from 5 to 3 , we were interested in the probability of downstream base pairing given that upstream positions would likely be protected by the ribosome footprint. Also, unlike our earlier analysis, we did not apply the rank-order filter to the RNAfold output because we wished to preserve nucleotide position information given that previous studies have implicated as important the region near nucleotides 1317 downstream of the TIS. Instead of using the rank-order filter, we computed for each nucleotide position the mean DownBPP in each test set TRII high , TRII low and Random 0.25. When compared to Random 0.25 , we observed a depression in predicted RNA secondary structure in the critical region +10 to +20. This depression was most pronounced for highly expressed genesTRII high (Figs. 2E, S9) and Ribosome high () and least pronounced for low expression genesTRII low (Figs. 2E, S9) and Ribosome low (). These results suggest that efficient translation is facilitated by reduced RNA structure in the region immediately downstream of the ribosome (approximately nucleotide positions +10 to +20 downstream of the TIS). Our results agree with previous observations () that poorer sequence context TISs have elevated predicted RNA structure downstream of the TIS. However, it may be more appropriate to consider the predicted RNA structure in TRII low sequences to be less depressed rather than elevatedTRII low sequences show depressed predicted RNA structure when compared with Random 0.25 sequences, but less depressed RNA structure when compared to TRII high. Hence, for suboptimal start sites, there may be a balance between two opposing selection forces: (i) selection for depressed secondary structure to increase translation rates and (ii) selection for elevated secondary structure in the downstream region to create a partial barrier to scanning and thereby increase the likelihood of translation initiation. Other studies have suggested that in addition to RNA structure properties, efficiency of translation is influenced by selection for codons with high tRNA adaptation indices (tAI) () and clustering of codons on mRNAs that use the same tRNA (). Examination of mean tAI indices for TRII high and TRII low , as well as Ribosome high and Ribosome low , and Protein high and Protein low () suggests that, as expected, the higher expression genes show selection for higher tAI index Page: 2655 26512655
mRNA landscape at yeast translation initiation sitescodons, which are better represented in the cell's tRNA pool. The higher expression genes also show selection for clustering of codons that utilize the same tRNA ().
ConclusionsFor highly expressed genes, there is selection against RNA secondary structure upstream of the TIS (positions 40 to 1) and in a critical region downstream of the TIS (positions +10 to +20). Reduction in secondary structure may facilitate efficient initiation by the ribosome. Elevation of A and depression of U or G content appear to contribute to reduced RNA structure (Figs. 2F, S8). For lower expression genes, there is less selection against RNA secondary structure, both upstream of the TIS and in the region predicted to be immediately downstream of the footprint of an initiating ribosome (positions +10 to +20). The presence of secondary structure downstream of the AUG is thought to facilitate ribosome pausing over the start site region, increasing the likelihood of translation initiation. These results suggest that future algorithms for prediction of protein translation initiation will benefit from inclusion of classifiers that incorporate predicted RNA structure upstream and downstream of the TIS.
The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org 2651 at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
