Plasmodium falciparum (Pf)-mediated malaria is one of the most devastating diseases in the world, and the search for suitable antimalarial drugs remains an extraordinary challenge for scientists working in this area. Novel unconventional approaches could reveal new potential targets that may be useful for the treatment of malaria. We used a bioinformatics approach to analyze the entire genome of the Pf3D7 strain. Because the carbon (C-) content is a pivotal parameter that determines the hydrophobicity of a protein, which in turn controls protein folding and function, we analyzed the entire Pf3D7 proteome based on the gene's thymine (T)-controlled amino acid expression. Our data disclose a total of 14 proteins encoded by chromosome-4 and chromosome-9 that have an outstanding T-encoded and C-controlled hydrophobic character. The identification of these proteins could open new pivotal drug-targeting avenues.
INTRODUCTIONThe most prevalent and lethal malaria parasite that infects humans, Plasmodium falciparum (Pf), may have recently undergone host switching to become a Plasmodia adaptation that is specific for humans (). P.falciparum is the most deadly of the five Plasmodium species that cause human malaria, which is the world's second largest cause of death after tuberculosis (). Thus we have chosen to analyze the completely sequenced and annotated Pf3D7 strain. The Pf3D7 nuclear genome is composed of 22.8 megabases, which are distributed among 14 chromosomes (Chrs) (). Despite the completion of the Pf3D7 genome and comparative proteomics studies (), we are far from a strategy for curing this disease because there are still too many uncharacterized proteins to obtain a reasonable understanding of the disease-causing activity of P.falciparum.The base thymine (T) defines the stability of an organism at the nucleotide level and, in turn, also controls the proteins' carbon (C-) content and thus hydrophobicity for stability and activity. Hydrophobic residues are important for dictating topological features of proteins because hydrophobic interactions are the dominant force in proper protein folding and in organizing the self-assembly of water-soluble globular proteins (). In the current study, we analyzed the entire Pf3D7 genome with regard to the T-content to identify potential novel proteins that could have pivotal significance in Pf3D7-mediated malaria.
METHODS
DatasetCoding regions (CDRs) of the complete set of 5334 messenger RNA sequences available for the Pf3D7 species studied here were downloaded from a public database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) (Supplementary).
Thymine distribution calculationUsing the programing language Perl, T-distribution analyses were conducted for all of the CDRs of the genes of each chromosome of Pf3D7 {fraction of T  [number of T residues in the gene (CDR)]/[total number of nucleotides in the gene (CDR)]} (Supplementary).
Calculatingthe absolute and relative amino acid numbers and protein lengths encoded by chromosome1-14 of Pf3D7We used previously described vectors () to calculate the proteins' length and amino acid (AA) composition (Supplementary Figs S3S6).
Hydrophobic and hydrophilic AA distribution in the Pf3d7 proteomeWe calculated the protein hydrophobicity under the consideration that XTX-encoded (X  A, T, G or C; T  thymine) AAs, such as phenylalanine, isoleucine, leucine, methionine and valine (FILMV; group A), and nonXTX-encoded AAs, such as glycine, alanine, proline, cysteine and tryptophan (GAPCW; group B), were considered separately. The composition FILMV  [(sum of the residues FILMV in a protein)/ (total number of residues in the protein)] was calculated for all of the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. proteins encoded by all of the 14 chromosome of Pf3D7, followed by calculation of the average composition for each chromosome. Similarly, the composition of GAPCW  [(sum of residues GCAPW in a protein)/(total number of residues in the protein)] (Supplementary Figs S7 and S8).
Carbon distribution in all of the proteins of Pf3d7We calculated the C-content in all of the AAs and proteins of Pf3D7 by translating the protein sequences into their corresponding atomic sequences and applying the carbon distribution (CARd) program () (Supplementary).
RESULTS
Thymine distribution and protein length encoded by all 14 chromosomes of Pf3D7Chr-4 has a relatively low T-fraction, whereas the T-content in Chr-9 is rather high. Considering the length of the proteins (Chr4 encodes for relatively long proteins), we show that the amounts of the AAs asparagine (D) and glutamate (glutamic acid, E) are relatively high, but the amount of phenylalanine (F) is relatively low in the proteins encoded by Chr-4 (Supplementary Figs S2S6).
Hydrophobic residue compositions of all of the proteins of Pf3D7On the one hand, Chr-4 has relatively few XTX-encoded hydrophobic AAs, whereas Chr-9 has a relatively high number of XTX-encoded hydrophobic AAs. On the other hand, Chr-4 and Chr-9 encode for a moderate number of nonXTX-encoded hydrophobic AAs, whereas Chr-12 encodes for a low number of nonXTX-encoded hydrophobic AAs (Supplementary Figs S7 and S8).
Carbon fraction analysis of all of the proteins of Pf3D7Furthermore, we found that the proteins encoded by Chr-4 have a lower protein C-content than the proteins of all of the other chromosomes, whereas Chr-1 and Chr-9 encode for proteins with a relatively high C-content (Supplementary).
Identification of 10 proteins encoded by Chr-4 of Pf3D7Recognizing that Chr-4 has a low T-content overall, encodes for a relatively high average protein length with a low content of XTX-encoded hydrophobic AAs and a low C-content (Supplementary Figs S2, S6, S7 and S9), we examined 10 proteins encoded by this Chr-4 more closely. We found that the relatively high XTX-encoded hydrophobicity of proteins 8 (329 AAs) and 10 (778 AAs) could be explained by their transmembrane (TM) domains, and that of protein-9 could be explained by its length (1111 AAs). The particularly high XTX-encoded hydrophobicity of protein-7 [413 AAs, probably S-adenosyl-methionine-dependent methyltransferase (SAM-or AdoMet-MTase, class I)], however, cannot be explained by its length nor a TM domain (; Supplementaryand Supplementary Tables S1 and S3).
Proteins 1114 encoded by Chr-9 of Pf3D7We also examined Chr-9 more closely because it had the highest content of XTX-encoded hydrophobic AAs; its carbon content was also high (Supplementary Figs S7 and S9). Among the 375 XTX-encoded hydrophobic proteins, we determined that proteins 1114 had a particularly high FILMV fraction (, Supplementaryand Supplementary Tables S2, S4S6). It is noteworthy that proteins 114 are all relatively rich in Asn (N, polar AA, uncharged side chain) and/or Lys (K, basic AA charged side chain); both of these AAs are non-hydrophobic AAs that have an additional NH 2 group in their side chains. It has already been shown that Pf has a higher Asn frequency than other Plasmodium species ().Our approach also identified the well-known protein rifin. Independent of the length of the proteins and across chromosomes 4 and 9, we found three ATPases (proteins 9, 10 and 12) and several membrane-associated proteins, all of which are further discussed below.
DISCUSSION
XTX-and non-XTXencoded AAs and C-content in the Pf3D7 proteomeWe found that chromosomes 4 and 7 of Pf3D7 had the lowest level of XTX-encoded AAs and the lowest C-content. In contrast, Chr-9 has the highest level of XTX-encoded AAs and the highest C-content (Supplementary Figs S7 and S9) and hence could encode for more globular proteins. Most of the proteins on these chromosomes have not been characterized yet. However, their characterization is of utmost importance because it is tempting to speculate that the relative T-encoded C-content of Chr-4 could account for the higher virulence of Pf (). The 14 proteins disclosed here have a divergent hydrophobic feature, thus attracting special attention for future functional investigations. Noticeably, protein-3 (its Cwc25 domain indicates its involvement in catalyzing spliceosome reactions) has an outstanding C-content, whereas the overall low T-content of gene-14 (serine/threonine protein kinase, FIKK family) correlates with a low protein C-content, therefore providing these two proteins exceptional qualities ().
Protein-7: AdoMet-MTaseAdoMet-MTases use SAM as a substrate for methyl transfer to create the product S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine (AdoHcy), which is used by AdoHcy hydrolases. AdoMet-MTases and AdoHcy hydrolases are currently under intense investigation as putative drug targets for the treatment of malaria (). The AdoMet-MTases are putatively redox-regulated proteins in malarial parasites and provide a functional link between AdoMet-MTases (protein-7, Chr-4) and Tlp2 (protein-11, Chr-9) ().
Protein-8: RifinRifin and stevor are proteins with variable surface antigens that are uniquely found in the malaria parasites P.falciparum and Plasmodium reichenowi. These two pathogens have evolved strategies to survive within the hosts they infect by varying the antigens they expose to the host immune system, which usually results in the proliferation of multicopy protein families that are commonly called variable surface antigens ().
Protein-9: AAA  ATPaseThis AAA  ATPase contains a von Willebrand factor type A domain [MDN1, midasin homolog; the members of this subgroup have a conserved MIDAS (metal ion-dependent adhesion site) motif; however, the function of this domain is not known]. AAA  ATPases are involved, inter alia, in promoting the degradation of ubiquinated proteins by the proteasome (). In P.falciparum, these proteins have also been described as being involved in DNA replication and transcription, chromatin remodeling, genome stability () and intra-erythrocytic schizogony () and also as being part of a novel export machine in malarial parasites (),
Protein-10: ATPaseProtein-10 contains a TM-and a LITAF-ABC2 domain. The P.falciparum ATP-binding cassette (ABC)-type transporter superfamily is composed of 16 members, and current knowledge of their physiological function and contribution to antimalarial drug resistance is limited (). In humans, an association of ABCA1 promoter polymorphisms with susceptibility to severe malaria has been reported (). The P.falciparum multidrug resistance gene 1 (pfmdr1) encodes a food vacuolar membrane transporter and has been linked with parasite drug resistance. P.falciparum develops resistance by gradually acquiring genetic polymorphisms that decrease drug susceptibility ().
Protein-11: Tlp2P.falciparum possesses a functional thioredoxin and glutathione system comprising the dithiol-containing redox proteins thioredoxin (Trx), glutaredoxin (Grx) and plasmoredoxin (Plrx) (). To maintain the intracellular redox balance,P.falciparum uses this complex thioredoxin and glutathione system (). Among their target proteins, several enzymes involved in SAM metabolism have been described, which suggests that redox control is required to balance the metabolic fluxes of SAM between methyl group transfer reactions and polyamine synthesis ().
Protein-12: V-ATPaseIon transport processes are expected to play a role in both pathogenicity and adaptation. The V-type H -ATPase is critical during the intra-erythrocytic stage of the human malaria parasite P.falciparum; it is responsible for maintaining a near-neutral cytosolic pH (pH 7.3), an acidic digestive vacuole (pH 4.55.5) and an inside-negative plasma membrane potential. Disruption of parasite pH regulation through the inhibition of its V-type H -ATPase results in parasite death and has thus been considered as an antimalarial approach ().
Protein-13Protein-13 is a TM protein with a putative rpoC2 domain that is usually found in DNA-directed RNA polymerase subunits. Localization of RNA replication to intracellular membranes, such as the mitochondria, is a universal feature of positivestrand RNA viruses and has been described previously (). In conclusion, we disclose 14 proteins of the Pf3D7 proteome with a pivotal T-encoded and C-controlled hydrophobic feature that determines the proteins' folding, structure and function. Further molecular and cellular experiments could confirm these molecules as functional therapeutic targets for the treatment of P.falciparum-induced malaria.
The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
B.Palanisamy et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Thymine distribution in genes at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
