Tiki proteins appear to antagonize Wnt signalling pathway by acting as Wnt proteases, thereby affecting Wnt solubility by its amino-terminal cleavage. Tiki1 protease activity was shown to be metal ion-dependent and was inhibited by chelating agents and thus was tentatively proposed to be a metalloprotease. Nevertheless, Tiki proteins exhibit no detectable sequence similarity to previously described metalloproteases, but instead have been reported as being homologues of TraB proteins (Pfam ID: PF01963), a widely distributed family of unknown function and structure. Here, we show that Tiki proteins are members of a new superfamily of domains contained not just in TraB proteins, but also in erythromycin esterase (Pfam ID: PF05139), DUF399 (domain of unknown function 399; Pfam ID: PF04187) and MARTX toxins that contribute to host invasion and pathogenesis by bacteria. We establish the core fold of this enzymatic domain and its catalytic residues.
INTRODUCTIONWnt signalling is a key developmental pathway controlling both embryonic development and tissue maintenance by regulation of stem cell proliferation in adults. Aberrant activation of the Wnt signalling pathway can lead to uncontrolled cell proliferation. Wnt-related diseases are extensive in number and include neurodegenerative disease, inflammatory bowel disease, cleft lip/palate disorders and various cancers (). The first Wnt gene was discovered 430 years ago, and despite extensive research into this signalling pathway, it has remained unclear how Wnt morphogen levels and activities are regulated. In large part, this is because of the vast numbers of Wnt isoforms, receptors, co-receptors and different secreted antagonists encoded in animal genomes (). Our understanding of Wnt signalling has recently been advanced substantially by the characterization of Tiki1, a gene which when over-expressed in Xenopus embryos results in head enlargement; Tiki refers to large-headed humanoid carvings in Polynesian cultures. Tiki1, and its paralogue Tiki2, antagonize Wnt activity upstream of its receptors ().
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Computational protein sequence analysis. The TIKI domain.Initially, we performed a sequence similarity search using the human Tiki1 protein as query using BLAST (). A multiple sequence alignment of Tiki homologous sequences was generated with T-Coffee () and used as input to make a profile using HMMER2 (). Iterative profile versus sequence searches against the UniRef50 protein sequence database () identified a conserved region that more clearly defines the family of Tiki homologous proteins (corresponding to amino acids 52331 of human Tiki1). The resulting Tiki alignment is extended relative to the TraB Pfam family (PF01963) (), which subsequently provided greater power to identify remote homologies. We then compared sequence conservation profiles from different protein families using HHpred (Soding) against Pfam () and pdb70 profile databases (Soding). Our first finding was that the conserved region in the Tiki/TraB family is similar in sequence to domain of unknown function 399 (DUF399) proteins () and to a family of erythromycin esterases () () (E-value: 1.7  10 3 ; Supplementary). Both families have structurally characterized members: for the DUF399 family, ChaN [protein data bank (PDB)]: 2G5G) () was identified as a heme interacting protein, although no enzymatic function for this protein was suggested. The erythromycin esterase family has two structurally characterized members: BcR136 (PDB: 2QGM) and BcR135 (PDB: 2RAD & 3B55) (Northeast Structural Genomics Consortium, unpublished). A detailed functional characterization, including active site identification and structural interpretation, was recently published for the erythromycin esterase EreB protein (). The structural similarity between DUF399 and erythromycin esterase families has already been described by(Supplementary). Unexpectedly, in the subsequent profile-versus-profile comparison analysis, we then also found sequence similarity to close homologues of the Pasteurella multocida Toxin (PMT, also known as the Dermonecrotic Toxin) (E-value: 6.9  10 2 ; Supplementary); this sequence similarity was restricted to the C2-2 domain whose tertiary structure is known in PMT (). The C2-2 domain-containing family is made up of multidomain protein toxins such as PMT and MARTX proteins from Vibrio cholerae, Vibrio vulnificus and *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com. Multiple sequence alignment of representative TIKI domain-containing families. Multiple sequence alignments for each family (Tiki/TraB, erythromycin esterase, DUF399 and Dermonecrotic toxins/MARTX) were generated with the program T-Coffee () using default parameters, slightly refined manually and visualized with the Belvu program (). The final superfamily alignment was generated using a combination of profile-to-profile comparisons (Soding) and sequence alignments derived from structural superpositions for those families whose structure is known (). Active site residues are labelled and coloured according to reference protein sequences: Tiki1, ChaN (DUF399 family), erythromycin esterase family member BcR136 (PDB: 2QGM, Northeast Structural Genomics Consortium, unpublished) and V.vulnificus MARTX in blue, grey, red and green, respectively. Families of TIKI domain-containing proteins are indicated by coloured bars to the left of the alignment: TIKI/TraB, DUF399, erythromycin esterase, C2-2 Dermonecrotin Toxin in blue, grey, red and green, respectively. Secondary structure predictions () were performed for the TIKI/TraB family (show in ss_pred lane), these are consistent with X-ray determined secondary structures of the DUF399 family member ChaN (PDB: 2G5G) (Aeromonas hydrophila (), as well as bacterial effector proteins from Pseudomonas syringae and Erwinia amylovora (). MARTX toxins, the most experimentally studied group of this family, are large proteins characterized by the presence of RtxA repeats (Pfam ID: PF07634) at the N and C termini, essential for translocation of the central portion of the toxin across the eukaryotic plasma membrane. After autoproteolysis of the holotoxin, at the host cell cytosol, the effector domains located in the central region of the toxin are released, which possess critical functions in toxinosis, and promote colonization and evasion of host immune system (). The C2-2 domain is one such effector domain whose function in pathogenesis has remained unknown. The unexpected finding of sequence similarity between erythromycin esterases and close homologues of PMT, prompted us to compare their known protein tertiary structures, which subsequently were revealed as being similar (PDB codes 2QGM and 2EBF; DALI Z-score  7, root-meansquare-deviation of superimposed alpha-carbon atoms  3.6 A  over 126 aligned residues with 13% identity; Supplementary Figs. S1 and S2) (). The shared core domain contains four beta-strands and five alpha-helices, precisely where the catalytic residues described in the esterase structure are located (Supplementary) (). Three reasons likely explain why these remote homologous relationships between C2-2 domains of bacterial toxins, erythromycin esterase/DUF399 and Tiki/TraB families had hitherto escaped detection: (i) the insertion of a non-conserved helical region that interrupts this domain (and Supplementary); (ii) the low degrees of sequence identity among the different members of the superfamily; and (iii) the absence of the putative catalytic residues in the C2-2 domain of the structurally characterized PMT (see TOXA_2EBF sequence in), which are otherwise conserved in many members of this family of bacterial toxins (see representative members shown in green inand Supplementary). Reciprocal profile versus profile similarity searches produced convergent results, which is strongly indicative of homology (Supplementary). No further homologues were identified in subsequent sequence similarity searches. Additionally, a secondary structure prediction was performed for the TIKI/TraB family (ss_pred lane inand Supplementary) (), showing good agreement with the known secondary structure of different members of the superfamily (lanes: 2C5G, 2QGM and 2EBFX inand Supplementary). The described similarities in sequence and structure provide strong evidence that TIKI/TraB, erythromycin esterase, DUF399 and C2-2 domain-containing proteins families form a new superfamily of enzymes. We term the domain common to all of these proteins 'TIKI', as it lies at the head of this large and diverse superfamily.
Reaction mechanism and active site conservationTIKI superfamily proteins appear to catalyze different hydrolytic (esterase or protease) reactions and are characterized by a number of conserved amino acids (and Supplementary) that form part of the recently described erythromycin esterase active site (showed that the Escherichia coli erythromycin esterase EreB activity is highly dependent on two amino acids (H46 and E74 in EreB; H84 and E112 in Bcr136), which correspond to human Tiki1 (H60 and E87). It is notable that these two amino acids, together with structurally adjacent basic residues (R304 and H332 in Tiki1), are highly conserved across TIKI domain proteins (and Supplementary). Consequently, we propose that enzymatically active TIKI domain proteins adopt the catalytic mechanism of the erythromycin esterase family wherein a conserved His Glu pair activates a water molecule, which acts as a nucleophile to hydrolyse a carbonyl group, which is common to both ester and peptide bonds (). The proposed metal ion-dependence described for Tiki1 () and EreA (erythromycin esterase family) may not be extended to all TIKI superfamily members because the reaction mechanism is metal ion-independent and resistant to chelating agents in EreB and Bcr136 members of the erythromycin esterase family ().. Continued after the protein name indicates the domain-repeat number when more than one TIKI domain is detected in the sequence (in E2XM72 and F3HPV8 bacterial toxin proteins). Sequences are named according to their UniProt identification or common name (details provided in Supplementary). Below the alignment are shown known and predicted 3D structures of representative members of the TIKI superfamily. Highly conserved residues in TIKI domains that form part of their predicted active centres are labelled and side chains shown using sticks. The human Tiki1 and V.vulnificus MARTX TIKI domains' structural models were created using Modeller () based on the DUF399 family member ChaN (PDB: 2G5G) (
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CONCLUSION Our analyses demonstrate that human TIKI proteins lie at the head of a widely phyletically distributed protein superfamily that includes not only the TraB family but also erythromycin esterase, DUF399 and MARTX families. Furthermore, our identification of likely active site residues in TIKI and MARTX proteins should assist experiments that investigate the function of these critical proteins in different human pathologies and encourage the development of drugs that target the identified TIKI superfamily conserved active centre of enzymes, with key roles in antibiotic resistance (erythromycin esterase family), bacterial toxinosis (MARTX and Dermonecrotic toxin families) and the Wnt signalling pathway (TIKI family). During completion of this work, Bazan et al. (2013) reported similar results that focused on the description of the TIKI/TraB subfamily. Our work complements these results by presenting a more extensive description and annotation of sequence conservation in the predicted active site across TIKI subfamilies.
Tiki, at the head of a new superfamily of enzymes at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
