Scientists, educators and the general public often need to know times of divergence between species. But they rarely can locate that information because it is buried in the scientific literature, usually in a format that is inaccessible to text search engines. We have developed a public knowledgebase that enables data-driven access to the collection of peer-reviewed publications in molecular evolution and phylogenetics that have reported estimates of time of divergence between species. Users can query the TimeTree resource by providing two names of organisms (common or scientific) that can correspond to species or groups of species. The current TimeTree web resource (TimeTree2) contains timetrees reported from molecular clock analyses in 910 published studies and 17 341 species that span the diversity of life. TimeTree2 interprets complex and hierarchical data from these studies for each user query, which can be launched using an iPhone application, in addition to the website. Published time estimates are now readily accessible to the scientific community, K–12 and college educators, and the general public, without requiring knowledge of evolutionary nomenclature. Availability: TimeTree2 is accessible from the URL
Fig. 1. Growthin the number of publications per year reporting molecular clock based estimates of species divergence times. Potentially relevant publications (>19 000) were retrieved from Google Scholar () by using the query: ( " molecular clock " OR " divergence time " OR " divergence times " OR " molecular time " OR " molecular divergence " OR " molecular date " OR " molecular dates " OR " divergence dates " ) NOT (circadian OR disorder OR periodicity). A randomly selected subset of 20 publications was examined for each year to generate the estimated numbers of relevant publications. We expect these numbers to be minimums because our search strings will not produce all relevant articles.Scientists and non-scientists frequently need to know when two species diverged in geologic time. Beyond that basic information, many wish to know if there is a consensus in the expert scientific community regarding the average or range of published times, and relevant publications. Answers cannot be generated by text mining the corpus of published literature (e.g. Google search). This is because the primary information on species and divergence times is in evolutionary trees that (i) appear in graphical formats (images) and (ii) contain hierarchical information among species, neither of which is accessible in text searches. For this reason, we have developed a professional resource in which divergence times reported in the form of phylogenetic trees scaled to time (timetrees), in tables, and in the regular text in 910 studies have been collected in a relational database of hierarchical (tree) data. These data, gathered by visual inspection of articles and by author-submitted data files, encompass 17 341 species among all major groups of life and include expert reports from a consortium of 102 scientists (http://www.timetree.org/consortium.php) in addition to individual studies. This new release advances our earlier prototype resource, which contained data from 70 studies with taxonomic scope limited to tetrapods (amphibians, reptiles, mammals and birds) (). In addition to database expansion in terms of studies and species diversity, we have also developed a completely new application for Apple's iPhone (and compatible devices) in order to make the knowledgebase available to a greater diversity ofpotential users and for easier and ready access beyond the classical website view alone. To use TimeTree2 for the iPhone, a user opens the app and is presented with a form for entering the names of two organisms of interest (). The user then taps the 'search' button to initialize the search. TimeTree first uses a synonym list (from NCBI) to translate from many common names and any ambiguities among the query names are resolved by presenting the user with a choice between possible matches. Then, the two most-inclusive groups containing the query organisms are identified, and all published studies included in the TimeTree repository are scanned for taxa pairs across groups to find all published times of divergence for the evolutionary split (). The results of a query return the divergence time (average weighted by number of genes) for the organisms of interest (). Times from individual studies are marked with a dot along a geological timescale to show the diversity of time estimates relating to the user query (). By tapping on a marker, a user can navigate to more detailed information for the published study, including the names of taxa used in the study, gene type, divergence time, number of genes, data type (nucleotide or amino acid), author, publication title and source of information within the article (e.g. the specific table or figure) (). A Summary page is also available to the users (), which shows more detailed information on the user-query, including the expert time estimates, if applicable, from The Timetree of Life (). As an added feature, users can conveniently send query results via email. This feature also enables scientists to generate alternative summary statistics if they desire. In summary, TimeTree resource has now matured to contain a substantial number of published studies, with studies being added at a steady pace over time. After release of TimeTree2, the rate of queries increased more than 10-fold, now surpassing 20 000 per month, with 60% coming from iPhones. This demonstrates that scientists at large and the general public are interested in the knowledge of species divergence times and use it when it is served in an accessible tool. Furthermore, providing access to scientific resources on new media (e.g. iPhone) decreases latent barriers and amplifies the usage of scientific information, as the iPhone app is currently being downloaded >1400 times each month. TimeTree already is being used by K12 educators () and we anticipate increased use in the education sector as the knowledgebase expands and graphical user interface is refined.
S.Kumar and S.B.Hedges
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
