We describe the implementation of the method introduced by Chambaz et al. in 2012. We also demonstrate its genome-wide application to the integrative search of new regions with strong association between DNA copy number and gene expression accounting for DNA methyla-tion in breast cancers. Availability and implementation: An open-source R package tmle.npvi is available from CRAN (http://cran.r-project.org/).
IntroductionLooking for genes whose DNA copy number is 'associated with' their expression level in a cancer study can help pinpoint candidates implied in the disease and enhance our understanding of its molecular bases. Genomic covariates may play an important role in the biological process and should therefore be taken into account. For instance, DNA methylation is known to regulate gene expression. To quantify the association between DNA copy number and expression, accounting for such relevant genomic covariates,have crafted a new parameter and built a method to infer it upon the targeted minimum loss-based inference principle (TMLE). Coined by van der, TMLE has been applied in a variety of contexts (van der). In this note, we describe the implementation of this method and its genome-wide, integrative application. Considering associations between DNA copy numbers and expression levels in genes is not new (). In contrast to these earlier contributions, ours does explicitly exploit that DNA copy number measurements feature both a reference level and a continuum of other levels, instead of discretizing them or considering them as purely continuous. Moreover, we naturally handle multidimensional, continuous covariates without discretization. We do not need to assume that they are normally distributed, nor that their true effect on DNA copy number and gene expression is linear.
Methods
PresentationWe first define the statistical parameter that we wish to target. Let O  W; X; Y be a generic observation, where W, X and Y are respectively the covariates (e.g. DNA methylation), DNA copy number and expression of a gene of interest in a randomly picked biological sample. Let x 0 be a reference value for X, corresponding to the normal state of 2 DNA copies. We assume that the probability to observe X  x 0 is bounded away from 0 and 1. We assume without loss of generality that x 0  0. In the absence of additional solid knowledge regarding the law of O, we decide to focus on the following nonparametric variableIts counterpart neglecting W is a different mapping from M to R given by F P  arg min b2RThe parameter W is pathwise differentiable in the sense that, for every P 2 M, there exists a function rW P of O such that for any bounded s : O7 !sO and all jej < jjsjj 1 1 , if we characterize P e 2 M by setting dP e =dP  1  es then WP e   WP  eE P frW P O sOg  oe. Likewise, F is pathwise differentiable and associated with rF. In semiparametrics, rW and rF are known as the efficient influence curves of W and F. Both are known in closed-form. The expression of rW involves finite-and infinite-dimensional features of P, including h P X; W  E P YjX; W; g P W  PX  0jW, P W  E P XjW; X 6  0 and r 2 P  E P fX 2 g.
TMLE AlgorithmSay that we observe n independent random variables O 1 ;. .. ; O n drawn from P. They yield the estimatorthe estimation of WP, it consists in 1. initially estimating P with P 0 n and setting k  0; 2. iteratively (a) constructing a one-dimensional model fP k n e : jej < jjsjj 1 1 gM by setting dP k n e=dP k n  1  es withcomputing the corresponding maximum likelihood estimator e k n , and (c) defining P k1 n  P k n e k n  and updating k k  1 unless a stopping criterion is met; 3. finally forming, by substitution, the TMLE estimator w n  WP K n  where K is the last value of k.Mild assumptions on P guarantee that n 1This is the pivotal property upon which the statistical study of w n relies.
InferenceUnder additional assumptions on P and on P K n ; f n ; w n  satisfies a central limit theorem (see). Furthermore, it is possible to estimate the corresponding asymptotic covariance matrix, hence the asymptotic variances of w n and of w n  f n . This paves the way to the testing of 'WP  0' and of 'WP  FP' against some alternatives.
Implementation, where m is user-supplied (defaults to 30), x 1 ;. .. ; x m are empirical quantiles of X, and W 2 fW 1 ;. .. ; W n g. The support of (X, W) consists of n  m points known beforehand. Storing iteratively the vectorsm;j n is sufficient. Thus, we reduce the time complexity while keeping the space complexity in On  m instead of On 2 . Finally, computing WP k n  requires simulating under P k n and retrieving the values of h P k n from the stored matrix. The series of updates is interrupted if the total variation distanceis small. Sensible data-dependent renormalizations and default values quantifying what 'small' means are given for each criterion in tmle.npvi. Running library(tmle.npvi); example(tmle.npvi); in R demonstrates the use of tmle.npvi. The simulation relies on synthetic data generated by perturbing real observations ().
An application to TCGA dataAs an illustration, we study a breast cancer data set from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Network (2012). We downloaded DNA methylation (W), DNA copy number (X) and expression (Y) of 11 314 genes for n  463 patients from https://tcga-data.nci.nih. gov/docs/publications/brca_2012. The dimension of W is the number of CpG loci in the gene's promoter region, which can vary from one gene to another. Conveniently, our implementation handles multi-dimensional covariates.presents the (log 10 ) p-values of the bilateral tests of 'WP  FP' for the 10 246 genes without missing data against their genomic position. A pattern emerges of regions featuring very small P-values, among which chromosomes 1q, 8, 16q. The pattern is not correlated to the marginal distribution of X, represented in the background. We also compute the partial correlation of X and Y given W for each gene (not shown). No pattern emerges. This suggests that the approach we propose may be useful to identify novel regions worthy of interest. For this data set, the typical run time of the method for a single gene with the default options of the package is 10 seconds on a standard laptop. The total run time for analyzing all 10 246 genes was 42 CPU hours. Obviously, this analysis can be parallelized very easily, as each gene is treated independently of all the other ones.
ConclusionWe have described the implementation of the method introduced by. We have also demonstrated its genome-wide application to the integrative search of new regions with strong association between DNA copy number and gene expression accounting for DNA methylation in breast cancers. The interest of the parameter W goes beyond the specific genomic context of this note, as it is designed to quantify the effect of any continuous exposure X with a reference value x 0 on any continuous outcome Y accounting for possibly multi-dimensional, relevant covariates W., gene by gene, the proportions of the 463 samples for which X < 0 (gray), X > 0 (light gray) and X  0 (white)
tmle.npvi
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
A.Chambaz and P.Neuvial at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
