Motivation: Eukaryote-infecting nucleo-cytoplasmic large DNA viruses (NCLDVs) feature some of the largest genomes in the viral world. These viruses typically do not strongly depend on the host DNA replication systems. In line with this observation, a number of essential DNA replication proteins, such as DNA polymerases, primases, helicases and ligases, have been identified in the NCLDVs. One other ubiquitous component of DNA replisomes is the single-stranded DNA-binding (SSB) protein. Intriguingly, no NCLDV homologs of canonical OB-fold-containing SSB proteins had previously been detected. Only in poxviruses, one of seven NCLDV families, I3 was identified as the SSB protein. However, whether I3 is related to any known protein structure has not yet been established. Results: Here, we addressed the case of 'missing' canonical SSB proteins in the NCLDVs and also probed evolutionary origins of the I3 family. Using advanced computational methods, in four NCLDV families, we detected homologs of the bacteriophage T7 SSB protein (gp2.5). We found the properties of these homologs to be consistent with the SSB function. Moreover, we implicated specific residues in single-stranded DNA binding. At the same time, we found no evolutionary link between the T7 gp2.5-like NCLDV SSB homologs and the poxviral SSB protein (I3). Instead, we identified a distant relationship between I3 and small protein B (SmpB), a bacterial RNA-binding protein. Thus, apparently, the NCLDVs have the two major distinct sets of SSB proteins having bacteriophage and bacterial origins, respectively.
INTRODUCTIONThe largest currently known viruses belong to the group of eukaryotic nucleo-cytoplasmic large DNA viruses (NCLDVs) (). At present, this group of double-stranded DNA viruses is classified into seven families (). Replication of these large viruses typically does not strongly depend on the host DNA replication and transcription systems. In line with the large genome size and the relative replication independence, comparative genomics studies revealed that NCLDV genomes encode essential DNA replication proteins, including DNA polymerase, helicase and primase (). However, conspicuously absent among the identified conserved NCLDV protein families () were canonical single-stranded DNA-binding (SSB) proteins. The SSB function in nature is strongly associated with the specific structural solution, oligonucleotide-binding (OB) fold, featuring a five-stranded-barrel capped with an-helix (). To our knowledge, there are only two documented exceptions, where the structure of an SSB protein is unrelated to OB-fold. The two exceptions include adenovirus () and Thermoproteales, a clade of hyperthermophilic Crenarchaea (). Given the importance of SSB proteins in various DNA transactions, the seeming absence of canonical OB-fold SSB proteins in NCLDV genomes was all the more intriguing. Although in poxviruses, one of seven NCLDV families, the SSB protein (I3) has been identified (), whether it is based on the OB-fold or some unrelated structure has not yet been established (). In this study, we aimed to resolve the puzzle of 'missing' canonical OB-fold SSB proteins in the NCLDVs and to explore the evolutionary origins of the enigmatic poxviral SSB protein family.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Four NCLDV families have canonical OB-fold SSB proteinsWe started by testing the hypothesis that NCLD viruses do possess classical OB-fold-containing SSB proteins, but with strongly diverged sequences. To this end, we performed iterative sequence searches with PSI-BLAST () and jackhmmer (). Searches were run against the nr70 sequence database (the NCBI non-redundant database filtered at 70% identity) using the E-value  0.001 inclusion threshold and well-characterized SSB proteins from both cellular organisms and viruses as queries (see Supplementary Material for more details on Methods). To our surprise, when we used the T7 bacteriophage SSB protein (gp2.5) sequence (gi: 9627442) as a query, we detected statistically significant matches (E-value50.001) in four NCLDV families (Phycodnaviridae, Mimiviridae, Iridoviridae and Marseillevirus). We scrutinized this finding by testing whether these putative NCLDV SSB homologs are able to detect T7 SSB in a reverse search. For this test, we used HHsearch (), a sensitive method based on comparison of sequence profiles. We generated sequence profiles for several newly identified putative NCLDV SSB proteins and queried them against profile databases. Searches against the sequence * To whom correspondence should be addressed. profile database derived from known structures (PDB) readily identified T7 gp2.5 with highly significant HHsearch probabilities (495%). Same queries against the Pfam protein family database detected two families annotated as domains of unknown function (DUFs). One of them (DUF2738) is a self-detection, whereas another family (DUF2815) comprises T7 gp2.5-like sequences, originating mainly from prophages (Supplementary). Taken together, these results provide convincing evidence that four NCLDV families encode T7-like SSB homologs. The detected relationship is not only reliable, but also specific because of distinct features of the T7 gp2.5 OB-fold domain. In T7 gp2.5, the capping-helix is inserted between strands 2 and 3 in contrast to its typical position between 3 and 4. In some NCLDV genomes, we detected more than one T7 SSB homolog (Supplementary). In most such cases, SSB orthologs were identified straightforwardly based on their grouping by sequence similarity using CLANS (). The ubiquitous presence of the C-terminal tail enriched in acidic residues emerged as an additional defining feature of orthologs. It is known that the acidic C-terminal tail of T7 gp2.5 is the site of interaction for multiple proteins involved in DNA transactions (). The functional role of paralogs is not clear, but one of the possibilities is that they are involved in the formation of an oligomeric SSB structure. Oligomeric structures represent a functional form of SSB proteins in organisms as diverse as T7 bacteriophage, Escherichia coli and humans (). One of the phycodnaviruses [Emiliania huxleyi virus 86(EhV86)], in addition to strongly diverged T7 SSB-like protein (Supplementaryand), has two homologs of eukaryotic/archaeal SSB (replication protein A). The T7 gp2.5-like protein in EhV86 is most distant among the corresponding homologs in other phycodnaviruses, suggesting that there may be a certain functional interplay between the gp2.5-like protein and replication protein A homologs. The EhV86 case notwithstanding, the identified relationship between putative NCLDV SSB proteins and T7 gp2.5 suggests their similar role in DNA replication and recombination. This notion is strengthened by the genomic context. We noticed that frequently putative NCLDV SSB proteins are encoded in the vicinity of proteins involved in DNA replication and recombination, such as DNA polymerases, helicases, topoisomerases, clamp and clamp loader subunits. Moreover, transcriptomics data indicate that putative SSB genes in Frog virus 3 (Iridoviridae), PBCV-1 (Phycodnaviridae) and Mimivirus are actively expressed early in the infection, together with DNA replication components ().
Structure of NCLDV SSB proteinsis consistent with the single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)-binding functionTo get a further insight regarding structure and function of putative NCLDV SSB proteins, we constructed a homology model for a representative (gi: 340025795) from the phycodnavirus PBCV-1. The model was built using iterative optimization of both the sequencestructure alignment and the set of protein structures used as modeling templates (). The initial PBCV-1 SSB model was constructed using the crystal structure of T7 gp2.5 (PDB: 1je5) as the single template. However, our analysis suggested that the capping-helix (1 in T7 gp2.5;) and the adjacent region of PBCV-1 SSB might be more similar to the corresponding OB-domain substructure of the herpesviral SSB protein (ICP8, PDB: 1urj; Supplementary). Indeed, the combination of T7 and herpesviral SSB structures led to a substantial improvement. According to the energy estimation with ProSA-web (), the final PBCV-1 SSB model (available at: http://www.ibt.lt/bioinformatics/models/pbcv1_ ssb/) fared better than the T7 gp2.5 structure, for which missing loops were modeled in before the evaluation. Prosa Z-score values were 7.34 for the PBCV-1 SSB model and 6.96 for T7 gp2.5 (more negative values imply a more energetically favorable structure). Thus, evaluation results suggested that the model is likely to be sufficiently accurate for the exploration of functional properties.. Alignment of the OB-fold region of SSB proteins from T7-like phages, NCLDVs and herpesviruses. Sequence labels are constructed from the abbreviated virus name, protein name (if available) and the gi number. Secondary structures of T7 gp2.5 and herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV1) ICP8 are shown, respectively, above and below the alignment (-strands are shown as arrows,-helices as rectangles). NCLDV SSB residues predicted to interact with ssDNA are indicated with asterisks above the alignment. Residues, whose importance in the interaction with ssDNA was established experimentally in T7 and Suid herpes virus 1 SSBs, are indicated with the black frame. For T7 gp2.5, these are K109 and Y158 and for SHV1 ICP8 K756 and K970. Numbers of residues omitted from non-conserved regions are indicated in parentheses. NCLDV SSB protein labels have green background. Paramecium bursaria chlorella virus 1 (PBCV-1) SSB is underlinedTo see whether the modeled PBCV-1 SSB structure indeed is suggestive of the single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) binding, we examined its surface properties (). Consistent with the predicted ssDNA-binding function, we observed an increased positive electrostatic potential in the region, which is thought to bind ssDNA in T7 gp2.5 (). Moreover, we established that the same PBCV-1 SSB surface region features some of the highest evolutionary conservation (). Based on the conservation and/or electrostatic properties, we identified four residues that are most likely to participate in the ssDNA binding (Figs 1 and 2). The involvement of at least two of these residues in ssDNA binding is supported by experimental studies of T7 and herpesviral SSB proteins. Suid herpes virus SSB K756 corresponding to PBCV-1 SSB K139 is critical for ssDNA binding (), while the point mutation of respective T7 2.5 residue (K109I) alters the ssDNA-binding mode (). The Y158C point mutation renders T7 SSB defective in ssDNA binding (), presumably by disrupting the stacking interaction with a nucleotide base. Consistent with such a role, the corresponding position in NCLDV SSB proteins (W182 in PBCV-1 SSB) is occupied exclusively by aromatic residues. The SSB protein of Suid herpes virus also has an aromatic residue (Y971) in this position. Although the importance of Y971 has not been addressed directly, the mutation of adjacent lysine (K970) significantly affected ssDNA binding (). The importance of the remaining two positions in NCLDV SSB proteins (K141 and R194 in PBCV-1) has no experimental support coming from either T7 or herpesviral SSBs. However, their location within the putative ssDNA-binding cleft and a fairly strong conservation suggest a likely role in ssDNA binding.
Poxviral SSB proteins (the I3 family) are evolutionary distinctIn poxviruses, we did not detect either T7 gp2.5-like or any other OB-fold-containing SSB homolog. On the other hand, vaccinia virus, the prototypic poxvirus, has long been known to encode the ssDNA-binding protein, named I3 (Rochester and). Several reports have provided convincing evidence that I3 is the replicative SSB protein and a major player in viral DNA recombination (). However, despite extensive efforts, no relationship between I3 and any other protein family could be established (). To search for homologous proteins related to the I3 family, we first performed standard PSI-BLAST and jackhmmer runs (up to five iterations, inclusion E-value  0.001) against the nr70 sequence database using representative I3 sequences as queries. However, these searches revealed no statistically significant matches outside of the I3 family. To increase sensitivity, we performed the same searches with the more permissive E-value inclusion threshold (0.01). This time, jackhmmer (but not PSI-BLAST) readily detected small protein B (SmpB) sequences as significant matches. To test whether the I3 alignment with SmpB is indicative of true homology or is just a spurious match, we performed additional analyses. We noticed that only the central region of I3 sequences was aligned to SmpB. It is commonly known that sequence segments of low complexity or unrelated domains may hinder homology detection. Thus, we reasoned that if I3 and SmpB are homologous, the removal of unaligned regions of I3 should improve the detection of SmpB. This indeed turned out to be the case. One of the N-and C-terminally truncated I3 sequences (Crocodilepox virus I3; gi: 115531731) in the jackhmmer search was now able to detect SmpB using a more stringent inclusion threshold (E-value  0.001). Next, we performed homology searches using HHsearch. Initially, we generated profiles based on representative full-length I3 sequences and queried them against the PDB-derived profile database. HHsearch detected SmpB from Aquifex aeolicus (PDB: 1p6v) as the best match. The most significant results (HHsearch probability  89%) were obtained using the Yoka poxvirus I3 (gi: 345107239) profile. This result alone would not be considered entirely reliable. However, HHsearch and jackhmmer returned essentially identical alignments for the same central region of I3 (). Moreover, when we ran queries with profiles based on truncated I3 sequences, HHsearch results in detecting SmpB have improved further, reaching the 95% probability (e.g. I3; gi: 41057468). As an additional test, we performed searches in the reverse direction using SmpB profiles as queries against the Pfam profile database. HHsearch did identify poxviral I3 profile as the best match (disregarding self-match to SmpB), but with the insufficient confidence (probability  90%). Again, if only the aligned region of SmpB was used, HHsearch was able to detect the I3 family with the highly significant 95% probability (SmpB; gi: 240047684). Collectively, all these homology search results strongly suggest common ancestry for I3 and SmpB families. SmpB is a bacterial protein that binds tmRNA, a hybrid RNA molecule having functions of both transfer RNA and messenger RNA. SmpB adopts a distinct structural fold with no significant similarity to any other structures (). Despite that, SmpB was proposed to contain an 'embedded' OB-fold (), a proposition that appears to be misleading. Our analysis revealed that the SmpB structure is a bona fideof the structural motif (Supplementary). Thus, the pseudosymmetric SmpB structure, made of two consecutive repeats, is in stark contrast to the repeat-free asymmetric OB-fold. Interestingly, only the second SmpB repeat is aligned with I3 in its entirety (), suggesting its stronger evolutionary conservation. Consistent with this notion, the aligned regions of both SmpB and I3 harbor a number of functionally important residues (). The central SmpB-like region of I3 is followed by the C-terminus, enriched in aspartates and glutamates and predicted to feature a significant intrinsic disorder. In this regard, the I3 C-terminus is reminiscent of unstructured acidic tails involved in proteinprotein interactions in canonical bacterial and phage SSB proteins.
Taxonomic distribution of NCLDV SSBs and its evolutionary implicationsWe mapped the resulting distribution of NCLDV SSB proteins onto the consensus phylogenetic tree of NCLD viruses (). As NCLDVs are thought to be monophyletic (), the distribution is suggestive of T7-like SSB being already present in the ancestral virus. This is consistent with the idea that bacteriophages played an important role in the early NCLDV evolution (). Indeed, many of NCLDV genes essential for genome replication (DNA primase-helicase, NAD-dependent ligase and Holliday junction resolvase) show bacteriophage origins (). Our newly detected T7 gp2.5-like protein family is yet another addition to this list. On the other hand, the unrelated I3 family, confined to poxviruses, is likely the result of a more recent non-orthologous replacement event.
The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
SSB proteins in nucleo-cytoplasmic large DNA viruses at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
D.Kazlauskas and C  .Venclovas at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
