Motivation: Recently, De Neve et al. proposed a modification of the Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney (WMW) test for assessing differential expression based on RT-qPCR data. Their test, referred to as the unified WMW (uWMW) test, incorporates a robust and intuitive normalization and quantifies the probability that the expression from one treatment group exceeds the expression from another treatment group. However, no software package for this test was available yet. Results: We have developed a Bioconductor package for analyzing RT-qPCR data with the uWMW test. The package also provides graphical tools for visualizing the effect sizes. Availability and implementation: The unifiedWMWqPCR package and its user documentation can be obtained through Bioconductor.
INTRODUCTIONConventional approaches for analyzing RT-qPCR data first adopt a separate normalization step, e.g. using the Bioconductor package SLqPCR (), before assessing differential expression. This preprocessing step can obscure the interpretation of the statistical test. Furthermore, the type I error can be inflated, as the additional uncertainty associated with normalization is typically ignored. If C 1 q denotes a quantification cycle associated with treatment group 1 and C 2 q a quantification cycle associated with group 2 for a particular feature (typically a gene or a microRNA), then the unified WilcoxonMann Whitney (uWMW) test considers the null hypothesiswhere the probability Px d y :=Px5y+0:5Px=y allows for tied quantification cycles. If there is no need for normalization, under the null hypothesis of no-treatment effect, " = 0.5 and the ordinary WilcoxonMannWhitney (WMW) test can be used. However, because of errors in the fluorescence quantification or differences in the amount of starting material and enzymatic efficiencies, among other reasons, " 6  0.5 even in the absence of a treatment effect, and hence, normalization is required. The uWMW test consists of the following steps: (i) estimate " based on housekeeping features or on all features when housekeeping features are not available. The latter approach assumes up-and downregulation to be balanced; (ii) perform an adjusted WMW test to test H 0 (1) while accounting for the additional uncertainty caused by estimating " from the data; and (iii) provide standard errors and P-values. H 0 (1) can be equivalently expressed in terms of odds and odds ratio's (ORs) as followswhere oddsA=PA=1  PA; " 0 ="=1  ", andORC 1 q d C 2 q =oddsC 1 q d C 2 q =" 0 .
SOFTWARE FEATURESThe unifiedWMWqPCR package is developed for R (R Core) and is a part of the Bioconductor environment (); both are freely available. The package includes a user's tutorial and can be installed on all major platforms.
UsageThe main function uWMW typically requires two inputs: (i) a data matrix where the rows indicate the features, the columns indicate the samples and each cell gives the raw (i.e. nonnormalized) C q values and (ii) a binary vector with length equal to the number of columns of the data matrix indicating the two treatment groups. However, other input formats such as data frames or qPCRset objects from the Bioconductor package HTqPCR () are also allowed. A vector with the names of housekeeping features for estimating " can be given as an optional argument. In the absence of housekeeping features, all features are used for the estimation of "; see De Neve et al. (2013) for more details. For more information on the other optional arguments, we refer to the R help files.
ExampleWe consider the neuroblastoma NB dataset of Mestdagh et al.39 samples for the MYCN amplified (MNA) and MYCN single copy (MNSC) group, respectively. We refer to the unifiedWMWqPCR vignette for more information. Following De, we assess null hypothesis (2) using all features for estimating " as follows:Estimated log odds ratio's (logor), corresponding standard errors (se), odds ratio's (or), test statistics and P-values can be extracted as follows:for hsa-let-7a is given by 0.78, and it is significantly different from 0 at the 5% level of significance. The p.adjust function (R, 2013) can be used to adjust the P-values for multiple testing. For visualization, the function forestplot can be used to draw a forest plot of a selection of microRNAs; see. The estimated probabilities in (1) as well as their (unadjusted) 95% confidence intervals are plotted. The diamond on the bottom gives the estimate and confidence interval of " with which the probabilities should be compared with. As the uWMW test is in essence obtained by fitting a probabilistic index model (), the estimated coefficients of the model and the estimated variancecovariance matrix can also be extracted. For more details on the package and its available plots, we refer to the unifiedWMWqPCR vignette and help-files.
PerformanceAs the uWMW test implies fitting a regression model to a dataset with n 1 n 2 N rows and N columns (where N is the total number of features and n i the number of samples in group i), its efficient implementation is an important property of the package. Analyzing a small dataset of 20 features with 10 replicates for each treatment group takes 50.2 s, whereas a large dataset of 1000 features with 100 replicates for each treatment group takes 530 s on an Intel 2.5 GHz CPU with 4 GB RAM.. Forest plot of the microRNAs associated with the miR-17-92 and miR-181 cluster
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
CONCLUSION This article presents the Bioconductor unifiedWMWqPCR package. It provides an extension of the WMW test so that a separate normalization preprocessing step is no longer required before assessing differential expression. In addition to P-values, the package also provides informative plots to visualize treatment effects. Funding: The authors acknowledge the Multidisciplinary Research Partnership Bioinformatics: From Nucleotides to Networks Project (01MR0310W) of Ghent University, and the IAP research network P7/06 of the Belgian Government (Belgian Science Policy). Conflict of Interest: none declared.
unifiedWMWqPCR at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
