Motivation: Signaling pathways control a large variety of cellular processes. However, currently, even within the same database signaling pathways are often curated at different levels of detail. This makes comparative and cross-talk analyses difficult. Results: We present SignaLink, a database containing eight major signaling pathways from Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster and humans. Based on 170 review and ∼800 research articles, we have compiled pathways with semi-automatic searches and uniform, well-documented curation rules. We found that in humans any two of the eight pathways can cross-talk. We quantified the possible tissue-and cancer-specific activity of cross-talks and found pathway-specific expression profiles. In addition, we identified 327 proteins relevant for drug target discovery. Conclusions: We provide a novel resource for comparative and cross-talk analyses of signaling pathways. The identified multi-pathway and tissue-specific cross-talks contribute to the understanding of the signaling complexity in health and disease, and underscore its importance in network-based drug target selection.
INTRODUCTIONIntracellular signaling, from the simplest cascades to the highly intertwined networks of protein kinases, contributes extensively to the diversity of developmental programs and adaptation responses in metazoans (Pires-daSilva and). In humans, defects in intracellular signaling can cause various diseases, e.g. cancer, neurodegeneration or diabetes. Thus, understanding the structure, function and evolution of signal transduction is an important task for both basic research and medicine. By now genetic studies have uncovered functionally separate, though interacting (cross-talking), pathways and the direction of information flow between pairs of signaling molecules in a number of species (). On the other hand, biochemical experiments have allowed the detailed characterization of direct physical interactions involved in signaling (). Integrating these data sets using uniform manual curation criteria can significantly contribute to a more precise assessment of their tissue-and cancer-specific utilization and the effects of drug treatments (). For example, inhibitors used for eliminating a signaling pathway in cancerous cells may in fact have the opposite effect. These drugs may suppress negative feedback loops and thereby, paradoxically, activate the targeted pathway (). Intracellular signaling was originally regarded as an assembly of distinct and almost linear cascades. Over the past decade, however, it has been realized that signaling pathways are highly structured and rich in cross-talks (where cross-talk is defined here as a directed physical interaction between pathways). Consequently, intracellular signaling is now viewed as a set of intertwined pathways forming a single signaling network (). This paradigm shift calls for novel experimental, curation and network modeling techniques (). Currently, high-throughput (HTP) experiments are the major sources of known proteinprotein interactions (PPIs). However, so far in most HTP experiments extracellular, membrane-bound and nuclear proteins have been underrepresented. These and other sampling biases strongly reduce their usability for identifying signaling interactions. Another limitation of HTP assays is that they produce undirected interactions even though in signaling directions are essential. Accordingly, several signaling pathway databases have been created recently by manually collecting the directed interactions from the literature (). Manually curated signaling pathway databases are often assembled without strictly defined and published standardized curation criteria (). Therefore, even within the same database, e.g. in KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of), the level of detail of curation and the rules for setting pathway boundaries can vary among pathways. In addition, in several signaling resources the definition of signaling pathways has no evolutionary or biochemical background. In other cases, e.g. in Reactome and NetPath (;Only the differences from SignaLink are listed. The features setting SignaLink most clearly apart have a gray background.), curation criteria are standardized; however,
Uniformly curated signaling pathways(i) pathways are usually handled as separate entities; (ii) cross-talks and multi-pathway proteins are underrepresented; and (iii) extracting signaling information from the databases is complicated and laborintensive, see Section 4 and Supplementary Material for details. Another limitation of several current signaling resources is that they neglect the importance of multi-pathway proteins, i.e. proteins functioning in more than one pathway (). In summary, the manual curation process needs to be uniform across all pathways and species to aid cross-talk analyses, tests of evolutionary hypotheses, dynamical modeling, setting up predictions and drug target selection (). We present SignaLink, a signaling resource compiled by applying uniform manual curation rules and data structures across eight major, biochemically defined signaling pathways in three metazoans (). The curation method allowed a systematic comparison of pathway sizes and cross-talks. We found that in humans any two of the eight pathways can cross-talk, and in humans we compared the possible dynamic activities of both the pathways and their cross-talks. We characterized tissue-and cancer-specific expression profiles, and identified proteins relevant for drug target discovery.
SYSTEM AND METHODS
Signaling proteins and interactionsSignaLink lists signaling proteins and directed signaling interactions between pairs of proteins in healthy cells of Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster and Homo sapiens. Each interaction is documented with the PubMed ID of the publication reporting the verifying experiment(s). SignaLink was compiled separately for all pathways of the three organisms. Search functions, data and network images of the pathways are available at http://SignaLink.org. In each of the three organisms, we first listed signaling proteins and interactions from reviews (and from WormBook in C.elegans) and then added further signaling interactions of the listed proteins. To identify additional interactions in C.elegans, we examined all interactions (except for transcription regulation) of the signaling proteins listed in WormBase () and added only those to SignaLink that we could manually identify in the literature as an experimentally verified signaling interaction. For D.melanogaster, we added to SignaLink those genetic interactions from FlyBase () that were also reported in at least one yeast-2-hybrid experiment. For humans, we manually checked the reliability and directions for the PPIs found with the search engines iHop and Chilibot (). SignaLink assigns proteins to signaling pathways using the full texts of pathway reviews (written by pathway experts). While most signaling resources consider 515 reviews per pathway, SignaLink uses a total of 170 review papers, i.e. more than 20 per pathway on average. Interactions were curated from a total of 941 articles (PubMed IDs are available at the website). We added a small number of proteins based on InParanoid ortholog clusters (). For curation, we used a self-developed graphical tool and Perl/Python scripts. The current version of SignaLink was completed in May 2008 based on WormBase (version 191), FlyBase (2008.6), Ensembl (49), UniProt (87) and the publications listed on the website. Pathway data can be downloaded in several formats: SQL, CSV, XLS, CYS and SVG exported from Cytoscape and SBML.
Quality control, database validation and statistical significance testsThe curation protocol of SignaLink () contains several steps aimed specifically at reducing data and curation errors. We used reviews as a starting point, manually looked up interactions three times, and manually searched for interactions of known signaling proteins with no signaling interactions so far in the database. The section 'Advantages and limitations of SignaLink' explains validation steps and results in detail. We performed functional significance tests for each of the signaling pathways and their overlaps, i.e. multi-pathway proteins, with the 'GO Termfinder' toolbox (). We found a significant functional similarity between the functions of multi-pathway proteins and the functions of their pathways compared to the control case (functional similarity between the functions of all proteins and all pathways). Moreover, we statistically evaluated the human interactions listed in SignaLink with the PRINCESS web service () and found that the ratio of high confidence interactions is 90.6%. Details for all statistical significance tests are available in the Supplementary Material.
Expression in selected healthy tissues and liver carcinomasTo investigate the dynamic activity of pathway interactions, we selected five healthy tissue typescolorectal, muscle, skin, liver and cardiovasculartissuesand two liver carcinomas (, see the details for the selection process of the tissues and controls in the Supplementary Material). Protein expression data in healthy tissue types were downloaded from the eGenetics database (integrated into Ensembl). Protein expression data in two screens of liver carcinomas were obtained from Oncomine 3.6 (). We considered a protein differentially expressed if the P-value of its expression in at least one of the two screens, as compared to healthy liver tissues and computed by a t-test of Oncomine, was below 0.05.
Functional annotation of drug target candidatesWe collected information on the proteins that can be relevant in drug target discovery with DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery;). We downloaded diseaserelated annotations from OMIM (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man), genetic association database (GAD) and Orthodisease (), domain information from InterPRO (), and molecular function and cellular component data from Gene Ontology (GO;).
RESULTS
Uniform compilation of signaling pathways in three metazoan speciesWe curated the signaling pathways of the nematode C.elegans, the fruit fly D.melanogaster, and H.sapiens. From the wide variety of classification schemes for selecting signaling pathways (), we followed the biochemical approach of Pires-daSilva and Sommer (2003). We selected eight major pathways for curation EGF/MAPK, Ins/IGF, TGF-, WNT, Hh (Hedgehog), JAK/STAT, Notch and NHR (Nuclear Hormone Receptors)that have central roles both in development and in normal cellular signaling. SignaLink is a manually compiled resource integrating experimentally confirmed genetic and physical interactions from healthy tissue types. Proteins and interactions are listed without tissue-specificity and can be visualized as networks of potential interactions. Tissue-and disease-specific information can be added easily as shown in the examples below. Five combined characteristics create the unique utility of SignaLink.(1) Pathways are biochemically defined and encompass all major developmental signaling mechanisms.(2) A protein can belong to more than one pathway (if it does, then it is called a multi-pathway protein).(3) Proteins are tagged with (i) the pathway(s), (ii) pathway region(s) (core and peripheral) and(iii) the pathway sections (one or two of: ligand, receptor, mediator, co-factor, transcription factor and other) they belong to.(4) The level of detail is the same for the entire database.
Page: 2045 20422050
Uniformly curated signaling pathways(
A large-scale view of species-specific pathway and pathway section sizesIn all three organisms, a few of the eight pathways are central and abundant. Of all proteins, 2638% participate in the EGF/MAPK and WNT pathways, respectively. Other pathways with high protein numbers are NHR in the worm, Hh and Notch in the fly, and TGF and JAK/STAT in humans. Altogether in each species 6885% of all signaling proteins participate in these pathways and 5670% of all cross-talks involve the EGF/MAPK, TGF or WNT pathways. C.elegans has almost identical numbers of core and peripheral proteins in each pathway (except for Notch and NHR), while in the other two species the ratio of core to peripheral proteins is around 1.5. Pathway size differences between the three species are often related to the different environments to which the cells of these organisms have adapted. For example, ligands from the environment can easily reach the nuclei of the worm's cells, thus, the worm's NHR pathway is exceptionally large (58% of all signaling proteins). On the other hand, due to the large variety of signals that human cells are exposed to the human JAK/STAT pathway is oversized compared to the other two species (21% of all signaling proteins in humans versus 0% and 4% in C.elegans and Drosophila, respectively). In all three species, EGF/MAPK and IGF have high number of mediators. However, environmental differences may affect pathway section sizes too. In C.elegans transcription factorsdominated by the NHR pathwayare the largest pathway section (39%). In the other two species, co-factors by far outnumber other pathway sections (3242%) and in humans JAK/STAT ligands and receptors are abundant.
Multi-pathway proteins: proteins functioning in more than one signaling pathwayIn C.elegans, D.melanogaster and humans, we found 6, 12 and 62 multi-pathway proteins, respectively. Within one human signaling pathway the ratio of proteins functioning in at least one other pathway varies from 5% (Notch) to 46% (IGF). Interestingly, a single protein can be even a central (i.e. core) component in more than one pathway. For example, the scaffold protein AXIN and the kinase GSK3 are both core components of more than one signaling pathway (; Luo and Lin, 2004). We found that EGF/MAPKthe largest pathwayis the only one sharing proteins with all other pathways. On the other end of the spectrum are the Notch, JAK/STAT and NHR pathways: their proteins are contained by three or four other pathways. These differences correlate well with the numbers of pathway functions. Note also that the set of 62 human multi-pathway proteins is enriched with disease-related proteins: 45% (28) of them are known to be
Cross-species comparison of cross-talksNext, we focused on how the complexity of intracellular signaling increases with a growing complexity of the organisms. In C.elegans only six of the eight curated pathways are active, and the Notch pathway is isolated (). In addition, the cross-talk network of the pathwayswhere nodes represent pathways and links represent cross-talksis sparse. Between the six active pathways only 5 of
T.Korcsmros et al.the 30 ( = 65 ) possible cross-talk types are present. In Drosophila, all eight curated pathways of SignaLink are active, but the NHR and JAK/STAT pathways are still isolated. Without these two pathways, the cross-talk network is already significantly denser than in the worm: 16 of the total 30 possible cross-talk types are present (). In humans (the most complex organism of the three), all eight curated signaling pathways are active and almost all of the 56 possible cross-talk types are possible (). The ubiquity of cross-talks (all 28 pathway pairs can cross-talk) expands both the repertoire of possible phenotypes and the system-level responses to environmental and pathological changes. In C.elegans cross-talk is possible through receptors, mediators and transcription factors (). In the other two species, all pathway sections can participate in cross-talk, except for the NHR and JAK/STAT pathways of Drosophila, where cross-talk occurs mostly at the transcriptional level and through mediators, respectively (and F). In addition to the number of active pathways and cross-talks, a further important indicator of signaling complexity is the number of cross-talks relative to all signaling interactions. In the worm 4.6% of all signaling interactions are cross-talks, in the fly 10.5% and in humans 30.3%. Interestingly, the growth of the number of crosstalks from worm to fly and human is not simply due to the growth of the number of protein-coding genes (20 100, 13 800 and 23 000, respectively) or the number of signaling-related PubMed articles (3889, 11 367 and 214 193 in worms, flies and humans, respectively). The presence of cross-talks in many pathways and pathway sections is a sign of the efficient utilization of resources: expanding the functions of an already existing pathway protein is more efficient than evolving a novel protein (). Given the high number of signaling cross-talks, a large variety of specific and robust phenotypes may emerge (). However, the actual signaling responses are controlled mainly by scaffold proteins, feedback loops, kinetic insulation, and the spatial and temporal expression patterns of proteins (). To map some of these possibilities, we investigated the dynamical activity of signaling cross-talks in humans where cross-talk was found ubiquitous.
Tissue-and disease-specific activity of cross-talksCross-talks, similar to other PPIs, are not active permanently in all tissue types. We considered an interaction to be possibly active in a given tissue type, if both of the mRNAs of its participating proteins are expressed in that tissue. It is reasonable to assume (as a simple approximation) that proteins whose mRNAs are expressed could be active in the given tissue (compared to those that are not transcribed). After merging SignaLink with protein expression profiles from human colorectal, muscle, skin, liver and cardiovascular tissues, we quantified the possible tissue-specific activity of cross-talks. We found that cross-talks between the pathways EGF/MAPK and TGF, and cross-talks from WNT to TGF and from EGF/MAPK to JAK/STAT are overrepresented (Wald-test, upper limit: 7.25%) The complete statistical test is available in the Supplementary Material. In addition, we found that (i) the Notch and NHR pathways are the least connected to other pathways and (ii) Notch and JAK/STAT are the least and most frequently used pathways, respectively: onIn the selected healthy tissue types, the pathways EGF/MAPK, WNT, TGF and IGF have the potential to crosstalk most frequently, while the cross-talk connections of the Notch pathway have less potential to be active. (B) In the two investigated liver carcinomas signaling interactions within the EGF/MAPK, WNT, and TGF pathways and their cross-talks are most extensively changed, while the cross-talks of the Notch pathway are the least affected. See text for details. average 26% and 48% of their proteins are expressed in the selected healthy tissue types (). Cancers are often viewed as systems diseases (). In cancer cells large-scale modifications of signaling pathways, especially changes of cross-talks (), are prevalent. Accordingly, detecting which proteins (cross-talks) are differentially expressed (active) in a carcinoma tissue may point out key causes of the given tumour and can help the identification of novel, systems-based drug targets (). To do this, we merged the network of eight human signaling pathways with protein expression data from human liver carcinomas. We considered a signaling interaction to be altered in these two liver carcinomas, if, compared to healthy liver tissues, at
Uniformly curated signaling pathwaysleast one of the participating proteins was differentially expressed (see Section 2 for details). In three of the eight pathways (WNT, NHR and JAK/STAT) only 30% of all proteins were differentially expressed in the investigated liver carcinomas, while in the other five pathways this ratio was 50% (). In summary, the largest signaling pathway, EGF/MAPK, is frequently used in the selected tissue types and significantly changed in the two liver carcinomas. JAK/STAT is also strongly used, but less modified in the two investigated liver carcinomas. A third example is Notch, which is neither strongly used nor strongly modified. Thus, even though cross-talks are possible between all pairs of investigated human signaling pathways, the possible activity of these pathways in healthy tissues and the modifications of their cross-talks in the analyzed cancer types are highly diverse. See the Supplementary Material for additional literature support.
Potential role of cross-talking proteins in drug target discoverySignaling proteins are overrepresented among human disease genes () and are intensively studied as potential drug target candidates (), often with network-based methods (). Among the 62 human multi-pathway proteins, 21 (33.8%) are known drug targets compared to 15% (94 of 646) in all 8 pathways and 8.2% (1610 of 19 534) among all human proteins. This implies that the remaining set of 41 human multi-pathway proteins may also be relevant for drug target discovery. In summary, the following two sets, altogether 327 proteins in our current study, are likely to be enriched with possible drug targets: (i) human multi-pathway proteins and (ii) proteins participating in cancer-related cross-talks. We analyzed the drug target relevance of human signaling proteins by examining four key properties: disease-relatedness, localization in the plasma membrane (), enzymatic functions and kinase domain content (). To identify the most promising drug target candidates from the 327 proteins selected in the previous paragraph, we first listed those nine that have all four key properties, i.e. disease-related enzymes (with a kinase domain) localized in the membrane (). Out of these nine proteins five (CASK, EGFR, ErbB2, IGF1R, and INSR) are currently used as drug targets, while the other four (IRAK1, MAP3K13/LZK/MLK, ROR2 and TGFBR1) are not. ROR2 is essential during bone formation () and the other three proteins are inflammation-related factors (). Interestingly, ROR2 was recently suggested as a therapeutic target for osteosarcoma based on expression analysis and siRNA treatment (). As for IRAK1, TGFBR1 and MLK, anti-inflammatory drugs (imiquimod, dexamethasone and larginine, respectively) frequently affect their pathways, but without sufficient specificity (). These findings support our predictions that these four human signaling proteins are promising novel drug targets.
DISCUSSION
Advantages and limitations of SignaLinkAccording to a recent study (), manual curation projects: (i) inherit the selection biases of the curated experiments; (ii) often lack the specific goals clearly defining the curationcriteria; and (iii) it is usually difficult to estimate their completeness and reliability. Note, however, that many signaling proteins function outside the cell (ligands), in membrane-bound positions (receptors), or in the nucleus (transcription factors), and that proteins from these compartments are underrepresented in current HTP data. Thus, for the purpose of identifying signaling proteins and interactions HTP techniques seem to be less adequate than those manual curation projects that have clear goals. In the case of SignaLink, the precisely defined curation process combines original research articles and reviews, thus, both experimental evidence and its critical discussion by specialists are included. Applying a biochemically based, well-documented and clear pathway definition is central to SignaLink. For example, the EGF/MAPK pathway in SignaLink contains (with evolutionary and biochemical reasoning) the pathway from the EGF ligand to the terminal MAPK kinases. In several other databases, this pathway is scattered across many separate (sub)pathways (e.g. EGFR, RAS, p38, JNK, ERK and ASK). An important consequence of precise pathway definitions is the reduced number of examined pathways. We suggest that appropriate and precise grouping, avoiding artificial pathway constructs, may be a better indicator of the goodness of the resource than merely the large number of pathways.In each pairwise comparison, we compared only the pathways curated in both databases. In KEGG, only protein complexes and their interactions were available and we constructed a list of binary interactions, i.e. a network, with the 'matrix' method (). a For the same pathways in SignaLink: EGFR, EGFR1 and MAPK are compared to the EGF/MAPK pathway of SignaLink. b Binary interactions from membership in the same complex. c Including predicted pathway member proteins. d For each directed interaction between two protein groups (KEGG complexes), we added a directed link between each protein of the source group and each protein of the target group. e Weighted cross-talk interaction number: a directed signaling interaction between two proteins annotated to n and m pathways, respectively, adds 1/(nm) to the weight between any two of the directed pathway pairs connected by this interaction. See the Supplementary Material for further details. Cross-talks (in italics) are a subgroup of all interactions.
Page: 2048 20422050
T.Korcsmros et al.Of the constantly increasing number of signaling databases () many are proprietary, list fewer than 200 molecules, or only selected types of pathway components, e.g. protein kinases. Even among the few databases passing these criteria (free for academic use, more than 200 molecules, all pathway component types included) there are currently no gold standards compiled with similar goals and methods as SignaLink. It is, therefore, important to compare both the curation protocols and the actual data of several available databases before selecting one of them for a particular analysis. In, we compare three widely used pathway databasesKEGG, Reactome, and NetPathand SignaLink (see the Supplementary Material for details). In each pairwise comparison, we used the pathways available in both databases. According toand the Supplementary Material, SignaLink has the following advantages compared to the three analyzed databases: (i) precisely defined and documented curation protocol; (ii) highest numbers of signaling proteins and interactions in the curated signaling pathways; (iii) highest numbers of cross-talks and multi-pathway proteins; (iv) largest protein overlap with the other databases; (v) a higher than average number of publications used per pathway; (vi) minimal usage of protein isoform names; (vii) no binary interactions inferred from the membership of two proteins in the same complex; (viii) low number of proteins from UniProt/TrEMBL (i.e., few unverified proteins). SignaLink was compiled based on pathway reviews and primary research articles. Thus, the high numbers of signaling proteins (including multipathway proteins) and cross-talks are likely to be dominated by true positives, indicating higher precision and coverage. Despite the care we have taken in creating SignaLink, it does have limitations, e.g., SignaLink does not contain all signaling proteins. Only those signaling proteins have been included that have an experimentally verified function in the selected eight major pathways or a directed interaction with at least one of their proteins. Several groups of proteins were fully excluded from SignaLink. These groups, together with our detailed reasons for excluding them, are listed in the Supplementary Material. The compilation of SignaLink was based on published review and research papers. Note that the curation of the current version of SignaLink was closed in May 2008. Naturally, more pathways (defined by the same evolutionary and biochemical rules) and proteins can be added in a future version. We plan to update SignaLink every July (starting 2011). The next update will include recent high-confidence HTP data. Overall, based on the comparison we presented in this subsection, we expect that the limitations of SignaLink are small compared to the improvements it can provide.
Current applicationsThe primary goal of SignaLink is to provide maps of global pathway communication in three metazoans (C.elegans, D.melanogaster and H.sapiens) with well-documented, uniform manual curation. Interactions from all healthy tissue types were included into SignaLink, and expression data from selected tissues were used for dynamic analysis. We found that the pathways EGF/MAPK, JAK/STAT and Notch are clear examples for three distinct types of behavior: (i) high expression in normal tissue types and strong changes in cancer; (ii) high expression, but small changes; and (iii) low expression and small changes. See the Supplementary Material for additional literature support. Network analysescombined with system-level resources can contribute to modern drug target discovery, e.g. to polypharmacology and multi-target drug selection (). With SignaLink, one can prioritize novel drug target candidates by examining the list of: (i) multi-pathway proteins and (ii) proteins participating in cancer-related cross-talks. Some of these proteins could be specific and proper targets, some of them could be too central and aspecific. After listing the properties of these proteins relevant for drug target selection, we suggested four novel drug target candidates. One of them, ROR2, was recently proposed as a novel chemotherapeutic target, while the other three are known to be non-specifically affected by anti-inflammatory drugs. A broader list contains 35 additional proteins with a lower confidence, which may be again filtered with additional criteria, e.g. phosphatase activity.
Page: 2049 20422050
Uniformly curated signaling pathwaysIn biomedical experimental work, the functions of a few selected proteins are often modified. These changes can unexpectedly perturb signaling pathways and non-specifically affect cellular processes. Based on several data sources, including SignaLink, we have launched a web server, PathwayLinker, to aid experimental work by linking the queried proteins to signaling pathways through physical and/or genetic interactions (submitted for publication).
Future applicationsAs their name suggests, targeting multi-pathway proteins may not be selective. However, selectivity is a key property in pharmacology, thus, analyses of multi-pathway proteins could support drug target discovery. Based on SignaLink, we suggest single-gene knock-out experiments or RNA silencing of individual cross-talking proteins to help understand the functional selectivity of signaling pathways and to reduce the redundancies that are assumed to make many currently used drugs less efficient (). For the mathematical modeling of the dynamical behavior of biomolecular pathways the precise, high-coverage reconstruction of the static network structure of these pathways is crucial (). In the case of signaling pathways, the manual curation of the existing literature can be efficient for assembling large-scale interaction maps. SignaLink datasets have a simple and uniform structure and are available in several formats for all eight pathways and three species at http://SignaLink.org. This allows one to easily merge SignaLink with stoichiometric and expression data from, e.g. perturbation analyses (). The static network provided by SignaLink can serve as a backbone for both numerical and differential equation-based models anddue to SignaLink's focus on cross-talksfor deciphering the rules of cooperation between pathways (). Finally, perturbation analyses that cannot be carried out with HTP PPI networks (they list undirected PPIs), may be manageable with SignaLink, because it contains the directions of interactions. A central goal of synthetic biology is to engineer cells that can carry out novel tasks (). One way to achieve this goal is to rewire signaling circuits by modifying scaffold proteins and other biomolecules or by changing feed-back loops. In these studies, detailed high-quality maps of intracellular signaling are essential, especially the positions of cross-talks and multi-pathway proteins. Comparative evolutionary studies usually focus on conserved and altered mechanisms underlying the observed differences in body plans. Among metazoans, these differences are largely due to changes in the complexity of regulation rather than different gene numbers (). Two decisive regulatory networks in this case are transcriptional control and signaling, in particular, cross-talks. SignaLink was compiled with uniform curation rules for eight major pathways in three metazoans that have similar signaling mechanisms but different morphologies. Therefore, the datasets of SignaLink are well applicable to studying evolutionary changes.
CONCLUSIONSContrary to earlier views, signaling pathways are now understood as interlinked (not linear) routes heavily interlinked by cross-talks. This major paradigm shift necessitates novel, systems-based approaches, e.g. new techniques for curation and modeling. Attempting to meet the novel curation requirements, we have compiled a signaling pathway resource, SignaLink. It allows the systematic comparison of pathways and their cross-talks. After finding that any two of the eight selected human signaling pathways may cross-talk, we quantified the possible activity patterns of these cross-talks in healthy and cancerous human tissues. Large-scale mapping of pathways and the activity patterns of their cross-talks revealed multi-pathway and cancer-related cross-talking proteins that can be relevant for drug target discovery.
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
