Motivation: A codon position could perform different or multiple roles in alternative transcripts of a gene. For instance, a non-synonymous position in one transcript could be a synonymous site in another. Alternatively, a position could remain as non-synonymous in multiple transcripts. Here we examined the impact of codon position plurality on the frequency of deleterious single-nucleotide variations (SNVs) using data from 6500 human exomes. Results: Our results showed that the proportion of deleterious SNVs was more than 2-fold higher in positions that remain non-synonymous in multiple transcripts compared with that observed in positions that are non-synonymous in one or some transcript(s) and synonymous or intronic in other(s). Furthermore, we observed a positive relationship between the fraction of deleterious non-synonymous SNVs and the number of proteins (alternative splice variants) affected. These results demonstrate that the plurality of codon positions is an important attribute , which could be useful in identifying mutations associated with diseases.
INTRODUCTIONA major task in clinical genomics is to identify mutations associated with human diseases (;). A number of computational prediction methods have been developed in the recent past to detect these deleterious mutations and to distinguish them from benign population polymorphisms (). Most of these methods examined the long-term evolutionary consequences of a mutation using the multiple-sequence alignments of human and other species. These methods predicted that mutations occurring in evolutionarily conserved positions are likely to be deleterious and hence have the potential to be associated with human diseases. Some of these methods evaluated the functional consequences of a mutation as well (). These methods proposed that mutations occurring in critical positions of a protein (such as a substrate binding site or a splice site) are likely to be deleterious as they disrupt the function and/or structure of a protein or mRNA. Furthermore, these methods suggested that mutations that result in changes between dissimilar amino acids are more deleterious than those between similar amino acids. However unlike conservation-based methods, these methods are applicable only to protein-coding regions. Nevertheless, these function-based methods have immense use in clinical genomics because almost 50% of the disease-associated mutations were found to be located in protein-coding regions (). Using conservation-as well as function-based methods, recent studies revealed an abundance of deleterious amino acid polymorphisms in human exomes (). Although these methods are useful in predicting deleterious variants, additional methods are still required to improve the accuracy of finding them. For this purpose, it is important to examine the possibility of using various genomic features. In this study, we focused on the roles of a position in human proteincoding genes. A codon position could perform different and/or multiple roles in alternate transcripts of a gene. For instance, a non-synonymous position in one transcript could be a synonymous or intronic position in another (). On the other hand, a site could remain non-synonymous in multiple transcripts. It is not clear how this site plurality influences the frequency of occurrence of deleterious single-nucleotide variations (SNVs). Furthermore, it is interesting to examine the relationship between the frequency of deleterious non-synonymous SNVs and the number of proteins (alternative splice variants) affected. The availability of large exome datasets has enabled us to address these issues.
METHODS
Exome dataExome data from 6515 humans were obtained from the Exome Variant Server (evs.gs.washington.edu), which included exomes from 4298 European Americans and 2217 African Americans (). We extracted only SNVs and grouped them based on the pattern of sharing between various transcripts. We examined only the SNVs present in non-synonymous, synonymous, intron, untranslated region (UTR) and splice sites, which were denoted as 'missense', 'coding-synonymous', 'intron', '3-UTR' (or '5-UTR') and 'splice-3' (or 'splice-5'), respectively. The annotations were based on Seattleseq Annotation 137 (http://snp.gs. washington.edu/SeattleSeqAnnotation137/HelpInputFiles.jsp), in which splice sites were defined as two bases at 5 0 and 3 0 ends of introns.We first grouped the SNVs present exclusively in one of the above genomic regions. For example, the SNVs present only in non-synonymous positions of multiple transcripts (eg. 2 in). Then we grouped those present in any two of the above regions in different transcripts. For instance, an SNV could occur in a non-synonymous position in one transcript but a synonymous position in another transcript of the same gene (eg. 1 in). Alternatively, an SNV might be present in a splice site of one transcript but in an intron of another transcript (eg. 5 in). Because of their complexity, we excluded SNVs present in three or more different genomic regions. We also grouped non-synonymous SNVs based on the number of alternatively spliced proteins affected by the mutation. For example, SNV 2 inaffects non-synonymous sites of all three transcripts, whereas SNV 3 affects non-synonymous sites of two transcripts and intron of one transcript.
Data analysisTo identify the deleterious nature of an SNV, we used three methods, namely GERP (), Phastcons () and Polyphen (). Hence, for the results shown inand B, we included only SNVs for which both GERP and Phastcons scores were available. However, for the results shown in, we included only the non-synonymous SNVs for which a Polyphen prediction (such as 'benign', 'possibly deleterious' or 'probably deleterious') was also available. To determine the deleterious nature of an SNV, we used the following thresholds: GERP score 45.0, Phastcons score 40.9 and Polyphen score 40.95 or designated as 'probably deleterious'. The proportion of deleterious SNVs was estimated using the ratio of deleterious SNVs to total SNVs. Standard error estimates were based on the binomial variance. A Z-test was used to determine the significance of the difference between the proportions of deleterious SNVs estimated for a pair of comparisons. R studio was used for multiple regression analysis. We used biallelic SNVs for all analyses reported. However, restricting the analysis using only the derived alleles also produced similar results (data not shown). To identify the orientation of the SNVs, we used the ancestral state of the nucleotides, which was inferred from six primate EPO alignments (). All analyses were performed using SNVs present in multiple transcripts, and those present in single transcripts were only used for comparison in(column 1). To estimate the proportion of transcripts affected by an SNV, we assumed that synonymous sites, introns and UTRs are largely neutral,and non-synonymous positions and splice sites are under selective constraint. If a gene has five transcripts and an SNV affects a non-synonymous/splice site in two transcripts and a synonymous site/intron/UTR in the other three transcripts, then the proportion of transcripts affected was calculated to be 2/5 or 40%. Hence, this measure was calculated as follows: No: of trancripts in which a nonsynoymous=splice site is affected Total number of transcripts of the gene
RESULTS
Duality of codon positionsWe first examined the effects of purifying selection on the codon positions that perform dual roles in different transcripts. For this purpose, SNVs present in two different locations in multiple transcripts were grouped based on the type of codon positions. For example, SNVs could be present in a nonsynonymous position of one transcript but in an intron of another transcript. We also grouped the SNVs present in only one type of exomic position (eg. non-synonymous positions in multiple transcripts). We then computed the proportion of deleterious SNVs in each group of SNVs shown inand Supplementary Table S1. It is evident that SNVs present exclusively in splice sites are the most deleterious (48%). This is much higher than the proportion of deleterious SNVs affecting only non-synonymous sites (28%), which suggests a greater purifying selection in splice sites. Interestingly, the deleterious proportion (38%) of the SNVs affecting a splice site of one (or more) transcript(s) and a non-synonymous position of the remaining transcript(s) was intermediate between the two groups mentioned above. This suggests that the magnitude of purifying selection on the sites is roughly the average of the selective constraints on the two types of positions. The deleterious fraction was only 14% for the SNVs present exclusively in synonymous sites or in introns or UTRs suggesting a nearly neutral evolution at these sites. In contrast, the deleterious fraction was 1021% for the SNVs present in the sites that perform as synonymous sites/intron/UTRs in one or more transcripts and non-synonymous sites in the remaining transcript(s). This proportion was intermediate as it was much higher than that computed using only non-coding sites (14%) but less than that estimated exclusively using non-synonymous sites (28%).
Quantifying the magnitude of selection constraint in alternatively spliced genesThe above results suggest that an SNV in a genomic position is under selective constraint for one or few transcripts of a gene (if they affect a non-synonymous or a splice site) and under nearly neutral evolution (if they affect a synonymous/intron/UTR site) for the remaining transcripts. Therefore, the selection pressure on these sites is less than that on sites that are constrained (eg. nonsynonymous sites) in all transcripts but higher than that on sites that are nearly neutral or slightly deleterious in nature. Hence, the sites that perform different roles in various transcripts experience intermediate or mean selection pressure. However, the above results are rather qualitative, and the mean selection pressure depends on the number of transcripts under selective constraint as well as those under nearly neutral evolution. Hence, to systematically quantify this, we estimated the proportion of transcripts affected by an SNV as shown in Section 2. We then plotted this measure against the proportion of deleterious SNVs and observed a perfect positive correlation between them (and Supplementary). For example, the deleterious fraction was only 0.17 for the SNVs that affect the nonsynonymous sites (or splice sites) of 35% of the transcripts and the synonymous (or intron/UTR) sites of the remaining 65% of the transcripts of the gene. In contrast, this fraction was 0.28, which is 60% higher for the SNVs that affect the non-synonymous sites of all the transcripts of the gene. This result suggests that the proportion of transcripts affected by an SNV is an important measure to predict the frequency of deleterious mutations.
Multiplicity of codon positionsIn the previous analyses, we examined the selection pressure on codon positions that perform different functions in different transcripts (plurality). Next we studied the pattern of purifying selection on the codon positions that perform the same function in multiple transcripts (multiplicity). For this purpose, we included only the SNVs that affect non-synonymous sites of all transcripts of a gene and excluded those SNVs that affect nonsynonymous sites in one (or more) transcript(s) and synonymous sites/introns/UTRs in the remaining transcripts of the same gene. The rationale for this analysis was to compare the amount of purifying selection on non-synonymous sites of genes coding for single versus multiple proteins (splice variants). Our results showed that the deleterious fraction of non-synonymous SNVs affecting single transcript proteins was 0.22, which was significantly (P50.001) less than that estimated for those affecting multiple splice variant proteins (0.28). To examine this further, we divided the SNVs affecting multiple splice variant proteins into five groups based on the number of (splice variant) proteins affected and computed the proportion of deleterious SNVs for each group (and Supplementary). The results clearly showed a positive relationship between the fraction of deleterious SNVs and the number of proteins affected by the SNVs. The deleterious fraction of SNVs affecting more than four alternatively spliced proteins (0.32/ 0.27) was 4455% higher than that of those affecting only single transcript proteins (0.22/0.18). For this analysis, we also determined the fraction of deleterious non-synonymous SNVs using the function-based method Polyphen in addition to the two other conservation-based methods. It is clear fromand Supplementarythat including this method also produced similar results. These results suggest a much higher purifying selection on the genes coding for multiple proteins compared with those coding for single proteins. Hence, mutations occurring at non-synonymous positions of multiple transcript proteins are more deleterious that those from single transcript proteins. In this study, we examined 0.75 million SNVs present in multiple transcripts (Supplementary), which constitutes roughly 41% of the SNVs observed in 6515 human exomes. This emphasizes the importance of considering the duality and multiplicity of codon positions. We showed that the duality of codon positions significantly influences the abundance of deleterious SNVs. We also quantified the magnitude of selection constraints based on the proportion of constrained transcripts and the number of alternatively spliced proteins and showed that the proportion of deleterious SNVs correlates positively with both of these measures. One of the interesting findings of this study is the much higher proportion of deleterious SNVs in splice sites compared with that in non-synonymous positions. This is important because mutations in splice sites are known to affect 4300 genes and are associated with 4370 diseases (). Furthermore, 413 000 splicing-associated disease mutations have been reported in the human gene mutation database (). In this study, we used a set of cutoffs to designate a deleterious SNV following previous studies, and different methods use different sets of criterion to predict a deleterious SNV. However, these limitations do not affect our conclusions because our results are only comparative. Nevertheless, to address these issues, we reanalyzed the data using a recently developed measure called Combined Annotation-Dependent Depletion (CADD) score (). This method integrates diverse prediction methods (including the three methods used here) and produces a single score indicating the extent of functional consequences of an SNV. To avoid using a cutoff value, we compared the mean estimates of the CADD scores obtained for different site categories (Supplementary). Our results based on this new measure also produced similar results (compareand Supplementary). For instance, the CADD score of the SNVs affecting non-synonymous + synonymous sites (12.2) was higher than the score estimated for the SNVs affecting exclusively synonymous sites (6.7) and lower than that obtained for the SNVs affecting non-synonymous sites only (14.9). In our analyses, we used SNVs from human genes under strong as well as weak selection pressures. Hence, it is important to examine whether the magnitude of selection pressure on genes (as opposed to that on independent sites or SNVs) influences the plurality or multiplicity of codon positions. To examine this, we separated the SNVs into three groups based on the magnitude of selection constraints on their respective genes. For this purpose, we used the ratio of non-synonymous-to-synonymous divergence (dN/dS) estimated for each gene using the humanrhesus monkey comparison. This analysis produced results (Supplementary Figs S2S4 and Supplementary Tables S4S6) similar to those reported inC. For instance, the proportion of deleterious SNVs affecting exclusively non-synonymous sites of highly constrained genes (dN/dS50.1) was much higher than that estimated for those affecting non-synonymous sites in one (or more) transcripts and intron or synonymous sites in the other remaining transcripts (0.38 versus 0.140.28 Supplementaryand Supplementary). A similar pattern (0.20 versus 0.080.15) was also observed for weakly constrained genes (dN/dS40.2) and the estimates were proportionally lower than the former. We also performed logistic binomial regression analysis by using 0 or 1 as the probability of an SNV being non-deleterious or deleterious, respectively. This was taken as a function of the proportion of transcripts affected (site-specific trait), dN/dS (gene-specific trait) plus the interaction between them. This analysis revealed that the proportion of affected transcripts is highly significant (P510 16 ) in predicting the probability of an SNV to be deleterious in nature. We obtained similar highly significant result when using the number of proteins affected as a predictor. Finally we replaced the binomial variable (0 or 1) with the actual probability of an SNV to be deleterious computed by the software Polyphen and performed a multiple regression analysis. This result showed that the variable, the number of proteins affected is highly significant (P510 16 ) even after controlling for the effects of dN/dS. These findings demonstrate that the gene-specific constraints do not influence our results. To identify deleterious SNVs, a number of methods have been developed in the past. These methods are either based on the evolutionary conservation of genomic positions and/or on the functional consequences of mutations. Here we showed a new genomic feature, the alternative splicing, which could potentially be used to identify deleterious SNVs. The results of this study suggest that the duality or multiplicity of codon positions could be used as an independent measure to detect deleterious variants. For instance, if a mutation is located in a codon position that remains a non-synonymous site in five or more transcripts (of a corresponding gene), then it is more likely to be deleterious than if the mutation is in a position that is non-synonymous in only one transcript even if both positions have similar GERP (or other) scores. Hence, along with other scores such as GERP, Phastcons and Polyphen, the plurality and multiplicity of a codon position could be used to increase the probability of identifying disease-associated mutations.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
S.Subramanian at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Using the plurality of codon positions at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
