Motivation: Ustiloxins A and B are toxic cyclic tetrapeptides, Tyr-Val/Ala-Ile-Gly (Y-V/A-I-G), that were originally identified from Ustilaginoidea virens, a pathogenic fungus affecting rice plants. Contrary to our report that ustiloxin B is ribosomally synthesized in Aspergillus flavus, a recent report suggested that ustiloxins are synthesized by a non-ribosomal peptide synthetase in U.virens. Thus, we analyzed the U.virens genome, to identify the responsible gene cluster. Results: The biosynthetic gene cluster was identified from the genome of U.virens based on homologies to the ribosomal peptide biosynthetic gene cluster for ustiloxin B identified from A.flavus. It contains a gene encoding precursor protein having five Tyr-Val-Ile-Gly and three Tyr-Ala-Ile-Gly motifs for ustiloxins A and B, respectively, strongly indicating that ustiloxins A and B from U.virens are ribosomally synthesized. Availability and implementation: Accession codes of the U.virens and A.flavus gene clusters in NCBI are BR001221 and BR001206, respectively.
IntroductionUstiloxins are toxic cyclic peptides that were originally identified from Ustilaginoidea virens, a pathogenic fungus affecting rice plant (). The circular moieties of these peptides are composed of Tyr-Val/Ala-Ile-Gly tetrapeptides that are circularized at the side-chains of Tyr and Ile (). Ustiloxin A, a derivative of ustiloxin peptides, contains a circularized tetrapeptide with the composition of Tyr-Val-Ile-Gly (YVIG), whereas ustiloxin B, another derivative of ustiloxin peptides, contains the circularized peptide of Tyr-Ala-Ile-Gly (YAIG).The aromatic rings of the Tyr residues in both ustiloxins A and B are modified by norvaline, a non-protein-coding amino acid, through a sulfoxide bond () (). Recently, the ustiloxin B biosynthetic gene cluster was experimentally identified from Aspergillus flavus using a novel method to predict gene clusters from transcriptome data, MIDDAS-M, and the subsequent validation by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of the gene deletion mutants (). The ustiloxin B gene cluster contains 15 genes including those encoding a fungal type C6 transcription factor, a major facilitatorsuperfamily transporter and cytochrome P450. Until recently, this cyclic peptide was believed to be biosynthesized by the so-called non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) because it contains a nonproteinogenic amino acid, norvaline, in its chemical structure. However, bioinformatic analyses of amino acid sequence indicated that no NRPS domains were observed in the gene cluster (). Instead, a function-unknown gene, ustA, with a translated product containing 16 repeats of the tetrapeptide YAIG, which is the exact amino acid sequence of the cyclic moiety of ustiloxin B, was identified in the gene cluster () (). Consequently, ustiloxin B was shown to be the first case of a ribosomally synthesized peptide reported from filamentous fungi (). Very recently,reported the whole genome sequence of U.virens, and proposed that an NRPS gene cluster is responsible for biosynthesis of ustiloxins in U.virens. However, our analysis strongly suggests that an entirely different gene cluster is responsible for the ustiloxin biosynthesis as ribosomal peptides in U.virens, based on homology to the ustiloxin B biosynthetic gene cluster from A.flavus.
Methods
Reannotation of coding sequencesin the ustiloxin B gene cluster from A.flavus by RNA-seq analysisTo reannotate the gene coding sequences (CDSs) in the ustiloxin B biosynthetic gene cluster, we performed RNA-seq analysis using 15 types of transcriptome data for A.flavus obtained under different conditions in the NCBI SRA database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov/SRA) (accession codes. SRR283857, SRR283858, SRR495778, SRR495942, SRR495943, SRR544871, SRR544872, SRR544873, SRR610531, SRR610532, SRR610533, SRR610534, SRR610535, SRR610537 and SRR610538). We mapped the sequence reads >30 bp after trimming the bases with average quality values of <20 over 7 bases, without unidentified bases, on the genome sequence of A.flavus, GenBank EQ963472-EQ96623211, using the Bowtie () and Tophat (softwares on a DELL server with Ubuntu 13.10 (CPU, Intel Xeon E52643; memory, 256 GB; hard disk, 40 TB). We visually observed the mapping results in the region of the ustiloxin cluster, AFLA_094940AFLA_095110 (), using the IGV software () and determined the region without inconsistencies in the start and stop codons as the gene coding regions. The ustiloxin B biosynthetic gene cluster from A.flavus contained 15 genes; two pairs of two genes, AFLA_095000AFLA_095010 and AFLA_095080AFLA_095090, were concatenated to single genes; AFLA_094970 was omitted because it did not express; the CDSs for eight genes, AFLA_094950, AFLA_094960, AFLA_094990, AFLA_095020, AFLA_095050, AFLA_095070, AFLA_095100 and AFLA_095110, were corrected. The other five genes in the ustiloxin cluster, AFLA_094940, AFLA_094980, AFLA_095030, AFLA_095040 and AFLA_095060, were identical to those in the NCBI database after RNA-seq analysis. The functions of the reannotated genes were analyzed by Blastp search () against UniProtKB () ().
Identificationof the ustiloxin gene cluster from the U.virens genome A tBLASTx search () was performed against the U.virens genome sequence of UV-8b (NCBI accession nos. JHTR01000001JHTR01000449) () with an E-value cutoff of <1e-4 using all 15 gene sequences of the ustiloxin B gene cluster from A.flavus identified by the RNA-seq analysis as queries. The region detected by the tBLASTx search in the U.virens genome was reannotated by the pipeline used for the Aspergillus oryzae and Umbelopsis isabellina genomes (). Briefly, the pipeline uses two different types of gene finding methods, ALN () and GlimmerHMM (). The ALN method predicts gene structures based on homologies to known genes. In this case, the 15 ustiloxin biosynthetic genes from A.flavus, genes encoded in the A. oryzae genome and genes in the UniProtKB database () were used as the known genes. The prediction ofgene structure by GlimmerHMM depends on the statistical features of genes, such as frequencies of codons in exons and nucleotides around splice sites. Regarding the precursor gene, uv_ustA, UV8b_7487 was adopted because it retains the signal peptide. Because the sequence of UV8b_7487 is largely different from the sequence of A.flavus ustA in the repeat count of the core peptide (), it is difficult to correctly align the A.flavus ustA sequence especially at the 5 0 terminal against U.virens genome. Using the amino acid sequences of the reannotated genes in the sequence region of the U.virens genome as queries, Blastp search () was performed against the 15 A.flavus ustiloxin genes after the RNA-seq analysis to evaluate homologies between the two gene clusters from U.virens and A.flavus, and against the UniProtKB () database to annotate their function ().
NRPS analysesThe NRPS gene clusters in the U.virens scaffold of JHTR01000005 (), which contains the gene clusterbelieved to be the ustiloxin biosynthetic cluster, were analyzed using the antiSMASH program (). One NRPS gene cluster from UV8b_1483 to UV8b_1497 was detected, including two and one NRPS A domains in UV8b_1490 and UV8b_1491, respectively. The amino acid sequence of UV8b_1490 was aligned with the sequence of the destruxins (Dtxs) NRPS gene from Metarhizium anisopliae (UniProtKB; E9FCP4) using the MAFFT program ().
Results and discussion
Identificationof the ustiloxin biosynthetic gene cluster in the U.
virens genomeOur sequence analysis revealed that the U.virens genome sequence () contains a gene cluster homologous to the ustiloxin B biosynthetic gene cluster in A.flavus (). The U.virens gene cluster is composed of 13 genes, out of which 10 genes of UV8b_7484UV8b_7494 were already annotated () but three other genes newly annotated by us, all of which are highly homologous to the genes in the ustiloxin B biosynthetic gene cluster from A.flavus (). The order and direction of the genes in U.virens are different from those in A.flavus, but the components of the cluster are the same in both genomes, except the former lacks two peptidase genes, ustP and ustH. In U.virens, UstA, the precursor protein for ustiloxins, has five YVIG motifs and three YAIG motifs for ustiloxin A and ustiloxin B, respectively, whereas 16 YAIG motifs have been identified in UstA from A.flavus () (). The sequence characteristics are fairly consistent; U.virens produces both ustiloxin A and B (), whereas A.flavus produces only ustiloxin B (). This report indicates that two types of ustiloxins are synthesized from a single precursor protein, UstA, which is the first identification of the precursor protein for the ribosomal peptide ustiloxin A. Our results strongly suggest that the cyclic peptide ustiloxins are not synthesized by NRPS but are instead ribosomally synthesized in U.virens, in the same manner as in A.flavus.
Previously reported NRPS as ustiloxin biosynthetic geneIn the recent article on the U.virens genome sequence,suggested that ustiloxins are synthesized by an NRPS and proposed that an NRPS gene cluster was responsible for ustiloxin biosynthesis (). They selected the UV8b_1490 gene as the NRPS for ustiloxin biosynthesis because it is similar to the NRPS for Dtxs biosynthesis in Metarhizium robertsii, an insect pathogenic fungus (). Althoughinsisted that ustiloxin compounds are similar to Dtxs, they are composed of an a-hydroxyisocaproic acid and the five residues of L-proline (Pro) or pipecolic acid (Pip), L-isoleucine (Ile) or L-valine (Val), N-methyl-L-valine (MeVal), N-methyl-L-alanine
Fungal cyclic peptides are ribosomally synthesized in U.virens(MeAla) and b-alanine (b-Ala) (), indicating an entirely different amino acid composition from that of ustiloxins (Supplementary). Furthermore, the NRPS gene (Uv8b_1490) suggested by Zhang et al. (2014) contains only two NRPS adenylation (A) domains according to an antiSMASH analysis (). The amino acid sequence of UV8b_1490 only shared 16% similarity with the NRPS for Dtxs (UniProtKB; E9FCP4), which contains six NRPS A domains, according to the MAFFT software (). Even including the neighbouring gene UV8b_1491, which contains an A domain, only three A domains of NRPS in total can be identified in the gene cluster (Supplementary(B)). With only three A domains, the NRPS does not synthesize a tetrapeptide, nevertheless the main cyclic component of both ustiloxins A and B is composed of a tetrapeptide. Instead of NRPS domains, we identified a gene corresponding to the precursor protein UstA, which contains the cyclic moiety of ustiloxins A and B (YVIG and YAIG, respectively), in the gene cluster from the U.virens genome. Therefore, we conclude that ustiloxins are ribosomally synthesized in U.virens, in the same manner as in A.flavus.
Comparisonof the two ustiloxin gene clusters from U.virens and A.flavusThe ustiloxin gene cluster from U.virens exhibits some differences from the A.flavus cluster. The primary difference is that the two genes encoding peptidases, ustH and ustP, were not identified within the ustiloxin gene cluster in U.virens. The ustH and ustP genes encode a glutathione hydrolase and peptidase S41 family protein, respectively, both of which are major enzymes in fungi. Thus, the functions of UstH and UstP essential for the ustiloxin biosynthesis in A.flavus were considered to be compensated by the gene products involved in basic metabolism in the case of U.virens. Another significant difference is the order of the genes in the cluster between U.virens and A.flavus (). Only a set of three genes in the U.virens cluster, UV8b_7486, UV8b_7485 and UV8b_7484, are conserved in the same order as in the A.flavus cluster. Both clusters include two pairs of homologous genes, ustF1ustF2 and ustYa-ustYb; however, the genes in each pair are located adjacent to each homologue in the U.virens cluster, whereas they are located separately in the A.flavus cluster (). These homologues may represent a duplication event in U.virens and may have separated during the evolution of A.flavus. Comparing the ustiloxin gene clusters from U.virens and A.flavus will lead to further characterization of the ustiloxin biosynthetic pathway.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
T.Tsukui et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
