Motivation: Studying the evolutionary conservation of cancer genes can improve our understanding of the genetic basis of human cancers. Functionally related proteins encoded by genes tend to interact with each other in a modular fashion, which may affect both the mode and tempo of their evolution. Results: In the human PPI network, we searched for subnetworks within each of which all proteins have evolved at similar rates since the human and mouse split. Identified at a given co-evolving level, the subnetworks with non-randomly large sizes were defined as co-evolving modules. We showed that proteins within modules tend to be conserved, evolutionarily old and enriched with housekeeping genes, while proteins outside modules tend to be less-conserved, evolutionarily younger and enriched with genes expressed in specific tissues. Viewing cancer genes from co-evolving modules showed that the overall conservation of cancer genes should be mainly attributed to the cancer proteins enriched in the conserved modules. Functional analysis further suggested that cancer proteins within and outside modules might play different roles in carcinogenesis, providing a new hint for studying the mechanism of cancer.
INTRODUCTIONStudying the evolutionary conservation of disease/cancer genes can improve our understanding of the genetic basis of human diseases. However, current results on this topic are still inconsistent. Some studies suggested that disease genes related to morbid phenotypes evolve more slowly than other genes (). Other studies () indicated that disease genes may evolve faster than other genes and thus are under weaker negative selection. Notably, most of these studies treated disease/cancer genes and the rest genes as if they were completely isolated and uncorrelated. However, it is known that proteins encoded by genes tend to perform functions by interacting with each other in a modular fashion (), which may affect both the mode and tempo of molecular evolution * To whom correspondence should be addressed. by reducing pleiotropy and enabling protein modules to be co-opted for new functions (;). Thus, studying the evolutionary patterns of cancer genes in the context of protein (gene) modules may provide us new clues to understand the genetic basis of human cancer. In this study, in the human PPI network, we firstly searched for PPI subnetworks within each of which all proteins have evolved at similar rates since the human and mouse split. At a given co-evolving level, the identified PPI subnetworks with significantly large sizes were selected as co-evolving modules, which could be highly cohesive fragments of some co-evolving functional units. Comparing proteins within and outside modules, we found that genes encoding proteins within modules tend to be conserved, evolutionarily old and enriched with housekeeping genes (), while genes encoding proteins outside modules are less-conserved, evolutionarily younger and enriched with genes expressed in specific tissues. Then, for proteins encoded by cancer genes collected in Cancer Gene Census database (), we showed that the cancer proteins within modules tend to be evolutionarily old and conserved, while the cancer proteins outside modules tend to be evolutionarily younger and less conserved. Thus, the overall conservation of cancer proteins in comparison with other proteins () should be mainly attributed to the cancer proteins enriched in co-evolving modules. These results suggested that cancer proteins with different evolutionary patterns may play different functional roles in carcinogenesis. In fact, we found that cancer proteins together with their co-evolving neighbors within modules tend to participate in some essential biological processes such as 'nuclear mRNA splicing, via spliceosome' and 'post-translational protein modification', while cancer proteins outside modules tend to be enriched in functions such as 'DNA damage response' and 'DNA repair'.
METHODS
The evolutionary rate and evolutionary age dataThe synonymous substitution rate (K s ) and non-synomymous substitution rate (K a ) data for human genes and their mouse (gallus) homologs were downloaded from NCBI HomoloGene (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/ HomoloGene/build58) (). The K a and K s data for pairs of homolog genes in a HomoloGene group are denoted by the symbols <HGStats_ka> and <HG-Stats_ks> in the homologene.xml.gz file (a XML dump Page: 920 919924
J. Zhu et al.of the HomoloGene build). To prevent possible contamination by paralogous genes, we only considered one-to-one mapped orthologous pairs asdid. The orthologs of human genes in 39 fully sequenced eukaryotes were obtained from the phylogenetic data by (). Here, we termed the proteins with fungi origin 'old', proteins with ortholgs in metazoan (Anopheles gambiae, Drosophila melanogaster, Apis mellifera, Caenorhabditis elegans and Caenorhabditis briggsae) 'middle', and proteins specific to species emerged later than metazoan 'young'.
The GO annotation and PPI dataThe GO annotation data was downloaded on August 16, 2008. The human PPI data was downloaded from MINT (), BIND (), IntAct (), HPRD (), MIPS (), DIP (), KEGG (PPrel for proteinprotein interactions and ECrel for enzymes involved in neighboring steps) () and Reactome protein pairs involved in a complex, reaction and neighboring reaction (). We pooled together the eight PPI datasets as did in () and compiled an integrated PPI network of 84 872 distinct interactions involving 10 863 connected human proteins with evolutionary rate data (Here, to reduce the false positive rate of the PPI data, we used the literaturebased PPI data from multiple sources. Though the literature-based human PPI data might be biased to well-studied proteins (), some researchers argued that this bias is negligible (). We note that even if this bias exists, our following results would be affected little because we focused on comparing the cancer proteins within and outside modules.
Cancer genes and housekeeping genesFrom Cancer Gene Census database (), we extracted 313 cancer genes with both K a and PPI data. We also analyzed 340 candidate cancer genes with both K a and PPI data, which were found in four somatic mutation screens of cancer genomes (). Focusing on genes with both K a and PPI data, 1856 housekeeping genes expressed in all of 31 human tissues and 598 genes uniquely expressed in a single tissue were extracted from ().
Measures of the difference of proteins in evolutionary ratesThe evolutionary rate of a protein is often measured by K a defined as the number of non-synonymous substitutions per non-synonymous site of the protein since the split of two species. It is also often measured by K a /K s where K s is the number of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site, which calculates the accepted non-synonymous substitutions normalized by chance if selection does not act on silent sites (). However, K s is also subject to selection in many species (). Thus, we used both K a and K a /K s to measure the evolutionary rates of human proteins. Here, we only showed the results based on K a. The results based on K a /K s were consistent. The absolute difference of two proteins i and j in evolutionary rate since the humanmouse split was calculated as K aij =|K ai K aj |. If they have evolved at similar rates over this time range, then K aij should be small (). As a distance metrics, K aij has three main properties: (i) symmetry, K aij = K aji ; (ii) non-negative, K aij  0; and (iii) delta non-negative, K aij  (K aik +K ajk ).
Viewing cancer genes from co-evolving gene modulesWe note that when applying the MannWhitney U-test to examine the difference of proteins within and outside modules in K a , the same significant results were found. However, the MannWhitney U-test might be biased to some extend since the evolutionary rates of interacting proteins are correlated.
Functional enrichment analysisWe identified biological process categories of GO enriched with proteins within (or outside) modules by Elim algorithm () which can remove some generic categories whose enrichment could be explained by their significant descendant categories. In a category of GO, the probability (P) of observing at least a given number of proteins within (or outside) modules by random chance was calculated by the hypergeometric test. The Pvalues were adjusted by the Bonferroni correction.
RESULTS
Co-evolving modules and proteins' conservationWe set the threshold for controlling the absolute difference of the evolutionary rates for each protein pair in a subnetwork as the top 5, 2.5 or 1 percentile cutoff of the distribution of K aij for all-againstall proteins pairs. When setting the threshold as the top 5 percentile cutoff, we found 382 co-evolving modules with sizes significantly larger than expected by random chance (P  0.05) by the algorithm described in 'Methods' section. When setting the threshold as the top 2.5 or 1 percentile cutoff, though the identified modules became smaller, all our following conclusions were consistently obtained (Supplementary Data and Supplementary Figs S1 and S2). As shown in, most proteins within modules are conserved with K a ranging from 0 to 0.0261 (median 0.0103), while most proteins outside modules are not conserved with K a ranging from 0 to 0.7038 (median 0.0644). However, due to some statistical and biological factors (see more in 'Discussion' section), a small fraction of the proteins outside modules are also conserved. The difference between the median K a of proteins within and outside modules was not observed in 100 random networks with permuted K a (P < 0.01). Furthermore, according to the human phylome (), 81.13% of the genes encoding proteins within modules have fungi origin (termed old, see 'Methods' section) or orthologs in metazoan (termed middle, see 'Methods' section) (). Thus, the proteins within modules tend to be involved in essential functions for both single-and multi-cellular organisms. In comparison, only 55.93% of the proteins outside modules are of old or middle age (P < 2.20e16, Fisher's exact test). Additionally, based on the gene expression profiles in 31 human tissues (), we found that genes encoding proteins within modules are enriched with housekeeping genes (P = 1.59e11, hypergeometric test), while genes encoding proteins outside modules are enriched with genes expressed in specific tissues (P = 2.27e06, hypergeometric test). All together, these results supported the assumption that evolutionary innovations tend to occur by altering proteins outside modules (). Similar results were observed when focusing cancer proteins within and outside modules. The median K a (0.01) of the cancer proteins within modules is smaller than the median K a (0.0528) of the cancer proteins outside modules (). By the randomized experiment as described in 'Methods' section, we found that the difference between the median K a of cancer proteins within andoutside modules could not be observed in any of the 100 random networks (P < 0.01). This result suggested that the previously reported overall conservation of cancer proteins in comparison with other proteins () should be mainly attributed to the enrichment of cancer proteins in co-evolving modules (P = 2.60e08, hypergeometric test). Additionally, 62.82% of the cancer proteins within modules are of old or middle age, while less (50.28%) cancer proteins outside modules are of old or middle age (P = 0.0631, Fisher's exact test) ().
Functional roles of different cancer proteinsDifferent conservation patterns of cancer proteins within and outside modules suggest that they may play distinct functional roles in carcinogenesis. By the hypergeometric test with 5% FDR control, we found that 139 of the 382 co-evolving module are enriched with cancer proteins. Additionally, we found that proteins encoded by the candidate cancer genes found from somatic mutation screens of cancer genomes () are also significantly enriched in these 139 co-evolving modules (P = 0.0301, hypergeometric test), suggesting that disruptions of these co-evolving modules might play essential roles in carcinogenesis. Page: 922 919924Then, we performed functional enrichment analysis for each of the 139 modules, by the method described in 'Methods' section. The results showed that genes within these co-evolving modules are enriched in essential biological processes 'nuclear mRNA splicing, via spliceosome', 'transmembrane receptor protein serine/threonine kinase signaling pathway', 'RNA elongation', 'post-translational protein modification', 'regulation of RNA metabolic process' and 'BMP signaling pathway' () (Supplementary). The cancer proteins outside modules are enriched in GO biological processes 'DNA damage response', 'signal transduction by p53 class mediator resulting in induction of apoptosis', 'DNA repair', 'mismatch repair', 'regulation of transcription, DNAdependent', 'transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter' and 'peptidyl-tyrosine phosphorylation'. The results suggested that cancer proteins within modules tend to participate in essential biological processes and be conserved, while cancer proteins outside modules tend to participate in functions for keeping the stability of the genome and have a higher degree of evolutionary plasticity.
J. Zhu et al.
Viewing cancer genes from co-evolving gene modulesfrom co-evolving modules suggested that the overall conservation of cancer genes () should be mainly attributed to the enrichment of cancer proteins in the conserved modules. In addition, we found that different from cancer genes within modules participating in some essential biological processes, cancer genes outside modules tend to play specific roles in functions related to DNA damage response and DNA repair. All together, these results suggested that the dysregulation of cancer proteins with different evolutionary and functional patterns might play different roles in carcinogenisis. Genes might have differentiated functionalities in different species, leading to changed co-evolving modules during different evolutionary periods. Here, we analyzed a case about the functional overlapping between modules co-evolving since the humanmouse split and modules co-evolving since the humangallus split which took place much earlier than the time of the humanmouse split. Generally, the modules of genes co-evolving since the humangallus split are smaller than the modules of genes co-evolving since the humanmouse split. The largest module for humangallus contains 134 genes enriched in 'nuclear mRNA splicing, via spliceosome' and 'translational elongation' (by the Elim algorithm, Bonferroni correction P < 0.05). As shown in Supplementary Table S2, this module shares 68 genes with the largest module for humanmouse which contains 396 genes enriched in the above two functions as well as in another four functions. However, some other genes in the largest module for human-gallus are not included in the largest modules for humanmouse. These results indicated that some genes cohesively co-evolving during the time since both the human mouse split and the humangallus split might perform some basic functions and thus be subjected to higher evolutionary constraints, while some other genes might have differentiated functionalities and thus different co-evolving patterns since the humanmouse split. However, this result should be interpreted with great caution because the partial overlapping between co-evolving modules might be artificially introduced by the algorithm limitation that a coevolving functional unit could be detected as several fragmental modules. As shown in the 'Results' section, some proteins outside modules are conserved though most are not. The conservation of some proteins outside modules could be explained by some statistical and biological factors. First, with a threshold for controlling the absolute difference between the evolutionary rates of protein pairs in the PPI subnetworks, the modules identified at a co-evolving level may miss some proteins (or some parts) of co-evolving functional units. Second, because current PPI data may cover only a small fraction of all the human proteinprotein interactions (), some proteins co-evolving with proteins in modules might be missed though we pooled eight literature-based PPI datasets together (). Also, the incomplete PPI data may lead to the presence of many small modules whose sizes were not significantly larger than expected by random chance but they could be biologically meaningful. This problem needs to be further addressed by integrating high-throughput PPI data and by assessing the significance of the modules on other aspects. Third, one hypothesis about how a PPI network and its constituent modules evolve indicates that proteins interacting with multiple modules might evolve more slowly owing to the high pleiotropic constraints on them (;). According to this hypothesis, some conserved proteins outside modules might regulate or participate in multiple functions and be subjected to high evolutionary constraints. In our previous work (), we found that the disruption of genes densely interacting with multiple functions associated with cancers may play pivot roles in carcinogenesis. In general, because genes play biological functions in a coordinated fashion in biological systems, studying the coordinated operations of genes within and outside modules can help us understand how these genes (and modules) play functional roles in inducing diseases. In our future work, we will further elucidate the coordinated roles of cancer proteins within and outside modules in inducing cancer by exploiting molecular data such as somatic mutations and epigenetic changes in cancer genomes ().
The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
at :: on August 31, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
.5 Finding co-evolving functional modules In the human PPI network, we searched for locally maximal PPI subnetworks within each of which all proteins have evolved at similar rates since the human and mouse split. In each subnetwork, the absolute difference of the evolutionary rates for every two proteins was required within a given threshold, reflecting the co-evolving level of these proteins in the subnetwork. Here, the threshold was taken as the top 5, 2.5 or 1 percentile of the distribution of K aij for all-against-all proteins pairs. Using the method proposed in Chuang et al. (2007), we performed a greedy search in the human PPI network to find co-evolving PPI subnetworks with locally maximal sizes. First, we took each protein as a seed. Then, from its interacting neighbors, we selected one protein whose evolutionary rate is similar to that of the seed. Iteratively, from proteins interacting with at least one of the pre-selected proteins, we selected one protein whose evolutionary rate was similar to all members of the pre-selected proteins. At each iteration step, when there were several proteins evolved at similar rates with all the pre-selected proteins, we randomly chose one. Such a random choice may lead to slightly different subnetworks (see details in Supplementary Data). The search stops when no proteins can be added. The subnetworks selected above were considered as candidate subnetworks, from which we further selected significant subnetworks with non-randomly large sizes according to two random experiments (Chuang et al., 2007). First, we produced 100 random networks by permuting the evolutionary rates of the proteins in the original PPI network and performed the same search procedure in each random network. The significance of the size of a candidate subnetwork was calculated as the percentage of the subnetworks, extracted from the 100 random networks, whose sizes were larger than the candidate subnetwork. Then, in each of the 100 random networks, we extracted subnetworks initialized from the same seed protein for producing the candidate subnetwork and estimated the percentage of the extracted subnetworks which were larger than the candidate subnetwork. Finally, from the candidate subnetworks, we selected the ones with significantly larger sizes according to both tests (P  0.05) as co-evolving modules or modules for short. The non-randomly large sizes of the modules suggested that the emergence of the modules could be introduced by the underlying evolutionary constraint on interacting proteins. Notably, when allowing a larger threshold for the absolute difference between the evolutionary rates of every two proteins in a subnetwork, we could identify larger subnetworks. The smaller the threshold is controlled, the more cohesive are the identified modules in co-evolution. Identified at a co-evolving level, the modules could be considered as highly cohesive fragments of some co-evolving functional units. At a given coevolving level, we defined all proteins in the identified modules as proteins within modules and compared them with proteins outside modules. Identified by the greedy search algorithm, some modules might share proteins and their boundaries could not be clearly defined. This is a common problem for algorithms for finding PPI subnetworks based on optimizing some given scores (Chuang et al., 2007; Kelley and Ideker, 2005; Ulitsky and Shamir, 2007). Here, we did not try to delete or merge modules with overlapping proteins according to some empirical criterion as did in some researches (Kelley and Ideker, 2005; Ulitsky and Shamir, 2007). Instead, we simply treated all modules as cohesive fragments of some co-evolving functional units. 2.6 Difference between proteins within and outside modules in the evolutionary rate To evaluate the significance of the difference between the median K a of the proteins within and outside modules, we calculated the corresponding difference in each of 100 random networks produced by randomly permuting the K a values of the proteins in the original PPI network. Then, the significance (P-value) of the real difference was calculated as the percentage of the random differences which were larger than the real difference. When evaluating the significance of the difference between the median K a of the cancer proteins within and outside modules, we produced 100 random networks by separately permuting K a for cancer proteins and other proteins in the original PPI network. By such a way, the K a distribution of cancer proteins in each random network was the same as that in the original PPI network.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION Based on the assumption that genes/proteins tend to express and perform functions in a modular fashion, some methods (e.g. EM algorithm, simulated annealing and greedy search) have been proposed for finding different types of gene/protein modules such as modules of co-regulated genes (Segal et al., 2003) and PPI subnetworks related to a specific condition(s) (Chuang et al., 2007; Guo et al., 2007; Ideker et al., 2002; Kelley and Ideker, 2005; Ulitsky and Shamir, 2007). Here, similarly to algorithms searching for PPI subnetworks related to a specific condition (Chuang et al., 2007), we performed a greedy search in the human PPI network to identify co-evolving PPI subnetworks at a given co-evolving level. The identified PPI subnetworks could be highly cohesive parts or fragments of some co-evolving functional units. Our results suggested that proteins within and outside modules have different evolutionary patterns and supported the assumption that evolutionary innovations tend to occur by altering proteins outside modules (Fraser, 2005; Hartwell et al., 1999). Viewing cancer genes
