Motivation: The precise quantification of intracellular metabolic flow rates is of fundamental importance in bio(techno)logy and medical research. The gold standard in the field is metabolic flux analysis (MFA) with 13 C-labeling experiments. 13 C-MFA workflows orchestrate several, mainly human-in-the-loop, software applications, integrating them with plenty of heterogeneous information. In practice, this had posed a major practical barrier for evaluating, interpreting and understanding isotopic data from carbon labeling experiments. Results: Graphical modeling, interactive model exploration and visual data analysis are the key to overcome this limitation. We have developed a first-of-its-kind graphical tool suite providing scientists with an integrated software framework for all aspects of 13 C-MFA. Almost 30 modules (plug-ins) have been implemented for the Omix visualization software. Several advanced graphical workflows and ergonomic user interfaces support major domain-specific modeling and proofreading tasks. With that, the graphical suite is a productivity enhancing tool and an original educational training instrument supporting the adoption of 13 C-MFA applications in all life science fields. Availability: The Omix Light Edition is freely available at http://www. omix
INTRODUCTION
13 C-metabolic flux analysisFluxomics, which is also known as metabolic flux analysis (MFA; Winter and Kr  omer, 2013), deals with the detailed quantification of metabolic reaction rates inside living cells. Fluxes are material flows through biochemical pathways, rather than metabolite concentrations. Fluxomics is unique among the 'omics' methods because it does notlike the other methodscharacterize the mere potential of an organism to perform a certain function, but rather it reflects its physiological status quo (). A distinguishing feature of MFA is that metabolic fluxes cannot be directly quantified but must be computed from measured data based on a mathematical model. This particularly applies to MFA with stable isotopic carbon atoms ( 13 C-MFA), which is considered the gold standard in the field, calculating the in vivo fluxes from stable 13 C enrichments of intracellular metabolites described by a mathematical model (). The unique information quality of isotope-based fluxomics is increasingly recognized as enabling technology in metabolic engineering, systems biology and biomedical research. The methodology of model-based 13 C-MFA is continuously developed since the early 1990s. The basics are described in tutorial papers () and the state of the art is covered by several reviews (; Wiechert and N oh, 2013;). In addition to the experimental procedures of carbon labeling experiments (CLEs) and the protocols for biochemical analytics, the computational aspects play a central role in 13 C-MFA. The latter involve a sequence of modeling, simulation, experimental design, flux estimation and statistical evaluation steps. In all steps, the biological expert must have the ability to intervene and stir the process. Up to now, establishing tailored computational evaluation pipelines for 13 C-MFA is a time-consuming exercise. Easing these tasks is the subject of this article.
Modeling CLEsLabel distribution over a metabolic network is governed by wellestablished physical laws. This means that all frameworks for modeling and simulating CLEs involve the same basic principles and thus require the same input, i.e. mass balances, reaction stoichiometry, carbon mappings between reactants and measurements (). On the other hand, various computational formalisms have also emerged, which process the physical laws in different ways (). More importantly, these formalisms impact on the performance of the computational procedures but not on the calculated flux results (). Unfortunately, structural and measured input data are both extensive and heterogeneous. A lot of information must be compiled on the metabolic network structure, carbon atom mappings (CAMs) for reactions, measurement configurations, flux constraints, input substrate compositions, etc. This implies that 13 C-MFA involves a painstaking configuration procedure requiring considerable experience. To this end, a general evaluation workflow for modeling and simulation of CLEs was proposed in (). Most software systems for 13 C-MFA follow a universal approach (e.g. influx_s, NMR2Flux+, Metran, OpenFLUX, 13CFLUX2, cf. Supplementary Table S1.4). In this context, 'universal' means that a modeling environment is available for the specification of arbitrary metabolic networks, input substrate compositions, measurement configurations and *To whom correspondence should be addressed. additional constraints. Available software tools for 13 C-MFA rely heavily on text-, table-, XML-or matrix-based input documents to specify models. From these files, all equations needed to describe the CLE are automatically generated. It is neither easy nor straightforward to build up the complex configuration for 13 C-MFA, to check its correctness and consistency, to trigger simulation and data evaluation runs or to automatically visualize the final flux maps in the metabolic network context. Notably, in all parts of a 13 C-MFA model, 100% correctness is needed. If, for example, one single CAM has been incorrectly specified, a measurement has been incorrectly related to a metabolite's fragment or the actual input substrate has not been accurately mirrored, the CLE analysis will fail to calculate the correct flux map. At present, it is difficult to detect and, in turn, locate the error in a model file or table covering several printed pages. Although more than 400 possible syntactic and semantic errors in the model specification can be detected, even the recently published 13CFLUX2 compiler, representing a decade of experience in 13 C-MFA, cannot prevent systematic mistakes or fundamental misunderstandings in the model formulation ().
Visual workflowsExperience has shown that building up the first model description of a complex CLE usually cannot be managed by a newcomer without experienced help. This simple fact is certainly one of the major reasons why 13 C-MFA is still not as commonly used as other omics techniques. This contribution goes one step further by addressing this very problem. An innovative collection of visual workflows is presented, which are intuitive to use and cover the 13 C-MFA model setup, all computational steps of simulation, experimental design, parameter fitting and statistical analysis, as well as the visual presentation of results. The comprehensive graphical tool suite that we have developed builds on the functionality of the network-based visualization software OmixV R (). The base functionalities of Omix allow even an inexperienced user to quickly create and edit metabolic networks (). Because all metabolic flux maps generated during the analysis are later visualized in the same network diagram, Omix users can design the network to suit their personal preferences and context-dependent priorities. This is essential for intuitive and effective visual recognition. The Omix Visualization Language (OVL) makes network drawings scriptable, which enables the easy and flexible user-defined mapping of data to the visual attributes of each single network node and edge (). To draw the maximum advantage from a graphical configuration of CLEs, it is important that graphical tools are not mere user interfaces to the underlying data structures but that they represent powerful, easy-to-learn, interactive and intuitive tools for immediate consistency, syntactical/semantical correctness and completeness checking, modeling and visual analysis. We achieved this goal by developing several advanced visual workflows supporting the model building processes (cf. SupplementaryIn the subsequent sections, we follow the general 13 C-MFA workflow outlined in () and illustrate how the visual model configuration is implemented for each of the steps. Orchestration of the single workflow steps is made easier by a graphical workflow manager, facilitating plug-and-play assembly and coordinated execution of each step. The established comprehensive visual 13 C-MFA workflow, as illustrated in Supplementary.1, consists of a unique collection of almost 30 Omix plug-ins (cf. Supplementary Table S1.2). Several figures illustrating the core elements of the graphical workflow along with a detailed explanation of non-trivial algorithms and additional applications are provided as Supplementary Material. Having briefly outlined the general aspects of metabolic network modeling, we will focus, in the following, on the 13 C-MFAspecific aspects of the visual workflows.
METABOLIC NETWORK ASSEMBLY
Metabolic network specification and annotationThe first step in any 13 C-MFA workflow is the collection of reactions, i.e. the stoichiometric relation between enzymes and metabolites. Clearly, building on expert-curated information sources minimizes the error in model configuration. There is a wide range of publicly available information sources, and a wealth of Omix plug-ins have been developed for importing metabolic networks into the workflow from databases (KEGG, BioCyc), files (SBML, BioPAX, SBGN-ML, GraphML) and reaction lists. In addition to the network structure, subsequent 13 C-MFA modeling steps rely heavily on accessory information such as the chemical structure formulas of metabolites, or common names and database IDs of reactions. Our graphical workflow helps to cut the costs of assembly and data integration by compiling tailored information sets automatically. In turn, these sets provide a valuable knowledge base for the subsequent modeling workflow (cf. Supplementary).
Flux constraintsFrom the network topology, one stoichiometric constraint for each internal metabolite node is derived by balancing the rates of incoming and outgoing reactions. In 13 C-MFA, reversible reaction steps have to be taken into account because they influence the labeling distribution, meaning that net fluxes should be complemented by their respective exchange fluxes (Wiechert and). Both net fluxes and exchange fluxes can be further constrained by imposing linear equality and inequality constraints derived from expert knowledge, e.g. concentrationinduced flux directions (cf. Supplementary). These additional modeling assumptions can be introduced in a dedicated window with a register of defined fluxes. Here, the user specifies (in)equality constraints in terms of linear sums of fluxes. When the user is defining these assumptions, a pop-up window opens showing a register of all fluxes contained in the network.equalities are parsed in real time. Immediate reporting of typing errors prevents users from entering reaction names that do not exist. Expressive error messages point out inconsistencies with the network and typing errors (cf. Supplementary).
CAMs: status quoCAMs must be specified to simulate CLEs. To this end, the fate of every single carbon atom in every reaction step of the network must be unambiguously defined (cf.and Supplementary Figs S2.46). This information must be absolutely correct and consistent. Unfortunately, the correctness of the transitions is difficult to verify manually in both the textual representation of CAMs () and in the mapping matrix representation (). Thus, it is almost impossible to proofread large models using the current state of the art. Some databases like ARM (), carbon-fate maps (), the MetaCyc database family and publications (e.g.) supply computationally generated and partially manually curated information on CAMs. Nevertheless, some general fundamental problems have yet to be solved. Firstly, there is still a lack of reliable CAM information with high coverage. Although progress was recently made in heuristics-based CAM generation (), unknown reaction mechanisms inducing unusual mappings pose an inherent problem for all automated approaches. Specifically, enzymatically indistinguishable 'C-symmetric' atoms require the formulation of alternative CAMs in 13 C-MFA models, which is still an unsolved problem (). Secondly, there is a lack of 13 C-MFA standards for CAMs and common tools for their data management, rendering model reuse, sharing and merging almost impossible. The underlying reason for this is that CAMs can only be correctly interpreted when the numbering of the carbon atoms is unambiguously stipulated and when this setting is clearly documented. Although IUPAC/IUBMB commissions provide detailed recommendations, these guidelines are invariably not obeyed in practice. In addition, the widely applied MDLV R , MOL or CML files are not standardized with regard to atom numbers and, hence, cannot be used as standard (cf. Supplementary). As a consequence, up to now, 13 C-MFA models can only be exchanged on a personal basis.
Canonical CAMs and supportive automatismsThe most reliable way to address this limitation while unlocking available CAM information for fluxomics is (i) to trust in the human expert's modeling and proofreading capabilities, and (ii) to keep the atom numbering issue away from the user. This requires graphical front-end tools that gather and display all of the necessary information in an intuitive visualization, allow for quick correction and the straightforward specification of new CAMs. If a unique numbering of the carbon atoms is additionally guaranteed in the back-end, this effort pays off immediately because once a correct model with curated CAMs of the central metabolism has been developed, further models can be quickly derived. Notably, model reuse and assembly benefits enormously from cut, copy and paste functionalities. This principle has been applied for the first time by implementing CAMs that are independent of human-imposed numbering schemes. To this end, we used the IUPAC International Chemical Identifier (InChI TM ver. 1.04, www.iupac.org/home/ publications/e-resources/inchi.html). The InChI Trust provides open software to transform a given structural formula into an InChI string. A unique atom sequence is obtained in the process. Referring CAMs to this reference numbering ensures that two humans drawing the same molecule or loading its MOL or CML files will always get the same carbon atom numbering. InChI's AuxInfo layer contains the information required to revert the conversion procedure (cf. Supplementary). By using molecular structure files, the human user directly obtains a graphical representation of each molecule along with a standardized atom numbering. The open-source Java library CDK (Chemistry Development Kit ver. 1.4,) is used for InChI string generation and the handling of diverse data formats. The molecules are imported and visualized by the Structural Formula plug-in. The limitation of InChI to correctly handle generic structures, such as Markush structures with generic R groups, is algorithmically solved within the plug-in. In Supplementary.8, we demonstrate how the KEGG RPAIR database containing atom correspondences between substrate and product metabolite pairs can be used to generate canonical CAMs. Owing to its universality, our novel approach is readily applicable to other CAM resources such as the BioCyc database. If the atom correspondences are not known, the user interactively specifies or edits the atom transitions by choosing the source carbon atom marker (colored circle) and dragging it toward its companion atom, which then changes its color from gray to the color of the source atom (cf. Supplementary Figs. S2.46). The actual carbon atom numbering of the reactants plays no role in this procedure and is only optionally displayed for the sake of integrity. It is not always desirable to map all atoms of a molecule. For instance, coenzyme A (CoA) synthesis is usually not regarded in 13 C-MFA network models. Thus, pruned CAMs include only the core carbon skeleton of compounds like acetyl CoA or succinyl CoA (cf. Supplementary Material). Consequently, only the balances of the traced carbon atoms are checked by the Atomic Layer Modeling plug-in. Importantly, the user can also specify alternative mappings, so-called 'variants', for reactions with C-symmetric reactants (cf. Supplementary). This obviates the need for the modeler to explicitly formulate symmetric reactions. All in all, the graphical specification and more vitally the proofreading have been turned into convenient procedures. Biochemical experts are familiar with the resulting representation and can now, for the first time, check as many as 100 reactions in a short time. We evaluated the visual CAM specification with a large carbon atom transition network for yeast metabolism containing 845 metabolites and 1100 reactions (826 thereof carrying manually specified CAMs). Visual proofreading of the network structure and CAMs took less than one working day. Other studies have showed similar figures.
SETTING THE NETWORK'S INS AND OUTSThe next task is to specify labeled substrates as an additional information source to effectively narrow down the number of possible flux solutions. Administering cells with 13 C-labeled substrates imprints specific labeling patterns on the intracellular metabolites. The goal is to end up with only one possible
Isotopic substrate specificationIt is common practice in 13 C-MFA to administer mixtures of differently labeled ( 13 C) and unlabeled ( 12 C) substrates to obtain maximum information from the CLE. Importantly, isotopically labeled substrate species always contain a small proportion of impure substances (commercially available substrates have typically a purity of 599 atom%).This means that each compound in a mixture is itself a mixture of differently labeled isotopomers. Owing to their impact on the flux calculation, it is essential to precisely define the input labeling impurities according to the manufacturer's specification. As shown in (), mixture compositions can be conveniently modeled by including multiple confluent substrate uptake steps into the network. Each influx carries the fraction of one of the (impure) labeled species provided in the substrate mixture. All of these input fluxes are then blended in one single mixture pool, and the sum of all influxes constitutes the total carbon uptake rate. The influx ratio determines the proportion of the mixture species. In this way, input substrate compositions can be intuitively modeled as an integral part of the metabolic network structure. In the graphical 13 C-MFA workflow, a list is generated of all input compounds found in the model. For each compound, the modeler specifies the associated input isotopomer visually by individually selecting the carbon atoms and interactively switching between labeled and unlabeled states (cf.and Supplementary). Finally, the isotopic purity of each labeled species is entered into the user interface.
Measurement (error) configurationOne of the most difficult tasks in 13 C-MFA is identifying the precise relation between various measured signals and the corresponding labeling fractions of intracellular metabolite pools. The reason for this is the enormous heterogeneity of mass spectrometric (MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) analytical platforms and protocols published in the literature as well as the continually advancing techniques. Recent developments in this field are described, for example, byand Nagana Gowda and Raftery (2014). Several other papers are concerned with the determination of labeling patterns for special equipment (cf. Supplementary12 for more references). A universal modeling framework must be flexible enough to model all present and expected future measurement configurations. A matrix representation describing a group of simultaneously measured signals as linear combinations of the analyte's isotopomer fractions provides a generally applicable approach (). Although measurement matrices are universal, they are inconvenient for manual specification. For example, a metabolite with nine carbon atoms, such as the amino acid L-phenylalanine, has 2 9 = 512 isotopomers, which induces a measurement matrix with as many columns. The generation of the corresponding measurement matrices should be hidden from the user and automated in such a way that the corresponding matrices are automatically generated from a structure-or fragment-related input while remaining consistent with the carbon atom network (cf.). The general approach taken in our visual 13 C-MFA workflow is to provide an interactive canvas where the modeler conveniently specifies the measurements. After one of the intracellular metabolites has been chosen from a drop-down menu, the measurement technique is selected (cf. Supplementary). Here, the modeler chooses between four different measurement types: ' 1 H-NMR' (positional 13 C enrichments), 'MS' (mass isotopomers), 'MS/MS' (positional mass isotopomers) and 'Generic' for all cases where the aforementioned measurement techniques do not provide sufficient flexibility. All measurement types are exemplified for L-phenylalanine in Supplementary. In addition to labeling patterns, the modeler likewise specifies extracellular fluxes, i.e. specific rates associated with substrate consumption, biomass and product synthesis. Each single measurement has to be accompanied by its estimated standard deviation, which depends on experimental, analytical and device-specific factors.
NETWORK ANALYSISGraphical tools and algorithms help us to understand important characteristics of the formulated metabolic labeling system and thus play an important role in the plausibility assessment, testing and proofreading of network models. Conventionally, any network analysis starts with inspecting the stoichiometric matrix containing the full set of stoichiometric coefficients of all reactants in the network. The set of all minimal pathways through the network is characterized by the elementary flux mode (), and phenotypes can be predicted with flux balance analysis (FBA,). We have developed Omix plug-ins for all of these analyses (cf. Supplementary Table S1.2). Additionally, the Klamt group has provided an Omix plug-in for the CellNetAnalyzer toolbox, facilitating various further network analysis functions (). In the following, we concentrate on the advanced analysis of isotope labeling systems.
Picking free net fluxesThe set of stoichiometric equations in union with the equality constraints reduces the dimension of the network model's flux space. The rank of the corresponding extended stoichiometric matrix determines the dimensionality of the feasible flux space. It proved convenient to represent the degrees of freedom in the stoichiometric space using so-called 'free fluxes' (Wiechert and). A set of free fluxes is a distinguished non-unique subset of all network fluxes. When it has been assigned to certain values, it can uniquely determine all other fluxes and thus the complete flux map. Usually, free fluxes are 'prominent' fluxes like the entry fluxes of the glycolysis or the citric acid cycle. Manual selection eases some of the following tasks because guesses for the initial fluxes are intuitively interpretable. Unfortunately, not every combination of the right number of fluxes gives a proper set of free fluxes (). For large networks, it is almost impossible to guess a valid set of independent fluxes by intuition. Various matrix factorization algorithms (e.g. singular value decomposition or Gaussian elimination) are capable of determining free flux sets automatically. However, the trade-off is that the proposed flux constellations are seldom human-interpretable. To avoid these problems and to allow a convenient and rapid user-driven selection of free fluxes, we invented an interactive recursive graphical algorithm. From the user viewpoint, the Omix Free Flux plug-in displays a clickable 'traffic light' symbol in the vicinity of each flux node in the network visualization (cf.and Supplementary). This symbol is green (the flux is selected as a free flux), yellow (the flux can still be chosen as free flux) or red (the flux can no longer be selected because of its stoichiometry-induced dependency on the free fluxes already selected). After each selection, the dependencies are automatically recalculated by recursive Gaussian elimination and the traffic light colors are updated. If a free flux selection turns out to be disadvantageous, it can be simply redefined with another mouse click on the traffic light symbol. Our experience with large-scale networks has shown that this visual explorative procedure always yields a convenient result for the selection of free fluxes within a short time frame of only a few minutes.
Tracing the paths of labeled atomsRecently, a universal path-tracing theory was developed for CAM networks that quantitatively explains the accumulation of labeled molecular species in each metabolite for a given input labeling composition (). It was found that metabolic cycles induce an infinite number of reaction sequences contributing to the label enrichment of a single metabolite pool. Path tracing of (un)labeled atoms and molecule fragments with a finite number of steps already enables a qualitative simulation of the CLE. This means that by forward tracking the fate of labeled input species and the backward tracing of measured species to their origins, CLEs can be played through. For this reason, tracing the possible paths of isotopically labeled atoms is an invaluable visual aid for proofreading and identifying basic effects such as the cycling of carbon atoms () or the unexpected emergence/dilution of labeling suggesting alternative routes (). For inexperienced users, the tracing of labeled molecules is an essential tool to understand the underlying complexity of CLEs and provides more confidence for evaluating the significance of observed effects. As a result, label path tracing has been frequently applied in the literature using manually drawn twodimensional pictures (e.g.). The CumoVis plug-in provides a tailored tool for label tracing that serves the needs of both, the practitioner and the theorist. CumoVis displays not only single paths of isotopic tracers but also the complete isotope labeling network (cf. Supplementary), which complements the reaction-wise proofreading described in Section 2.4. To facilitate a better understanding, three-dimensional visualization techniques are applied (). As an extension of its first version, the secondgeneration CumoVis plug-in fully exploits the benefits of this visualization in a wealth of 3D views (cf. Supplementary Movies). The views show freely rotatable and zoomable largescale metabolic and isotope labeling networks from every angle, allowing the user to browse the network structure and to filter out subgraphs for closer inspection. Important new features are that tracers can be followed both forward and backward through the network starting from any specified atom or molecule fragment, represented by its chemical structure, up to a specified path length. All label paths can be conveniently investigated one by one in a fully animated fashion.
COMPUTATIONAL TASKSThe subsequent computational tasks constitute the backbone of any 13 C-MFA workflow and thus provide typical functionalities of fluxomics software tools. In this article, we feature the 13CFLUX2 simulation framework (). In principle, it is also possible to interface other 13 C-MFA software systems from the Omix environment (cf. Supplementary Table S1.4). We have developed several tailored visual interfaces to pass the input data to the respective computational tools, check the validity of the 13CFLUX2 model file, launch calculations via Web services on distributed computers and, finally, aggregate and visually present the results to the modeler.
CLE simulationBased on the CAM network model with specified input substrate labeling, constraints and, optionally, measurements, the forward simulation of a CLE represents the central computational module of any 13 C-MFA workflow. 'Forward simulation' is the assumption of some feasible flux distributioni.e. values are assigned to the free fluxes fulfilling all specified constraints followed by the computing of the steady-state isotope labeling distribution of the metabolic intermediates. The simulation tool is of great value for exploring the influence of different fluxes and input labels on the outcome of the CLE. In this way, for example, sensitive measurement signals can be identified. The calculated simulation results are deposited in 13CFLUX2tailored XML-based output formats and stored for subsequent analysis or directly used to visualize informative flux maps (cf.).
Experimental designOwing to a limited number of available measurements and the ubiquitous measurement errors in extracellular fluxes and labeling data, it can happen that not all fluxes in a metabolic network are reasonably well determined. Fortunately, a good prediction of the expected quality of the flux map can be calculated before any experiment is carried out (M  ollney et al., 1999). Thus, the optimal experimental design (OED) methodology has become a routine tool for designing CLEs with a wide range of applications (). OED algorithms compute a maximally informative input substrate mixture targeted to the specific research aim. All OED variants are based on statistical quality measures evaluating how well the fluxes are determined by the data. By assigning user-specified weights to the fluxes, the design can be focused on specific regions of the network. The mathematical details of various design measures and 'alphabetical' optimality criteria can be found in the classical literature (P azman, 1986). In 13 C-MFA studies, seldom more than three differently labeled substrate speciestypically 12 C-, 1-13 C-and U-13 C-labeled glucoseare fed to the cells. In the triplicate case, the space of possible substrate mixtures can be conveniently presented by a mixture triangle (M ), which is a statistical quality measure for each input composition (cf. Supplementary). From this mixture triangle, optimal or suboptimal input composites can be directly read off. It is just as important that the robustness of an experimental design with respect to variations in the input mixture can be easily judged visually. Nowadays, a variety of specifically labeled substrate species can be synthetized. Thus, for explorative purposes, higherdimensional OEDs with more than three labeled substrate species may be investigated with the 13CFLUX2 program. Instead of directly visualizing the results of such OEDs, the modeler can download them as HDF5 files for post-processing purposes.
Flux estimation and statistical assessmentAfter the well-designed CLE has been carried out, the central step in the 13 C-MFA workflow is the estimation of the in vivo fluxes from the data. Measurements are typically made available as a table of extracellular measured fluxes and MS(/MS)-or NMR-based labeling enrichments. Every measured value must be accompanied by a standard deviation characterizing its uncertainty. All measurement/standard deviation pairs can be either arranged in groups or as independent single measurements. Measurement values and standard deviations can be conveniently copied from prepared spreadsheets and pasted in the measurement specification dialogue as described in Section 3.2 (cf. Supplementary). The unknown in vivo fluxes are calculated from a parameter fitting procedure where the difference between real and simulated data is minimized, e.g. by means of a non-linear weighted leastsquares functional (). In contrast to the simulation step, the process of fitting CLE data depends on various factors and its running time therefore cannot be predicted a priori (). Hence, the modeler can monitor the progress of the iterative flux estimation procedure online (cf. Supplementary). After finalization of the fitting procedure, the best flux fits are collected and transferred back to the local Omix modeling environment to visualize the resulting flux maps. The final step involves a companion uncertainty analysis (), which assesses the reliability of the calculated flux estimates. Confidence intervals provide a range for each flux, which contains the true flux value up to a certain degree of confidence. By using OVL, reaction/metabolite nodes of the flux maps are easily decorated with annotation boxes that display all relevant values numerically, size-or color-coded ().
Putting pieces together: workflow compositionWe have described various computational modules requiring different input configurations, data specifications and dependencies that must be fixed and maintained by the scientist. Controlling the tools manually is a must for learning and training purposes and is adequate for one single fluxome study. For routine analysis of large-scale datasets, however, this practice is not effective. Particularly in eScience, scientific workflows have emerged as a useful new paradigm to describe and automate routine computational analysis tasks (). By stringing existing 13CFLUX2 modules together, tailored 13 C-MFA evaluation pipelines can be assembled, ranging from initial model building to final flux-map visualization. In turn, these workflows act as computational protocols for subsequent reuse, verification and adaption purposes. The Omix 13CFLUX2 Launcher plug-in provides a lightweight scientific workflow manager with a graphical editor to ease the tasks of designing, manipulating, executing and monitoring universal fluxomics analysis (cf.). As a starting point, all network, atom mapping, constraint, measurement and input substrate-mixture data are assumed to be available either as Omix or 13CFLUX2 model files. Graphical primitives representing the workflow's atomic components on a high-level are provided, representing fully configurable front-ends to the aforementioned tools. These components can be manually selected and linked by the modeler to set up comprehensive 13 C-MFA evaluation pipelines. Supplementary.16 shows the Omix workflow manager canvas with an explorative 13 C-MFA workflow assembled by drag-and-drop from the tool list. The workflow composition is guided by the colors of the modules' I/O nodes, which indicate their interoperability. All workflow tasks are implemented as remote Web services where independent workflow branches run in parallel. To enable an easy online survey of the computation progress, advancing steps are colored yellow, completed tasks are displayed in green and, should unexpected failures emerge, the box turns red and the reasons for interruptions can be inspected in detail. Once all computational tasks have been completed, the workflow manager automatically downloads and saves the simulation results for further processing.
DISCUSSIONThe presented comprehensive plug-in suite for the Omix visualization software complements the recently published 13CFLUX2 software and graphically supports the complete well-established 13 C-MFA workflow. The new 'look' and 'feel' enables experimentalists who are not familiar with programming or scripting to use the 13 C-MFA computational machinery immediately. The classical command-line orientation of 13 C-MFA tools has thus become history, although certain special requirements still might require a scripted solution. At the time of writing, 27 Omix plugins can be orchestrated to tailored evaluation workflows (cf. Supplementaryand Supplementary Table S1.2). These plug-ins have been extensively tested and used in several 13 C-MFA studies with toy examples as well as with realistically complex real-life examples. As a typical use case, the developed suite is used to analyze a variety of Corynebacterium glutamicum strains for a broad range of dilution rates and bioreactor working volumes (unpublished data). Once a reference network model was set up, 420 datasets were quickly processed and visually evaluated with no overhead. Resulting flux maps were visualized with a tailored OVL script (e.g.), making it easy for the experimentalist to comparatively assess and characterize the CLEs according to their biological, analytical and experimental reproducibility. With that an in-depth understanding of experimental and biological robustness of C.glutamicum is conveyed. In similar studies, the graphical workflows was found to strongly reduce the development time for flux models and ease serial, yet interactive, fluxome analyses. Equally important, the graphical look-and-feel makes it much easier for 13 C-MFA newcomers to get started. Therewith, our graphical suite delivers productivityenhancing tools that accelerate 13 C-MFA learning, execution and dissimilation processes. Apart from practical issues, the implementation of a complete graphical tool suite supporting 13 C-MFA is not just a simple WYSIWYG task. A collection of innovative ideas and algorithms were developed to exploit the potential of interactive graphical visualization. Non-trivial, domain-specific, yet universal, algorithmic solutions are the derivation of CAMs from information contained in databases, full copy/paste functionality and compatibility of CAMs, graphical proofreading and editing of CAMs, interactive determination of free flux sets, threedimensional representation and exploration of carbon labeling networks, interactive path tracing, as well as the automatic generation and drawing of mixture diagrams (cf. Supplementary.3 for a complete list). Although bare simulation times at present are in the range of milliseconds for single simulation runs, extensive analyses should preferably be distributed to dedicated computing resources. Purchase-on-demand compute models are an option for largescale 13 C-MFA workflows (). Future work will be dedicated to alleviating (post-)processing tasks on distributed HPC resources to meet the increasing need for real-time accessibility and the control of fluxomics workflows, which, undoubtedly, presents new challenges for our visual workflow.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThe development of Omix plug-ins for fluxomics is driven by interactions and collaborations with the 13 C-MFA community and 13CFLUX2 user groups as the ultimate end users of the suite. On the other hand, work in related projects also inspired and influenced the presented developments. The authors would like to thank all direct and indirect contributors, in particular, Andreas Dietrich (FreeFluxes, FBA plug-ins), Tobias Vehrkamp (KEGG, Molecular Structure plug-ins), Michael Weitzel, Tolga Dalman and Robert Siegburg (13CFLUX2 and Web service assistance), Sebastian Niedenf  uhr, Stephan Noack, as well asElisabeth and Stephan Zelle for providing application studies and rigorous and time-intensive testing.
The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
Visual workflows for 13 C-metabolic flux analysis at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
K.N  oh et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
