Motivation: Single cell time-lapse microscopy is a powerful method for investigating heterogeneous cell behavior. Advances in microfluidic lab-on-a-chip technologies and live-cell imaging render the parallel observation of the development of individual cells in hundreds of populations possible. While image analysis tools are available for cell detection and tracking, biologists are still confronted with the challenge of exploring and evaluating this data. Results: We present the software tool Vizardous that assists scientists with explorative analysis and interpretation tasks of single cell data in an interactive, configurable and visual way. With Vizardous, lineage tree drawings can be augmented with various, time-resolved cellular characteristics. Associated statistical moments bridge the gap between single cell and the population-average level. Availability and implementation: The software, including documentation and examples, is available as executable Java archive as well as in source form at https://github.com/modsim/vizardous.
IntroductionSingle cell analysis with time-lapse (fluorescence) microscopy has been widely established in the life sciences in recent years. Whereas microarray analysis and flow cytometry yield population level data at a particular point in time, time-lapse live-cell imaging targets the assessment of individual cell parameters with their spatial and temporal (lineage) context. Microfluidic lab-on-chip technologies have enabled the parallel cultivation of hundreds of cells over several generations (). Combined with time-lapse imaging, it has been used, e.g. to study the dynamics of cellular regulation mechanisms and stochasticity of metabolism (), to investigate cellular size homeostasis () and phenotypic heterogeneity in dependence of stressors as well as the detection of rare events (). The easy availability of time-resolved data poses new challenges on data analysis by the mere amounts and complexity of acquired information. While several, typically organism-specific, image analysis tools are available for cell detection, feature extraction and tracking tools for the generic task of analyzing and understanding this information are lacking. We developed the software tool Vizardous to assist researchers with the following single cell data related tasks: (i) visualize data with single cell resolution in the lineage context, (ii) visually detect emerging structural patterns such as (a)symmetries in subtrees and (iii) assessing joint cellular properties and structural motifs.
DescriptionThe single cell community has adopted phylogenies (lineage trees,
Vizardous exploration workflowThe most important analysis steps are explained with a representative evaluation workflow using pre-processed time-lapse videos of a growing Corynebacterium glutamicum population under transient carbon limitation (for details see Supplement 1):Step 1: Importing experimental data. Single cell data are read from phyloXML and MetaXML file pairs containing lineage information and figures about individual cells, respectively. One or more of such file pairs can be imported from a local file system or an external storage location, e.g. OMERO (). Step 2: Visualization of lineage trees. Lineage trees are generated and visualized alongside population distributions for a complete experiment or a specific time point (temporal slice). As an indicator of population heterogeneity statistical moments (mean, SD) are calculated for the selection.Step 3: Highlighting individual cells. When screening for rare events or outliers in populations, the highlighting of single cells in a lineage tree according to cellular properties is especially useful. Two different approaches are implemented: 1. Change the property of a lineage tree element (node or branch) according to a specified cellular property, e.g. nodes are sized according to the cell area. 2. Set a threshold for a cellular property and highlight all cells that exceed the defined value.Step 4: Selecting cells for inspection. The user has the possibility to interactively select (and deselect) individual cells of interest from the lineage tree. The associated information is visualized in trace charts (). These charts unlock the contextual interpretation of feature dynamics along the temporal axis therewith bridging the gap between the ancestral relationships of cells and their metainformation.Step 5: Exporting lineage trees and charts. The lineage trees and single cell traces are fully customizable and exportable to publication ready vector graphics (SVG) or bitmap formats (JPEG, PNG). Additionally, the data underlying single cell traces can be saved to tabular data formats (XLS, CSV) for further processing.
Results and conclusionsVizardous has been used in several studies, e.g. (), by scientists with different backgrounds to answer a variety of scientific questions. These and further case studies (cf. Supplementary Data) show that Vizardous is a versatile tool that supports researchers in various aspects with the discovery-driven, explorative analysis of single cell experiments. By supporting additional input formats and seamless integration with available bioimage analysis software we anticipate that a range of fields including biological and medical sciences will benefit in the future.. Lineage tree extracted from an experiment with fluorescence reporters to elucidate the regulation dynamics of key genes. Time-resolved fluorescence traces are shown in the bottom chart for two lineages. Cellular characteristics, i.e. cell area, fluorescence, are shown for selected cells in the table on the left
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from cellular development and to link time-resolved data to the tree structures. Here, in particular a flexible 'pattern and outlier' detection based on spatio-temporal phenotypic observables of individual cells is essential. Because the objectives in single cell analysis are notably different from those in evolutionary biology, conventional software tools for analyzing phylogenies are unsuitable in the single cell domain (see Supplementary Table S2 for a characterization of selected tools). Vizardous is an open-source software that is designed as out-ofthe-box solution to deal with the data from live-cell imaging experiments. The software is implemented using published methods and available libraries wherever appropriate (see Table S3). Mother daughter relationships are provided in the standardized phyloXML format (Han and Zmasek, 2009) and cellular characteristics (e.g. cell length, area, volume, fluorescence reporter signal) as well as population average information in the specially designed document format MetaXML (cf. Supplement 5). An intuitive user interface enables experimentalists to browse quantitative single cell data in the lineage context. While the major use case of Vizardous is the visualization of lineage trees, the underlying information can also be acquired from the data models using an API (cf. Supplement 4) which allows users with programming experience to script the data analysis tasks directly with Java, Jython (www.jython.org), or by using the implemented export capabilities. Vizardous' features are summarized in Supplementary Table S1.
S.Helfrich et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
