Waggawagga is a web-based tool for the comparative visualization of coiled-coil predictions and the detection of stable single a-helices (SAH domains). Overview schemes show the predicted coiled-coil regions found in the query sequence and provide sliders, which can be used to select segments for detailed helical wheel and helical net views. A window-based score has been developed to predict SAH domains. Export to several bitmap and vector graphics formats is supported. Availability and implementation: http://waggawagga.
IntroductionCoiled coils are a-helical structural domains common to all domains of life and present in 212% of the proteins of a proteome (). The classical coiled coils comprise dimerising long a-helices that wind around each other forming superhelices () as found in structural proteins such as a-keratins, muscle myosins and tropomyosin (KMTs). In the last years, this view has shifted to defining coiled-coil segments based on the presence of knobs-into-holes packing of side chains between a-helices resulting in many different architectures and topologies (). The basis for a coiled coil is an amino acid heptad ('abcdefg'), in which the 'a' and 'd' positions are occupied by hydrophobic residues. Coiled coils were among the first structural domains to be predicted by algorithms (). In this method a query sequence is compared with a database of known coiled-coil sequences, which were the KMTs available at that time. Subsequently, a similarity score is computed and a probability to form a coiled-coil calculated. In principle, this is an implementation of the basic ideas already presented nine years before, that residues show an asymmetric distribution within the heptad repeats and that this statistical data can be used to predict coiled coils in other proteins (). This position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM) approach has been improved both on the database site and on the feature site trying to disfavor the assignment of high coiled-coil probabilities to hydrophilic sequences. Another approach to predict coiled coils is based on the pairwise residue probabilities as implemented in Paircoil () and Paircoil2 (). Here, pairwise frequencies of heptad residues are calculated from known coiled-coil sequences and the probability of a pair of amino acids in a given sequence for a certain combination in the heptad is scored. With this approach better predictions for long coiled-coil regions could be obtained compared to PSSM predictions. Improvement of the prediction of short coiled coils has been reached by using a hidden Markov model as in Marcoil (), and, recently, Markov Random Fields as used in Multicoil2 (). These general coiled-coil prediction approaches have been extended by software to predict different oligomerization states as Scorer (), PrOCoil (), and LOGICOIL (). However, all these approaches provide different results and fail to distinguish between coiled coils and stable single a-helices (SAH domains). A special case of SAH). Waggawagga is designed to provide a direct schematic comparison of many coiled-coil prediction tools. Users can inspect the predictions in classical helical wheel () and helical net () representations. Visualization of the coiled-coil predictions in helical wheel schemes provides the possibility to fast and easily identify potential hydrophobic seams in 'a' and 'd' and oppositely charged residues in 'e' and 'g' positions, respectively. In contrast, SAH domains have patterns of highly charged residues only occasionally interrupted by hydrophobic or hydrophilic amino acids. Therefore, charged residues are highly enriched in the 'a' and 'd' positions. The hydrogen-bonded and charged interaction network in SAH domains is best seen in helical net representations showing the potential interactions along the helix. Waggawagga provides layouts that can easily be used in presentations and manuscripts.
FeaturesWaggawagga allows the comparative analysis of six coiled-coil prediction (Marcoil, Multicoil, Multicoil2, Ncoils, Paircoil, Paircoil2) and three oligomerization state prediction programs (Scorer, PrOCoil and LOGICOIL). In addition, Multicoil2 distinguishes dimers, trimers and non-coiled-coil oligomerization states. These tools can be run in any combination against single or multiple query sequences.
Domain viewThe interactive domain view () is the main control element for setting the two analysis views, the helical wheel () and the helical net views (). Separate schemes are generated for each of the results of the selected coiled-coil prediction programs visualizing the coiled-coil regions on top of the query sequence. For each region, the predicted oligomerization state is given depending on the selected tools. In the selected domain scheme, any specific region can be chosen by mouse clicks or by moving an interactive slider. The respective region is shown in detail in the helical wheel and the helical net views.
Helical wheel viewThe exact sequence borders of the coiled-coil region and several different types of helix arrangements (parallel dimer, anti-parallel dimer, trimer) can be set in the configuration panel. In the helical wheel view, every a-helix is shown along the helix axis and the helices are arranged that the hydrophobic core is in the interface of the two or three helices. Each helical wheel represents 10 helix turns.
Helical net viewIntra-helical interactions are displayed in the helical net view, which is the representation of a helix split open along a line parallel to its axis and laid flat. Solid and dashed lines mark strong and week interactions, respectively. Strong and weak interactions are mainly formed by oppositely charged residues from subsequent turns resulting in hydrogen-bonded networks in addition to charge interactions, with the strength of the interaction given by the distance between the residues and their relative orientation. Interaction networks lead to extra stabilization in addition to that of the component pairs, and hydrophobic seams favor helix association in contrast to single helices. The so-called SAH-score is calculated as the sum of theSolid and dotted lines between residues denote strong and weak intrahelical interactions, respectively, as have been introduced by others (). (D) SAH line plots for different window sizes interactions divided by the window-size resulting in values from 0 to 1. SAHs typically have values greater than 0.25.
Line plots and tablesHere, the prediction scores are presented as line plots and tables (). These are particularly useful to evaluate the relevance of SAH regions.
Performance and limitationsThe SAH prediction scheme and score have been developed and tested against previously reported regions from human proteins (), SwissProt proteins (S veges et al., 2009), and thousands of cytoskeletal and motor proteins from all across the eukaryotes as available from CyMoBase (http://www. cymobase.org). There are other proteins that are mispredicted as coiled coils although forming monomeric a-helical structures, such as stathmin, which, however, are not enriched in E, Q, K, and R residues and do not form stable structures in solution (). These types of proteins do not contain SAH domains according to their definition (), and are consequently not detected and characterized as monomeric a-helical proteins in the current implementation of Waggawagga.
ImplementationThe web application framework is Ruby on Rails. In order to present the user with a feature rich interface the site makes extensive use of Ajax (Asynchronous JavaScript and XML) using jQuery (http://jquery.com) and FancyBox (http://fancybox.net). Interactive schemes are drawn as SVG and graphs are generated with the graphical toolkit GnuPlot (http://www.gnuplot.info). Figure export is done through an intermediary SVG file, which is converted into various output formats using the Inkscape graphics package (http:// inkscape.org). User-uploaded data is stored temporary on the server and deleted when leaving the application.
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
D.Simm et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
