Motivation: Water molecules are key players for protein folding and function. On the protein surface , water is not placed randomly, but display instead a particular structure evidenced by the presence of specific water sites (WS). These WS can be derived and characterized using explicit water Molecular Dynamics simulations, providing useful information for ligand binding prediction and design. Here we present WATCLUST, a WS determination and analysis tool running on the VMD platform. The tool also allows direct transfer of the WS information to Autodock program to perform biased docking. Availability and implementation: The WATCLUST plugin and documentation are freely available at
IntroductionWater molecules play an essential role in the structure/function of proteins, participating in enzymatic reaction mechanisms, ligand binding and release and proton/electron transfer processes, among others. Importantly, due to the shape and electrostatic potential of the protein surface, water molecules are not placed randomly and display instead a particular structure that can be characterized by the presence of hydration or water sites (WS). These sites are defined as confined space regions, adjacent to the protein surface, where the probability of finding a water molecule is higher than in the bulk solvent. They can be determined from explicit water Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations (). Moreover, using the theoretical basis of the Inhomogeneous Fluid Solvation Theory (), WS can also be structurally and thermodynamically characterized. Once identified, they constitute a precious knowledge that can be used in several applications, such as analysis of protein-ligand and protein-protein complexes (), determination of hydration free energies of simple solutes (), small ligands uptake by heme proteins () and, as shown by us and others, significant improvement of molecular docking results, both in terms of accuracy and selectivity (). To date, there are few methods for WS detection and characterization. WaterMap () is a grid based method part of the Schrodinger package which is not freely available. WATsite () is restricted to perform MD simulations only with GROMACS. Finally, there are other programs that do not require MD simulations () or use alternative thermodynamic calculation methods (). It should be noted that none of them allow to use the WS information directly in docking calculations. Extended application of MD simulations to understand protein function boosted the use of the open source graphical), one of the most widely used open source docking programs, in order to perform WS biased docking (WSBD) ().
MethodsThe method requires as input a set of snapshots derived from an explicit water MD trajectory. The strategy used to determine the WS is adapted from our previous works (). For each obtained WS the program computes the following parameters: (i) water finding probability (WFP), (ii) R 90 , (iii) WSprotein mean interaction energy (< E wp >), (iv) WS-water mean interaction energy (< E ww >), (v) mean total interaction energy with respect to bulk (DE int ) and finally, (vi) excess rotational (Sr) and translational (St) entropies. The resulting WS (or a selection of them) can then be used to define an Autodock grid map to perform a WSBD. See SI for details on WS determination, properties and WSBD. The usage and output will be only briefly described here. For further details and information on how to install the app see the tutorials and/or user guide available at the previously cited web page.Step 1. Load Trajectory. The first step required by WATCLUST is to load in the VMD program an explicit water MD simulation set of snapshots. Previous works from our group show that 1020 ns long MD simulations with c.a. 1000 snapshots are enough to provide converged results. Step 2. Determine WS. Once the trajectory is loaded, the WATCLUST plugin can be accessed in 'Extensions > Analysis > WATCLUST'. The plugin allows to select the parameters that define how and where the WS are to be determined. Briefly, a subgroup of residues can be selected to define the region where the WS will be computed, while a reference structure-frame (or a group of residues) for the alignment of all the trajectory snapshots is required. Proper alignment is important to obtain accurate results and several residue selections, e.g. only those in the binding site, should be tested. It is important to avoid the inclusion of residues with high mobility. Step 3. Analyze WS. WS can be characterized directly in VMD, colored according to WFP or R 90 and analyzed using all the capabilities of the VMD program. All the previously mentioned structural and thermodynamic parameters are reported in log files for each WS.Step 4. Transfer WS data to Autodock. Once WS have been determined, they can be used to build modified Autodock grid maps to perform WSBD. To obtain the biased map, a conventional oxygen grid map should be loaded into VMD. After selection of the desired WS, the modified grid should be saved and used for docking calculations in the usual way.As an example (see tutorials), inwe present WS found in the active site of AmpC beta-lactamase. The WS are shown superimposed to the structure of the HTC-AmpC complex. It is clearly seen how the best WS (i.e. with high WFP and low R 90 ) match the ligand oxygen groups interacting with the protein. Moreover, the comparative docking results between WSBD and the non-biased case () underscore the WSBD improved performance yielding a clear outlier (with significant higher cluster population and the best binding energy) in the population vs. DG plot, that nicely overlays (RMSD 1.72 A  ) with the reference ligand.shows the poses of the outlier results compared to the reference ligand for both docking methods. A final remark should be made concerning the use of WS as potential replacement sites in docking calculations. In some cases, water molecules strongly interacting with the protein are not replaced by the ligand, but instead act as bridges between the ligand and receptor, (Garcia) thus careful analysis of WS should be performed and their inclusion as part of the receptor must be evaluated.
ConclusionWe present an application that works as a plugin under the widely used VMD program. Based on an explicit water MD simulation trajectory, it allows the characterization of the solvent structure through the identification and analysis of WS. The program features are a flexible definition of the WS finding algorithm, determination of each WS structural and thermodynamical parameters and visualization of results on VMD with all its functionality. The method is thus ideally suited for studies of the solvent structure on protein surfaces and cavities with a wide range of applications, such as (i) determination of WS in protein-ligand binding sites and (ii) proteinprotein interaction surfaces that evidence hydrophilic hot-spots, (iii) determination of water structure in water/ion channels and (iv) characterization of catalytic waters, among others. It also allows to build modified Autodock grid maps to perform WS biased docking calculations, which we have shown to give significantly better results when compared to conventional docking, especially for ligands having hydrophilic moieties (). The only drawback is that the method relies on the presence of specific protein-water interactions, so it should not be used on large highly hydrophobic surfaces or regions with too high mobility.
FundingThis work was supported by Agencia Nacional de Promoci n Cientfica y Tecnol gica. Conflict of Interest: none declared.Role of the active-site solvent in the thermodynamics of factor Xa ligand binding. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 130, 28172831.Structure of the reference complex (PDB: 1XGJ) superimposed to the WS positions (red spheres). (B) Population vs. binding free energy plot obtained with conventional docking (black triangles) and WSBD (green squares). Values next to the dots represent the ligand RMSD between the predicted complex structure and the reference. (C) Structures for the predicted HTC orientation (ball and stick) compared to the reference ligand pose (cylinder)
References
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
