In this work we present WhichCyp, a tool for prediction of which cytochromes P450 isoforms (among 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A4) a given molecule is likely to inhibit. The models are built from experimental high-throughput data using support vector machines and molecular signatures. Availability: The WhichCyp server is freely available for use on the web at http://drug.ku.dk/whichcyp, where the WhichCyp Java program and source code is also available for download.
INTRODUCTIONThe cytochromes P450 (CYP) is a ubiquitous enzyme family found throughout the nature. These enzymes are involved in the metabolism of a large majority of the drugs in use today (). Modeling of their interactions with druglike compounds have been a hot topic during the past decade, stretching from quantum mechanical studies of reaction mechanisms to data mining approaches and QSAR studies (). The five most important human CYP isoforms, with regard to drug metabolism, are 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A4 (). In 2009, a large high-throughput study of inhibition to these isoforms was performed (), enabling the application of machine learning techniques to the classification of CYP inhibitors. Such classification models are important for the prediction of drugdrug interactions. In this work, we present WhichCyp, a publically available software and web server for prediction of CYP inhibitors built from these data.
METHODSInhibitory data for 17 143 substances tested using quantitative highthroughput screening with in vitro bioluminescent assay against five major isoforms of cytochrome P450 was obtained from the PubChem BioAssay database, AID:1851 (). Inorganic compounds, salts and mixtures, as well as entries classified as inconclusive were excluded from the dataset. For each of the five isoforms, 3000 compounds were extracted from the corresponding dataset to use as a test set, while the remaining compounds were used as a training set. The distribution of inhibitors/non-inhibitors for the 10 datasets is shown in the supporting information, Supplementary. Classification models were constructed with support vector machines (SVM) () using the libSVM library () together with R (http://www.r-project.org/). As features for the model building, we used molecular signatures () of heights from 0 to 4, computed with the Bioclipse software (). Molecular signatures are built up from atomic signatures, which in turn are a type of circular atomic fragments. The height of an atomic signature is the maximum number of bonds between the atom and the other atoms in its atomic signature. The SVM models were weighted by the relative number of positives and negatives in each dataset. The optimization of C and gamma parameters in the SVM was made through 5-fold cross validation to achieve a Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) () as high as possible, but with the constraint that the sensitivity and specificity should also be similar. To achieve this, the 1A2, 2C19 and 3A4 datasets could be optimized for MCC alone, whereas the datasets with the most uneven distributions (2C9 and 2D6) had to be optimized toward the highest sensitivity. The constraint that sensitivity and specificity should be similar was added because there are multiple use cases for the models, which have opposite needs in this regard. First, a chemist might be interested in which CYP isoforms would be inhibited by a compound (to avoid drugdrug interactions), in which case sensitivity would be important. Second, the purpose could be to make sure a compound is not metabolized by CYPs (to enable a longer half-life), in which case specificity is important. Finally, after the models' performance was evaluated and best sets of signature heights were chosen, models for all isoforms were reoptimized and rebuilt using all experimental datatest sets used earlier in the studies were also included in the training set. These models are used in the publicly available code.
RESULTSWe investigated signatures with different heights, ranging from 0 to 4, and combinations thereof. The most successful combinations were combinations of heights 03, results for which are shown in. Combinations of signature heights for the ranges 02 and 04 gave similar results, but with slightly worse area under curve (AUC) values for almost all models (Supplementary Material). The final models () give accurate predictions with AUC values ranging from 0.88 to 0.95, and even sensitivity and specificity for all models except the one for 2D6 (due to the unbalanced dataset). These results are improvements compared with earlier studies, in which combined classifiers using fingerprints resulted in AUC values of 0.81, *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 0.86, 0.84, 0.88, 0.79 () and 264 molecular descriptors in values of 0.93, 0.89, 0.89, 0.85, 0.87 () for isoforms 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A4, respectively. Other approaches that have been used were discussed in a recent review (). To investigate if we could determine an applicability domain type measure, we studied the relation between the number of signatures for the compounds in the test sets that did not exist in the training set, and the performance of the models. It was found that the number of missing signatures of height three (Supplementary Figs S1S5) could be used as an estimation of the likelihood that the model performs well, and that the sensitivity was the first measure to drop (among sensitivity, specificity and prediction accuracy).
WEB SERVER AND SOFTWARE
Interface featuresThe WhichCyp web server offers the user three ways to submit molecules. The user can upload a file in any standard format, enter SMILES strings representing molecules or draw a molecule. The results are displayed directly in the browser and include the molecular structure and highlighting of the structural fragment that gave the most important contribution to the decision of the SVM model (see), as well as a sensitivity warning if there are too many missing signatures of height three (defined as the number of missing signatures in the test set that resulted in a sensitivity of 0.6).
ImplementationThe web server uses php code to run WhichCyp and the interface functionality. To support all standard formats, uploaded files are converted by Open Babel (O') when necessary. The web server code was copied from the SMARTCyp web server (). WhichCyp is implemented using the CDK Java library ().
Java programThe server runs a command line Java program that also is available for download as both an executable jar file and as source code. The Java program has several optional flags to enable the user flexibility in what output is generated.. The HTML output for 2-acetylaminoflourene. Isoform names with a dark background are predicted to be inhibited
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
M.Rostkowski et al. at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
