Motivation: The scientific literature contains a wealth of information about biological systems. Manual curation lacks the scalability to extract this information due to the ever-increasing numbers of papers being published. The development and application of text mining technologies has been proposed as a way of dealing with this problem. However, the inter-species ambiguity of the genomic nomenclature makes mapping of gene mentions identified in text to their corresponding Entrez gene identifiers an extremely difficult task. We propose a novel method, which transforms a MEDLINE record into a mixture of adjacency matrices; by performing a random walkover the resulting graph, we can perform multi-class supervised classification allowing the assignment of taxonomy identifiers to individual gene mentions. The ability to achieve good performance at this task has a direct impact on the performance of normalizing gene mentions to Entrez gene identifiers. Such graph mixtures add flexibility and allow us to generate probabilistic classification schemes that naturally reflect the uncertainties inherent, even in literature-derived data. Results: Our method performs well in terms of both micro-and macro-averaged performance, achieving micro-F 1 of 0.76 and macro-F 1 of 0.36 on the publicly available DECA corpus. Re-curation of the DECA corpus was performed, with our method achieving 0.88 micro-F 1 and 0.51 macro-F 1. Our method improves over standard classification techniques [such as support vector machines (SVMs)] in a number of ways: flexibility, interpretability and its resistance to the effects of class bias in the training data. Good performance is achieved without the need for computationally expensive parse tree generation or 'bag of words classification'.
INTRODUCTIONThe scientific literature contains a wealth of information about biological organisms that is relevant for biomedical scientists: from descriptions of proteinprotein interactions (PPIs) * To whom correspondence should be addressed.() to parameters for models of biological systems (). The ever-increasing publication rate now means that it has become impossible for manual curators to extract this information comprehensively. This situation has led to a sustained interest in the development and application of text mining (TM) methods to the biological and biomedical domain (). Many organisms are used to investigate biological processes and phenomena () with the expectation that any understanding obtained can be applied to other organisms (e.g. the zebrafish immune system is used as a model of the human immune system). However, in some cases this mapping of experimental results is not justified due to inter-species variation (i.e. a protein may be subject to neo/subfunctionalization), which could lead to erroneous inferences being drawn. Therefore, it is important to identify the species to which any genes (and other entities of interest) mentioned in a paper belong, and in which species the experiments were performed in order to reduce the chances of this kind of mistake occurring. Here, we provide a new method that is able to achieve this automatically embedded in a TM framework. A typical TM pipeline works by first recognizing or tagging named entities (NEs) of interest (e.g. gene mentions or species mentions) in a block of text and then normalizing or mapping these mentions to canonical unique identifiers (e.g. Entrez gene identifiers or NCBI Taxonomy identifiers). This normalization process facilitates summarizing and integration of results obtained using TM with other types of biological knowledge. However, the ambiguity and variability of the genomic nomenclature makes this task extremely challenging. A single gene mention can potentially refer to many genes within a species or across species. The inter-species ambiguity of the genomic nomenclature () means that identifying the correct species of a gene mention is an important subtask of gene normalization (), but despite of this there has been only limited work in this area.investigated methods to identify the focal organisms of an abstract using a custom species tagger and various heuristics. This work showed that identifying the species mentioned in an abstract was beneficial both for gene normalization and PPI extraction. Genes from several species can be mentioned in a single article (e.g. an article on evolutionary analysis of a gene may refer to its homologues in multiple species) so it is important to perform species disambiguation at the level of an individual gene mention. Not performing species-driven gene name disambiguation led to poor performance in the BioCreative (BC)Page: 255 254260
Species-driven gene mention disambiguationII PPI extraction task () as gene mentions participating in interactions were required to be normalized to identifiers from various species. The simplest method to perform species disambiguation is to assign taxonomy identifiers based on a majority vote, where the most frequent taxonomy identifier in a document is assigned to all genes in that document. Another simple way to perform species disambiguation at the document level is to use the MeSH terms attached to a MEDLINE record. MeSH is a controlled vocabulary where terms are assigned to new documents by a team of annotators. However, not all records have MeSH identifiers and there is an implicit assumption of both the completeness of MeSH vocabulary (with respect to species names) and the reliability of the manual annotations. Both the BC II.5 () and BC III gene normalization task were concerned with inter-species gene normalization at the document level. Inter-species gene name disambiguation is a difficult task, as is evident from the large difference in performance between the best results reported in the BC II evaluation (which only looked at identifiers from human) and BC II.5.investigated different strategies for assigning species corresponding to genes mentions, e.g. assigning gene mentions to a species based on their proximity to species words, or by considering which species was mentioned first in the document. The publicly accessible GNAT () and GeneTUKit () systems both perform species-driven gene name disambiguation to achieve high levels of performance in gene name normalization tasks. Methods which only look a global features of a document lead to poor performance at the level of individual mentions. In order to improve performance, the syntactical/contextual relationship (i.e. co-occurrence in a sentence or noun phrase) of words suggestive of a certain species with an individual gene mention needs to be used. Recently,produced the freely available DECA corpus (available for download from http://www.nactem .ac.uk/deca/) allowing the development and evaluation of methods for species disambiguation at the mention level. The DECA corpus is an annotated corpus of 636 abstracts from the BC I and BC II gene normalization tasks, consisting of pairs of gene mentions and NCBI taxonomy identifiers. Gene mentions were identified using dictionary-based named entity recognition, and taxonomy identifiers were manually assigned to the identified mentions by PhD level biologists. The annotators were only allowed to choose from 10 potential taxonomy identifiers (those identified as the most frequent based on the BC II Protein Interaction Pairs task (), if the gene mention was found to belong to another species then it was annotated as 'Other'. Several methods were proposed and evaluated (RELATION, ML and HYBRID methods) on this corpus. A hybrid method combining a syntactic parser with both a relation and supervised classification model was found to have the best overall performance. We propose a novel method, which transforms a MEDLINE record into a mixture of adjacency matrices and by using a random walkover this mixture model performs multi-class supervised classification (where the potential classes are defined by the contents of a record). Each class corresponds to a single NCBI Taxonomy identifier. This method does not require training data for all potential classes in order to achieve high performance and does not only perform classification but also provides a probability, which serves to quantify the certainty attached to a classification.Re-annotations is the number of annotations that have changed compared to the original DECA annotations.
METHODS
Preprocessing of the DECA corpusTwo of the abstracts in the original DECA corpus were found to be duplicates and were removed (corpus A). Error analysis of the results produced by our method led us to identify several annotation mistakes in the corpus. This led to extensive manual re-curation of the corpus. Where possible if the species was proposed in the original corpus as 0 (other species), it was reannotated with its correct taxonomy identifier (corpus B). A representative selection of these re-annotations were checked by another annotator and found to be correct. This led to a large increase in the number of potential classes to distinguish between. Statistics regarding the resulting corpora are provided in. We evaluated our method on both the original corpus (with duplicate documents removed) and on the re-annotated version (Supplementary Material I). Where available, MeSH terms for all abstracts were obtained from the MEDLINE database. Titles were also obtained from MEDLINE when they were absent from the original BC corpora.
Processing pipelineThe resulting text was then split into sentences using the Julie Sentence Boundary detector (). After this, shallow parsing using the GENIA tagger () was then performed on these sentences providing information on the boundaries of noun and verb phrases. We use the gene mentions provided in the DECA corpus. As in previous work, we collectively refer to words suggestive of the species of a gene entity (such as species mentions, cell line mentions, MeSH terms and prefixes) as species words. We evaluate our method using two different methods for identifying these species words. In order to provide as fair a comparison as possible to the results in the original DECA paper, we used the U-Compare () NaCTeM Species Word Detector in order to identify species mentions. This component both identifies species mentions and normalizes them to their corresponding NCBI Taxonomy identifier. We obtained the mapping used byin order to map non-species identifiers to species identifiers (i.e. allowing the mapping of mammalian to 9606 and Drosophila to 7227). We denote the use of this set of species words on corpus A as A 1. We also evaluate how the performance depends on the set of species words used. A custom species word detection and normalization component was used, which identifies a variety of species words (species mentions, cell line mentions and MeSH terms) and normalizes them to NCBI taxonomy identifiers. We denote the use of this set of species words on corpus A as A 2. Species mentions were identified using the LINNAEUS species tagger () combined with an implementation of the Schwartz and Hearst algorithm () to identify and disambiguate abbreviations. Species mentions which were part of experimental methods mentions were then filtered out (i.e. yeast from yeast two-hybrid method). Experimental methods were identified using exact text matching against a dictionary of experimental methods extracted from the PSI:MI ontology (Supplementary Material II). Species mentions were then normalized to Page: 256 254260
N.Harmston et al.NCBI Taxonomy identifiers using dictionary lookup and a set of heuristics to help handle mentions that mapped to multiple identifiers. One type of species mention that can lead to this problem is the use of a shortened form of the Linnaean binomial species name (D. miranda) without the explicit declaration of the long form (Drosophila melanogaster). Authors may do this when talking about a number of species from the same genus, the first species mention been written with its full Linnaean binomial name, followed by mentions with an abbreviated genus component of the name. This observation allows the use of a heuristic where an ambiguous mention is normalized by using the taxonomic tree. Given an ambiguous mention, we identify the potential genera it could be associated with and look in the abstract for any unambiguous mentions with these potential genera. If only one exists, we propose this to be the genus of the mention and use this to normalize the species mention to a unique taxonomy identifier e.g. if an abstract contains mentions of D.melanogaster and D.miranda then D.miranda would be mapped as Drosophila miranda rather than Diaspis miranda as Drosophila is the genus of both Drosophila melanogaster and Drosophila miranda. In the cases where this heuristic could not be applied and the ambiguous abbreviation potentially referred to a major model organism (e.g. Caenorhabditis elegans maps to 41 different organisms) and a long form is not present, then the mention is mapped to the most probable model organism) and the GENIA tagger. These mentions were then mapped to taxonomy identifiers using a manually curated dictionary, which was created by integrating CLKB (), ATCC, HyperCLDB (), MeSH ontology and the DMSZ catalogues (Supplementary Material III). If a cell line mention could be normalized to multiple taxonomy identifiers, then the same probability was assigned to all the potential identifiers that the mention could refer to. MeSH terms from the B subtree of the MeSH ontology were mapped to taxonomy identifiers using exact dictionary matching against the NCBI taxonomy database (Supplementary Material IV). Sometimes prefixes (e.g.are attached to gene mentions to indicate the species that the gene symbol is referring to. Typically, this is only allowed by a limited number of journals, and only to help avoid confusion during cross-species comparisons. Prefixes can also be used to indicate whether the gene mention refers to a mutant version (e.g. mSos-1) or that it is a ribosomal gene (e.g. rChromatin); these are, of course, ambiguous with the prefix for mouse (m) and rat (r), respectively. Where possible we distinguish the correct sense of the prefix by using the long form (if present) identified by the implementation of the Schwartz and Hearst algorithm.
Random walks over a mixture of adjacency matricesWe propose a novel method to solve the species-driven gene name disambiguation problem by using a random walkover an additive mixture model of adjacency matrices (). For a specific document, i, we denote the set of gene mentions for that document as M i , the set of species words associated with that document as N i and the set of taxonomy identifiers to which the species words in that document can be normalized to as Oi.We assume that different authors state the species of a gene mention over all documents in a similar way irrespective of the actual species being proposed. We represent the relationships between these species words and gene mentions as a directed bipartite graph, G (i,j) , with edges, e  E (i,j) , from nodes in M i to nodes inLy9 is a mouse cell membrane antigen found on all lymphocytes and coded for by a gene that maps to chromosome 1. We previously described the isolation and characterization of a full-length cDNA clone for mouse Ly9. Using cross-species hybridization we isolated cDNA clones encoding the human homologue Humly9. PMID:8537117The adjacency matrix A (i,j) is the corresponding adjacency matrix for graph G (i,j) with entries defined by,) is true and m  M i and n  N i and mn  E (i,j) 0, else.Each matrix, A (i,j) , represents the adjacency matrix for a specific relationship type j in document i () and is generated by combining the entities and information generated by the processing pipeline. An edge exists between a gene mention (m), species word (n) pair for a specific feature (j) if that feature holds for that pair [i.e. J(m,n) evaluates to. This is equivalent to its corresponding entry in A (i,j) mn being equal to 1. If m and n are in the same sentence, then the corresponding entry for adjacency matrix 1 is 1. These are then combined together using an additive mixture model. The normalization of species mentions to taxonomy identifiers is represented by a different directed bipartite graph,where there are edges, e   E (i) , from nodes in N i to nodes in O i. The adjacency matrix B (i) is the adjacency matrix for graphGgraph graphG (i) with entries defined using Equation (5). The edge weights are the probabilities assigned by the species normalizer that a species mention normalizes to a specific taxonomy identifier,Page: 257 254260The union of these two bipartite graphs is then taken, resulting in a tripartite graph. We define the union operator on adjacency matrices to give the same result as a graph join () on the graphs they encode,
Species-driven gene mention disambiguationThe corresponding adjacency matrix is then row-normalized to form a transition matrix, and random walks of either length 2 or 3 depending on the adjacency matrix are performed. For example, an author may refer to mouse Ly9 and then later just Ly9 while still referring to the mouse version of Ly9. The second term in Equation (7) allows the transfer of information between gene mentions with the same surface form. Here the second Ly9 () can reach identifier 10 090 through a three-step random walk by first walking to a previous mention of Ly9 and then on from there. This allows use of the contextual information of the previous Ly9 in making a decision about the second mention. We allow spreading of information in two distinct directions (from earlier/later mentions to later/earlier mentions). The two tripartite graphs are then combined with the value at position mo stating the probability of ending at taxonomy identifier o starting from gene mention m. The probability that a specific gene mention m is associated with taxonomy identifier o is given by,The first term in the likelihood equation corresponds to the two-step random walks through the network and the second term to three-step random walks. A gene mention is assigned the taxonomy identifier with the highest probability in its row in the final tripartite adjacency matrix. If the maximum value is not unique (i.e. there is a tie), no classification is made. We only allow edges between gene mentions where they have the same surface form (e.g. M i  M j ). Random walks longer than length 3 are not possible in this network topology. C 1 is the normalization vector for the transition matrix for the twostep random walk random and C k is the normalization vector for the transition matrices for three-step random walk (where each matrix represents a different direction that the walk can proceed in). Each entry in the normalization vector is calculated as the reciprocal of the equivalent row sum for each row in A * . We then can the calculate the likelihood using Equation (7). The parameters ( * ) of the individual components of the mixture model A (i, * ) are estimated by minimizing the negative log-likelihood (Lk) of the model [Equation (8)]. T i is the set of annotations for document i in the portion of the corpus that is used as a training set T ,
RESULTSOur method was evaluated using 5-fold cross-validation over the DECA corpus. We assume that gene mentions are provided and the aim is to assign a single taxonomy identifier to individual gene mentions. We calculated the micro-precision, micro-recall, microF1, macro-precision, macro-recall and macro-F1 over the different versions of the DECA corpus. Precision is calculated as the total number of correctly assigned gene mentiontaxonomy identifier pairs divided by the total number of assigned pairs. Recall is calculated as the total number of correctly assigned 'gene mentiontaxonomy identifier' pairs divided by the total number of pairs annotated in the corpus. F 1 is the unweighted harmonic mean of precision and recall. Micro-averaged metrics are calculated globally over all potential classes. These metrics provide a measure of how well our method is doing over all the instances in the corpus. However, training data for multi-classification tasks can exhibit a class bias, where certain classes are over-represented. This can lead to high micro-averaged performance as the method may work well on the classes with a large number of instances, but the method may show poor performance on rarer classes with few or no instances in the training set. Macro-averaged metrics provide measures where this class bias is taken into consideration by explicitly assuming that the class sizes are equal. This is achieved by taking the mean of the desired performance metric over the potential classes. Methods that report high micro-average and low macro-average performance suggest that the method is susceptible to local over-fitting. Our method performs well compared to the current state-of-theart methods reported previously by, in terms of both macro-and micro-averaged metrics (). Randomization testing was performed and the method was found by significantly outperforming the previously reported ML method in terms of macro-averaged performance and the RELATION method in terms of both macro-and micro-averaged performance (). In comparison to the method in, which only used a species tagger and prefix resolution system, using a different species tagger and additionally using cell lines and MeSH terms as extra sources of evidence was found to improve overall performance. A number of abstracts contain no species mentions and the only clue with regard to the species is the assigned MeSH terms. If MeSH terms were not used in the model, the micro-averaged F 1 would decrease to 0.7344 and 0.7572, for corpus A 2 and B, respectively [we note that our method resolves many more species than the method ofand hence a decrease in micro-averages is expected]. Not including cell line mentions in the evaluation resulted in a decrease to 0.8459 and 0.8840 for corpus A 2 and B in terms on F 1. This shows that in addition to identifying species names, using other sources of evidence improves the overall performance. Our method enables the integration of these additional sources of evidence in a coherent and easily understandable manner.Values inside brackets show the range of the performance measure over the 5-folds. A 1 shows the performance of the method using the species words identified by the NaCTeM Species Word Detector. A 2 using our custom species word detection and normalization component.
Page: 258 254260
N.Harmston et al.denotes that our method performs significantly worse than a previously proposed method, + denotes significantly better than and N denotes no significant difference was observed (P < 0.05). Details of the mean and variance for each performance metric are provided in Supplementary Material V.We show the performance measures on the individual classes for A 1 , A 2 , B in Tables 5, 6 and 7, respectively. It should be noted that the method can disambiguate species even when the species has only a small number of instances in the corpus. High performance is achieved even when members of a class are absent from the training data for that fold (as certain classes are only present in one document in the corpus). Examination of the parameter estimates over the different folds shows that they are relatively stable, with most having a small coefficient of variation (CV) (). The rank of the parametersis notably similar over all folds (Spearmans  = 0.9621 and 0.9718 for corpus A 2 and B, respectively). This shows that the relative importance of the features is highly consistent over all folds, supporting the assumption that authors state the species of a gene in a consistent manner irrespective of the actual species.
DISCUSSIONUnlike other classification (e.g. SVMs) approaches, our method does not provide a hard classification ('yes'/'no') and instead provides a probability associated with each classification it makes. This probability reflects both the uncertainty in assigning a species word to a gene mention, and in the normalization of a species word to an NCBI taxonomy identifier, allowing uncertainty to be propagated. Thus, the reliability of the proposed species identifier can be assessed directly, and we do not artificially inflate confidence in a given classification. Where there is insufficient evidence in the abstract to distinguish between the species of an entity, a Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) approach is followed where all potential taxonomy identifiers are assigned a uniform probability (no classification is made). Like the relation method proposed by, our method does not require separate training data for each class/species and instead assumes that authors propose the species of an entity in a uniform manner over all species. The method is conceptually similar to construction-integration model proposed by Kintsch (1988).In the absence of any species words, it is not possible to propose a taxonomy identifier for any gene mentions within that abstract. In future, it may be possible to use an imputation step where we could probabilistically assign an identifier based on the frequency of species in PubMed, or by looking at its candidates in BioThesaurus () and assigning a uniform probability over all potential taxonomy identifiers. The performance of any species disambiguation method is highly dependent on the performance of the components responsible for tagging and normalizing species words. Here, we used both the NaCTeM Species Word Detector and the LINNAEUS tagger for species named entity recognition (NER), and any publicly available/custom-built species tagger could be used [e.g. TaxonGrab () or the OrganismTagger (. One of the issues with species name identification is that authors can use the genus name as shorthand for the species name. Performance of the method would improve if genus names were identified and normalized to the major model organism in that genus [e.g. identifying and normalising Arabidopsis to Arabidopsis thaliana
Page: 259 254260
Species-driven gene mention disambiguation. However, this would require a species tagger capable of distinguishing whether the genus mention is referring to an individual species or the genus as a whole in order to not adversely impact precision. In cases involving co-ordination (e.g. the human and mouse KLHLI genes (PMID:10888605), both elements of the coordination are assigned to the named entity with similar (but not necessarily equal) probabilities of being the correct one. In some cases, this leads to false positives. Unlike the previous work by, we have not investigated the use of the computationally expensive syntactic parse trees; however, these could possibly be used as an additional feature in our model and enable us to handle coordinated entities. We find, however, that good performance can be achieved without incurring the heavy computational burden of generating parse trees of sentences in the MEDLINE abstracts. We believe that in future species disambiguation should be considered as a multi-label classification problem, where a gene mention can have many taxonomy identifiers assigned to it, although it would require another complete re-curation (and extension) of the DECA corpus to make this possible. It is not possible to include 'bag of words' style features in the proposed graph mixture model and so we have not investigated their use here. The results show that our method attains perfect precision and recall for some classes and performs poorly for others. Some of the low incidence species inoccur in only 1-fold (sometimes in only one document). Even though the training information for these specific classes is non-existent, our method achieves remarkable performance on some of these classes. The main reason for poor performance on these low incidence classes is that the evidence for other classes in an abstract overwhelms the evidence for that class (i.e. the correct class has a single species word while the incorrect class has many species words close to the gene mention). Examination of misclassifications revealed two situations where our method can perform poorly: in cases where the abstract describes the result of a transfection experiment where a gene from one species is transfected into another species; and when an abstract is talking about the interactions between viral and host genes, the host species is implicitly mentioned in the name of the virus and is not identified by the species NER component, leading to possible misclassification of host genes as viral genes. Beyond this no systematic sources of bias were detectable. In principle, we could also use higher order information in this task. For example, it has previously been noted that other species words such as the names of diseases (e.g. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and LiFraumeni syndrome) are indicative of human; however, we leave the identification, mapping and evaluation of such clues for future work. Previous work in gene normalization has found that examining co-authorship networks () can improve performance in gene normalization tasks. As researchers would tend to work on a limited number of organisms during their career (e.g. 'researcher A only works on species 'X'), it seems that this information could also be exploited in distinguishing the species of named entities, but this requires us to identify authors reliably (which would be simplified immeasurably by researcher IDs).
CONCLUSIONOur method performs well in terms of both macro-and microaveraged performance of previous methods and shows significant improvements over the RELATION method proposed by. Most importantly, our approach, once the reliable Page: 260 254260
N.Harmston et al.corpora are in place, can be applied in an automatic fashion without any further user intervention, which will greatly aid its employment in the context of novel organisms or contexts which consider broad phylogenetic panels. We are currently integrating this approach with our TM pipeline (Serendipity) in order to generate species specific PPI networks for a variety of organisms (Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Escherichia coli and for various host pathogen interaction/infection networks). The method is quite generic and could potentially be used for a host of relation classification tasks, such as assigning genes to PATO identifiers using phenotype clues identified in an abstract potentially allowing the automatic association of genes to phenotypic information. This is already a taxing problem for human annotators, but computational approaches such as proposed here are the only really viable option in order to cope with the wealth of information being generated in genomics and systems biology.
The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at :: on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
