Motivation: A particular challenge of the current omics age is to make sense of the inferred differential expression of genes and proteins. The most common approach is to perform a gene ontol-ogy (GO) enrichment analysis, thereby relying on a database that has been extracted from a variety of organisms and that can therefore only yield reliable information on evolutionary conserved functions. Results: We here present a web-based application for a taxon-specific gene set exploration and enrichment analysis, which is expected to yield novel functional insights into newly determined gene sets. The approach is based on the complete collection of curated high-throughput gene expression data sets for the model nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, including 1786 gene sets from more than 350 studies. Availability and implementation: WormExp is available at http://wormexp.
IntroductionHigh-throughput molecular technologies have greatly enhanced our understanding of biological processes by characterizing expression changes of genes (microarray and RNA-Seq data) and proteins (proteomics data) or transcription factor targets and epigenetics states (ChIP-chip and ChIP-Seq data). These technologies usually yield hundreds or thousands of differentially regulated genes or proteins that are not always easy to interpret. Validation of the numerous differentially expressed genes is usually not possible. Uncovering the underlying organizational principles from such large gene lists requires computational and statistical approaches as well as precise biological reference information. Gene set enrichment analysis represents a powerful tool to link the identified differentially expressed gene lists to biological processes and functions. They are based on the statistical evaluation of the overlap between the generated gene set and a specified reference list of genes. These enrichment analyses are usually based on public functional genomic analyses. Several applications such as GSEA () and EASE () have been developed to permit performance of enrichment analyses with curated gene sets, derived for example from published expression studies in the same organism. Yet, a systematic assessment of the value of taxon-specific enrichment analyses is still missing. WormExp provides a web resource to explore such an approach for the nematode C.elegans. This nematode has a well annotated genome sequence and is widely used as a powerful model organism in biological research. Over the last decade, more than 350 high-throughput expression studies have been published, covering a large variety of research themes, such as immunity, aging, development and stress responses. The resulting lists of differentially expressed genes are publicly available and can be related to a specific experimental design, environmental condition and/or gene defect. Because they capture a variety of inducible expression responses of this particular organism, they might be highly useful in interpreting new C.elegans gene lists () or predicting candidates for downstream analysis (. In this manuscript, we present WormExp, a web-based application for gene set enrichment analysis in C.elegans. We collated nearly all published highthroughput expression data sets of C.elegans from public databases and also the available literature. We classified these gene sets in nine categories according to the experimental designs or specific condition used. WormExp accepts Wormbase () identifiers (IDs), sequence names, gene names or a mixture of these as input. It offers tools for performing an enrichment analysis based on the taxon-specific 1786 gene sets, searching specific gene lists and downloading complete data sets.
Methods and featuresWormExp utilizes a curated database built from published high-throughput expression studies in the nematode C.elegans. The database can be downloaded and will be updated continuously. Users start their analysis by uploading a gene list, for example a set of genes, whose expression is induced upon C.elegans exposure to a certain condition. The user then has two options (and workflow in manual): (i) perform an enrichment analysis using either the entire database as reference or selected categories of gene lists (e.g. 'mutants'), or (ii) search for overlaps between the uploaded gene set and specific gene lists (e.g. 'up pmk-1 mutant'), selected from the database with the help of keywords (e.g. 'pmk-1'). For enrichment analysis, WormExp employs the adjusted Fisher exact test from the program EASE, which penalizes or removes one gene within a given gene set from the test list and calculates the p-value (for further details, see manual in supplementary file). This modulation makes the Fisher exact test more robust when applied on gene sets supported by few genes, thus reducing false positives (for details, please see (). WormExp is available as a webserver with an interface from InterMine (), developed by Java 2 Enterprise System (J2EE) and Java Remote Method Invocations (RMI). RMI ensures fast responses due to memory-oriented query. See supplemen tary files S1 and S2 for manual and detailed information.
Data structureCurrently, the WormExp database includes 1786 gene sets derived from 361 studies and collated from the NCBI GEO database (), ArrayExpress database (), Stanford microarray database (), Princeton University MicroArray database and directly from the literature (Supplementary Data S1). According to experimental design and used conditions, we classified these 1786 gene sets into nine categories: Kim Mountains (); Mutants (differentially expressed genes in mutants or upon RNA interference-silencing of a particular gene); Microbes (exposure to various microorganisms), TF Targets (transcription factor targets inferred by knock-down/ knock-out of the respective transcription factors), Tissue (tissue specific expression), Development/Dauer/Aging (differential expression in the various developmental stages and during aging), DAF/Insulin/ food (differential expression in response to food, starvation, or insulin-like receptor activation/de-activation), Chemicals/stress (exposure to chemical compounds or other stressors) and Other (all gene sets not included above). The database will be updated regularly to integrate new C.elegans expression studies.
databases such as those defined by Gene ontology (Ashburner et al., 2000) and KEGG pathways (Kanehisa and Goto, 2000). However, these existing databases have important drawbacks. First, the annotations are incomplete and only a subset of known genes are functionally annotated (King et al., 2003). For example, functional information is only available for approximately 60% of the gene repertoire of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, one of the most intensively studied model organisms in biological research (Petersen et al., 2015). Second, the included functional information is often imprecise, as it usually represents an extrapolation from experimental data of a different taxon and thus assumes a high level of functional conservation across evolution, which may not always be the case (Khatri and Dra  ghici, 2005). Third, functional information is predicted for most organisms from protein domains. Taxon-specific genes or protein domains may thus be missed. Taxon-specific gene sets, which explicitly consider taxon-restricted genes and also taxonspecific expression responses, are thus required for improved V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 943 Bioinformatics, 32(6), 2016, 943945 doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv667 Advance Access Publication Date: 11 November 2015 Applications Note at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
W.Yang et al. at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
