XIBD performs pairwise relatedness mapping on the X chromosome using dense single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data from either SNP chips or next generation sequencing data. It correctly accounts for the difference in chromosomal numbers between males and females and estimates global relatedness as well as regions of the genome that are identical by descent (IBD). XIBD also generates novel graphical summaries of all pairwise IBD tracts for a cohort making it very useful for disease locus mapping.
IntroductionGenomic regions that have been inherited from a common ancestor are said to be identical by descent (IBD). Identification of IBD regions has proven useful in many applications, including discovery and quantification of unknown or misspecified familial relatedness () and disease mapping where a region inherited in multiple affected individuals is indicative of a critical region containing disease susceptibility genes (). Several methods have been proposed for inferring IBD, however few allow for analysis of the X chromosome. This is unfortunate as the X chromosome allows for inference of more distant relatedness than autosomes since fewer recombination events occur, resulting in IBD segments that are sustained over longer periods of time. Current IBD analysis of the X chromosome is based on identity by state sharing, which is non-probabilistic and does not necessarily imply IBD (). Here we present XIBD; the only hidden Markov model (HMM) that infers IBD on the X chromosome in addition to the autosomes, where IBD is detectable between individuals with a recent common ancestor, within 25 generations, rather than more distant relatedness. Many IBD methodologies rely on large cohorts to estimate allele frequency data or to infer linkage disequilibrium structure. XIBD can be applied to as few as two samples with the option to use HapMap allele frequency data for 11 populations. Furthermore, it can be applied to either single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chip or next generation sequencing (NGS) data (exome or genome wide).
MethodsXIBD implements a first order continuous time HMM to infer IBD between pairs of individuals using unphased genotype data, where time is the genetic map distance in centimorgans (cM). While the model is continuous time, IBD is estimated at the genotyped positions only. The memoryless assumption of a Markov process is unlikely to hold due to recombination, howeverThe hidden states in the Markov model are the number of alleles shared IBD between a pair of individuals, which depend on the genders of the individuals being compared. Assuming the pair are not inbred, if at least one individual is male, then 0 or 1 allele will be shared IBD and the state space is Z  f0; 1g. Alternatively, if both individuals are female then 0, 1 or 2 alleles will be shared IBD with Z  f0; 1; 2g. The initial state probabilities of sharing 0, 1 or 2 alleles IBD are denoted x 0 , x 1 and x 2 respectively, where P 2 i0 x i  1. These probabilities can be calculated using identity coefficients if relationships are known. We use IdCoefs () for autosomes and have implemented the equivalent for the X chromosome. Individuals may be distantly related with unknown relationships, therefore these values must be calculated using an alternative approach. We use the method-of-moments approach described into estimate these probabilities. The estimated values are used in the analysis as they can be accurately calculated for known and unknown relationships and avoid misspecified pedigrees leading to incorrect global estimates. Since there are two state spaces in the model, we require two transition probability matrices. These can be computed by solving Kolmogorov's forward (or backward) equation given the transition rate matrices (Supplementary information, Eqs. S1 and S2). The transition rate matrices require the number of meiosis m separating the pair of individuals, estimated as in, and the recombination rate h estimated by Ott (1999). The genotypic state space for an individual also depends on their gender. Let A and a denote the reference allele and alternative allele respectively. Since male X chromosomes are haploid, they cannot have heterozygous genotype calls. Therefore the male genotypic state space is G  fA; ag while the female genotypic state space is G  fAA; Aa; aag. A pair of genotypes makes up the observation for each marker in the model. Hence, the observation state space differs for each of the three pairwise combinations of genders and this difference leads to three sets of emission probabilities (Supplementary Information,). The emission probabilities are functions of the individuals' genders, the state space, the observed genotype pair and the population allele frequencies. The population allele frequencies are calculated from either a reference dataset such as HapMap (http://hapmap.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) or the input dataset itself. We include a genotyping error term into our calculation of the emission probabilities as implemented by(Supplementary Information, Tables S2 and S3) and accommodate missing data. Dense marker datasets allow for better detection of small IBD tracts and hence more distant relatedness. However, the presence of LD can result in unwanted background sharing. To avoid this, we allow the user to select one of two models to accommodate for LD., model 1 assumes the markers are in linkage equilibrium, which may require thinning of datasets prior to use. However datasets with denser markers in LD can be used at the expense of false IBD segments being reported (). 2. Like, LD is implicitly accounted for in model 2 using conditional emission probabilities (Supplementary Information, Tables S4S6). Pairwise LD between markers is calculated using the squared correlation (R 2 ) of reference genotypes using PLINK ().); allowing the user to choose between the 11 HapMap population. Furthermore, given a homogeneous population, we allow the user to calculate the necessary frequencies from the input dataset itself or to specify their own homogeneous reference dataset of matching population. Global relatedness estimates (x 0 , x 1 , x 2 and m) are reported for each pair of individuals analyzed, as well as inferred IBD tracts from the Viterbi algorithm and posterior probabilities from the forward backward algorithm (). IBD results are reported in spreadsheets. These can be cumbersome to investigate when many shared regions are inferred. However, XIBD also produces novel graphical summaries that allow the user to visualize shared regions in multiple individuals (). Unlike other algorithms, XIBD does not require a large cohort for accurate IBD inference. In, XIBD was implemented on a single pair of male individuals with X-linked intellectual disability, to verify that a detected variation was contained within a small shared IBD tract on the X chromosome, thus leading to the conclusion that the variant was causal, rather than a technical artifact. Results from simulation studies can be found in the Supplementary Information, Figures S1 and S2. We note that pseudo-autosomal regions are excluded from analysis. Finally,
Like Purcell
V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
at University of California, Los Angeles on August 30, 2016 http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from
