Protein-coding genes with multiple alternative polyadenylation sites can generate mRNA 3 0 UTR sequences of different lengths, thereby causing the loss or gain of regulatory elements , which can affect stability, localization and translation efficiency. 3USS is a web-server developed with the aim of giving experimentalists the possibility to automatically identify alternative 3 0 UTRs (shorter or longer with respect to a reference transcriptome), an option that is not available in standard RNA-seq data analysis procedures. The tool reports as putative novel the 3 0 UTRs not annotated in available databases. Furthermore, if data from two related samples are uploaded, common and specific alternative 3 0 UTRs are identified and reported by the server.
IntroductionThe 3 0 untranslated regions (3 0 UTRs) of mRNAs play a crucial role in post-transcriptional regulation. In fact, they contain cis-regulatory elements, such as AU-rich elements (ARE), microRNA binding sites, etc. (), which can affect transcript stability, degradation, subcellular localization and translation. Through alternative polyadenylation, a widespread mechanism in eukaryotic organisms, different isoforms of the same gene can acquire alternative (longer or shorter) 3 0 untranslated regions (). The phenomenon seems to be different in different tissues (), during development () and, recently, it has also been observed in cancer cells (). With the emergence of next-generation sequencing technologies, it is now possible to sequence entire transcriptomes in one experiment. In standard RNA-seq data analysis protocols the reconstructed transcripts are compared with an annotated Reference transcriptome. The most commonly used methods [e.g. Cuffcompare and Cuffmerge (distinguish known from putative novel isoforms, but they rely on the comparison of the intronic structure of the transcripts, thereby do not take into account reads that might support the existence of alternative 3 0 UTRs and therefore the existence of putative novel transcripts with different 3 0 UTR is not reported to the user. The great interest for these important regulatory regions is leading to the development of more sophisticated RNA sequencing library preparation protocols (the more powerful will be the possibility to entirely sequence the untranslated region, the more accurate will the reconstruction of putative novel 3'UTRs be). At the same time, different computational tools to capture
DescriptionThe server starts the analysis from a transcriptome assembly file obtained by standard computational methods for RNA-seq transcript reconstruction, such as Cufflinks (), Scripture () and others. Indeed, the 3USS procedure is independent from the transcriptome reconstruction method used to obtain the RNA-seq assembly file as long as the data have been compared with a Reference annotation). 3USS also permits to easily retrieve the genomic coordinates and sequences of transcripts already annotated in public databases.