Motivation: Electron cryo-microscopy can be used to infer 3D structures of large macromolecules with high resolution, but the large amounts of data captured necessitate the development of appropriate statistical models to describe the data generation process, and to perform structure inference. We present a new method for performing ab initio inference of the 3D structures of macromolecules from single particle electron cryo-microscopy experiments using class average images. Results: We demonstrate this algorithm on one phantom, one synthetic dataset and three real (experimental) datasets (ATP synthase, V-type ATPase and GroEL). Structures consistent with the known structures were inferred for all datasets. Availability: The software and source code for this method is available for download from our website: http://compbio.cs.toronto .edu/cryoem/ Contact:
INTRODUCTIONSingle particle electron cryo-microscopy has achieved remarkable success in determining 3D structures of macromolecules at resolutions close to atomic scales (). Some of the protein structures recently determined at high resolutions using this modality include 15 bacteriophage at 4.5 , GroEL at 4.2  and cytoplasmic polyhedrosis virus and rotavirus at 3.8  (). These experiments used a large amount of data, knowledge of the symmetry of these structures, and an approximate initial model of the structure to achieve this high resolution. However, successful 3D inference of asymmetric structures and symmetric structures with unknown symmetries still remains a challenging task in the absence of an initial model. In this article, we present a general method for creating an initial * To whom correspondence should be addressed. model (typically referred to as ab initio 3D inference) that can be used to create high-resolution structures. Before we describe our method, we first briefly describe the typical data analysis steps in performing 3D inference using single particle images. The reader is referred elsewhere for a detailed review of the various analysis steps in the data-processing pipeline (). Electron micrographs are electron-optic images of the biological sample recorded on a charge-coupled device or on film. These images contain projections of hundreds to thousands of copies of the macromolecule in different and unknown orientations (which may or may not be uniform over the space of rotations). However, the projections are convoluted with the point spread function of the microscope and corrupted by noise. Before a 3D structure can be estimated, these large micrograph images must be preprocessed to select the subsections of the images that correspond to the projections of the individual macromolecules (or particles) under study. Extensive research has been conducted on achieving this goal, called particle picking, using different techniques (). Once these particle images have been extracted, 3D structure determination may be performed in one of the two main ways, depending on the availability of a prior low-resolution model of the macromolecule. With an initial model, the particle images that have been picked are used to generate a higher resolution model through a process called refinement. To do so, the orientations of the noisy particle images with respect to the initial model are first determined, and then these orientations are used to generate a high-resolution model. Several methods have been developed to determine the orientations of particle images with respect to a model. In the projection matching technique (), projections of the model at different orientations are computed and the particle images are matched to these projections to determine their orientation. Frealign () uses a signal-to-noise ratio weighted correlation coefficient between the Fourier transform of the particle images and the corresponding central slice of the Fourier transform of the 3D model to determine the orientation of particles. Maximum likelihood-based procedures have also been developed for aligning particles to multiple 2D () and 3D references (). These methods have the added advantage that the refinement of the 2D references or 3D models is performed simultaneously with the alignment.
DISCUSSIONWe have shown above that our method performs reasonably well in discovering 3D models from class average images for five different systems. Here, we give insight into our motivations for the choices made in different components of the algorithm and provide some guidance on how ab initio models may be created for novel systems using our method.