Motivation: Binary datasets represent a compact and simple way to store data about the relationships between a group of objects and their possible properties. In the last few years, different biclustering algorithms have been specially developed to be applied to binary datasets. Several approaches based on matrix factorization, suffix trees or divide-and-conquer techniques have been proposed to extract useful biclusters from binary data, and these approaches provide information about the distribution of patterns and intrinsic correlations. Results: A novel approach to extracting biclusters from binary datasets, BiBit, is introduced here. The results obtained from different experiments with synthetic data reveal the excellent performance and the robustness of BiBit to density and size of input data. Also, BiBit is applied to a central nervous system embryonic tumor gene expression dataset to test the quality of the results. A novel gene expression preprocessing methodology, based on expression level layers, and the selective search performed by BiBit, based on a very fast bit-pattern processing technique, provide very satisfactory results in quality and computational cost. The power of biclustering in finding genes involved simultaneously in different cancer processes is also shown. Finally, a comparison with Bimax, one of the most cited binary biclustering algorithms, shows that BiBit is faster while providing essentially the same results. Availability: The source and binary codes, the datasets used in the experiments and the results can be found at:
INTRODUCTIONBinary datasets represent a compact and simple way to store data about the relationships between a group of objects and their possible properties. This type of data is present in many research fields, including data mining (), text mining (), bioinformatics (), engineering () or paleontology * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(), among others. What the values 0 and 1 stand for depends on the context. For example, when working with gene and protein features, if gene r encodes a protein that belongs to a protein of class c, then r,c is equal to 1; otherwise, it is equal to 0 (). Commonly, the binary values 1 and 0 mean that under experimental condition c, gene r is either expressed or not, respectively (). In some transcription regulation datasets, a matrix element is 1 if the transcription factor associated with the motif group putatively binds the upstream region of a certain gene (). Clustering is one of the most popular techniques used to identify the distribution of patterns and intrinsic correlations in large datasets (). However, the impossibility of discovering local patterns by this technique has led to the popularization of biclustering algorithms, which are able to analyze all dataset dimensions simultaneously and, consequently, extract local patterns that provide a better understanding of the underlying biological phenomena. Different biclustering algorithms have been developed for their use with binary datasets. For example, in, biclusters are defined as submatrices dense enough with 1's to be considered statistically significant. Based on the same concept, the work of Vanadapts a score function to effectively deal with sparse binary datasets. However, these changes lead to a more complicated user input parameters. Besides, all the elements of every generated bicluster are set to zero in the input matrix, introducing noise. Matrix factorization can be applied to reduce the dimensionality of data, yielding a representation of conditions as linear combinations of a reduced set of k-factors. Based on this idea, a Binary Matrix Factorization (BMF) algorithm is presented in. The objective is to decompose the input binary matrix, X, into two binary matrices, W and H, such that X  WH. Determining the suitable number of factors k is, however, the main hurdle with these type of approaches (). Suffix trees have also been used to extract biclusters from binary matrices. Thus, the e-BiMotif algorithm () combines sequence alignment with an adaptation of the e-CCCBiclustering algorithm () to further group sequences with similar motif structures. To find all the maximal contiguous column biclusters, the e-BiMotif algorithm generates a suffix tree T from a binary matrix where rows and columns represent candidate motifs and sequences, respectively. Then, T is used to spell all valid biclusters taking into account an error threshold in the structure of the motifs.