Motivation: Fungi form extensive interconnected mycelial networks that scavenge efficiently for scarce resources in a heterogeneous environment. The architecture of the network is highly responsive to local nutritional cues, damage or predation, and continuously adapts through growth, branching, fusion or regression. These networks also provide an example of an experimental planar network system that can be subjected to both theoretical analysis and experimental manipulation in multiple replicates. For high-throughput measurements , with hundreds of thousands of branches on each image, manual detection is not a realistic option, especially if extended time series are captured. Furthermore, branches typically show considerable variation in contrast as the individual cords span several orders of magnitude and the compressed soil substrate is not homogeneous in texture making automated segmentation challenging. Results: We have developed and evaluated a high-throughput automated image analysis and processing approach using Phase Congruency Tensors and watershed segmentation to characterize complex fungal networks. The performance of the proposed approach is evaluated using complex images of saprotrophic fungal networks with 10 5 –10 6 edges. The results obtained demonstrate that this approach provides a fast and robust solution for detection and graph-based representation of complex curvilinear networks. Availability and implementation: The Matlab toolbox is freely available through the Oxford e-Research Centre website: http://www.oerc .ox.ac.uk/research/bioimage/software Contacts:
INTRODUCTIONRapid advances in imaging technologies have heralded a new era of quantitative measurements that offer considerable potential to improve our understanding of complex biological systems, particularly those that need to be considered as integrated functional units (). In particular, enhanced image processing techniques have greatly facilitated characterization of interconnected transport and communication networks in animal systems, including vascular systems, milk ducts, respiratory pathways and neuronal circuitry [e.g. (. In contrast, there has been remarkably little progress to characterize macroscopic microbial network development for an entire taxonomic group of organisms, namely the fungi. Unlike other biological networks, which exist within an organism, the entire growth form of fungi is as an adaptive network. Foraging saprotrophic fungi play a central role in ecosystem biology as they are the only organisms capable of complete degradation of wood in temperate forests. These fungi form extensive interconnected mycelial networks of multi-hyphal cords that forage for scarce resources that are patchily distributed in time and space (). The architecture of the network responds to local nutritional cues, damage or predation and the local structure is continuously remodeled through growth, branching, fusion or regression of the hyphal cords. Despite the absence of any centralized control system, these organisms exhibit complex foraging and decision making behavior as a co-ordinated individual. Unlike animal network models, microbial networks also provide an example of an extremely tractable experimental system that can be subjected to both theoretical analysis and experimental manipulation in multiple replicates (). Early measures of macroscopic mycelial organisation focussed on fractal dimension as a useful tool to capture aspects of the network structure as a metric (). However, a single summary statistic, such as the overall fractal dimension provides little opportunity to characterize the network structure and dynamics further or to explore the underlying mechanism leading to network optimisation. There has been some progress at the microscopic level to extract the physical network structure using (semi)-automated image analysis (). However, to date, delineation of the network architecture from the larger soil-based systems has only been possibly manually (), as basic intensity-based segmentation is not effective in this context (M.D.Fricker, L.Boddy and D.P.Bebber, unpublished data). As a result, the total number of macroscopic fungal networks analysed so far is relatively low. Nevertheless, graph-theoretic analysis of the digitised networks has provided evidence that these indeterminate, de-centralized systems yield adaptive networks with both high-transport capacity and robustness to damage, but at a relatively low cost, through a 'Darwinian' process of selective reinforcement of key transport pathways and recycling of redundant routes (). Furthermore, fungal networks dynamically modify link strengths and local connectivity when subject to experimental attack to readjust the balance between transport capacity, robustness to damage and resource allocation, resulting in increased resilience as the environment becomes more challenging (). Existing image processing approaches for semi-automated fungal network extraction work best if the mycelium is grown on a suitable substrate, such as cellophane () or nitrocellulose () to facilitate acquisition of high-contrast images. The subsequent processing procedure typically involves noise reduction, using median or band-pass filters, intensity-based thresholding, with manual or automated threshold selection, followed by morphological processing to achieve an improved skeletonisation of the colony structure e.g. Barry and Williams (2011). However, these methods require rather specific culture conditions and illumination regimes that cannot readily be adapted for macroscopic networks grown on soil-based media, which is essential to explore the natural behavioural capability of these organisms and the range of their responses. In addition, the branches (termed cords in these systems) are multi-hyphal aggregates and show considerable variation in contrast as the individual cords span several orders of magnitude in diameter from m to mm, within a single colony. Furthermore, the background from the compressed soil substrate is not homogeneous in texture or reflectivity. Under these conditions, automatic characterization of the fungal network is challenging for conventional image processing approaches and more advanced solutions are required. We have developed a high-throughput automated image analysis approach to detect and characterize large complex fungal networks, grown under realistic conditions. We use watershed segmentation to extract the network rapidly, with prior curvilinear feature enhancement to highlight the network structure in noisy or low contrast images. The proposed enhancement method uses a novel brightness-and contrast-invariant approach based on the concept of local phase, called the Phase Congruency Tensor (PCT). The resulting skeleton is then pruned on the basis of local cost functions that incorporate both intensity and tensor direction information. A graph representation of the network is constructed from the pruned skeleton to give the network topology or a weighted network that includes edge lengths. To obtain an estimate of the edge thickness, which is important in predicting the physiological performance of the system, the skeleton is dilated to capture the approximate dimension at each point, and this value is used to set a local sampling region to estimate the reflected cord intensity for comparison with empirically derived calibration curves. This approach ensures that even sub-resolution branches can be analysed correctly. An addition procedure is applied to extract the resource region which is then used to redefine a corresponding part of the graph. Although we apply the method here to fungal networks, it has wide applicability to planar networks in any domain. highlight curvilinear features and reduce background effects. Although other alternatives are available, here we concentrate on methods based on tensors.