Motivation: Retrocopies are important genes in the genomes of almost all higher eukaryotes. However, the annotation of such genes is a non-trivial task. Intronless genes have often been considered to be retroposed copies of intron-containing paralogs. Such categorization relies on the implicit premise that alignable regions of the duplicates should be long enough to cover exon– exon junctions of the intron-containing genes, and thus intron loss events can be inferred. Here, we examined the alternative possibility that intronless genes could be generated by partial DNA-based duplication of intron-containing genes in the fruitfly genome. Results: By building pairwise protein-, transcript-and genome-level DNA alignments between intronless genes and their corresponding intron-containing paralogs, we found that alignments do not cover exon–exon junctions in 40% of cases and thus no intron loss could be inferred. For these cases, the candidate parental proteins tend to be partially duplicated, and intergenic sequences or neighboring genes are included in the intronless paralog. Moreover, we observed that it is significantly less likely for these paralogs to show inter-chromosomal duplication and testis-dominant transcription, compared to the remaining 60% of cases with evidence of clear intron loss (retrogenes). These lines of analysis reveal that DNA-based duplication contributes significantly to the 40% of cases of single exon gene duplication. Finally, we performed an analogous survey in the human genome and the result is similar, wherein 34% of the cases do not cover exon–exon junctions. Thus, genome annotation for retrogene identification should discard candidates without clear evidence of intron loss.
INTRODUCTIONMechanisms that generate new gene duplicates can be roughly divided into two categories: DNA-based mechanisms and retroposition (). Unlike DNA-based duplicates, retrogenes have less evolutionary constraint, given that they lose the cis-regulator elements of their parental loci, and thus might more often undergo neofunctionalization (). The empirical data confirming this hypothesis are that retrogenes are more often fast evolving relative to DNAbased duplicates (). Thus, because DNAand RNA-based duplications likely have different functional and evolutionary consequences, it is necessary to disentangle the origination mechanisms of duplicated genes. Since retroposition uses mature mRNA as the template instead of intron-containing pre-mRNA, the signature of intron loss has been proposed as a hallmark to differentiate these two duplication mechanisms for a derived duplicate with an intron-containing parental gene (). It is standard annotation practice to perform an all-against-all protein alignment to search paralogous gene pairs. If one copy has at least one intron while the other copy is intronless, the latter is defined as a retrogene, with the assumption that the alignment should be long enough to cover exon exon junctions, thus allowing intron loss to be inferred. A more conservative method is to check the actual alignments and discard cases where the alignment is too short and no parental introns are covered (). It is difficult to compare the performance of these two strategies since it remains unknown how many alignments between single-exon new genes and intron-containing parents do not cover introns and whether DNA-based duplication contributes to many of these cases. Here, we performed a computational survey of intronless genes with intron-containing paralogs in the genomes of both fruitfly and human. The purpose of our work is 2-fold. First, we attempted to provide an evaluation of how we classify retrogene and DNAbased duplicates. The directionality of intron loss can be used to define parental/daughter gene relationships in the case of the retroposition-based copying mechanism. If there is actually no evidence for intron loss, it is difficult to define which paralog is the derived copy and which is the ancestral copy. Such information is critical for the study of evolutionary novelty contributed by