Motivation: Identifier (ID) mapping establishes links between various biological databases and is an essential first step for molecular data integration and functional annotation. ID mapping allows diverse molecular data on genes and proteins to be combined and mapped to functional pathways and ontologies. We have developed comprehensive protein-centric ID mapping services providing mappings for 90 IDs derived from databases on genes, proteins, pathways, diseases, structures, protein families, protein interaction, literature, ontologies, etc. The services are widely used and have been regularly updated since 2006. Availability: www.uniprot.org/mapping and proteininformation-resource.org/pirwww/search/
INTRODUCTIONA central difficulty in integrating and comparing molecular data is finding and maintaining correspondences of identifiers (IDs) for genes, proteins and higher level functional groupings like pathways and Gene Ontology (GO) terms. Various research groups and data repositories use different data sources, IDs and names for nucleotide and proteins sequences in their analysis. The first step to integrate diverse datasets is to map the data to a common set of biological objects. In our experience working with research labs, we are often presented with 34 different types of database IDs for the same types of biological object, whether proteins or genes. In addition, many of these IDs are redundant in that several actually point to the same gene/protein. Several groups have developed tools to address this common problem. Many take a gene-centric approach useful for genomic and microarray work (). Others take a more protein-centric approach (), which is more useful for proteomics work, and also can be useful for systems biology as proteins are often the active biological object that interacts with other objects and pathways. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.We have developed comprehensive protein-centric ID mapping tools and services built on the iProClass protein data warehouse (), which provides mappings between UniProtKB () and currently supports IDs from 90 data sources. The services allow individual and batch mappings as well as programmatic access and FTP downloads. The mappings are updated monthly.