Background: Macrophage activation by lipopolysaccharide and ad-enosine triphosphate (ATP) has been studied extensively because this model system mimics the physiological context of bacterial infection and subsequent inflammatory responses. Previous studies on macro-phages elucidated the biological roles of caspase-1 in post-transla-tional activation of interleukin-1b and interleukin-18 in inflammation and apoptosis. However, the results from these studies focused only on a small number of factors. To better understand the host response, we have performed a high-throughput study of Kdo2-lipid A (KLA)-primed macrophages stimulated with ATP. Results: The study suggests that treating mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages with KLA and ATP produces synergistic effects that are not seen with treatment of KLA or ATP alone. The syn-ergistic regulation of genes related to immunity, apoptosis and lipid metabolism is observed in a time-dependent manner. The synergistic effects are produced by nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-kB) and activator protein (AP)-1 through regulation of their target cytokines. The synergistically regulated cytokines then activate signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) factors that result in enhanced immunity, apoptosis and lipid metabolism ; STAT1 enhances immunity by promoting anti-microbial factors; and STAT3 contributes to downregulation of cell cycle and upregula-tion of apoptosis. STAT1 and STAT3 also regulate glycerolipid and eicosanoid metabolism, respectively. Further, western blot analysis for STAT1 and STAT3 showed that the changes in transcriptomic levels were consistent with their proteomic levels. In summary, this study shows the synergistic interaction between the toll-like receptor and purinergic receptor signaling during macrophage activation on bacterial infection. Availability: Time-course data of transcriptomics and lipidomics can be queried or downloaded from http://www.lipidmaps.org.
INTRODUCTIONLipopolysaccharide (LPS) is an endotoxin from bacterial cell wall that stimulates leukocytes via a toll-like receptor (TLR)-4 pathway (). Kdo2-lipid A (KLA) is an active component of LPS with an analogous response () in activating macrophages. The TLR-4 signaling pathway ultimately mediates the release of pro-and anti-inflammatory factors by activating mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade, nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-kB) and/or activator protein (AP)-1 (). In this study, we have primed macrophages with KLA before stimulation with ATP. KLA priming represents bacterial exposure, which elicits subsequent release of ATP in the extracellular space from inflamed, damaged or dying cells. ATP then acts via autocrine and paracrine signaling and is interpreted as a 'danger signal' by immune cells. These events induce the transcription of pro-inflammatory mediators through the transcription factors (TFs) NF-kB and AP1 (). Interestingly, a model system of ATP stimulation of LPS-primed macrophages exhibited increased cell death compared with the macrophages treated with either ATP or LPS alone (). The increased apoptosis, caused by LPS and ATP treatment, was reduced with caspase-1 inhibitors but not with mitogen-activated protein kinase, protein kinase (PK)-C, or PK-A inhibitors (). In addition to LPS and ATP treatment, there have been a number of studies on LPS-primed macrophages stimulated by various ligands including air particles, lysophosphatidic acid, interferon (IFN)-, IL-4 and toxicants (El). Moreover, sequential activation of one or more TLR receptors by their respective ligands was studied in LPSprimed macrophages (). Most of these studies showed the importance of selected genes or cytokines in LPS-primed macrophages to mimic the biological context of bacterial infection and subsequent immune response. In addition to the cytokine response, LPS-stimulated macrophages showed changes in lipids such as eicosanoids, sphingolipids, sterols, glycerolipids and glycerophospholipids (; Knapp and English, *To whom correspondence should be addressed.