Motivation: Tumors exhibit numerous genomic lesions such as copy number variations, structural variations and sequence variations. It is difficult to determine whether a specific constellation of lesions observed across a cohort of multiple tumors provides statistically significant evidence that the lesions target a set of genes that may be located across different chromosomes but yet are all involved in a single specific biological process or function. Results: We introduce the genomic random interval (GRIN) statistical model and analysis method that evaluates the statistical significance of the abundance of genomic lesions that overlap a specific locus or a pre-defined set of biologically related loci. The GRIN model retains certain biologically important properties of genomic lesions that are ignored by other methods. In a simulation study and two example analyses of leukemia genomic lesion data, GRIN more effectively identified important loci as significant than did three methods based on a permutation-of-markers model. GRIN also identified biologically relevant pathways with a significant abundance of lesions in both examples.
INTRODUCTIONMicroarray and next-generation sequencing technologies have enabled biomedical researchers to characterize the genome of individual tissue samples at a high resolution. In cancer genomics, these technologies have been used to identify genomic lesions in which the DNA of the tumor has been altered relative to that of normal tissue from the same subject. Genomic lesions include copy number changes, sequence mutations and structural rearrangements. Genomic lesions may impact oncogenesis () and clinical prognosis (). In this way, the development of the data collection technologies and associated data analysis methods has contributed profoundly to our understanding of the genomic basis of cancer development and prognosis. Several analysis methods have been developed to identify and assign a statistical significance (e.g. P-value) to 'hot spot' loci that are affected by copy number alterations at a high frequency: the Genomic Identification of Significant Targets in Cancer (GISTIC;) algorithm and its extensions JISTIC () and GISTIC 2.0 (); Significant Aberration in Cancer (SAIC;); and TAGCNA (). GISTIC is one of the most widely used methods. It computes a statistic that summarizes the frequency and amplitude of copy number alterations at each marker of a specific microarray platform. It then uses within-tumor permutation of the assignment of copy number status to marker locus as a null statistical model to evaluate statistical significance. In this way, GISTIC obtains a P-value for each microarray marker locus, and significant peaks are subsequently identified from this profile of P-values. The JISTIC method uses a modified algorithm for identifying peaks in the P-value profile. The GISTIC 2.0 algorithm modifies several components of the original GISTIC algorithm, but GISTIC 2.0 still relies on permutation of markers (POMs) or bins of markers to compute P-values. SAIC and TAGCNA compute statistics that describe the extent to which specific marker loci are affected by copy number alterations and use POMs as a null statistical model to determine statistical significance. Each of these methods has been successfully used for several applications and thus represent important contributions in computational cancer biology. Nevertheless, each of these methods have some limitations that should be addressed. First of all, these methods use a biologically implausible statistical model of the null probability that a lesion affects a locus. GISTIC, JISTIC, GISTIC 2.0, SAIC and TAGCNA each use a POMs model for this purpose. POM permutes the assignment of copy number status to marker locus within each tumor. In this way, POM shatters single contigous lesions into numerous probabilistically independent entities. Consequently, many biologically important lesions are not identified as statistically significant (). Secondly, these methods are not readily applicable to genomic lesion data collected by whole-genome sequencing (WGS). These methods each require that the data be represented in the form of a marker-by-subject matrix. With WGS, every 'mappable' base pair in the genome is a 'marker' so the matrix will be large.Additionally, these methods were developed solely for copy number alterations and do not provide a way to incorporate other lesions, such as point mutations or structural rearrangements that may be detected with WGS (). Finally, these methods only evaluate the statistical significance of the frequency that individual markers are affected by a lesion, but do not directly determine whether a given set of biologically related genes scattered across the genome (such as a particular pathway) have a statistically significant abundance of genomic lesions. Therefore, we have developed the genomic random interval (GRIN) statistical model for statistical analysis of genomic lesion data. The GRIN model explicitly represents each genomic lesion as an entity that affects one point locus, a set of point loci or an interval locus along a chromosome. In this way, the GRIN model retains the continuity of the genomic lesions and naturally avoids the difficulties introduced by statistical models that do not retain lesion continuity. Additionally, the GRIN model can accommodate any genomic lesion that can be represented as a locus on the reference genome. Copy number alterations are represented by intervals with distinct start and end loci; point mutations are represented by their respective loci; and structural rearrangements are represented by the loci of the associated breakpoints. Finally, the GRIN model provides a computationally feasible approach to evaluate the statistical significance of the frequency that lesions affect a set of genes involved in a particular biological process. Furthermore, like other methods, GRIN also provides a mechanism to evaluate the significance of the frequency that lesions affect each point locus in the genome and the locus of each individual gene in the genome. The remainder of this work is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the GRIN model in detail. Section 3 evaluates the performance of GRIN and other methods in a simulation study and two example analyses from leukemia studies. Section 4 provides discussion and concluding remarks.