Motivation: Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) measures the association between two sets of multidimensional variables. We reasoned that CCA could provide an efficient and powerful approach for both univariate and multivariate gene-based tests of association without the need for permutation testing. Results: Compared with a commonly used permutation-based approach, CCA (i) is faster; (ii) has appropriate type-I error rate for normally distributed quantitative traits; (iii) provides comparable power for small to medium-sized genes (100 kb); (iv) provides greater power when the causal variants are uncommon; (v) provides considerably less power for larger genes (≥100 kb) when the causal variants have a broad minor allele frequency (MAF) spectrum. Application to a GWAS of leukocyte levels identified SAFB and a histone gene cluster as novel putative loci harboring multiple independent variants regulating lymphocyte and neutrophil counts.
INTRODUCTIONOver the past few years, genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have been successful in uncovering common genetic variants underlying complex traits or diseases. Considerable efforts have been made to replicate the most associated marker in a given GWAS locus, but there is growing evidence that some loci harbor additional independently associated variants (). This phenomenon, which may be widespread, can be explored through gene-based association methods () to facilitate the identification of genes with multiple risk variants with weak effects. Current gene-based methods typically require permutation or simulation testing to account for the correlation between SNPs as well as gene size, among which VEGAS () and PLINK set-based tests () are most frequently employed. Both tests combine results from single-SNP analyses but differ in how an appropriate null distribution is obtained. VEGAS relies on simulations of linkage disequilibrium (LD) structure from * To whom correspondence should be addressed. a reference dataset, such as the HapMap, whereas PLINK setbased tests resort to permutation testing. In general, these are flexible approaches that can accommodate many different analytical strategies, but can be computationally intensive with increasing number of SNPs tested and when the level of significance is high. Previously, Ferreira and Purcell (2009) proposed a multivariate test of association based on canonical correlation analysis (CCA) to simultaneously test the association between a single SNP and multiple phenotypes. CCA, first described by Harold, measures the association between two sets of multidimensional variables by maximizing the correlation between their linear combinations. We reasoned that CCA could also provide an efficient and powerful approach for a gene-based test of association by intrinsically taking into account the correlation structure between SNPs without the need for permutation testing. Therefore, in the present study, we extended the CCA approach to test multiple SNPs for association with a single or multiple phenotypes measured in unrelated individuals and compared its performance with permutation-based tests of association.
DISCUSSIONWe performed a series of simulations to test whether CCA could provide a convenient, robust and powerful statistical framework for a gene-based test of association when analyzing a quantitative trait measured in unrelated individuals. Our results suggest that, when compared with a commonly used permutation-based approach that considers all genetic variation assayed in a gene, a CCA genebased test (i) can be orders of magnitude faster, particularly for larger, highly significant genes; (ii) has appropriate type-I error rate when analyzing a single normally distributed quantitative trait; (iii) provides comparable power for small to medium-sized genes (100 kb); (iv) provides greater power when the causal variants are uncommon, irrespectively of gene size. On the other hand, the CCA test was considerably less powerful for larger genes ( 100 kb) when the causal variants have a broad MAF spectrum or are relatively common (MAF  20%). Of note, 22% of the 17 470 genes tested in the WBCs study were larger than 100 kb, which included a 15 kb buffer. We further show that including in the CCA gene-based test all genetic variation assayed in a given gene can be counterproductive when the specific aim of the analysis is to identify genes that harbor exclusively uncommon or common causal variants, but not both. Based on these intuitive results, we suggest that CCA may provide a particularly useful gene-based approach for the separate analysis of either uncommon or common variants. Gene-based association P-values are often used as input for pathway-based association analyses. In this case, CCA may not be the most appropriate test to use because of the large impact of gene size on power. Gene-based methods that have a more comparable performance across different gene lengths (e.g. all-SNP or GWiS tests) may provide a better alternative to ensure that an association with pathways composed of large genes can be as readily detected as with those composed of smaller genes. Our results suggest that CCA also provides a valid test for the analysis of a single disease trait or multiple quantitative traits. In this case, however, CCA provided little if any gain in power when compared to the all-SNP permutation-based approach. The CCA gene-based test nonetheless provides a computationally efficient alternative when analyzing such traits. In the multivariate scenario, a significant result can be followed by (i) an examination of the weights attributed by the CCA to each phenotype; and/or (ii) inspection of the univariate gene-based results. In this way, the individual traits underlying the multivariate association can be identified. As proof-of-principle, we applied the CCA gene-based test to the analysis of six WBC traits measured in up to 1061 unrelated healthy individuals. Univariate gene-based analyses of both common and uncommon SNPs identified two notable regions of association, one for lymphocyte counts on chromosome 19 that included the two paralog genes SAFB and SAFB2, and another for neutrophil counts including several genes in the histone 1 cluster on chromosome 6. SAFB is involved in the transcription repression of immune regulatory genes, including HLA and cytokine genes (). Furthermore, SAFB / knockout mice show defects in the development of the hematopoietic system, increased WBC counts, hypoplasia of the thymus and increased signs of infections (). Thus, together with these data, our results suggest that SAFB and/or SAFB2 represent novel putative genes with multiple independent QTL regulating variation in lymphocyte counts in humans. Our analyses identified two specific uncommon variants (rs4239608 and rs806706) in this region that could be the focus of subsequent follow-up studies. The second notable region was the histone 1 gene cluster on chromosome 6, which was associated with neutrophil counts. Histones are increasingly recognized to have an important role in cellular signaling and innate immunity, in addition to their role in the regulation of chromatin structure (). Interestingly, mice challenged with a sublethal dose of histones, develop a prominent accumulation of neutrophils in the lung (). Furthermore, the histone 1 gene cluster contains the greatest enrichment of SAFB target-binding sites (). These results thus raise the possibility that genetic variants in this region may affect the binding of SAFB which, in turn, may regulate the transcription of key histone genes involved in neutrophil production, migration or apoptosis. Candidate SNPs that may explain this effect include rs4145878, rs17598658 and rs4593350; further studies that attempt to replicate our observed association between these and neutrophil counts are warranted. In conclusion, we show that CCA provides a useful framework for a gene-based test of association which, in some situations, may outperform commonly used permutation-based approaches. Our