Motivation: Detecting modules of coordinated activity is fundamental in the analysis of large biological studies. For two-dimensional data (e.g. genes Â patients), this is often done via clustering or biclustering. More recently, studies monitoring patients over time have added another dimension. Analysis is much more challenging in this case, especially when time measurements are not synchronized. New methods that can analyze three-way data are thus needed. Results: We present a new algorithm for finding coherent and flexible modules in three-way data. Our method can identify both core modules that appear in multiple patients and patient-specific augmentations of these core modules that contain additional genes. Our algorithm is based on a hierarchical Bayesian data model and Gibbs sampling. The algorithm outperforms extant methods on simulated and on real data. The method successfully dissected key components of septic shock response from time series measurements of gene expression. Detected patient-specific module augmentations were informative for disease outcome. In analyzing brain functional magnetic resonance imaging time series of subjects at rest, it detected the pertinent brain regions involved. Availability and implementation: R code and data are available at http://doc.aporc.org/wiki/CNetQ
IntroductionIdentifying modules of elements acting in concert is a fundamental paradigm in interpreting, visualizing and dissecting complex biomedical data. For two-dimensional data (e.g. genes versus conditions), clustering is the simplest way to group the elements of one dimension (). Biclustering seeks row and column subsets that manifest similarity (). Such analysis has become standard in computational biology (). Algorithms for finding biclusters differ in how they define (and identify) biclusters (). For example, biclusters were defined as sub-matrices with constant values (), row or column additive or multiplicative values () and submatrices with order preserving values (). Recent studies have extended the idea of biclustering to more complex input structures beyond the standard rowcolumn data (extended the classic Iterative Signature Algorithm (ISA) () to analyze a single matrix of time series data together with prior knowledge on gene function to detect temporal transcription modules that are biologically meaningful. Li and Tuck (2009) introduced an algorithm for joint analysis of ChIP-chip and gene expression data to find biclusters that are likely to be regulated by similar transcription factors.andproposed threeway clustering of gene-condition-organism data. The algorithm ofuses sequence information to integrate data across species, and a post-processing step allows detection of species-specific information.cluster tissues hierarchically and then find the representative gene set of each tissue cluster in the hierarchy. A common data source that calls for three-way analysis is a collection of gene expression profiles measured for a set of subjects over a series of time points. Hence, the data are represented by a V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.
DiscussionWe presented a novel problem formulation and algorithm for flexible three-way clustering of multi-matrix time course data. We defined a core module as (i) a set of rows that are likely to be active together across a set of subjects and (ii) a set of active time points in each covered subject. In addition, each core module has subject-specific private modules that can contain additional genes and have high overlap with the core module. The set of active time points of a module can vary in size and times among subjects. Our model is much more flexible than existing models. First, it allows different active time points for each subject, thereby accommodating heterogeneity and asynchrony in the response of different subjects. Second, different subjects can differ in their underlying features (rows) and time points (columns). The row set of a particular subject in a module does not necessarily cover all core module rows. This property was crucial in the analysis of fMRI data, where it allowed discovering core modules that better covered active brain regions. In addition, the row set of a private module can contain additional rows that represent subject-specific signal. This property was crucial in the gene expression case as it allowed discovering patient-specific up-regulated immune processes. We compared TWIGS to seven other methods and showed that extant methods have difficulties in finding modules that cover many subjects, whereas TWIGS easily finds modules that represent a biological function shared by many subjects. In addition, our method outperformed other methods in terms of enrichment analysis. We employed additional metrics for evaluation in each domain. Other comparison criteria can be used in the future, e.g. test-likelihood or perplexity. Our current analysis has some limitations that can be addressed by future studies. First, we assume that the data originated from two distributions f 0 and f 1. Other approaches could be considered, such as row-based or column-based additive models (). Second, our basic model deals with only a single module at a time. More complex models and algorithms could be proposed to directly model multiple modules. Finally, additional tests are needed to fully exploit the abilities of the model. For example, we focused only on testing a time window of size 1 to find homogenous highly activated private modules.