Motivation: Isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) is a widely used method in quantitative proteomics. A robust data analysis strategy is required to determine protein quantification reliability, i.e. changes due to biological regulation rather than technical variation, so that proteins that are differentially expressed can be identified. Methods: Samples were created by mixing 5, 10, 15 and 20 mg Escherichia coli cell lysate with 100 mg of cell lysate from mouse, corresponding to expected relative fold changes of one for mouse proteins and from 0.25 to 4 for E.coli proteins. Relative quantification was carried out using eight channel isobaric tagging with iTRAQ reagent, and proteins were identified using a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer. Technical variation inherent in this iTRAQ dataset was systematically investigated. Results: A hierarchical statistical model was developed to use quantitative information at peptide level and protein level simultaneously to estimate variation present in each individual peptide and protein. A novel data analysis strategy for iTRAQ, denoted in short as WHATraq, was subsequently proposed with its performance evaluated by the proportion of E.coli proteins that are successfully identified as differentially expressed. Compared with two benchmark data analysis strategies WHATraq was able to identify at least 62.8% more true positive proteins that are differentially expressed. Further validated using a biological iTRAQ dataset including multiple biological repli-cates from varied murine cell lines, WHATraq performed consistently and identified 375% more proteins as being differentially expressed among different cell lines than the other data analysis strategies.
INTRODUCTIONOver the past decade, mass spectrometry (MS) has become the method of choice for large-scale proteomics research to identify and quantify proteins present in different biological contexts (). Several techniques including isotopic labeling and label-free methods have been developed in association with MS to monitor quantitative changes in protein expression and post-translational modification states (). The isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) approach is particularly of interest among isotopic labeling methods due to its ability to analyze in vivo samples and to compare up to eight samples simultaneously (). In general terms, the goal of an iTRAQ experiment is to identify differentially expressed peptides/proteins as a function of different biological conditions. There is a requirement for sophisticated methodologies to define significance for the observed changes in relative quantification, so that changes as a result of biological regulation can be distinguished from those as a result of technical issues. Value to the investigators comes from focusing on identifying differentially expressed proteins as we describe later in the text, yet identifying differentially expressed peptides is a much simpler process. A fundamental assumption for all the discussion is that peptides have been identified and iTRAQ reporter ion intensities are available for these peptides. Analysis of iTRAQ data starts from the processing of raw MS signal to match spectra to peptides and extracting the areas under iTRAQ reporter ion peaks, followed by empirical or statistical methods to identify differentially expressed proteins. Early efforts reported for iTRAQ data analysis included applying ad hoc thresholds to the observed quantitative changes () and using analysis of variance (ANOVA) to identify significant changes after fitting the observed changes with a linear model (). It was proposed more recently that significance of the observed changes can be defined based on the standard deviation of technical variation, which can be estimated using technical replicates (). The most recent advance in analyzing iTRAQ data came from the observation that peptides with lower iTRAQ reporter ion intensities tend to suffer from larger technical variation (). Many approaches have been proposed to address the observed variance heterogeneity, and as a result to achieve more accurate protein *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
DISCUSSIONIn this work, a novel data analysis strategy denoted as WHATraq was proposed for the analysis of iTRAQ proteomics datasets, allowing differentially expressed proteins to be identified. The strategy was primarily based on a novel hierarchical statistical model that was capable of estimating technical/ biological variation inherent in relative quantification of any peptide/protein. The model benefited from making use of quantitative information at both peptide and protein levels and estimated not only random noise as other published models do, but also bias present in peptides and proteins. Here, bias refers to the non-random effect from factors such as noise from coeluting peptides and nearly isobaric peptides. It was also demonstrated that biological variation can also be modeled as biases. WHATraq was shown to have superior ability in identifying proteins that were differentially expressed due to biological regulation, from changes due to technical noise compared with other benchmark data analysis strategies such as STDP and Isobar. Biological replicates can be modeled using WHATraq resulting in an estimation of a combination of technical variation and biological variation. However, such analysis was carried out based on an assumption that the biological variation of all proteins within the sample belonged to one unique normal distribution. Though the assumption was valid for the majority of the proteins, many proteins could exhibit extremely large biological variation. The invalidation of the assumption resulted in an overestimation of bias on peptides and bias on proteins, which in turn reduced the number of differentially expressed proteins being identified. On the other hand, proteins with large biological variation can also be identified by mistake as being differentially expressed because their biological variation was underestimated by the model. We would like to argue that including an. Modeling a combination of technical and biological variation. The figure showed the statistical model of a combination of technical and biological variation at protein level. Bias on peptides and bias on proteins dominated the total variation. Comparison with the model built up on technical variation alone demonstrated that the values of instrument noise in the two models are close, whereas bias on peptide/proteins nearly doubled with the additional biological variation. Asterisk: instrument noise was calculated at iTRAQ reporter ion intensity equals to 1000additional pair of technical replicates to estimate technical variation may be the best approach to accurately identify proteins being differently expressed because it allows biological variation to be estimated for each individual protein. In large-scale studies that include multiple subjects being analyzed in multiple iTRAQ experiments, it was especially useful to include a pair of common reference samples (such as pooled samples) as technical replicates. This will allow comparison of protein expression level across different experiments, e.g. for the purpose of estimating intersubject variation. WHATraq is more likely to identify proteins with higher number of peptides as being differentially expressed. However, sometimes researchers are particularly interested in proteins with low expression level, which typically exhibit low number of peptides in an iTRAQ dataset. In this case, an additional analysis can be carried out to search for differentially expressed proteins with only a limited number of peptides, using the same procedure as standard analysis present in this study. Such an analysis will increase the global FDR to a limited extent but provides a unique chance for proteins with low expression level to be identified as being differentially expressed. For example, the analysis on proteins with three peptides or less allowed identification of an additional five TP proteins (no FP) from the E.coli/murine dataset. Some proteins were identified to be changing probably as a consequence of mutant IDH expression compared with the control cells expressing wild-type IDH. We also showed proteins potentially expressed as a consequence of retroviral-mediated gene transfer with an empty vector. Thus, it was demonstrated that the methodology is applicable directly to real experiments. It has been proposed in earlier publications that an intensity cutoff should be applied to eliminate peptides with low iTRAQ reporter ion intensities because these peptides usually associate with high technical variation and provide inaccurate quantitative information (). In this study, we tested various cutoff values ranging from 6 to 230, which were derived using the technical variation model at peptide level, corresponding to the standard deviation of technical variation to be 1.5, 1.2, 1.0, 0.7 and 0.5, respectively. We discovered that applying intensity cutoffs provided no benefit to WHATraq probably because it has already taken the uncertainty from peptides with low iTRAQ reporter ion intensities into account (Supplementary). Instead, applying intensity cutoffs can decrease the FPR of data analysis strategies that do not have technical variation models at peptide level, such as STDP. It has been shown that iTRAQ quantification often underestimates fold change due to several factors (). Underestimation is believed to primarily be a result of reporter ion mixing from multiple coeluting peptides or nearly isobaric peptides. This background effect has been reduced but not removed by increased fractionation of samples reducing fraction complexity; this, however, is at the expense of increased analysis time (). Another approach to eliminate the quantitative inaccuracy of isobaric tagging techniques uses MS3 to add an additional fractionation step to target peptide signals (). This is only available on MS instrumentation capable of higher order fragmentation events and so cannot be applied in many situations. Therefore, a model that can differentiate between genuine changes and technical variation, such as the one proposed here, is important for the correct identification of low level changes in the proteome.
CONCLUSIONIn this work, we proposed a novel data analysis strategy called WHATraq for quantitative proteomics experiments using iTRAQ. Based on a hierarchical statistical model, the strategy is capable of estimating technical/biological variation for each individual peptide and protein, and subsequently identifying proteins that were differentially expressed. We demonstrated that the strategy was able to identify significantly larger number of proteins as being differentially expressed compared with two other benchmark data analysis strategies STDP and Isobar.