Motivation: Transmembrane β-barrels (TMBBs) belong to a special structural class of proteins predominately found in the outer membranes of Gram-negative bacteria, mitochondria and chloroplasts. TMBBs are surface-exposed proteins that perform a variety of functions ranging from nutrient acquisition to osmotic regulation. These properties suggest that TMBBs have great potential for use in vaccine or drug therapy development. However, membrane proteins, such as TMBBs, are notoriously difficult to identify and characterize using traditional experimental approaches and current prediction methods are still unreliable. Results: A prediction method based on the physicochemical properties of experimentally characterized TMBB structures was developed to predict TMBB-encoding genes from genomic databases. The Freeman–Wimley prediction algorithm developed in this study has an accuracy of 99% and MCC of 0.748 when using the most efficient prediction criteria, which is better than any previously published algorithm. Availability: The MS Windows-compatible application is available for download at http://www.cbcb.umd.edu/software/jellyfish.
INTRODUCTIONThe transmembrane -barrel (TMBB) is one of two major structural classes of membrane-spanning proteins; TM helical bundles are the other. TMBBs are found in the outer membranes of Gramnegative bacteria, mitochondria and chloroplasts, while TM helical bundles are found in the cytoplasmic membranes of all living organisms. Although genes that encode TMBBs are estimated to represent at least 3% of all protein-coding genes in Gram-negative bacteria, TMBBs represent only 1% of the solved protein structures from Gram-negative organisms. As a rapidly expanding number of genomic sequences become available, using in silico methods to identify previously unknown TMBBs is an appealing alternative to more difficult and time-consuming experimental methods such as crystallography. Computational TMBB prediction methods can identify candidate genes in order to perform experimental validation or structural proteomics on a more focused population. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.These methods also provide the opportunity to identify and characterize TMBBs that may not be expressed under standard culturing conditions and thus, would go unobserved using traditional screening methods such as proteomic analysis. Computational prediction methods have been used to predict TM helices with an accuracy of 99% for nearly a decade. TM helices are simple stretches of 1925 hydrophobic residues, which can be predicted with near-perfect accuracy using experimentally determined hydrophobicity scales; an example of such a program is MPEX (). However, the prediction of TMBBs presents a more difficult challenge due to the cryptic nature of the TMBB structure (). The TMBB structure is a series of anti-parallel -strands that are arranged in a cylindrical geometry forming a structure that resembles a barrel (). The TM -strands of TMBBs consist of 10 amino acids arranged in an alternating, dyad repeat pattern of hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues, where the hydrophobic side-chains face the lipid environment and the hydrophilic sidechains face the interior of the -barrel. The -hairpin, which is the major structural unit of the TMBB, is a pair of anti-parallel TM -strands connected by a short loop of 37 residues (i.e., hairpin turn). The -hairpins are connected to each other by loops of varying length. The complexities and irregularities in the structure including the variations in loop length and composition, deviations from the pattern of hydrophobicity in some -strands, and the low information content (e.g., only five hydrophobic residues in a TM strand) make the identification of TMBBs especially problematic (). There are a wide variety of TMBB prediction algorithms that utilize machine learning methods ranging from Bayesian networks to k-nearest neighbor methods. Machine learning methods are designed to identify the common features of the TMBBs in a training dataset as well as features that distinguish TMBBs from other types of proteins. The distinguishing variables, as interpreted by the algorithm, are used as rules to classify a test sequence (). Although these methods can yield reasonable TMBB prediction accuracies (6497%), their predictions are still less reliable than those made for TM helical bundles (;). Besides achieving less than ideal prediction accuracy, a major disadvantage of using a machine learning method is that it cannot be used for hypothesis testing because the variables used to make the predictions are either hidden or arbitrary, thus there is no discernable link between the variables and the physicochemical properties of the experimentally solved TMBB structures. A TMBB prediction algorithm based on the physicochemical properties of TMBBs was developed in this lab (). This algorithm is based on an analysis of the structure and compositionPage
DISCUSSION