We conducted a reanalysis of genome-wide histone H3 tail methylation data in mammalian pluripotent and differentiated cells. We show that the promoters marked with histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) tend to have more exonic positions in the promoter regions. However, this is not due to any preferential marking on exons over introns by H3K27me3. The relationship is also independent the status of histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) mark, CpG content and the platforms used in the high-throughput profiling of histone modifications. It provides evidence for the link between histone modifications and transcribed exons in promoter regions. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONHistone modification is closely related to cellular states and gene regulation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) combined with chip or sequencing technologies has been a powerful tool to map the genome-wide distribution of histone modifications. The highresolution maps of several key histone modifications have been obtained for the embryonic stem (ES) cells and the differentiated cell lineages (). Among the modifications on histone tails, histone H3 lysine 4 and lysine 27 methylation are of particular interest. Genes with the promoters marked by histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) but not histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) are actively expressed. Genes with the promoters marked by both H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 (termed 'bivalent domains') are poised for expression, and those with only H3K27me3 marks are stably repressed (reviewed in). These modifications are catalyzed by trithorax-and Polycomb-group proteins, respectively. The proteins mediate the epigenetic inheritance of lineage-specific gene expression patterns and have important function in development (). All of these reflect the central role of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 in the maintenance of pluripotent state and the lineage potential. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.Another histone modification H3K36me3 has been reported to be associated with transcriptional elongation (). More recent studies show that exons are preferentially marked with H3K36me3 relative to introns, which indicates a dynamic link between transcription and splicing (). Intragenic histone hyper-acetylation affects nearby alternative splicing, which further indicates the coupling of transcription and splicing through histone modifications (). In addition, it has been reported that RNA-directed transcriptional gene silencing (TGS) can be initiated through promoter-targeted siRNAs and the targeted promoters are marked with silent histone H3K9me2 and H3K27me3 (). During TGS, low-copy of promoter-associated RNAs are transcribed (e.g. RNAs transcribed from upstream promoter in close proximity) and recognized by the antisense strand of the siRNA to mediate TGS (). These results indicate that transcribed RNAs are closely related to histone modifications. Here, we explore the relationship between H3K27me3 modification and the RNA transcribed from the same promoter. Specifically, we found that the promoters marked by H3K27me3 tend to have more exonic positions in the promoter regions, which further indicates the potential relationship between histone modifications and transcribed RNAs.
DISCUSSIONHere, we analyzed the relationship between the exonic positions and the histone modifications in gene promoter regions. We found that although H3K27me3 marks do not distinguish exonic or intronic positions, the number of exonic positions is positively associated with the H3K27me3 signal. This association is independent of the H3K4me3 status, nucleosome occupancy, CpG content and highthroughput platforms.