Motivation: Structural characterization of protein interactions is necessary for understanding and modulating biological processes. On one hand, X-ray crystallography or NMR spectroscopy provide atomic resolution structures but the data collection process is typically long and the success rate is low. On the other hand, computational methods for modeling assembly structures from individual components frequently suffer from high false-positive rate, rarely resulting in a unique solution. Results: Here, we present a combined approach that computationally integrates data from a variety of fast and accessible experimental techniques for rapid and accurate structure determination of pro-tein–protein complexes. The integrative method uses atomistic models of two interacting proteins and one or more datasets from five accessible experimental techniques: a small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) profile, 2D class average images from negative-stain electron microscopy micrographs (EM), a 3D density map from single-particle negative-stain EM, residue type content of the pro-tein–protein interface from NMR spectroscopy and chemical cross-linking detected by mass spectrometry. The method is tested on a docking benchmark consisting of 176 known complex structures and simulated experimental data. The near-native model is the top scoring one for up to 61% of benchmark cases depending on the included experimental datasets; in comparison to 10% for standard computational docking. We also collected SAXS, 2D class average images and 3D density map from negative-stain EM to model the PCSK9 antigen–J16 Fab antibody complex, followed by validation of the model by a subsequently available X-ray crystallographic structure. Availability:
INTRODUCTIONBiologists are identifying components of macromolecular assemblies and networks (). To understand how these assemblies and networks underpin essential biological processes and to modulate them for therapeutic purposes, we need to describe the structures of both natural and engineered protein interactions (). Owing to the difficulty of determining the atomic structures of protein complexes by X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy as well as inaccuracy of alternative methods, such as proteinprotein docking, new techniques are necessary (). One major computational approach to predicting structures of protein complexes relies on molecular docking of unbound single-component structures. Even for complexes with two proteins, docking problem remains challenging despite recent advances (). The major bottlenecks include dealing with protein flexibility and the absence of an accurate scoring function (). Pairwise protein docking methods can be divided into three classes based on their configurational sampling algorithm (): (i) global methods using a fast Fourier transform (FFT) () or geometric matching (); (ii) medium-range methods such as Monte Carlo sampling (); and (iii) methods guided by data, such as complex refinement based on NMR restraints, cross-linking, interface prediction or site-directed mutagenesis (). It is common to begin docking two proteins with an unbiased global search followed by refinement of the best scoring models ().Characterizing the structures of multi-subunit complexes benefits from using varied experimental datasets (). In this hybrid or integrative approach, the datasets are encoded into a scoring function used to evaluate candidate models generated by a sampling method. Integrative structure determination typically iterates through the following stages: (i) gathering information, (ii) designing model representation and evaluation, (iii) sampling good models, and (iv) analyzing models and information. Here, we present an integrative approach to pairwise protein docking. First, data from one or more of five different experiment types are translated into the corresponding scoring function terms. These data include (i) the pair-distance distribution function of the complex from a small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) profile, (ii) 2D class average images of the complex from negative-stain electron microscopy micrographs (EM2D), (iii) a 3D density map of the complex from single-particle negative-stain electron microscopy micrographs (EM3D), (iv) residue type content at the protein interface from NMR spectroscopy (NMR-RTC) (), and (v) chemical cross-linking detected by mass spectrometry (CXMS). These five experimental methods were selected because of their feasibility and efficiency of data collection: a SAXS profile of the complex in solution can be collected in several minutes (); a 3D EM density map can be reconstructed from a smaller sample amount than that for SAXS, but data collection process is significantly longer (); 2D class averages can be computed from micrographs more easily and rapidly than performing a full 3D reconstruction; the composition of interface residues from NMR () provides information about the interaction interface, unlike the SAXS and EM data; and cross-linking data () provide information at intermediate resolution imposing an upper distance bound on inter-molecular pairs of residues. Second, complex models are sampled, relying on efficient global search methods developed for pairwise protein docking, followed by filtering based on fit to the experimental data, conformational refinement and composite scoring. Third, good-scoring representatives of clusters of models are picked as final models. To validate this approach, we apply the integrative method in two contexts. First, we test the method on a large benchmark for protein docking () with simulated experimental data and known complex structures. This test allows a robust assessment of the value of the individual types of experimental data for specific types of proteins. Second, we also collected SAXS, EM2D and EM3D data to model the PCSK9 antigenJ16 Fab antibody complex, followed by validation of the model by a subsequently available X-ray crystallographic structure. This second test highlights the advantages of the integrative method that allows computing an accurate model in a timely manner.
DISCUSSIONWe developed an integrative method for docking two protein structures by combining protein docking techniques with data from five experimental methods including SAXS, EM2D, EM3D, NMR-RTC and CXMS. To assess the accuracy of the integrative method, we used a benchmark of 176 complex structures with simulated experimental data. We also applied thescoring cluster representatives (red, green, gold and yellow) for integrative docking with SAXS, EM2D and EM3D filters, superimposed on X-ray crystallographic structure (blue). The models are superimposed on PCSK9 (prodomain in cyan, catalytic domain in blue and C-terminal domain in dark blue). (C) Fit of the top-scoring cluster representatives to the SAXS profile, EM2D class averages and EM3D density map method to an antibodyantigen complex, relying on experimental datasets collected specifically for this study. Additional information, such as sequence conservation and impact of site-directed mutagenesis on complex formation, has been used previously to increase the accuracy of pairwise protein docking (). Here, we analyze the improved docking success rates afforded by data from five accessible experimental methods. Our integrative framework can be modularly extended to support additional types of experimental data, such as those from footprinting, site-directed mutagenesis, FRET spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy (). In addition to the data types tested here, binding site residues and distance constraints, if available, can be added directly to the PatchDock input. In principle, experimental datasets can be used either to filter docking models or directly to drive the sampling. We select the first approach, because it allows seamless integration of any combination of datasets and we can rely on efficient global search methods already developed for pairwise protein docking. Moreover, driving the docking with global shape data, such as SAXS and EM2D, is algorithmically challenging.