An important topic in systems biology is the reverse engineering of regulatory mechanisms through reconstruction of context-dependent gene networks. A major challenge is to identify the genes and the regulations specific to a condition or phenotype, given that regulatory processes are highly connected such that a specific response is typically accompanied by numerous collateral effects. In this study, we design a multi-layer approach that is able to reconstruct condition-specific genes and their regulation through an integrative analysis of large-scale information of gene expression, protein interaction and transcriptional regulation (transcription factor-target gene relationships). We establish the accuracy of our methodology against synthetic datasets, as well as a yeast dataset. We then extend the framework to the application of higher eukaryotic systems, including human breast cancer and Arabidopsis thaliana cold acclimation. Our study identified TACSTD2 (TROP2) as a target gene for human breast cancer and discovered its regulation by transcription factors CREB, as well as NFkB. We also predict KIF2C is a target gene for ERÀ/HER2À breast cancer and is positively regulated by E2F1. The predictions were further confirmed through experimental studies. Availability: The implementation and detailed protocol of the layer approach is available at http://www.egr.msu.edu/changroup/Protocols/Three-layer%20approach
INTRODUCTIONThe accumulation of high-throughput transcriptome data has driven the development and application of computational approaches to infer networks, elucidate gene regulation and identify targets. Initial network inference methods based on gene expression data were successful with prokaryotes (). However, higher eukaryotes systems, with their higher number of genes, provided many more candidate genes (several hundred) and interactions (more than a thousand) [e.g. (. This generates numerous hypotheses, and with this sheer number, most of the candidates cannot be investigated or validated through experiments, making it difficult to assess the utility of the proposed approach on these systems. Generating too many hypotheses arises, in part, due to disconnect between the computational and biological assumptions applied in the models. The direct applications of learning/ mining methods aim to infer 'functional interactions' in accordance with certain presumed mathematical definitions, which may not be appropriate in a biological context. For example, biologically, the 'candidate genes' specific to a phenotype usually refer to genes that assume a major response for a condition or to causal genes involved in the development of a phenotype. In contrast, computationally, statistical analyses are applied to identify those that are expressed differentially that help to classify two conditions (), which does not define causal genes. In a biological context, interactions refer to direct physical or regulatory interactions, whereas computationally the interactions inferred are statistical correlations between gene expression that may not necessary indicate direct regulatory relationships (). To address this challenge, one could develop a model based on the biological question to be addressed. For example, a correlation between two genes could suggest 'regulating', 'being regulated' or an indirect relationship in a biological context. The model of ARANCE assumes indirect interactions should have lower correlations and is thereby able to predict transcriptional interaction by removing the indirect interactions (). Alternatively, incorporating physical interactions by integrating proteinprotein interaction (PPI) and proteinDNA (P-DNA) data with gene expression data could help bridge and facilitate the interpretation of the computational results into biological context (). In these previous studies, the genes are selected based on differential expression and correlation analyses and then superimposed onto a physical interaction network, which helped to interpret the identified genes/interactions. Nevertheless, the aforementioned approaches still will provide large numbers of hypotheses with hundreds of genes and interactions identified in the reconstructed network. Notably, a majority of the candidate genes/interactions are often related to general processes that are not specifically responsive to the condition being investigated. With this large number of possible candidates literature search to 'manually' characterize many of *To whom correspondence should be addressed. these predicted candidates are typically performed to identify specific targets for further experimental investigation based on one's expertise. Alternatively, enrichment analysis, such as gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) () and GO (http://www.geneontology.org/) annotations have been applied in many reverse engineering studies to interpret the results, which provide understanding of the 'general' processes involved rather than the direct molecular mechanisms. Another challenge is that a majority of the reconstruction methods used to identify transcriptional interactions/regulations are based on correlation. However, an absence of a correlation does not preclude a possible regulatory relationship, e.g. posttranscriptionally regulated interactions, including RNA processing, post-translational modifications (e.g. phosphorylation) or co-factors of transcription factors (TFs). Note that analyses of gene expression cannot distinguish the effect of RNA processing, protein modifications or protein co-factors; thus, all these events are considered as 'post-transcriptional' effects on the TF activity in this study, and throughout this article. Although more recently, methods have been developed to uncover these potential post-transcriptional interactions (). Notably these recent methods are not 'reconstruction approach' in the strict sense and further require expert knowledge that the user must provide. For example, the user has to provide the TF and target gene pair along with a list of potential regulators to determine the potential post-transcriptional modulators. The overall objective here is to provide regulatory hypotheses that are more specific to the condition of interest rather than those related to general responses. Our approach separates the network reconstruction into multiple levels, each addressing a specific biological question wherein a particular scenario of biological regulation is modeled. There are two major steps; first is to identify the candidate genes that are specific to the phenotype and have distinct expression pattern under the condition of interest (layer I). We note that the problem of generating too many hypotheses is because the predictions are not specific enough. For example, in biological systems, a specific and direct response to a perturbation usually is accompanied by a cascade of collateral effects on many genes and dozens of regulatory modules in the network. For example,showed that in an experiment that knocked out the GAL80 gene in yeast, and comparing the transcriptomes before and after the treatment showed that such modulation of a single pathway eventually caused a global effect throughout the whole biomolecular interaction network. The specific response of the knock out experiment is the activation of the galactose-processing pathways by eliminating GAL80's repression on the GAL4 transcription factor; nevertheless, the repression of this one pathway resulted in hundreds of differentially expressed genes and dozens of activated modules, making it difficult to identify the essential 'trigger', i.e. the specific pathway in response to the perturbation. Therefore, in a typical network inference or module analysis, many of the genes and modules identified would likely be such 'side effects' or collateral responses rather than direct and specific effects. For example () in identifying the activity of the p450 gene in human liver, network analysis (clustering and network reconstruction based on correlation) identified 45000 differentially expressed traits spanning many general functional modules including immune response, cell cycle, lipid metabolism, macromolecule biosynthesis and so forth. This provides a 'rough measurement' of the overall influence, but it is difficult to identify from this list the specific pathway(s) that regulates these effects and to guide the experimental design for further indepth functional studies. Therefore, the specific responses are usually concealed by many less specific effects, which are difficult to distinguished based on current network analysis methods. We address this challenge by taking an alternative approach to identify the target genes that are specific for the condition of interest, and which may not necessary be hubs in a network (). Our approach compares the condition of interest with multiple conditions, where the multiple conditions are grouped together, which is in contrast to current studies that evaluate multiple conditions (). Thus, in this first step of our network reconstruction framework, we integrate microarray data from a diverse set of conditions to provide a common context (more and better controls) for the expression behaviors of the genes and apply advanced feature selection technique to identify the target genes that are most specific to the condition being investigated. Incorporating these diverse conditions for comparison in the feature selection of genes and interactions reduces the falsepositive rate and enhances the specificity. The second step of our method identifies the TFs of these genes, including post-transcriptionally regulated TFs, by incorporating interaction data to account for the TF activity, beyond the expression level of the TF. Thus, from these 'specific' target genes identified in layer I, the network is expanded in layer II based on known and predicted interactions with these genes, obtained from the PPI and proteinDNA networks, which provides conditional gene regulations. A filtering approach based on mutual information is applied to the physical interaction network to reconstruct the regulatory pathway from the candidate genes. In layer III, we infer the conditional TF activity to identify the major regulators in the gene network, accounting for posttranscriptional regulation. The multiple layers of learning with their distinct biological assumptions at each level capture different biological features in the regulation to achieve reconstruction of condition-specific gene networks that account for both transcriptional and post-translational molecular interactions. We establish the accuracy of our methodology against synthetic datasets, as well as a yeast dataset. Finally, we extend the framework to the application of higher eukaryotic systems.