Motivation: Small non-coding RNAs (sRNAs) have major roles in the post-transcriptional regulation in prokaryotes. The experimental validation of a relatively small number of sRNAs in few species requires developing computational algorithms capable of robustly encoding the available knowledge and using this knowledge to predict sRNAs within and across species. Results: We present a novel methodology designed to identify bacterial sRNAs by incorporating the knowledge encoded by different sRNA prediction methods and optimally aggregating them as potential pre-dictors. Because some of these methods emphasize specificity, whereas others emphasize sensitivity while detecting sRNAs, their optimal aggregation constitutes trade-off solutions between these two contradictory objectives that enhance their individual merits. Many non-redundant optimal aggregations uncovered by using multiobjec-tive optimization techniques are then combined into a multiclassifier, which ensures robustness during detection and prediction even in gen-omes with distinct nucleotide composition. By training with sRNAs in Salmonella enterica Typhimurium, we were able to successfully predict sRNAs in Sinorhizobium meliloti, as well as in multiple and poorly annotated species. The proposed methodology, like a meta-analysis approach , may begin to lay a possible foundation for developing robust predictive methods across a wide spectrum of genomic variability. Availability and implementation: Scripts created for the experimentation are available at
INTRODUCTIONSmall non-coding RNAs (sRNAs) have major roles in the bacterial post-transcriptional regulation, affecting important cellular processes such as cell division () and response to environmental stimuli (), among others. Experimental methods, including nextgeneration sequencing technologies, are critical for the functional characterization of sRNAs (). However, the experimental verification of a relatively small number of sRNAs, primarily in Escherichia coli K12 () and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium LT2 (SLT2) (), is not sufficient to help detect them in the large list of available sequenced genomes. Therefore, there is a requirement of developing computational algorithms capable of robustly encoding the knowledge of known sRNAs available in certain genomes and using this knowledge to predict sRNAs in other species (). The computational identification of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), which includes sRNAs, (ribosomal RNAs) rRNAs and transfer RNAs (tRNAs), is constrained by their diversity in terms of structures, sequences and functions (). Structures of ncRNAs are often scored based on thermodynamic stability, conservation and/or covariance of sequence alignments. Sequences of ncRNAs are primarily analyzed by using two strategies: ab initio, which scrutinizes a single-query sequence [e.g. zMFold (), vsFold (and comparative [e.g. QRNA (), Alifoldz (), dynalign (), MSARi () and RNAz2 (, where the query sequence is investigated by its similarity to other aligned sequences. The latter strategy requires methods for accessing databases, as well as heuristics to efficiently evaluate similarity among sequences. Both strategies require classifiers [e.g. support vector machines () or customized hidden Markov models ()] to predict new ncRNAs based on the acquired knowledge in the training phase. Remarkably, most of the training sets currently used to predict sRNAs are composed of positive examples of rRNAs and tRNAs, which are easier to identify than sRNAs because of their longer sequences and well-defined structure. Although several methods have been developed and represent a step forward in the computational detection of sRNAs, their success is limited because of (i) the excessive emphasis on specificity, which generates a high number of false-negative predictions by targeting few well-known sRNA families corresponding only to a small percentage of the available sRNAs, (ii) the use of genomic features (e.g. motifs of terminators, RNA polymerase) that are only conserved in closely related organisms [e.g. E.coli and Salmonella (the emphasis on sensitivity to detect novel findings by thermodynamical approaches, where several examples shown in bacterial genomes harbor well-defined secondary structures and high thermodynamical stability () but do not correspond to true sRNA sequences () (i.e. predicted false-positive findings). Combining pairs of these methods partially overcome these limitations (del). For example, we previously combined QRNA and RNAz to identify sRNAs in Sinorhizobium meliloti; however, the significant reduction in the number of false-positive findings leads to very low sensitivity (del). The performance of a classifier or prediction method may be improved when combining different methods and thus suggests a path to improve bacterial sRNA prediction through metaanalyses of results from existing tools. Therefore, here we propose a new methodology (), which performs optimal aggregations of existing methodstermed basic methodsto predict sRNAs by using machine learning and optimization techniques. This strategy minimizes the false-positive rate during detection and prediction and, simultaneously, maximizes the number of sRNA identified, independently of the evaluated genome. We trained our methodology using the SLT2 genome, which is the Gammaproteobacteria model organism harboring the highest number of experimentally validated sRNAs. The resulting strategy was later successfully applied to predict sRNAs in S.meliloti, a distant Alphaproteobacteria of a great agricultural importance, that has not been used in the training set and has numerous annotated sRNAs (). Finally, the strategy was tested in a multispecies dataset (). The performance achieved by our methodology when compared with that of the basic or pairwise combinations of methods demonstrated that the proposed methodology is accurate and robust to detect sRNAs even in distantly related species. Note that our approach does not invalidate methods developed de novo but complements them by providing an efficient way of combining their most reliable features and thus extracts the maximum benefits from each method. Our approach might bring some light into the development of robust predictive methods across a wide spectrum of genomic variability.
DISCUSSIONThe use of next-generation technologies, such as RNA-seq, demonstrated that the number and diversity of sRNAs is greater than was originally expected (). Therefore, there is increased interest in identifying sRNAs and deciphering their role in regulatory systems within a particular species or across multiple species. These experimental methods are critical for functional characterization of sRNAs (); however, their applicability still has been constrained to a relatively small number of sRNAs as well as genomes. Consequently, computational prediction of sRNAs is required to develop new hypothesis that allows focusing the experimental verification on particular targets, to provide clues about the molecular mechanisms governing gene regulation. Different strategies have been implemented using distinct computational methods to predict sRNAs (); however, most of them exhibit similar limitations. Essentially, there is a trend in these computational methods to favor either Sp or Sn, but not both, in their predictions () and that, in turn, generates either a high number of false-positive predictions or false-negative predictions. This is true even if some methods combine in one predictor different sRNA features and/or genomic information (). In this work, we presented a new methodology, which identifies bacterial sRNAs by simultaneously minimizing the false-positive predictions (Sp) and maximizing the number of recognized sRNAs (Sn). This method isable to predict sRNAs in different genomes, even when there is a lack of reliable annotations, because it does not rely on additional genomic features. Several characteristics distinguish our methodology from other methods. The proposed approach uses the distinctive features of different methodstermed basic methodsinstead of developing a new method de novo, and combines them in a manner that resolves the problem of contradictory knowledge and thus improving their predictive power. To do that, our methodology combines the predictions of the basic methods by using typical set theory operations such as the union and/or intersection. Likewise in logic expressions, the systematic application of these operations produces chained and disparate aggregations of methods. Because not all aggregations may perform better than an individual method (del), and large aggregations including all methods may also produce overfitting, our methodology selects optimal aggregations as a trade-off between Sp and Sn by using multiobjective optimization heuristic techniques. Particularly, we used the genetic algorithms NSGA-II. The efficient heuristics used by our methodology avoids intractable processing times, which are common in combinatorial optimization (De). This process results in non-redundant optimal aggregations, where the balance between the two contradictory objectives also prevents overfitting (). This approach substantially improves both Sp and Sn over that of previous single aggregation of two predefined methods (). We applied our methodology to a dataset of experimentally validated sRNAs in SLT2. The results are significantly better than those results from the basic methods alone (Tables 1 and 2) in training or test datasets (Supplementaryand Supplementary Tables S4S7). Remarkably, the Sp and Sn scores are similar between both training and test sets, and even within the training test fold partitions performed in the crossvalidation. These results strongly suggest that the method is robust for predicting sRNAs despite the possible sample variability. To effectively confirm these findings, we tested the predictive power of the method in two datasets that were not used in the training process: the S.meliloti and the multispecies datasets. Despite the different nucleotide composition of these genomes (see GC content; Supplementary), our methodology obtained good Sp and Sn scores. Finally, our proposed method obtained better Sn scores than SIPHT (), a widely used method that uses specific genomic information about binding sites and terminators (). Unlike our method that uses general characteristics of sRNAs, SIPHT uses particular genomic features. Therefore, the database of negative examples based on shuffled sequences cannot be fairly used to estimate comparable Sps for both methods. It would be interesting to derive negative examples acceptable to both methods to better compare their power. In sum, our approach has demonstrated to encode a successful and robust methodology to predict sRNAs even in poorly annotated genomes. Moreover, we have shown that appropriately combining results from existing methods in a meta-analysis-like approach may significantly improve their accuracy and facilitates the generation of new predictors by simply using different training datasets and/or aggregating new basic methods.