Motivation: Diagrams embedded in the biomedical literature convey rich contents, which often concisely and intuitively highlight key thesis of a research article. Despite their vital importance and informative clues for biomedical literature navigation and retrieval; currently, we miss an effective computational method for automatically understanding and accessing these valuable resources. Proposed Method: To address the aforementioned gap, we propose a novel context-based algorithm for estimating the similarity between a pair of biomedical diagrams. The main difference of the proposed algorithm with respect to the existing methods lies in the new algorithms incorporation of the semantic context associated with diagrams in their source documents into the diagram similarity estimation process. In addition, the new approach also performs a series of advanced image processing and text mining operations to comprehensively extract the semantic content graphically encoded inside diagram images. Results: The new algorithm can be deployed as a reusable component providing a fundamental function for building many advanced, semantic-aware applications on biomedical diagram processing. As a case study, in our experiments, we demonstrate the advantage of the new algorithm for diagram retrieval. A set of biomedical diagram search and ranking experiments were conducted, where the performance of the new method was compared with that of five peer methods. The comparison results demonstrate the performance superiority of the new algorithm with all peer methods with statistical significance. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONDiagrams are widely used graphical vehicles for illustrating ideas, explaining hypotheses and reporting findings. They provide a powerful communication device for visually sharing key information supplied in a document. These visual elements are well received by readerspeople often like to overview key contents of a document through browsing its embedded diagrams, if any. Such a diagram browsing-based practice for document navigation has been popularly adopted in reality by many biomedical researchers to cope with the exploding amount of biomedical literature in existence today. In this article, we propose a new diagram similarity estimation method, which exploits the context information of a diagram latent in its source document for deriving a high-level understanding over the diagram's intended semantic messages. As image similarity is of fundamental importance for many biomedical diagram image processing, understanding and retrieval tasks, our new similarity estimation method can be used for many advanced semantic computing applications relating to diagram images, such as searching, ranking, clustering and categorizing diagrams, to name a few. One important extended application of our algorithm is to apply the algorithm to empower search engines and digital library systems, so that they can more capably return diagrams and the corresponding source documents to meet users' needs and interests in diagram searching and diagram browsing-based visual literature navigation. Because of space limit, we will only report the results of our experiments that demonstrate the advantage of our method for diagram retrieval and ranking. In this article, we introduce a new method for context-based diagram similarity estimation via a probabilistic reasoning approach. Based on the new method, we build an algorithmic framework for deriving context-based diagram similarity, including procedures to detect nodes and edges from an input diagram image using off-the-shelf computer vision tools, a method to represent the extracted nodes and edges from the input diagram image as a graph and the procedure to apply the new method for deriving pairwise diagram similarity through cross-referencing the diagrams' graph representations and their source documents (seefor an example). In the end, we also present extensive experimental results for validating the effectiveness of our new method in the application context of diagram retrieval and ranking.