Motivation: The three-dimensional structure of genomes makes it possible for genomic regions not adjacent in the primary sequence to be spatially proximal. These DNA contacts have been found to be related to various molecular activities. Previous methods for analyzing DNA contact maps obtained from Hi-C experiments have largely focused on studying individual interactions, forming spatial clusters composed of contiguous blocks of genomic locations, or classifying these clusters into general categories based on some global properties of the contact maps. Results: Here, we describe a novel computational method that can flexibly identify small clusters of spatially proximal genomic regions based on their local contact patterns. Using simulated data that highly resemble Hi-C data obtained from real genome structures, we demonstrate that our method identifies spatial clusters that are more compact than methods previously used for clustering genomic regions based on DNA contact maps. The clusters identified by our method enable us to confirm functionally related genomic regions previously reported to be spatially proximal in different species. We further show that each genomic region can be assigned a numeric affinity value that indicates its degree of participation in each local cluster, and these affinity values correlate quantitatively with DNase I hypersensitivity, gene expression, super enhancer activities and repli-cation timing in a cell type specific manner. We also show that these cluster affinity values can precisely define boundaries of reported topologically associating domains, and further define local sub-domains within each domain. Availability and implementation: The source code of BNMF and tutorials on how to use the software to extract local clusters from contact maps are available at http://yiplab.cse.cuhk.edu.hk/bnmf/.Contact:
IntroductionAlthough genomes are commonly depicted as a linear sequence of base pairs, they actually contain complex three-dimensional (3D) structures. There has long been an interest in identifying biologically meaningful territories from these structures (). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) has provided insights into genome organization by visualizing individual pairs of spatially interacting genomic regions (), but it has limited resolution and cannot be scaled up to study a large number of interacting regions at the same time. These limitations have been overcome by high-throughput experimental methods that can probe interacting regions genome-wide by means of crosslinking and deep sequencing, such as ChIA-PET, Hi-C and TCC (). Each sequencing read produced provides information about two interacting regions. The whole set of reads is summarized by a contact map in the form of a square matrix, where the whole genome is binned into contiguous genomic locations with each bin V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.