Motivation: It becomes widely accepted that human cancer is a disease involving dynamic changes in the genome and that the missense mutations constitute the bulk of human genetic variations. A multitude of computational algorithms, especially the machine learning-based ones, has consequently been proposed to distinguish missense changes that contribute to the cancer progression (driver mutation) from those that do not (passenger mutation). However, the existing methods have multifaceted shortcomings, in the sense that they either adopt incomplete feature space or depend on protein structural databases which are usually far from integrated. Results: In this article, we investigated multiple aspects of a missense mutation and identified a novel feature space that well distinguishes cancer-associated driver mutations from passenger ones. An index (DX score) was proposed to evaluate the discriminating capability of each feature, and a subset of these features which ranks top was selected to build the SVM classifier. Cross-validation showed that the classifier trained on our selected features significantly outperforms the existing ones both in precision and robustness. We applied our method to several datasets of missense mutations culled from published database and literature and obtained more reasonable results than previous studies. Availability: The software is available online at http://www.methodis thealth.com/software and https://sites.google.com/site/driver mutationidentification/.
INTRODUCTIONHuman malignancies are believed to arise as a result of somatic alterations within the cancer genome that leads to activation of oncogenes or inactivation of tumor suppressor genes (). With the recent considerable improvement in genome analysis technologies, diverse alterations including point mutations, copy number increases and decreases, loss of allelic heterozygosity and chromosome translocations in the genome of a particular cancer type have gradually been specified. Among these, the missense mutations (a point mutation that results in a codon coding for a different amino acid) attract increasing attentions in that they are recurrently identified within the cancer genomes (). Although up to hundreds of missense mutations were characterized in the genome of some cancer type [e.g. brain, breast, colorectal and pancreatic cancers, see http://www.sanger.ac.uk/genetics/CGP/ cosmic/ and also (, only a small fraction of these mutations are suggested to directly contribute to the neoplastic process ('driver' mutation), whereas the remaining bulk consists of neutral polymorphisms which are believed to have no direct effect on the tumorigenesis ('passenger' mutation) (). Differentiating driver mutation and passenger mutations is critical for understanding the molecular mechanisms responsible for cancer progression and also provides prognostic and diagnostic markers as well as targets for therapeutic interventions. However, the ability to distinguish these drivers is seriously limited by in vivo functional analyses alone. Therefore, this situation has provoked a bunch of mathematical methods that assist in prioritizing potential drivers for further analysis during the past years. These methods can be mainly categorized into two classes, the statistical method and the machine learning-based method. The former is largely based on the assumption that mutations that occur more frequently are more likely to be a driver mutation [e.g. (, which turned out to be somehow unreasonable according to recent reports, for example,pointed that it is the 'hills' (infrequently mutant genes) not the 'mountains' (frequently mutant genes) that dominate the cancer genome landscape. For the machine learning-based method, on the other hand, researchers typically extract features related to the missense mutations, train a classifier using label-clear mutations and perform classifications for the unknowns on the trained classifier. Through this routine, several groups have reported their results so far () and claimed their performance is better than others based on different classifier tools, training data and, particularly, on different feature spaces. The existing machine learning-based methods have shortcomings on several aspects, especially on the feature space they employ to construct the classifier. For example, in(2009) and Krishnan and Westhead (2003), features relating to physicochemical properties of amino acids and structural traits of proteins are predicted using computational software. The reliability as well as significance of such kind of features are dubious (). Others may avoid the predicted attributes by relying on the published databases that contain structural traits or annotations they need (). The applicability of these models is limited because of the probable incompleteness of their cited databases. The remaining work avoids the above flaws at the price of missing some important properties of the mutation under investigationthey set up too simple rules for discrimination (). The shortcomings mentioned here make questionable the reliability and/or robustness of prediction of the existing methods. In this article, we comprehensively investigated the properties relating to a particular missense mutation. Besides the previously used features such as physicochemical changes upon the amino acid substitution and binary categorical features extracted from public annotated databases, we for the first time systematically studied all kinds of substitution scoring matrix (SSM) features and protein sequence-specific (PSS) features to evaluate their potential power of discrimination (see Section 2). A SSM (or mutation matrix) is typically a 20  20 numerical matrix with each element representing the similarity and distance of a particular pair of amino acids with respect to a particular physicochemical or biochemical property (), making it potentially a candidate feature for discrimination. Some researchers (e.g.) have incorporated several well-known substitution matrices such as PAM (), BLOSUM () and Grantham Score () as predictive features, but is much incomplete. We explored many such substitution scoring matrices as candidate features and assessed their distinguishing capability. The PSS features were widely overlooked in the previous related studies. Instead, they use structural or functional properties of proteins predicted by computational tools. This scheme is of weak reliability since it easily loses some essential information. To compensate this potential information loss, we parse the protein sequences directly, by which we obtained the sequence-specific features (k-gram features, see Section 2). To summarize, we proposed a set of 126 candidate predictive descriptors for training a mutation classifier, most of which have not been used previously. These features describe a missense mutation from multiple angles including amino acid residues, protein sequence profiles and functional annotations culled from open databases (details in Section 2). A novel scoring system (DX score) was employed to evaluate the performance of each feature in distinguishing the positive from the negative. Numerical experiments showed that support vector machine (SVM) classifier trained by the top-ranked 70 features got highest cross-validation (CV) accuracy and outperformed the previous methods both in precision and robustness. Among the top-ranked 70 features, our proposed SSM and PSS features, which were largely neglected or simply overlooked in the previous studies, take an overwhelming part (see Section 3). This clearly demonstrates the significance of them as predictive features of a mutation classifier. We tested the classifier on several distinct datasets collected from published databases along with literature and got more sensible predictions than before. Particularly, these novel predictive features are expected to significantly improve the current in silico studies of driver mutation identification.
DISCUSSIONIn this work, we dramatically enlarged the existing features used for missense mutation classification, and consequently improved the prediction performance of previous classifiers that discriminate between driver and passenger mutations. Besides incorporating and extending existing features in relation to amino acid properties and binary categorical features extracted from published databases, we for the first time, to our best knowledge, systematically studied all kinds of SSM and investigated their potential power in distinguishing missense mutations. In addition, we are the first to extensively explore the protein sequence patterns instead of structural profiles predicted computationally. This is justified in that protein structure prediction is largely based on sequence alignment with proteins whose structures are already known, hence we rationally expect less information loss by parsing the sequences directly. Indeed, our feature selection scheme confirms the high performance of the SSM and PSS features in separating driver mutations from passenger ones. The 5-fold CV experiments performed on a large set of training data consistently showed strong prediction capability of our method, both in accuracy and robustness. By applying the trained classifier to several datasets of missense mutations culled from published databases and literature, we obtained more reasonable prediction results than previous studies (by ROC and PR curves as well as functional relevance analysis). Hence, our proposed novel feature extraction scheme is hoped to significantly improve the current work of driver mutation identification. Another highlight of our work is that the feature extraction scheme depends little on other computational software or databases, which extended the applicability substantially. In principle, given the mutation with associated protein sequence, our system could automatically extract all the features except for the 14 additional ones as mentioned; while if the referred mutation happens to be annotated in the UniProtKB database, then all the 126 features can be extracted without depending on any other software or databases (although our tool only chooses the top-ranked 70 ones for default). The reason that some data in the classifying part cannot be covered lies in the fact that the original paper did not provide the corresponding protein sequences but only a gene name/ID instead. In this case, we have to map it to related databases to extract its protein sequence first. At this step, if one data use a very uncommon gene name/ ID then we cannot map it to the records in UniProtKB, even under the help of GeneCards. Another reason of miss-covering is we discarded the mutations at the beginning and end of a sequence in that windows-based amino acid residue sequence composition features could not handle them. In practice, such kind of mutations with missing values can be treated as in. Of note, only one of the 15 AARC features ranked within the top 70, namely the number of hydrogen atoms of one amino acid. This is probably because most information of the amino acid has been already contained in the SSM features, for example, the 42nd feature incorporates biochemical and biophysical properties of amino acids to construct the WAC matrix (). A large part of SSM and PSS features were selected by the DX scoring scheme, namely, 40 out of 51 and 21 out of 31 for the former and latter, respectively. What is attractive is one of the sequence specific features LCC ranks very topit gets the fourth highest DX score. This again confirms that PSS features play a very significant role on discrimination. Our proposed method outperforms previous ones, whether or not including the additional features (). However, both methods got higher CV accuracy when including the additional categorical features (features 98 through 111, Supplementary). This clearly demonstrates their superior distinguishing capability, and the superiority was further boosted by the facts that half of this part was selected (7 out of 14) by DX score and two features of them ranked the top 2. This is not surprising by