Motivation: For many complex traits, including height, the majority of variants identified by genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have small effects, leaving a significant proportion of the heritable variation unexplained. Although many penalized multiple regression methodologies have been proposed to increase the power to detect associations for complex genetic architectures, they generally lack mechanisms for false-positive control and diagnostics for model over-fitting. Our methodology is the first penalized multiple regression approach that explicitly controls Type I error rates and provide model over-fitting diagnostics through a novel normally distributed statistic defined for every marker within the GWAS, based on results from a variational Bayes spike regression algorithm. Results: We compare the performance of our method to the lasso and single marker analysis on simulated data and demonstrate that our approach has superior performance in terms of power and Type I error control. In addition, using the Womens Health Initiative (WHI) SNP Health Association Resource (SHARe) GWAS of African-Americans, we show that our method has power to detect additional novel associations with body height. These findings replicate by reaching a stringent cutoff of marginal association in a larger cohort. Availability: An R-package, including an implementation of our variational Bayes spike regression (vBsr) algorithm, is available at http://kooperberg.fhcrc.org/soft.html.
INTRODUCTIONPopulation-based genome-wide association studies have succeeded in discovering a large number of variants that individually explain a small percentage of heritability for many complex phenotypes. For example, when considering height in Caucasian populations, over 180 loci have been identified (), which cumulatively explain 10% of the variation, whereas the total estimated heritable variation is 8090% (). This 'missing' or 'dark' heritability * To whom correspondence should be addressed.() has many purported causes, including additional highly penetrant or large effect rare alleles (), epistatic interactions (), epigenetic variation () or many uncharacterized loci of small effect (). In the case of height, most of the additional loci recently identified are in this latter category, and only reach genome-wide significance in studies with hundreds of thousands of subjects (). In addition, predictive models of height within the Framingham study () have demonstrated that a much larger number of loci are likely contributing to variation in height, though not all of these loci may reach a stringent genome-wide significance threshold.also showed that the estimated heritability ascribed to height can largely be explained through observed common variants across the genome, where common variants explained 45% of the variation in height within an Australian population of European descent. These studies demonstrate an important challenge that while evidence suggests many common genetic variants driving phenotypic variation exist, our current methodologies and studies are under-powered to map the location of many of these causal variants. The GWAS approach of testing individual variants for association with phenotype has succeeded in producing replicable associations (). This success is largely attributable to both stringent Type I error control after accounting for a large number of tests and the systematic correction for confounding factors such as population stratification (). Complex phenotypes, such as body height, with hundreds of genetic associations could in theory benefit from a modeling approach that tests for multiple genetic variants simultaneously. One type of solution to this problem is the use of penalized multiple regression methods. These methods can have greater power to detect genetic associations by including all the genetic variants within the GWAS in the model of association (). Penalized regression consists of estimating the additive genotypic effectsIn this model, y i is the phenotype, x ij is the jth genotype, and e i is the residual error for the ith individual. Penalization of  is necessary to prevent model over-fitting when millions of variants are being tested with only thousands of samples. Although each penalized regression method proposed for GWAS can have greater power than single-marker analysis, none has demonstrated strict control of FWER, thus precluding their broader application in the field. We propose the first penalized regression methodology, based on the variational Bayes approach of, that is capable of directly controlling the family-wise error rate (FWER) through a variant level test statistic, z vb , that is approximately N 0,1 distributed under the null hypothesis. Similar toand Carbonetto and Stephens (2011) our variational Bayes spike regression (vBsr) approach treats the genetic effects  as random, with the prior. This prior can be thought of as a constraint on  similar to best subset selection, with p  controlling the sparsity of the subset solution. We simplify the models proposed by, who propose a three-component mixture, and the approach of Carbonetto and Stephens (2011), who propose a twocomponent mixture, by using a two-component mixture without the 'slab' component (see Supplementary Material for further details). The variant level statistic z vb is derived based on the results of fitting the vBsr model. We show that when p   0 this statistic is asymptotically N 0,1 under the null hypothesis. We then propose a diagnostic statistic (log KL ) to determine the size of the vBsr best subset solution (i.e. p  : p   0) such that this empirical distribution is approximately N 0,1 for the vast majority of genetic variants within the GWAS. The main assumptions of this approach are that most genetic variants are independent of the phenotype of interest, their empirical distribution under the null hypothesis will be N 0,1 , and this distribution will be very sensitive to model over-fitting (for example if p  is tuned to be too large). Given these conservative assumptions, the innovation of this test-statistic is therefore 2-fold. Not only can we demonstrate that it is possible to generate an approximately N 0,1 distributed test statistic within a multi-locus penalized regression methodology (and therefore have much tighter control of the FWER) but also it is possible to use the data to suitably tune the penalized regression methodology to ensure that this approximation is valid.
DISCUSSIONThe z vb test statistic provides three major practical advantages over either single-marker analysis or alternative multiple locus penalized regression approaches in the GWAS setting. First, as demonstrated through both simulations (as shown in; Supplementary Figs S1 and S3), and the analysis of the WHI SHARe GWAS of height (shown in), this statistic has greater power to detect additional replicable loci beyond those that are identifiable by either a standard single-marker analysis or the lasso, given the phenotype is highly heritable or the sample size is sufficiently large. In addition, while the increase in power was modest over the single-marker analyses in terms of replicated associations, we also see that the two associations vBsr identified on Chromosome 17 had statistically significant correlations with the two replicated hits on Chromosome 17 (the R 2 between rs11658329, the replicated association and rs11867328, the vBsr association was 0.044, P  10 16 , and the R 2 between rs1549519, the replicated association and rs565042, the vBsr association, was 0.066, P  10 16 ). Although the physical distance between these associations is large, because of the weak statistical dependence vBsr still identifies a signal. Second, the main innovation of the z vb statistic is that it is possible to tune vBsr such that it is approximately N 0,1 distributed under the null hypothesis. This means that, unlike other penalized regression methodologies, it is possible to directly control either the FWER or FDR. Other multiple locus penalized regression procedures often rely on cross-validation, or information criterion such as AIC or BIC to choose the appropriate model size and magnitude of their penalty (), which will not necessarily control the Type I error to an arbitrary level (as shown infor the lasso). We demonstrated the Type I error control capability of our method through a wide range of simulations, of either the null model for independent genotypes, the null features in a non-null model with independent genotypes (as in), or even in a non-null model with linkage disequilibrium among genotypes (as in Supplementary). Third, while a few authors have proposed a choice of penalty parameter within penalized regression methods to asymptotically bound the type I error (), our approach is unique, in that we demonstrate a data-driven choice of the penalty parameter 0. The penalty parameter 0 (or alternatively p  ) is an appropriate tuning parameter because it directly determines the evidence necessary for a given genetic variant to be included in the model by controlling the scale of the posterior probability of inclusion, p j , for all genetic variants. The posterior probability of inclusion for a given variant is an essential aspect of the vBsr model since it determines the effect of a given genetic variant on the overall model through the expectation E  j = p j  j , where p j  0 implies the variant is not in the model and p j  1 implies the variant is in the model and effectively unpenalized. In general, we always choose 0 such that the empirical distribution of the z vb statistic matches very closely to the expected N 0,1 null distribution for the vast majority of genetic features (i.e. up to the 99-th percentile for simulations, or between the 99.9-th and 99.99-th percentiles in the dataanalysis), within the study (as shown in Supplementary Figs S4 and S5). Therefore not only can we control the Type I error to an arbitrary level, but also, we do not necessarily rely on an asymptotic argument for the choice of 0 to ensure the validity of our choice of penalty parameter. Finally, the vBsr methodology incorporates additional general features beyond the choice of penalty parameters which are unique and distinguish it from alternative penalized regression methodologies () including other 'spike-and-slab' approaches (). This includes the use of Bayesian model averaging to regularize over uncertainty in the space of identified models. In addition, there is theoretical evidence that 'spike-andslab' penalized regression approaches do not suffer from the possible model selection inconsistency of the lasso, given highly correlated predictors (). We see the practical consequences of this fact for m  n datasets where the Type I error rates for the lasso seem to be driven by random correlations between causal and null features (as shown in), even among independently sampled genetic features. Finally, by defining a test-statistic which is approximated by a N 0,1 distribution for
CONCLUSIONOur vBsr methodology is a novel approach for identifying additional replicable loci within genome-wide association studies that directly addresses the limitations of other penalized multiple regression methodologies. Specifically, the data-driven choice of penalty to ensure the validity of the distribution of the test statistic and the use of a penalty with attractive theoretical model selection properties make this a robust and practical tool for the GWAS practitioner interested in identifying additional replicable associations for complex phenotypes with rich genetic architectures.