Motivation: Copy number variants (CNVs) have been implicated in a variety of neurodevelopmen-tal disorders, including autism spectrum disorders, intellectual disability and schizophrenia. Recent advances in high-throughput genomic technologies have enabled rapid discovery of many genetic variants including CNVs. As a result, there is increasing interest in studying the role of CNVs in the etiology of many complex diseases. Despite the availability of an unprecedented wealth of CNV data, methods for testing association between CNVs and disease-related traits are still underdeveloped due to the low prevalence and complicated multi-scale features of CNVs. Results: We propose a novel CNV kernel association test (CKAT) in this paper. To address the low prevalence, CNVs are first grouped into CNV regions (CNVR). Then, taking into account the multi-scale features of CNVs, we first design a single-CNV kernel which summarizes the similarity between two CNVs, and next aggregate the single-CNV kernel to a CNVR kernel which summarizes the similarity between two CNVRs. Finally, association between CNVR and disease-related traits is assessed by comparing the kernel-based similarity with the similarity in the trait using a score test for variance components in a random effect model. We illustrate the proposed CKAT using simulations and show that CKAT is more powerful than existing methods, while always being able to control the type I error. We also apply CKAT to a real dataset examining the association between CNV and autism spectrum disorders, which demonstrates the potential usefulness of the proposed method. Availability and Implementation: A R package to implement the proposed CKAT method is available at
IntroductionCNVs are deletions and duplications of DNA segments in the genome, ranging in size from one kilobase (Kb) to several megabases (Mb), which represent the most common form of structural genetic variation in human genome (). The advent of high-throughput technologies such as comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) microarrays has enabled rapid discovery of genetic variants including CNVs (). As more and more CNVs have been detected throughout the human genome, there is a growing appreciation for studying their potential role in the etiology of many conditions and diseases, including autism spectrum disorders (ASD), intellectual disability, schizophrenia and many other neurodevelopment disorders (). Understanding the relationship between CNVs and these diseases can contribute important new insights into the underlying genetics etiology and may further lead to effective means in prevention and treatments. A useful means to study the complex relationship between CNVs and human health conditions is through genetic association studies (). A powerful mode of genetic association analysis is collapsing methods, which study the association between a group of genetic variants and traits. Such methods have been widely used in SNPs association analysis () and rare variants association analysis (). However, these collapsing methods cannot be directly applied to CNV association analysis due to its unique features. First, SNPs are probe-based in that different subjects have the same loci genotyped. On the other hand, CNVs are sample-based in that different CNVs can be detected in different subjects. It is very common that a particular rare CNV is detected in few subjects while is absent in the rest. In other words, a typical SNP data matrix is a regular matrix while a CNV data matrix is irregular in that different rows (samples) have different length of columns (CNVs). A SNPs collapsing method usually combines multiple columns together for analysis. However, it is not clear how CNVs should be grouped together in the irregular data matrix. Second, It is more complicated to model the effect of CNVs than that of SNPs. SNPs usually takes values 0, 1, 2 (in an additive model) representing the copy of minor alleles. On the other hand, CNVs has multi-scale features including a start position, an end position and a type (deletion or duplication). Phenotypic heterogeneity (a deletion CNV and a duplication CNV can have different effects) are often observed. Also, it has been hypothesized that both CNV size (length) and CNV type (deletion or duplication) may affect the disease risk. Due to all these reasons, it is not straightforward to extend most current SNP or rare variant collapsing methods () to CNV association analysis. One way to fix those aforementioned difficulties is to break the multi-dimensional CNV information into pieces, and to apply some collapsing methods on a certain piece. For example, the recent CNV collapsing random effects test (CCRET) () treats the length of CNV as fix effect, and the CNV dosage (copy number) as random effect of interest. To test for association with traits, kernel-based collapsing methods () can be easily applied to the CNV dosage (). Despite its feasibility, the interpretation of this method may be slightly different from classical CNV association analysis. It is no longer the CNV effect on the disease risk, but the CNV dosage effect on the disease risk, conditioned on the CNV length. Alternatively, instead of breaking the multi-scale CNV information into pieces, the presence/ absence analysis is often used in casecontrol studies. Typically, a contingency table is created based on counting whether a CNV is detected in a subject, and then a statistical test such as Fisher's exact test (), is applied to evaluate the association. This kind of analysis only utilizes the presence/absence information of a CNV and ignores other information, such as CNV type and size. Thus, neither CCRET nor Fisher's exact test exploits the full information in a CNV.In this study, to utilize both type and size information in a CNV, we propose the CNV kernel association test (CKAT). We first design a single-CNV kernel which accounts for the multi-scale features of a CNV. Intuitively speaking, the kernel is used as a similarity measure between two CNVs. To overcome low prevalence of CNVs, we pool CNVs together to form CNV regions (CNVRs) and carefully aggregate the single-CNV kernel to a CNVR kernel which describes the similarity between two CNVRs. Compared with a single CNV, more samples are likely to have CNVs detected in a region which can makes the CNVR kernel more informative. Finally, association between CNVR and the trait is tested by comparing the similarity in CNVRs (captured by the CNVR kernel) to that in the trait. In particular, the trait we considered in this paper is disease status. If the CNVR similarity between two patients (or two healthy controls) is consistently higher than the CNVR similarity between one patient and one healthy control, then it may suggest existence of association between the CNVR and the disease risk. Statistically speaking, the similarity comparison is evaluated in a logistic random effect model and the P-value for the association test is also analytically calculated via a variance component score test in the logistic regression framework. Using extensive simulation studies, we demonstrate that the proposed CKAT always has correct type I error rate and high power in a wide range of settings. Finally, the CKAT is applied to a real ASD data example which provides new insights and formal testing results for previous observations.