Motivation: Interplays between transcription factors (TFs) and microRNAs (miRNAs) in gene regulation are implicated in various physiological processes. It is thus important to identify biologically meaningful network motifs involving both types of regulators to understand the key co-regulatory mechanisms underlying the cellular identity and function. However, existing motif finders do not scale well for large networks and are not designed specifically for co-regulatory networks. Results: In this study, we propose a novel algorithm CoMoFinder to accurately and efficiently identify composite network motifs in genome-scale co-regulatory networks. We define composite network motifs as network patterns involving at least one TF, one miRNA and one target gene that are statistically significant than expected. Using two published disease-related co-regulatory networks , we show that CoMoFinder outperforms existing methods in both accuracy and robustness. We then applied CoMoFinder to human TF-miRNA co-regulatory network derived from The Encyclopedia of DNA Elements project and identified 44 recurring composite network motifs of size 4. The functional analysis revealed that genes involved in the 44 motifs are enriched for significantly higher number of biological processes or pathways comparing with non-motifs. We further analyzed the identified composite bi-fan motif and showed that gene pairs involved in this motif structure tend to physically interact and are functionally more similar to each other than expected. Availability and implementation: CoMoFinder is implemented in Java and available for download at http://mugsy.sf.net.
IntroductionAt the maturity of high-throughput technologies such as microarray and next-generation sequencing, a vast amount of genome-wide data have been generated to interrogate human regulatory networks at both transcriptional and post-transcriptional level (). The combination and orchestration between regulatory mechanisms at both levels are central to a precise gene expression program (). In contrast toa regulatory network involving only one type of regulators, a coregulatory network may involve transcription factors (TF), microRNAs (miRNA) and their (shared) target genes (). The interplay between TF and miRNA underlies a coordinated circuitry responsible for a variety of cellular processes (); many of these processes are carried out by recurring structures called network motifs. Network motifs are recurring patterns of connectivity, occurring significantly more frequently than expected (). Identification of network motifs in the context of coregulatory networks can yield new mechanistic insights into biological system and offer crucial clues into gene regulation (). For instance, it has been shown that miRNAmediated feed-forward loops (FFLs) and feedback loops (FBLs) enhance the robustness of gene regulation in mammalian genomes (). Furthermore, TF-mediated FFLs were theoretically proved to ensure the stability of gene expression against stochastic fluctuations (), whereas the TF $ miRNA FBLs are demonstrated to provide 'high flux capacity' to coordinate the high information flow that passes through the miRNA and TF within the FBLs (). Various methods have been developed to detect network motifs. However, only a handful of them could be applied on co-regulatory networks. As one of the widely used tools (), FANMOD is an efficient motif detection algorithm, which takes into account networks with different types of nodes and edges by exploiting the concept of graph isomorphism (). Although FANMOD has been widely applied to many kinds of biological networks (), its randomization scheme is limited to covering only a small range of subgraphs frequency reflected by the low-variance of the number of certain subgraphs in the random network ensemble (). Besides, FANMOD is not capable of utilizing multi-cores. WaRSwap is another network shuffling algorithm, which was proposed to discover network motifs in large TF-miRNA co-regulatory networks (). Briefly, WaRSwap breaks the co-regulatory network into separate layers according to the node types and then shuffles the regulatory edges in each layer, while keeping the node degree distribution unchanged. Notably, WaRSwap is only a randomization technique that must be used accompanied with a motif discovery tool such as FANMOD, which substantially limits its application scope. Additionally, WaRSwap requires predefining values of several free parameters to adjust the sampling weights during the randomization process, which may affect the final outcomes. The limitations of these existing methods make it necessary to develop new method that can effectively detect reliable network motifs in large coregulatory networks consisting of miRNAs, TFs and target genes. In this study, we propose a novel network motif search algorithm called CoMoFinder, which is developed based on a parallel subgraph enumeration strategy to efficiently and accurately identify composite motifs in large TF-miRNA co-regulatory networks. Distinct from previous algorithms, CoMoFinder seeks for a maximum difference between a given co-regulatory network and its randomized counterpart to ensure sufficient shuffling during the randomization process, which provides a reliable background distribution of the random network ensemble for motif discovery. Compared with existing methods that were applied to the published co-regulatory networks, CoMoFinder achieved favorable performance in terms of accuracy, robustness and computational complexity. After having established its superior performance, we next applied CoMoFinder to systematically discover recurring 4-node motifs in human co-regulatory network derived from The Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) consortium. We discovered 44 composite motifs involving the previously wellstudied 3-node FFLs and are corroborated by a number of biological evidences such as enrichment for Gene Ontology (GO) terms or canonical pathways. Together, we present a novel framework for network motif discovery, demonstrate its utility in analyzing large human co-regulatory networks and envision it being a useful tool for future analyses of various large biological networks.
DiscussionIt has been appreciated that gene regulatory network in metazoans are complex and involve multiple layers and distinct type of regulators, e.g. regulations at the transcriptional or post-transcriptional level and regulations by TF or by miRNA (or RNA-binding protein).An important goal in systems biology is to accurately recapitulate co-regulatory networks to investigate how different types of regulators interact with each other. Accurate network motif discovery plays a pivotal role in studies of complex networks as they provide a systematic way to reveal the intrinsic co-regulatory patterns among multiple types of regulators. However, detecting network motifs in arbitrarily complex networks remains computationally intractable and challenging. In this study, we developed a novel de novo motif finding algorithm called CoMoFinder to discover co-regulatory network motifs each involving at least one TF, one miRNA and one target gene. Here, we define network motif as network patterns consisting of miRNAs, TFs and target genes that occur significantly in higher frequencies than expected. The novelty of our algorithm is 3-fold: (i) we first proposed an efficient enumeration process specifically for finding co-regulatory subgraphs of moderate size; (ii) we then introduced a refined canonical labeling method together with a new graph isomorphism testing strategy to effectively classify these composite subgraphs into different isomorphic groups and (iii) we also proposed a new randomization strategy by breaking the co-regulatory network into different layers and seeking for the maximum difference between the original network and the randomized network in each layer. Notably, FANMOD () and WaRSwap () use canonical labeling generated by a practical graph isomorphism algorithm NAUTY, which takes the diagonal of the adjacency matrix to denote the node types. Different from these previous approaches, our refined canonical labeling method can easily differentiate composite subgraphs with or without self-regulations/interactions in co-regulatory networks. Furthermore, our randomization algorithm is applicable to coregulatory networks containing multiple types of edges including undirected edges such as PPI and directed repression/activation edges. In contrast, WaRSwap can only be applied on directed coregulatory networks. To demonstrate the utility of CoMoFinder, we compared it with FANMOD and WaRSwap on published co-regulatory networks of GBM () and AD (). Because the range of co-regulatory subgraphs and their isomorphic classes are the same, the performance of each method solely depends on their constructed background network distributions. By examining the distributions of composite subgraphs generated by each randomization technique, we found that CoMoFinder and FANMOD could maintain a similar number of composite subgraphs as in the observed network, whereas WaRSwap-derived random networks lack a substantial number of composite subgraphs. The results thus indicate that WaRSwap tends to generate more statistically significant network patterns as network motifs improperly comparing with CoMoFinder and FANMOD. Based on the overlaps of motifs found by each method, CoMoFinder achieved a good balance comparing with FANMOD and WaRSwap, which appear to be too stringent and too lenient, respectively. Moreover, we conducted rigorous power analysis using an empirical gold standard motif set. Encouragingly, CoMoFinder achieved consistently the greatest area under the curves. We also tested the robustness of each method upon random removals of edges in the given networks and showed that CoMoFinder is relatively robust up to 30% of edge removal. Together, the results corroborate the reliability and stability of CoMoFinder. We then applied CoMoFinder to a human coregulatory network derived from ENCODE project, which is much larger than the GBM and AD networks. We detected 44 co-regulatory network motifs of size 4 and found a significant overlap between motifs from ENCODE and GBM/AD dataset. The functional analysis revealed that the 44 motifs are significantlyenriched for higher number of meaningful biological pathways or processes compared with non-motif instances. Among the 44 motifs, 35 of them involve two TFs, one miRNA and one target gene; eight of them involve one TF, two miRNAs and one target gene; only one of them involve two genes with one TF and one miRNA. We further investigated the latter motif and found that the gene pairs involved in this motif tend to physically interact with each other and have more functional similarities. In terms of computational time efficiency, CoMoFinder leverages multicores of modern CPU, which can provide substantial speed-up in running time over singlethreaded algorithms such as FANMOD and WaRSwap. In particular, CoMoFinder could gain an almost linear speed-up as increase of the CPU cores. In summary, CoMoFinder is a reliable and efficient tool that can detect co-regulatory network motifs in large-scale datasets. Nevertheless, as the main focus of our method is to find network motifs consisting of miRNAs, TFs and genes, one of the limitations of CoMoFinder is that it is only applicable to co-regulatory networks involving these elements up to now. We also want to stress that the miRNAs examined in our work represent both miRNA precursors (mir) and the mature forms (miR). However, multiple distinct precursors may give rise to identical mature sequences that target the same set of genes, while regulated by very distinct set of TFs. Since precursors typically reside within gene introns and are often subject to co-regulation with their host gene, the TF ! miRNA regulatory relations usually involve host genes and precursor (i.e. TF ! gene ! mir ! miR). This also implies the existence of miR ! gene ! mir regulation, which would imply an indirect miRNA ! miRNA regulation. Thus, it would be ideal to consider miR and mir as two separate node types. Although in this work we did not take the indirect regulations into consideration, CoMoFinder is able to deal with this type of regulations, which can be explicitly specified by users in the input co-regulatory network. The general framework of CoMoFinder will be further extended to other types of composite networks with arbitrary numbers of node types in the future.