Motivation: Within medical research there is an increasing trend toward deriving multiple types of data from the same individual. The most effective prognostic prediction methods should use all available data, as this maximizes the amount of information used. In this article, we consider a variety of learning strategies to boost prediction performance based on the use of all available data. Implementation: We consider data integration via the use of multiple kernel learning supervised learning methods. We propose a scheme in which feature selection by statistical score is performed separately per data type and by pathway membership. We further consider the introduction of a confidence measure for the class assignment, both to remove some ambiguously labeled datapoints from the training data and to implement a cautious classifier that only makes predictions when the associated confidence is high. Results: We use the METABRIC dataset for breast cancer, with prediction of survival at 2000 days from diagnosis. Predictive accuracy is improved by using kernels that exclusively use those genes, as features , which are known members of particular pathways. We show that yet further improvements can be made by using a range of additional kernels based on clinical covariates such as Estrogen Receptor (ER) status. Using this range of measures to improve prediction performance , we show that the test accuracy on new instances is nearly 80%, though predictions are only made on 69.2% of the patient cohort.
INTRODUCTIONWithin the biomedical sciences it is increasingly common to derive multiple types of data from the same individual. A good example is the Cancer Genome Atlas (cancergenome.nih.gov) in which gene expression (EXP) array, microRNA array, methylation and copy number variation (CNV) data are derived from the majority of tumor samples. By using multiple types of data derived from a given sample, we can understand linkages between attributes within each type of data. Also, by maximizing the information content, models that use all the available data are intrinsically more powerful than models that use only one data type. For these reasons there has been an increasing interest in data integration methods, both for unsupervised () and supervised learning (; Gonen), and their use with genomic datasets. For supervised learning with multiple types of input data, the decision function will need to successfully integrate the different components of the input data. One way of doing so is to create a committee of decision functions, each handling a separate component of the data, and feed these decisions into an integrative decision function for the final outcome decision. Of course, different types of data will have different degrees of informativeness and consequently we need to be able to weight the contribution of different members of the committee accordingly. One way of doing so is to associate a confidence measure with the vote of individual committee members and use these probabilistic measures to define their relative contribution to the final decision. In this article, though, we follow the more direct route of encoding each type of data into objects called kernels and using a weighted combination of these in the final decision function, an approach called multiple kernel learning (MKL) (see). Kernels encode the similarity between data objects (Shawe). In this article, learning is performed using composite kernels, which are a linear combination of a large set of base kernels, encoding particular types of data. In Section 2.2, we also consider probabilistic MKL. By restricting prediction to high confidence instances only we can further improve predictive accuracy. In Section 3.2, we apply *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the last two authors should be regarded as joint Last Authors., EXP, CNV and clinical data from the METABRIC dataset were made available for evaluating the performance of different approaches for predicting breast cancer survival. The model that gave the best results () was an ensemble of different methods, including Cox regression based on the Akaike Information Criterion, a Generalized Boosting Model and k-nearest neighbors. This model included prior knowledge based on the selection of groups of genes. Inthe authors analyzed several models submitted to this competition, including Random Forest, Lasso-based regression models, Elastic Nets and boosting and ensemble models, and thus we compare with these.
DISCUSSIONWe now discuss some broad conclusions that can be drawn from this study, various ways in which classifier test accuracy can be further improved and other contexts in which we could apply the method outlined. Two key conclusions coming from our study are the importance of incorporating prior knowledge and performing feature selection. Prior knowledge was represented by pathway information. Where appropriate, data were grouped into clusters representing their particular pathway membership. Using feature selection within each such cluster, we use the most representative features within each pathway. Because of the sparse nature of this particular MKL implementation, we can select a set of pathways that are most relevant to survival prediction. As expected, classifiers that can use all the available data are more powerful that those that use only one type of data. MKL methods also have the advantage that they weight the contribution of individual data types, and thus indicate their relative significance. Our study highlighted the importance of using all available clinical data alongside expression array and CNV data. In addition, expression and CNV data were best incorporated into the classifier by using pathway-based kernels. Further improvements came from using a cautious classifier that only makes predictions on a restricted class of high confidence cases and by removal of ambiguously labeled samples from the training data. These last improvements highlight the importance of using a confidence measure associated with the label assignment and motivate further work on devising robust probabilistic classifiers for use with MKL. Using these various measures, predictive performance moved from $64% for prediction with EXP array data alone, to almost 80%, with the qualification that prediction is made on 69.2% of individuals. However, it is reasonable to expect that this test accuracy can be improved beyond 80% through the use of additional types of data and further refinement of the method. MicroRNA array data, methylation data and condensed information from images of tumor biopsies are complimentary types of data, which could provide additional base kernels, in addition to string kernels (; Shawe-Taylor and), incorporating sequence data. Furthermore, expression by certain individual genes [e.g. p27 (or small sets of genes [e.g. associated with TP53, ()] has documented correlation with survival status, and these genes could be given extra weight by assigning them individual base kernels. For the methodology, there are some further directions that could be considered. Rather than using KEGG pathway data, we could investigate other approaches to feature selection, such as filtering features based on Gene Ontology labels. The kernel coefficients would then indicate which Gene Ontology labels are most relevant to predicting survival outcome. If one of the two classes is viewed as more clinically important than the other, then we could use an asymmetric soft margin () during SVM training: this improves test accuracy on one class, at the expense of accuracy on the other. The SimpleMKL method used in this article has associated publically available software (http://asi.insa-rouen.fr/enseig nants/arakoto/code/mklindex.html); it is an effective and representative MKL algorithm and it gives a sparse representation over the set of base kernels. However, a large number of MKL methods have been proposed (Gonen) and some methods with a less sparse solution may give higher accuracy (). In short, additional data, further refinement of the method and the use of a cautious classifier could lead to a test performance nearer 90%. This performance, though, would be achieved at the cost of a wide range of genomic and clinical measurements and does not result in prediction with all patients. Nomograms and simple clinical measures such as ER-status are reliable indicators of disease progression for breast cancer. A predictive method, such as that described, would need to be competitive against these. However, it is in other contexts that similar studies could be effective. Thus, for prostate cancer, there is a well-recognized problem distinguishing aggressive from lowrisk cancer. In the US, $20% of men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer, whereas only 3% would die from the disease (). With limited ability to predict risk, many tumors are unnecessarily labeled as high risk and treated aggressively. It would be interesting to see if the test accuracies stated in this article can be achieved with prostate cancer and other cancers. This would require similar large datasets with a broad range of genomic and clinical measurements. To get good predictive performance, the dataset would need to contain a sufficient number of aggressive disease examples and not just represent the spectrum of disease observed in the general populationwhich is numerically weighted toward low-risk disease.