Motivation: High-throughput sequencing technologies have made population-scale studies of human genetic variation possible. Accurate and comprehensive detection of DNA sequence variants is crucial for the success of these studies. Small insertions and deletions represent the second most frequent class of variation in the human genome after single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Although several alignment tools for the gapped alignment of sequence reads to a reference genome are available, computational methods for discriminating indels from sequencing errors and genotyping indels directly from sequence reads are needed. Results: We describe a probabilistic method for the accurate detection and genotyping of short indels from population-scale sequence data. In this approach, aligned sequence reads from a population of individuals are used to automatically account for context-specific sequencing errors associated with indels. We applied this approach to population sequence datasets from the 1000 Genomes exon pilot project generated using the Roche 454 and Illumina sequencing platforms, and were able to detect a significantly greater number of indels than reported previously. Comparison to indels identified in the 1000 Genomes pilot project demonstrated the sensitivity of our method. The consistency in the number of indels and the fraction of indels whose length is a multiple of three across different human populations and two different sequencing platforms indicated that our method has a low false discovery rate. Finally, the method represents a general approach for the detection and genotyping of small-scale DNA sequence variants for population-scale sequencing projects.
INTRODUCTIONSmall insertions and deletions (150 bp) represent the second most frequent class of variation in the human genome after single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Although indels exhibit greater potential to disrupt functional elements than SNPs, indels have * To whom correspondence should be addressed. been characterized to a significantly lesser extent, and are greatly underrepresented in public variation databases. There are two main reasons for this: (i) SNPs are more abundant in the genome and are easier to genotype using arrays and (ii) indels are more difficult to detect reliably using sequencing data. Sequencing of the first individual genome using the Sanger method bydemonstrated that short indels are frequent in the human genome. Previously,performed a populationscale characterization of short indels in the human genome by resequencing 330 genes in 47 individuals using the Sanger method.generated a genome-wide map of indels by analyzing Sanger resequencing data. In recent years, several highthroughput DNA sequencing technologies have emerged that are able to generate gigabases of DNA sequence data in a single instrument run. These next-generation sequencing (NGS) methods offer greater potential to detect indels compared with Sanger sequencing since each allele is sequenced independently multiple times. Indeed, whole-genome shotgun sequencing of several individuals using high-throughput platforms has demonstrated the presence of several hundred thousands of short indel variants per genome (). Indels can be identified from sequence reads by performing gapped alignment of reads to a reference sequence. Several alignment tools developed for next-generation sequencing data allow gapped alignments () [seefor a survey of. After reads have been aligned, the presence of multiple reads that support the same insertion/deletion event can be used to call indels. However, it can often be challenging to identify moderately long indels from short sequence reads since each read is aligned independently to the reference genome. Further, reads that span an indel event close to the ends of a read are difficult to align with gaps and can potentially be misaligned resulting in false SNPs (). The problem of misaligned reads can be alleviated by locally realigning reads using information from reads that are informative about the presence of an indel. Many tools for doing local realignment of short reads have recently been developed (). Once reads have been aligned to a reference sequence as accurately as possible, the next challenge is to distinguish true indels from sequencing errors and alignment artifacts. Several methods have been developed to detect single nucleotide variants using sequence data generated from individual genomes and