Motivation: A gene regulatory network in which the modes (activation/ inhibition) of the transcriptional regulations are known and in which gene expression assumes boolean values can be treated as a system of linear equations over a binary field, i.e. as a constraint satisfaction problem for an information code. Results: For currently available gene networks, we show in this article that the distortion associated with the corresponding information code is much lower than expected from null models, and that it is close to (when not lower than) the Shannon bound determined by the rate-distortion theorem. This corresponds to saying that the distribution of regulatory modes is highly atypical in the networks, and that this atypicality greatly helps in avoiding contradictory transcriptional actions. Choosing a boolean formalism to represent the gene networks, we also show how to formulate criteria for the selection of gates that maximize the compatibility with the empirical information available on the transcriptional regulatory modes. Proceeding in this way, we obtain in particular that non-canalizing gates are upper-bounded by the distortion, and hence that the boolean gene networks are more canalizing than expected from null models.
INTRODUCTIONA gene regulatory network consists of a set of transcription factors (TF) regulating the expression of the genes of a given genome. As our knowledge of these regulatory mechanisms grows steadily, the problem of understanding the principles behind their organization and their functioning is becoming a crucial question of Systems Biology, see. While the current literature is focused mainly on the topological aspects of a gene regulatory network, the perspective that we take in this article is to study whether the transcriptional regulatory modes (i.e. the activation/inhibition role of a TF on its target genes) of the gene networks currently available are distributed randomly on the given network or are organized according to some criterion, and how this organization can affect the dynamics of the gene network. To formalize this question and to try to understand the rules of this design, we use tools from information theory (;) and in particular we treat a gene network as a 'code' for which the signs of the regulatory actions constitute a particular 'source word', which can be compared with the typical words generated by a corresponding probabilistic model (further details on the terminology in section 2). As a comparison criterion, we use the 'level of coherence' of the regulatory actions along the network. Two regulatory orders emanating from a TF and acting on the same target gene (possibly through intermediate genes) are considered coherent when they induce the same behavior on the target gene (i.e. they both induce activation or repression); they are considered incoherent when they induce conflicting behaviors. As can be easily deduced from simple examples like FeedForward Loops (FFL) (), in a gene regulatory network, incoherence is associated with negative (undirected) cycles on the signed graph having the genes as nodes, the regulations as edges and the modes of the regulations as signs of the edges, see. An undirected cycle is negative when it contains an odd number of inhibitions. Provided we associate binary values to the expression of the genes, the main feature of a negative undirected cycle is that no choice of expression can satisfy all constraints imposed by the regulations. This satisfiability can be tested by formulating the 'compatibility' as a system of linear algebraic equations over a binary field. In combinatorial optimization, such problems are well known to be equivalent to constraint satisfaction problems of exclusive OR (XOR) type, see. If the gene regulatory network is a code, and the signs of the regulations specify a codeword, then the problem can be studied as a (lossy) source compression problem, see Ciliberti and Mezard. In this framework, in particular, the level of coherence of the transcriptional regulations can be rigorously computed as the distortion introduced by the source compression problem. Computing this distortion is a hard problem. In the constraint satisfaction literature, it is sometimes referred to as Maximum XOR Satisfiability (MAXXORSAT) problem, and consists in computing the binary gene expression assignment that maximizes the number of satisfied (SAT) linear equations at steady state, see. For the gene networks currently available, the distortion can be quantified with sufficient precision and can be compared with two important quantities: (i) the average distortion of a typical word associated to the same 'code' (i.e. a gene network with the same topology but signs reshuffled); (ii) the best average distortion achievable by any gene network with the same ratio of genes/regulations. The latter value corresponds to the Shannon bound provided by the rate-distortion theorem (). We show in the article that the distortion of the currently available gene networks is much lower than the one of a typical sequence of the same code, and that it is comparable with (when not better than) the Shannon bound. This atypicality implies that in our gene networks the signs of the transcriptional regulations are highly organized and far from random. In particular, the origin of the low distortion can be traced in the scarcity of dual-mode TF, i.e. of TF acting both as activators and as repressors. Our calculation suggests a practical reason for such an organization: single-mode TF lower the distortion and hence help in avoiding conflictual transcriptional orders in which different TF induce contradictory actions on a downstream gene. In a gene network represented as a signed graph, the regulatory actions represent two-body interaction terms (i.e. the value of a gene acting as a TF, multiplied by that of its target gene, with the sign of the corresponding edge) or, in system-theoretic language, Single-Input Single-Output (SISO) regulations. When multiple genes act simultaneously as TF on a target gene, the overall regulation can be described as a superposition of these SISO terms. An alternative assumption, common in the gene network literature (), is that the transcription of a gene having multiple regulators is decided by some logical combination of the inputs. This corresponds to replacing superpositions of two-body terms with a single multibody term (MISO: Multi-Input SingleOutput action). One of the major drawbacks of the boolean networks obtained in this way is the arbitrarity in the choice of the gates, due to the lack of systematic methods for gates disambiguation based on experimental evidence (see e.g.for a few attempts in this direction, mostly based on inference from microarrays). The approach that we take in this article is to try to identify classes of boolean gates such that the steady-state MISO predictions for the regulation overlap as much as possible with the corresponding SISO predictions. In terms of perturbative expansions, this corresponds to asking that the two-body projections of the complex multibody terms be 'coherent' with the corresponding two-body terms, whenever the latter are not ambiguous. The rationale behind this choice is that the only type of information currently available in large-scale gene networks is precisely compendia of SISO regulatory signs. We will show in the article that under this assumption, a natural choice is to associate canalizing gates (i.e. AND-OR type of gates, see) to positive undirected cycles and (possibly) non-canalizing gates to negative undirected cycles. The property of low distortion of the gene networks then reflects in a low amount of non-canalizing gates in the boolean formulations of the gene networks with respect to null models. Looking at the corresponding dynamics, we observe that, in spite of the higher canalization, our gene networks seem to be more sensitive to perturbations than the corresponding null models. This appears to be due to the near-acyclic and massively parallel feed-forward architecture of the networks, in which noncanalizing gates have the effect of breaking the steady-state global symmetry of the basic inputoutput motifs.