Motivation: Empirical analyses of protein secondary structures based on circular dichroism (CD) and synchrotron radiation circular dichroism (SRCD) spectroscopic data rely on the availability of reference datasets comprised of spectra of relevant proteins, whose crystal structures have been determined. Datasets comprised of only soluble proteins have not proven suitable for analysing the spectra of membrane proteins. Results: A new reference dataset, MP180, has been created containing the spectra of 30 membrane proteins encompassing the secondary structure and fold space covered by all known membrane protein structures. In addition a mixed soluble and membrane protein dataset, SMP180, has been created, which includes 98 soluble protein spectra (SP) plus the MP180 spectra. Calculations of both membrane and soluble protein secondary structures using SMP180 are significantly improved with respect to those produced, using soluble protein-only datasets. The SMP180 dataset also enables determination of the percentage of transmembrane residues, thus enhancing the information previously obtainable from CD spectroscopy. Availability and Implementation: Reference dataset online at the DichroWeb analysis server (http://dichroweb.cryst.bbk.ac.uk); individual protein spectra in the Protein Circular Dichroism Data Bank
INTRODUCTIONCircular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy is an important method in structural biology with applications that include determination of protein secondary structure content, detection of protein folding and unfolding, protein stability, formation of macromolecular complexes and characterisation of ligandprotein interactions. Synchrotron radiation circular dichroism (SRCD) instruments have enhanced the technique by producing data to lower wavelengths with higher information contents and improved signal-to-noise levels relative to those obtained using conventional bench-top instruments. The use of CD as an analytical tool for protein secondary structure analyses relies on empirical algorithms (;) and associated spectral reference datasets derived from proteins with known structures. The accuracies of such analyses are dependant upon the range of structural and spectral characteristics of the constituent proteins in the reference dataset and how representative those proteins are of the types of structures present in the proteins being analysed (). Most reference databases were developed sometime ago for the analysis of soluble proteins (). More recently, a large reference dataset of soluble proteins, designated SP175 consisting of 71 soluble protein spectra (SP) with a low wavelength limit of 175 nm [achieved using an SRCD instrument], was created based on bioinformatics considerations (). It produces enhanced predictive accuracies for CD data in comparison with the previous reference datasets as a result of its extensive coverage of secondary structure and fold space. Membrane proteins make up approximately one-quarter to onethird of the proteins encoded by the currently sequenced genomes and they carry out important cellular functions, making them major targets for pharmaceutical drug development. However compared to soluble proteins, membrane proteins are under-represented in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (), because they are difficult to crystallise and they tend to be too large for NMR studies; therefore, developing other methods for their structural characterisation is important. Analyses of membrane protein CD and SRCD spectra using reference datasets based solely on soluble proteins generally do not yield predictions as reliable as those for soluble proteins (). It is likely that this is because membrane proteins are embedded in environments of low dielectric constant, either detergent micelles or lipid vesicles, which can influence the relative ground and excited states of the electronic transitions of the peptide backbones relative to those in aqueous solutions (). It has been suggested that the inclusion of membrane proteins in a soluble protein datasetPage: 1631 16301636