Motivation: Target enrichment, also referred to as DNA capture, provides an effective way to focus sequencing efforts on a genomic region of interest. Capture data are typically used to detect single-nucleotide variants. It can also be used to detect copy number alterations, which is particularly useful in the context of cancer, where such changes occur frequently. In copy number analysis , it is a common practice to determine log-ratios between test and control samples, but this approach results in a loss of information as it disregards the total coverage or intensity at a locus. Results: We modeled the coverage or intensity of the test sample as a linear function of the control sample. This regression approach is able to deal with regions that are completely deleted, which are problematic for methods that use log-ratios. To demonstrate the utility of our approach, we used capture data to determine copy number for a set of 600 genes in a panel of nine breast cancer cell lines. We found high concordance between our results and those generated using a single-nucleotide polymorphsim genotyping platform. When we compared our results with other log-ratio-based methods, including ExomeCNV, we found that our approach produced better overall correlation with SNP data.
INTRODUCTIONThe majority of the human genome is composed of repetitive sequences and intergenic regions. Over the past 5 years, a number of hybridization-based approaches have been developed to enable selective enrichment of target DNA sequences, allowing for high coverage sequencing of protein coding genes (). Capture sequencing has been used successfully to identify variants underlying rare genetic disorders and to find genes that are recurrently mutated in cancer (). Although capture sequencing has traditionally been used to identify SNVs and small insertions and deletions, it is now clear that it can also be used to derive gene copy number (). This approach has tremendous potential, as detecting recurrent copy number alterations (CNAs) is a powerful way to identify oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes (). Here we present a new statistical approach for the detection of CNAs and illustrate its performances on capture sequencing data. Instead of modeling the ratio or log-ratio between the test and control sample coverage, we modeled the test sample coverage as a linear function of the control sample coverage (a proportionality model). Using the outcome of this model, we segment the data into regions where the proportionality between the test coverage and control coverage is constant, which should equate to regions with similar copy number. An exact algorithm was used to recover the maximum-likelihood (ML) segmentation and the number of segments was selected using a modified Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) that is adapted for segmentation problems (). To validate our method, we determined copy number from capture sequencing data derived from nine breast cancer cell lines that had previously been analyzed with single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping arrays (). One major challenge in determining copy number from sequencing data is that the level of coverage varies greatly between different regions. Using a proportionality model overcomes this problem and produces far fewer outliers than approaches that use the ratio between a test and control sample. The proportionality model is also able to handle homozygous deletions, which are problematic for methods which use log-ratios (). Overall, we found that the proportionality model (PropSeg, for proportionality based segmentation) outperformed ratio and log-ratio-based methods for copy number determination, produced the best correlation to SNP array data and the lowest number of false-positive breakpoints with an equivalent recall. In the following sections, we describe the details of the statistical model and the associated inference scheme. *To whom correspondence should be addressed. The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the last two authors should be regarded as joint Last Authors.
DISCUSSION