Motivation: ChIP-seq is becoming the main approach to the genome-wide study of protein–DNA interactions and histone modifications. Existing informatics tools perform well to extract strong ChIP-enriched sites. However, two questions remain to be answered: (i) to which extent is a ChIP-seq experiment able to reveal the weak ChIP-enriched sites? (ii) are the weak sites biologically meaningful? To answer these questions, it is necessary to identify the weak ChIP signals from background noise. Results: We propose a linear signal–noise model, in which a noise rate was introduced to represent the fraction of noise in a ChIP library. We developed an iterative algorithm to estimate the noise rate using a control library, and derived a library-swapping strategy for the false discovery rate estimation. These approaches were integrated in a general-purpose framework, named CCAT (Control-based ChIP-seq Analysis Tool), for the significance analysis of ChIP-seq. Applications to H3K4me3 and H3K36me3 datasets showed that CCAT predicted significantly more ChIP-enriched sites that the previous methods did. With the high sensitivity of CCAT prediction, we revealed distinct chromatin features associated to the strong and weak H3K4me3 sites.
INTRODUCTIONWith the advances of ultra-high-throughput sequencing technologies in the past 3 years, ChIP-seq is becoming the main approach to the genome-wide study of proteinDNA interactions and histone modifications (). In ChIP-seq analysis, the biologically interesting sites are identified by searching for the genomic loci where the reads sequenced from ChIP DNA are over-represented. A number of ChIP-seq analysis tools have been developed for this purpose (; * To whom correspondence should be addressed.). All these tools perform well to extract strong ChIP-enriched sites. However, two questions remain to be answered: (i) to which extent is a ChIP-seq experiment able to reveal the weak ChIP-enriched sites? (ii) are the weak sites biologically meaningful? To answer these questions, it is necessary to establish a signalnoise model to separate the weak ChIP signals from background noise. In a ChIP-seq experiment, majority of the unbound DNA fragments are washed out in the immune-precipitation procedure. The ChIP-processed library is enriched by the fragments pulled down from the genomic loci with high chance of proteinDNA interactions or histone modifications. However, considerable 'nonuseful' fragments remain in the library due to the random protein DNA or antibodyDNA contacts that are not position-specific. Reads sequenced from these fragments are widely spread in the genome, and are considered background noise in addition to the real signal of ChIP enrichment. In early ChIP-seq application without a negative control, distribution of the noise was assumed to be uniform (). However, recent studies showed that the uniform model is too ideal due to the existence of sequencing and mapping biases, chromatin structure and genome copy number variations (). Adjustment of these intrinsic biases requires a negative control, which could be generated using non-specific antibody or input DNA. To utilize a negative control in ChIP-seq analysis,suggested normalizing the control to a level equivalent to the background noise of the ChIP library. They incorporated the normalization factor into the Bernoulli probability of a binomial distribution for statistical test, and computed false discovery rate (FDR) by P-value correction. We extended their idea to a linear signalnoise model, in which a noise rate was introduced to represent the fraction of noise in the ChIP library. We developed an iterative algorithm to estimate the noise rate using a control library, and derived a library-swapping strategy for the FDR estimation. With spike-in simulation datasets, we showed the proposed iterative algorithm can well estimate the noise rate with relative error 5% under practical sequencing depth. Moreover, spike-in simulation also indicated that the library-swapping approach outperformed the P-value correction method in FDR estimation. We integrated our approaches in a general-purpose framework, named CCAT (Control-based ChIP-seq Analysis Tool), for the significance analysis of ChIP-seq. The CCAT framework wasPage: 1200 11991204
DISCUSSIONThe goal of the research work presented in this article is to investigate the extent to which the weak ChIP signals are detectable in a ChIP-seq experiment. For this purpose, we proposed a linear signalnoise model for ChIP-seq analysis with negative control. The noise rate defined in the model provides a measurement of the data quality, which determines the capability of ChIP-seq to detect weak ChIP-enriched sites. We developed an iterative algorithm to estimate the noise rate using control library, and derived a library-swapping approach for FDR estimation. The performance of the proposed approaches was demonstrated with spike-in datasets. These approaches, integrated in the CCAT framework, were further applied to H3K4me3 and H3K36me3 datasets, and identified significantly more weak sites than previous predictions. Two reasons count for the improvement of sensitivity: first, the estimation of noise Page: 1204 11991204