Motivation: We address the following question: Does inhibition of the expression of a gene X in a cellular assay affect the expression of another gene Y? Rather than inhibiting gene X experimentally , we aim at answering this question computationally using as the only input observational gene expression data. Recently, a new statistical algorithm called Intervention calculus when the Directed acyclic graph is Absent (IDA), has been proposed for this problem. For several biological systems, IDA has been shown to outcompete regression-based methods with respect to the number of true positives versus the number of false positives for the top 5000 predicted effects. Further improvements in the performance of IDA have been realized by stability selection, a resampling method wrapped around IDA that enhances the discovery of true causal effects. Nevertheless, the rate of false positive and false negative predictions is still unsatisfactorily high. Results: We introduce a new resampling approach for causal discovery called accumulation IDA (aIDA). We show that aIDA improves the performance of causal discoveries compared to existing variants of IDA on both simulated and real yeast data. The higher reliability of top causal effect predictions achieved by aIDA promises to increase the rate of success of wet lab intervention experiments for functional studies.
IntroductionUnderstanding of the complex molecular networks underlying cellular processes is the key challenge of systems biology. Here, we focus on gene regulatory networks. Interpreting these networks causally requires a direction of information flow. Given a causal network, the most basic question is: If I perturb gene X, what happens to gene Y? Of course, this question can be answered experimentally by inhibiting X, e.g. by PCR-based gene deletion strategy (), RNA interference (), or CRISPRi () screening, and observing Y. We here discuss to what extend the same question may be answered in a virtual way, i.e. without the need to perform a cellular perturbation experiment. A high-throughput version of this problem would be the following: Find all pairs of genes X ! Y, where perturbing X affects Y. We refer to this causal data mining approach as causal discovery. Statistically, the challenge is to estimate causal effects between random variables from purely observational data. For gene expression data the causal effect of gene X on gene Y can be defined as the number of units gene Y changes in expression, if the expression of gene X is experimentally altered by one unit. Causal Networks are a well established statistical framework for analyzing this problem (). In causal transcriptional networks the nodes of a directed acyclic graph (DAG) are random variables representing genes and their V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.
Application
Application
DiscussionWe presented aIDA, a method to estimate causal effects from observational data in situations where we have many variables but only few observations, a common situation in biology due to costs of the experiments and availability of biomaterial. aIDA does not require any knowledge about the causal network underlying the data. It uses IDA in a subsampling approach () to account for small sample sizes. While IDA and CStaR take the. Comparison of the partial area under the ROC curve up to 100 false positives for the 5 simulated datasets with 1000 nodes, n  50 samples, a  0:5 and a dense and a sparse underlying true graph, respectively. Black bars show values for aIDA, gray bars show values for CStaR. The error bars indicate standard errors across the 5 datasets minimum absolute value of causal effects from K subsampling runs (), aIDA uses the whole multisets of causal effects. The estimate for the true causal effect is the mode of the density calculated over all estimated sets of causal effects across K subsampling runs. IDA and all its extensions require among other assumptions that the multivariate Gaussian distribution is faithful to the DAG (Kalisch and B hlmann, 2007), i.e. statistical conditional independencies can be inferred from the underlying DAG. Faithfulness in general is not testable () and, of course, there is no evolutionary selection pressure that makes biological networks faithful. An additional limitation of all existing approaches for causal discovery is that feedback mechanisms cannot be captured by a DAG. Therefore, IDA, CStaR and aIDA cannot replace wet lab experiments, but are a good starting point for experimental design. We show that aIDA outperforms CStaR on both simulated and real datasets with respect to the partial area under the receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve up to 100 false positives. Besides yielding improved estimates of the top candidates for intervention experiments, the results on simulated data suggest that aIDA performs better than existing algorithms on small sample sizes. In summary aIDA improves the estimation of causal effects from observational data. These findings suggest aIDA as a useful tool for experimental design of functional studies.Improved causal discovery in virtual cellular experiments