Motivation: There is a growing number of studies generating matched Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 and gene expression data, yet there is a corresponding shortage of statistical tools aimed at their integrative analysis. Such integrative tools are important for the discovery of epigenetically regulated gene modules or molecular pathways , which play key roles in cellular differentiation and disease. Results: Here, we present a novel functional supervised algorithm, called Functional Epigenetic Modules (FEM), for the integrative analysis of Infinium 450k DNA methylation and matched or unmatched gene expression data. The algorithm identifies gene modules of coordinated differential methylation and differential expression in the context of a human interactome. We validate the FEM algorithm on simulated and real data, demonstrating how it successfully retrieves an epigenetically deregulated gene, previously known to drive endo-metrial cancer development. Importantly, in the same cancer, FEM identified a novel epigenetically deregulated hotspot, directly upstream of the well-known progesterone receptor tumour suppressor pathway. In the context of cellular differentiation, FEM successfully identifies known endothelial cell subtype-specific gene expression markers, as well as a novel gene module whose overexpression in blood endothelial cells is mediated by DNA hypomethylation. The systems-level integrative framework presented here could be used to identify novel key genes or signalling pathways, which drive cellular differentiation or disease through an underlying epigenetic mechanism. Availability and implementation: FEM is freely available as an R-package from http://sourceforge.net/projects/funepimod.
INTRODUCTIONEpigenetic mechanisms are important not only in cellular differentiation () but also in disease (), especially cancer (). Among the epigenetic modifications seen in disease, DNA methylation (DNAm) is especially important for two reasons. First, unlike other epigenetic modifications such as histone marks, it is possible to measure genome-wide DNAm profiles in large numbers of samples (), including fresh-frozen and formalinfixed paraffin-embedded clinical tissue specimens (). Second, there is mounting evidence that DNAm aberrations can either predispose to or cause disease progression (). Such causal influences have been shown to be mediated by corresponding changes in gene expression (). Thus, DNAm has emerged as the 'epigenetic marker' of choice in epigenome-wide association studies () and in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) studies that generate matched gene expression data (). Specifically, the Illumina Infinium 450k DNAm beadarray has emerged as a popular choice offering both scalability and coverage at a reasonable economic cost (). Thus, there is now an urgent need to develop statistical bioinformatic tools for the integrative analysis of Illumina Infinium 450k and gene expression data. Here we present the Functional Epigenetic Module (FEM) algorithm for integrative analysis of Illumina Infinium 450k data with matched (or unmatched) gene expression data. The FEM algorithm performs a supervised analysis using a proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network () as a scaffold to identify gene modules or signalling pathways which are epigenetically and functionally deregulated in a cellular phenotype. Supervised functional network analyses have been used extensively in the gene expression context, see e.g.. We have also previously demonstrated the feasibility of integrating Illumina Infinium 27k DNAm data with a PPI, identifying key signalling pathways and gene modules undergoing age-associated changes in DNA methylation, which were then validated in independent data (). Similarly, we also recently demonstrated the feasibility and power of integrating Illumina Infinium 27k DNAm data with gene expression and a PPI, identifying an epigenetically deregulated gene, called HAND2, which drives endometrial cancer (). What these latter studies have *To whom correspondence should be addressed demonstrated is that PPI hotspots of differential methylation (i.e. PPI subnetworks where a significant number of members exhibit statistically significant differential methylation) associated with ageing and cancer exist, and that further integration with gene expression data allows the identification of its putative target(s). Given that the Illumina 27k technology has now been superseded by the more comprehensive Illumina 450k platform, we were impelled to extend our previous algorithm to the 450k case. This extension, however, is non-trivial because for the Illumina 450k Methylation beadchip, there are typically many probes mapping to a gene, and to different regions associated with the gene, including distal transcription start site (TSS), proximal TSS, 5 0 UTR, first exon, gene body and 3 0 UTR. Thus, at present, it is still unclear how best to summarize the DNAm values at the gene level, especially in relation to its integration with matched or unmatched gene expression data. Although the reported correlations between Infinium 450k and gene expression data are not strong, they are nevertheless highly statistically significant (), indicating that valuable information can be extracted from such integrative analyses. To this end, we here develop a novel integrative approach, especially designed for Illumina 450k DNAm data, and validate this approach by demonstrating that it can successfully retrieve known genes and gene modules driving cellular differentiation or cancer. The key aspect of our approach is the identification of key genes or gene modules, which are functionally deregulated as a result of underlying DNAm changes.
DISCUSSIONWe have presented a novel algorithm for integrative functional supervised analyses of Illumina 450k DNAm and gene expression data. By applying and testing it in two different biological contexts, we have demonstrated here the feasibility of integrating Illumina 450k data with gene expression in a systems context, using a human protein interaction network as a scaffold to identify gene modules whose differential expression is regulated by differential methylation. In an application to cancer, we have seen how it successfully retrieved an epigenetically deregulated gene module centred around (HAND2), a gene known to mediate the tumour suppressive effects of the PGR pathway (). Specifically, silencing of HAND2 inactivates this tumour suppressor pathway. It is therefore remarkable that FEM identified another hotspot and target gene (TGFB1I1) implicated in the PGR pathway. Our data suggest that hypermethylationmediated silencing of TGFB1I1 could also lead to downregulation of the PGR tumour suppressor pathway because TGFB1I1 (HIC5) is a known co-activator of PGR (). Importantly, the TGFB1I1 module was validated in independent data, further supporting its biological significance. In the context of endothelial cell differentiation, we have shown how FEM retrieved known markers of endothelial cell subtypes, including an MHC gene module hypomethylated and overexpressed in BECs. Likewise, it identified DNA hypomethylation as the potential mechanism underlying STAT6's overexpression in BECs. That the overexpression of the MHC module genes and STAT6 in BECs may be regulated by DNAm isto the best of our knowledgean entirely novel insight. All these results clearly highlight the value of the FEM algorithm to identify novel biologically and clinically interesting gene modules of coordinated differential methylation and expression. It is important to comment on the number and nature of the inferred FEMs. In principle, a FEM could be driven by one gene only, if this gene has exceptionally large absolute statistics of differential methylation and expression. Other FEMs could be driven by several genes, but with each one having only a marginally significant statistic. Importantly, the FEM algorithm is capable of identifying both types. For instance, in the application to endometrial cancer we have observed FEMs of the two types, with the HAND2 module being an example of the former, and the TGFB1I1 module an example of the latter. In the case of the HAND2 module, many genes showed differential methylation changes, but only HAND2 showed the expected directional change in gene expression, thus identifying it as the target of the deregulated epigenetic hotspot. In the application to endothelial cell differentiation, we observed a similar pattern, with some FEMs driven mainly by individual genes with large differential methylation and expression statistics, and others driven by a number of functionally related genes (e.g. the MHC module). The existence of 'rich' modules (i.e. modules implicating several targets, like the MHC module) should not be surprising because functionally related genes are often commonly regulated, with epigenetic mechanisms controlling this regulation. In particular, application of FEM to complex tissues such as blood may revealNote: We provide the symbol, entrez ID, the statistic and P-value of differential methylation, the statistic and P-value of differential expression and the overall statistic t(Int). Positive statistics mean higher levels in BECs compared with LECs.