Motivation: Viewing a cellular system as a collection of interacting parts can lead to new insights into the complex cellular behavior. In this study, we have investigated aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) signal transduction pathway from such a system-level perspective. AhR detects various xenobiotics, such as drugs or endocrine disruptors (e.g. dioxin), and mediates transcriptional regulation of target genes such as those in the cytochrome P450 (CYP450) family. On binding with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), however, AhR becomes abnormally activated and conveys toxic effects on cells. Despite many related studies on the TCDD-mediated toxicity, quantitative system-level understanding of how TCDD-mediated toxicity generates various toxic responses is still lacking. Results: Here, we present a manually curated TCDD-mediated AhR signaling pathway including crosstalks with the hypoxia pathway that copes with oxygen deficiency and the p53 pathway that induces a DNA damage response. Based on the integrated pathway, we have constructed a mathematical model and validated it through quantitative experiments. Using the mathematical model, we have investigated: (i) TCDD dose-dependent effects on AhR target genes; (ii) the crosstalk effect between AhR and hypoxia signals; and (iii) p53 inhibition effect of TCDD-liganded AhR. Our results show that cellular intake of TCDD induces AhR signaling pathway to be abnormally up-regulated and thereby interrupts other signaling pathways. Interruption of hypoxia and p53 pathways, in turn, can incur various hazardous effects on cells. Taken together, our study provides a system-level understanding of how AhR signal mediates various TCDD-induced toxicities under the presence of hypoxia and/or DNA damage in cells.
INTRODUCTIONCells are composed of well-organized molecular interaction networks. To understand the response mechanism of a cell against an external stimulation, we should not only identify the mediating signal transduction pathways but also investigate the dynamics accompanied with the signal transmission. This can be readily achieved using high-throughput techniques such as microarray experiments, but previous studies indicated the problem of low reproducibility in such cases (). So, we construct a mathematical model for computer simulations by employing low-throughput techniques and investigate the dynamics of cell signaling at a system-level by combined analysis of computer simulations and biochemical experimentation. Based on the collection of biological or biochemical information about signaling pathways induced by a specific stimulation, we can construct the relevant molecular interaction network and further investigate the dynamics of the molecules involved in the network (). This might lead us to a system-level understanding of the complex phenomena. Here, we applied the idea to the AhR signaling pathway to unravel the complicated signaling pathway disruption by external stimulations. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a member of the basic helix loophelix/Periodaryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT) Single minded (bHLH/PAS) DNA binding protein family. Although AhR is located in the cytosol bound to a molecular complex composed of HSP90, XAP2 and p23, upon binding with a ligand such as TCDD, it is translocated to the nucleus and becomes heterodimerized with ARNT after dissociated from the HSP90/XAP2/p23 complex. This liganded AhR/ARNT dimer binds to consensus regulatory sequences of DNA, called 'dioxin response elements' or 'xenobiotic response elements' and transcribes the associated genes. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is a specific type of polychlorinated dibenzodioxins, also known as dioxin, which is one group of the most toxic materials including dioxin-like chemicals known so far, such as polychlorinated dibenzofurans and biphenyls. TCDD is used as a toxic standard evaluating the toxic equivalency factor (TEF) value of dioxins and dioxin-like chemicals to indicate the degree of toxicity. TCDD is top ranked with TEF = 1, which is the highest value among the tested chemicals (Van den). TCDD is a toxic standard for dioxin-like chemicals because a number of evidences have been reported about its various hazardous effects on human body: liver and skin damages (), diabetes (), thyroid (), etc. Recent studies also revealed that TCDD could be a potential carcinogen (). Although various toxic effects of TCDD have been studied for several decades, its detailed molecular mechanisms are still poorly understood except the TCDD-mediated transcriptional regulation of AhR and its binding with ARNT. TCDD gets bio-accumulated in fatty tissue of human due to its hydrophobicity with wide individual variation of half-life 710 years (). Accumulated in fatty tissue, TCDD sustains AhR activation and causes the transcription of target genes such as CYP1A1 (Cytochrome P450, family 1, subfamily A, polypeptide 1) and AhRR (AhR repressor gene) (). In many cases, the TCDD toxicity is strongly related to the accumulation of CYP1A1. Although there have been a number of studies to discover the downstream mechanism followed by this abnormal accumulation of CYP1A1, it is still unclear how the downstream signals flow and what affects the cellular toxicity. Conventional studies on toxic materials usually focus on a single particular aspect among various observed toxicities or phenomenological responses, called 'doseresponse relationship' in which the dose denotes the amount of a toxic substance and the response usually indicates the lethal rate of an organism. However, complex polygenic disease like cancer and diverse effects of toxic materials on living organisms need a broader systems approach. Several recent studies revealed that AhR may crosstalk with other signaling pathways so that liganded AhR could affect other biological functions (). In particular, we note two previous studies reporting that TCDDliganded AhR inactivates p53 by increasing the basal level of MDM2 protein, not its mRNA, which is a well-known E3 ubiquitin ligase () and ARNT, the counterpart of AhR, binds with hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF1), a well-known hypoxia responding protein (). ARNT is one of the bHLH/PAS transcription factor families. ARNT transcribes various genes after binding with HIF1 (or AhR) to cope with toxic perturbations such as hypoxia (or dioxin intake). This suggests the possibility that ARNT might play a limiting role in the competing signal transmission between AhR and HIFs (). These results indicate that TCDD might have some positive effect on carcinogenesis by disturbing the DNA damage response signaling pathways and the role of p53, and negative effect by competing with HIF1 that transcribes genes related to angiogenesis under hypoxia. Hence, there is a pressing need to do a system-level study on these such that we can unravel the molecular mechanism of various toxic responses produced by the TCDD-mediated AhR signaling pathway.
CONCLUSIONTo our knowledge, no attempt has been made to understand the complex regulatory mechanism of TCDD-mediated AhR pathway from an integrated system-level perspective. Only a few review papers described the overall schematic model of the AhR signaling pathway without consideration of the crosstalks (). So, we have reconstructed a comprehensive model of the AhR signaling network through extensive manual curation, and developed a mathematical model of it using ODEs based on biochemical experiments. Our combined simulation analysis and experimental validation of the model showed that AhR localization and its transcriptional activity are dose-dependent and that they are influenced by hypoxia through the crosstalk with HIF1 where ARNT plays a role as a limiting factor. Interestingly, the hypoxia signaling inhibits the transcriptional activity of AhR, but the reverse is not true. This might be originated from the different binding affinities between AhR and ARNT, and HIF1 and ARNT. We also found that the maximum level of p53 changes as the levels of DNA damage and the TCDD intake vary. In particular, for low DNA damage, the p53 level does not change much along with the TCDD intake and remains at a basal level. For high DNA damage, TCDD attenuates the p53 response but the decrease is not enough and the transcription activity of p53 is