Currently available bisulfite sequencing tools frequently suffer from low mapping rates and low methylation calls, especially for data generated from the Illumina sequencer, NextSeq. Here, we introduce a sequential trimming-and-retrieving alignment approach for investigating DNA methylation patterns, which significantly improves the number of mapped reads and covered CpG sites. The method is implemented in an automated analysis toolkit for processing bisulfite sequencing reads. Availability and implementation:
IntroductionThe advancement of next-generation sequencing technologies offers the opportunity to investigate the epigenetic modification on genome-wide scale and at single-base resolution (). Reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) has emerged as a popular tool for profiling DNA methylation at CpG rich regions. A major advantage of the RRBS method is its reproducibility over time and sample types. Compared with traditional enrichment based methods, RRBS is more applicable to formalin-fixed and paraffinembedded clinical samples, due to its low DNA input requirement. However, there are considerable challenges when analyzing the reads from RRBS due to the complexity induced by the bisulfite conversion. Highly specialized analysis pipelines are neededto target different data types and different platforms. all samples sequenced by the Illumina NextSeq platform. An important feature of reads from an RRBS library is that most sequences have Gs at the second and third bases. Consequently low read quality will thus be observed at positions 2 and 3 on NextSeq 500, because 'G' bases do not have a dye attached. The easiest remedy appears to be trimming the first few lowquality bases from each read to improve the subsequent alignment process. The first base of every sequence, however, is particularly informative in indicating methylation status at one CpG sitewhich should predominantly be a 'C' if it was methylated and a 'T' if not methylated. Another possible solution is to mask the low-quality bases by replacing their reads with 'N's. We tested this solution but did not observe any improvement compared with the mapping based on raw reads. This is understandable because the ambiguity of base calls still exists. Such issues can be largely alleviated when libraries are sequenced on a HiSeq platform. The downside is that one would obtain even fewer reads per library per sequencing run. Although this may be compensated by decreasing multiplexing (the number of individual libraries sequenced at the same time), the sequencing costs per library increase accordingly. Furthermore, many smaller laboratories do not have easy access to HiSeqs, while a desktop NextSeq is both cheaper and easier to operate. NextSeq is also widely used in large sequencing facilities due to its fast turnaround time. Therefore, it is critical to adapt the current RRBS processing pipeline to incorporate this issue.