Motivation: Laboratory notebooks remain crucial to the activities of research communities. With the increase in generation of electronic data within both wet and dry analytical laboratories and new technologies providing more efficient means of communication, Electronic Laboratory Notebooks (ELN) offer equivalent record keeping to paper-based laboratory notebooks (PLN). They additionally allow more efficient mechanisms for data sharing and retrieval, which explains the growing number of commercial ELNs available varying in size and scope but all are increasingly accepted and used by the scientific community. The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) having already an LIMS and a Biobank Management System for respectively laboratory workflows and sample management, we have developed a free multidisciplinary ELN specifically dedicated to work notes that will be flexible enough to accommodate different types of data. Availability and implementation: Information for installation of our freeware ELN with source codes customizations are detailed in supplementary data.
INTRODUCTIONThe requirements for the development of International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) Electronic Laboratory Notebooks (ELN) consisted of integrating all the features existing in the paper-based laboratory notebooks (PLN) together with additional functionalities to enable easy and intuitive navigation and information search capacities upon the notebooks (), following the definition of the Collaborative Electronic Notebook Systems Association: 'System to create, store, retrieve and share fully electronic records in ways that meet all legal, regulatory, technical and scientific requirements; records being collections of information or data associated with an experiment to enable a suitably skilled person to repeat it'. The specifications included (i) recording of experimental data in a flexible way through a common platform suitable for the various research activities of the institute, and at the same time maintaining the rigorous scientific practices required for day-to-day notekeeping (traceability of each single modification), all within a highly secure environment; (ii) improving lab efficiency and work productivity by facilitating protocol and data sharing, record keeping, particularly in terms of limiting repetitive tasks; (iii) providing an efficient means by which to search archived material; (iv) being free, open-source and web based requiring no installation of software on user's computer; and finally (v) enabling long-term and secure storage in basic electronic format (text).
CONCLUSIONAfter 6 months of testing and validation, the ELN accounts for around 50 regular users, 100 notebooks and over 1300 pages. This exploratory phase having been a complete success, the Agency has decided to switch from the PLN to the ELN since 1st of January 2013. As IARC's LIMS () and IARC's Biobank Management System (), the IARC ELN has been largely adopted and is now intensively used within the agency, as it has proven to bring higher quality documentation, gain of time for data recording and retrieving as well as higher security. It should also strengthen collaborations and exchanges between researchers within the Agency. Last but not least it demands verylow resources and is scalable whatever the size of the institution or laboratory is (cf. Supplementary Material).