
INTRODUCTIONGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) have become increasingly popular for studying complex human diseases. Within the last several years, the number of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) per DNA array has grown from 10 000 to 1 million (). Despite the very large number of SNPs that are genotyped in a study, GWAS data are commonly analyzed one SNP at a time. Indeed, the Armitage trend test (ATT) is used almost exclusively. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.There are at least two strong reasons for considering all the SNPs or at least a large subset of them simultaneously. First, the marginal effects of SNPs (i.e. the effect of each SNP on disease when it is considered alone) may be quite different from their joint effects:(i) a SNP that is not related to disease but is correlated with a causal SNP will be marginally associated with disease; (ii) some SNPs may have weak marginal effects but strong joint effects. Conditional on causal SNPs that are already in the model, false positive signals tend to be weakened while marginally uncorrelated causal SNPs have a better chance of being selected. Second, the predictive power of a single SNP tends to be very low. The accuracy of prediction can be improved substantially by utilizing a large number of relevant SNPs. It is extremely challenging to decide which set of SNPs should be included in the joint analysis because the number of SNPs in a GWAS is much larger than the sample size. This is commonly referred to as the 'small n, large p' problem. A major difficulty in this problem is that the number and extent of spurious associations between predictors and response increase rapidly with increasing p. Weak effects of causal variants and strong linkage disequilibrium (LD) among SNPs present additional challenges. There is a large body of literature on variable selection methods, including bridge regression (), least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO;), smoothly clipped absolute deviation (SCAD;), elastic net () and adaptive lasso (). However, these methods were designed for a moderate number of predictors (i.e. tens or hundreds). For ultra-high p, these methods may be computationally infeasible and statistically inaccurate. Recently, Fan and Lv (2008) developed the so-called sure independence screening (SIS) strategy for high-dimensional statistical modeling. The idea is to first reduce the dimension from a very large scale to a moderate scale that is below sample size by univariate correlation learning, and then select important predictors by a moderate-scale variable selection method, such as the LASSO or SCAD. In a similar spirit,reduced the dimension of SNPs in a GWAS to several hundreds using a simple score criterion and applied the LASSO to the reduced set of SNPs. A drawback of this approach is that important features that are marginally uncorrelated with response are bound to be missed because the univariate screening step is based entirely on marginal correlations.suggested the iterative sure independence screening (ISIS) procedure, which iterates the SIS procedure conditional on the previously selected features so as to capture important features that are marginally uncorrelated with response. Fan and Lv's work is confined to linear regression of a continuous response, and the number of features they considered is merely thousands. In this article, we extend Fan and Lv's ISIS idea to logistic regression of casecontrol GWAS data. This extension is challenging for several reasons. First, the ISIS performs linear regression analysis of residuals, but residuals cannot be used as response variables in logistic regression. Second, prediction errors tend to be much higher for binary outcomes than continuous outcomes. Third, the number of SNPs can be extremely large, typically more than half a million. Fourth, the effects of causal SNPs on complex diseases tend to be small to modest, so the signal-to-noise ratio in GWAS data is low. Fifth, the LD among SNPs is extensive and can be extremely high in certain regions. A separate challenge is that the false discovery rate (FDR) associated with the ISIS, and indeed with any existing variable selection method, tends to be high. Recently, Meinshausen andproposed the stability selection strategy to reduce the FDR. The idea is to repeatedly subsample the original data and perform variable selection on each subsample. The features selected frequently among the subsamples tend to be truly associated with outcome and thus should be included in the final model. In this article, we integrate stability selection into our ISIS procedure to develop a new approach, GWASelect, for genome-wide variable selection. We describe our approach in the next section. In Section 3, we demonstrate through simulation studies that GWASelect has robust performance under a variety of LD structures and can substantially increase the power and reduce the FDR compared with existing methods. In addition, the regression models generated by GWASelect significantly improve prediction accuracy. In Section 4, we apply GWASelect to the GWAS data from the Wellcome Trust Case-Control Consortium () and show that it yields several novel discoveries and improves prediction accuracy.
DISCUSSIONWe have developed a new tool, GWASelect, for variable selection at the genome-wide level. This regression-based method has the ability to capture both marginally correlated and marginally uncorrelated causal SNPs and has low FDR. The advantages over the existing methods have been demonstrated through simulated and real data. Our method has two versions. The first version requires the specification of the model size d, for which we suggest to choose a number that is consistent with the current biological knowledge of the studied disease. The second version (d-GWASelect) does not require the specification of the model size, and this is the version we recommend for general use. The correlation structures for causal variants used in our simulation studies have biological relevance. Scheme 2 mimics a scenario in which the causal variants form a gene cluster that contributes synergistically to the disease outcome, while scheme 3 reflects a scenario in which several biological pathways (or networks) affect the disease development. We did not include least angle regression (LARS) in our studies because it has been shown to have highly similar performance to LASSO (). Indeed, LASSO can be implemented by LARS with a small modification.demonstrated that CCD is 'considerably faster and more robust than LARS' and is 'more successful than LARS in model selection'. The HLASSO adopts a concave penalty function, but the CCD algorithm may not converge for non-convex penalty functions (). A valid algorithm to implement concave penalty functions is local linear approximation (), which amounts to multiple rounds of CCD and would make the HLASSO computation prohibitively expensive. For the WTCCC T1D data, running the CCD version of the HLASSO with 10 iterations on an Intel Quadcore Nehalem processor (2.4 GHz, 16 GB memory) requires 67.5 to 175 h, depending on the value of the tuning parameter. In contrast, we have been running the GWASelect in a parallel computing environment, and the same analysis can be completed within several hours on 16 processors. In an independent effort,developed an ISIS method for generalized linear models in the context of microarray data analysis. In their method, the conditional screening procedure requires fitting a separate regression model for each feature, which would create heavy computational burden for GWAS data. In addition, their method tends to have high FDR. They observed that cross-validation tends to yield large models for logistic regression, resonating our findings. We can extend our methods to select interactions. Instead of considering all possible interaction terms, we may incorporate known biological network information () into our selection procedure. Another approach is to first extend the existing genetic network identification tools, such as the liquid association () and bounded mode stochastic search (), to infer SNP interactions and then incorporate such information into our GWASelect procedure. Recently,proposed a Markov blanket-based method to evaluate epistatic interactions for GWAS data. It will be interesting to compare to that method when we extend our work to interaction effects.