Motivation: Detection of allelic imbalances in ChIP-Seq reads is a powerful approach to identify functional non-coding single nucleotide variants (SNVs), either polymorphisms or mutations, which modulate the affinity of transcription factors for chromatin. We present ABC, a computational tool that identifies allele-specific binding of transcription factors from aligned ChIP-Seq reads at heterozygous SNVs. ABC controls for potential false positives resulting from biases introduced by the use of short sequencing reads in ChIP-Seq and can efficiently process a large number of het-erozygous SNVs. Results: ABC successfully identifies previously characterized functional SNVs, such as the rs4784227 breast cancer risk associated SNP that modulates the affinity of FOXA1 for the chromatin. Availability and implementation: The code is open-source under an Artistic-2.0 license and ver-sioned on GitHub (https://github.com/mlupien/ABC/). ABC is written in PERL and can be run on any platform with both PERL
IntroductionGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified thousands of single nucleotide variants (SNV) representing genomic loci associated with human traits and disease (). The causal variant(s) underlying each association are hard to identify because most of the associated loci fall outside of annotated genes (). ChIP-Seq allows for the identification of transcription factor (TF) binding sites across the genome (). Functional studies have shown that many trait/disease-associated loci modulate the affinity of TFs for chromatin (). Noncoding somatic mutations found in tumors can also modulate TF binding to promote tumor growth and progression (). The generation of ChIP-seq data for TFs in normal cells and tumors () provides an opportunity to directly assess the functional effect of risk-variants and somatic mutations on TF binding. This creates a need for a computational tool to systematically identify SNVs imparting an allelic imbalance in TF binding to the chromatin. To eliminate alignment biases existing tools () incorporate the alignment of the ChIP-Seq reads to two separate genomes. The use of two representative parental genomes assumes a diploid set of chromosomes. Therefore, the applicability of these tools to cancer