Motivation: Various human pathogens secret effector proteins into hosts cells via the type IV secretion system (T4SS). These proteins play important roles in the interaction between bacteria and hosts. Computational methods for T4SS effector prediction have been developed for screening experimental targets in several isolated bacterial species; however, widely applicable prediction approaches are still unavailable Results: In this work, four types of distinctive features, namely, amino acid composition, dipeptide composition, .position-specific scoring matrix composition and auto covariance transformation of position-specific scoring matrix, were calculated from primary sequences. A classifier, T4EffPred, was developed using the support vector machine with these features and their different combinations for effector prediction. Various theoretical tests were performed in a newly established dataset, and the results were measured with four indexes. We demonstrated that T4EffPred can discriminate IVA and IVB effectors in benchmark datasets with positive rates of 76.7% and 89.7%, respectively. The overall accuracy of 95.9% shows that the present method is accurate for distinguishing the T4SS effector in unidentified sequences. A classifier ensemble was designed to synthesize all single classifiers. Notable performance improvement was observed using this ensemble system in benchmark tests. To demonstrate the models application, a genome-scale prediction of effectors was performed in Bartonella henselae, an important zoonotic pathogen. A number of putative candidates were distinguished. Availability: A web server implementing the prediction method and the source code are both available at http://bioinfo.tmmu.edu.cn/T4EffPred.
INTRODUCTIONBacterial pathogens translocate numerous effector proteins into the extracellular environment of host cells via secretion systems. These proteins play critical roles in virulence and survival. In gram-negative bacteria, secretion systems are classified into seven major evolutionarily and functionally related subclasses, termed types IVII (). In recent years, type III and type IV secretion systems (T3SS and T4SS), which allow injection of effectors directly into the host cell cytoplasm, have been widely studied (;). T4SS consists of transmembrane multi-protein complexes and exists in many zoonotic pathogens, such as Brucella sp., Bartonella henselae, Coxiella burnetii, as well as in some other gram-negative pathogens, such as Bordetella pertussis, Helicobacter pylori and L.pneumophila (). Many T4SS effectors, including two main subtypes called IVA and IVB, have been confirmed to be involved in the pathogenicity of these species (). To adapt to different hosts and different survival strategies, the arsenal of known effectors varies widely across bacterial species and even shows distinct differences between bacterial strains. Recently, a number of novel T4SS effectors have been identified by experimental approaches such as fusion protein report assays (). In many of these studies, previously developed bioinformatics screening strategies were adopted to predict effector candidates in genomic proteins before experimental translocation verification. Sequence homology to known effectors and conserved domain analysis were used to detect putative effectors in the genome of Brucella abortus (). An omnibus method, synthesizing hydropathy profile comparison, eukaryotic domain search, signal peptide identification and sequence similarity alignment, was built to scan genomic sequences of Anaplasma marginale for potential T4SS effectors (). Two approaches based on feature extraction and machine learning algorithms were developed for large-scale effector identification in L.pneumophila () and C.burnetii (), respectively. A hidden semi-Markov model (HSMM) was constructed to describe C-terminal patterns and predict type-IVB secretion signals with high accuracy (). Established methods for detecting the regulatory elements or C-terminal translocation signals of eukaryotic proteins were applied before screening of the experimental targets, resulting in most of the T4SS effectors being identified in L.pneumophila (). The computational filters in these existing methods successfully selected a small portion of the genomic proteins as candidates for experimental identification. However, these methods *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com are not exhaustive enough and are not generally applicable for secretion signal detection, especially for modelling type-IVA signal. Homology search based on sequence alignment can only find candidates that are similar to known effectors. Scanning of regulatory elements or C-terminal signals relies on the known motifs in the sequences of effectors and their promoters, which are conserved but specific to effector families. Furthermore, all existing machine learning models are based on sequence features from a small supply of known effectors from particular bacterial species. Therefore, they are often not accurate for genomic effector discovery in other bacterial species. There are 5300 experimentally validated effectors in the 1884 known effectors stored in the SecReT4 database (). Although several methods have reported excellent performance in identifying T3SS effectors in a wide variety of bacterial genomes (), they are not recommended for T4SS effector prediction due to low accuracies. Accurate prediction approaches that are widely applicable to mining putative type-IVA or type-IVB effectors in gram-negative pathogens are still absent. Several computational approaches based on existing machine learning algorithms, e.g. Naive Bayes, hidden Markov models, artificial neural network and support vector machine (SVM), have successfully predicted T3SS secreted signals (). However, the accuracy of machine learning approach depends on the quantities of authentic negative and positive samples. Studies identifying T3SS effectors are abundant, but those identifying T4SS effectors are rare. The two recently published databases, AtlasT4SS () and SecRet4 (), have announced freely available datasets for T4SS components and secreted proteins. These datasets provide numerous samples to train and optimize machine learning models for T4SS effectors prediction. In this article, we propose a SVM model using four types of features calculated from residue composition and position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM) profiles. The machine learning-based model is trained on a set of experimentally validated T4SS effectors and 1132 non-effectors and is used to provide accurate predictions of T4SS secreted proteins in evolutionarily distinct bacteria. We demonstrate that our model can discriminate between IVA effectors (or IVB effectors) and non-effectors, with an accuracy of 93.3% (or 95.9%), via leave-one-tests. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first method to predict IVA effectors in gram-negative bacteria. Genomic-scale prediction of effectors in the zoonotic pathogen B.henselae is also performed and discussed. A list of predicted candidates from B.henselae may be of academic interest in studying human pathogenic bacteria.
DISCUSSIONThe prediction of effectors in bacterial genomes is an important task for functional analysis of the T4SS of human pathogens.. Comparison of ROC curves for IVB effector prediction using different features. The results obtained from amino acid composition (AAC), residue pair composition (DPC), PSSM composition (PSSM) and auto covariance transformation of PSSM profiles (PSSM_AC) as well as the combination of AAC and DPC (AACDPC), the combination of AAC and PSSM (PSSMAAC), the combination of AAC and PSSM_AC (PSSM AAC) and the combination of two PSSM feature classes (PSSM PSSM_AC) are shown as color curves. (a) Five-fold cross-validation tests in T4_1472 using four single feature classes; (b) 5-fold cross-validation tests in T4_1472 using four combined feature classesPrevious studies demonstrated that T4SS effectors in several bacterial species contained conserved C-terminal signals and eukaryotic domains (). Differences in GC content between the effector genes and the non-effector genes were also discovered (). Xu et al. reported a hidden Markov model-based method to evaluate the distribution pattern of EPIYA motifs in a broad range of biological species to predict potential T3SS effectors, but this motif was not widely distributed from T4SS secreted proteins (). Burstein et al. presented a machine learning method based on known features to predict candidates for genome-wide effector identification in L.pneumophila (). This approach was effective for screening experimental targets but was specific to certain well-known bacterial species because few general features exist for extensive prediction. The HSMM model presented by Lifshitz et al. captured IVB secreted signals with a high success rate but was not usable for the detection of IVA effectors (). We developed a widely applicable method for accurate prediction of different subtypes of T4SS effectors in gram-negative pathogens. To accomplish this, we calculated ACCs, residue pair compositions, PSSM profiles and their auto covariance transformations. We used these features to train SVM-based predictors for discrimination of effectors from non-effectors. To assess the performance of our prediction system, two reusable datasets were constructed for experimentally validated effectors and potential non-effectors. ACC analysis showed that hydrophobic residues, especially aliphatic Ala, Gly and Val, occur with higher frequencies in non-effectors than in effectors. On the contrary, hydrophilic and polar residues are more common components of effector sequences. As most of the known secreted proteins exist in aqueous environments, such as the cytoplasm of host cells, residue pairs with hydrophilic residues would be expected to have higher compositions in effectors than in non-effectors. We inferred that some hydrophilic and polar groups may be important for effector protein functions. Performance tests showed that two classes of PSSM-based features were more helpful for discrimination of effectors than using ACC. The PSSM revealed remote relevance between function-related proteins. This relevance was conserved throughout evolution, although amino acids continuously mutated. For the two PSSM feature classes that we used, PSSM composition indicated the position-specific information of each amino acid type in the query sequence. On the other hand, auto covariance transformation of the PSSM described the sequence-order positionspecific information. The former method performed better than the latter method in benchmark tests. Feature combination is a frequently used approach for improving classification performance. We combined four different feature vectors and found that more accurate results were produced using vector combinations. The prediction accuracy for IVB effectors was higher than for IVA effectors. This can be attributed to different numbers of positive samples and more abundant signals within IVB sequences, such as C-terminal motifs, which are more informative than the known motifs in IVA effectors. We noticed that taxonomic and functional biases in the training data impacted the assessment and application of our method. In T4_1472, 30 IVA sequences were derived from the genomic proteins of nine species, i.e. A.marginale (4), Anaplasma phagocytophilum (2), Bartonella sp.(3), H.pylori (1), Agrobacterium tumefacien (3), Agrobacterium rhizogenes (4), Brucella sp.(8), B.pertussis (4) and E.chaffeensis (1); 310 IVB effectors were selected from L.pneumophila (258) and C.burnetii (52). The taxonomic distribution of IVA sequences showed no obvious bias, but bias was present for IVB sequences. Although all the effectors were experimentally validated to be secreted by T4SS, the functions of most of them in host cells have not been identified. Therefore, the functional bias of these effectors is still unknown. To reduce bias for negative sequences, we collected non-effectors through multiple channels. Though biases in datasets are inevitable, the results of theoretical validations in several datasets showed that our predictor was both accurate and robust for distinguishing T4SS effectors. This indicates that our method may be useful for IVA effector prediction in various T4SS pathogens but should be restricted to Legionella sp., Coxiella sp. and their related species for IVB effector prediction. It is noteworthy that characteristic signals exist in both some T4SS effectors and some T3SS effectors (), which may have similar amino acid distributions and evolutionary conservation profiles. Thus, the present method may not completely discriminate between T4SS effectors and those secreted through the T3SS. We improved the prediction accuracy using multi-classifier ensembles with simple voting strategies. The 2-in-3 voting and 3-in-4 voting systems are linear discrimination systems that use condition relaxation. Therefore, accurate prediction does not indicate identical prediction performance in pathogenic genomes. Accurate discrimination of effectors in bacterial genomes is the ultimate goal of developing these prediction models. The prediction results for the B.henselae genome demonstrate that our method is effective at distinguishing unknown T4SS effectors from genomic sequences. A small list of predicted candidates will help to easily confirm experimental targets. In the B.henselae genome, seven genes encoding known effector proteins were all predicted by our classifier ensemble. Furthermore, several proteins located at BH14310BH14330 and BH14510BH14590 were repeatedly predicted as positives by multi-classifiers, indicating strong potential T4SS effectors. In Supplementary Table S10, 47 out of 50 putative T4SS candidates are annotated as 'hypothetical proteins' in the B.henselae genome. The left three are inferred to be relevant to T4SS from Bartonella. Most homologs of these proteins in gram-negative species are still uncharacterized and the annotated information in available public databases shows some of the candidates are most likely secreted proteins. A maximum likelihood phylogenic tree was constructed to reveal the evolutionary relationship between the 26 IVA effectors and the 50 inferred effectors using MUSCLE and MEGA5 (Supplementary). Conversely, no phylogenic trees for IVB effectors could be established by any evolutionary algorithms because no common sites in these sequences were found when computing the distances. Supplementaryshows that several distinct groups (YP_414449, YP_153762, YP_153570 and YP_505319) were formed by multiple predicted effectors and an embedded IVA protein. The seven known effectors of B.henselae were grouped in a sub-tree, sharing a most recent common ancestor with BH07480 and displaying close relationships to the putative effector BH13840. The arrangement of each branch in the tree indicates that the predicted effectors in each sub-tree were most likely captured by our model based on the evolutionary information of their nearest IVA effectors. We hope that these predicted effectors may serve as a useful resource for the research community. By taking into account all of our results and analyses, we can conclude that the present method can detect T4SS effectors within unidentified sequences with great power. As the features used in our system are sequence-based and are commonly calculated across both genus and species, we believe that our method can be widely used for T4SS effector screening for 10 confirmed pathogens as well as for other gram-negative bacterial species.