Motivation: New long read sequencing technologies, like PacBio SMRT and Oxford NanoPore, can produce sequencing reads up to 50 000 bp long but with an error rate of at least 15%. Reducing the error rate is necessary for subsequent utilization of the reads in, e.g. de novo genome assembly. The error correction problem has been tackled either by aligning the long reads against each other or by a hybrid approach that uses the more accurate short reads produced by second generation sequencing technologies to correct the long reads. Results: We present an error correction method that uses long reads only. The method consists of two phases: first, we use an iterative alignment-free correction method based on de Bruijn graphs with increasing length of k-mers, and second, the corrected reads are further polished using long-distance dependencies that are found using multiple alignments. According to our experiments, the proposed method is the most accurate one relying on long reads only for read sets with high coverage. Furthermore, when the coverage of the read set is at least 75Â, the throughput of the new method is at least 20% higher. Availability and Implementation: LoRMA is freely available at http://www.cs.helsinki.fi/u/Imsalmel/
IntroductionWith the diminishing costs, high-throughput DNA sequencing has become a commonplace technology in biological research. Whereas the second generation sequencers produced short but quite accurate reads, new technologies such as Pacific Biosciences and Oxford NanoPore are producing reads up to 50 000 bp long but with an error rate at least 15%. Although the long reads have proven to be very helpful in applications like genome assembly (), the error rate poses a challenge for the utilization of this data. Many methods have been developed for correcting short reads () but these methods are not directly applicable to the long reads because of their much higher error rate. Moreover, most research of short read error correction has concentrated on mismatches, the dominant error type in Illumina data, whereas in long reads indels are more common. Recently, several methods for error correction of long reads have also been developed. These methods fall into two categories: either the highly erroneous long reads are self-corrected by aligning them against each other, or a hybrid strategy is adopted in which the long reads are corrected using the accurate short reads that are assumed to be available. Most standalone error correction tools like proovread (), LoRDEC (), LSC () and Jabba () are hybrid methods. PBcR () is a tool that can employ either the hybrid or self-correction strategy. Most hybrid methods like PBcR, LSC and proovread are based on the mapping approach. They first map the short reads on the long reads and then correct the long reads according to a consensus built on the mapped short reads. PBcR extends this strategy to selfcorrection of PacBio reads by computing overlaps between the long reads using probabilistic locality-sensitive hashing and then correcting the reads according to a consensus built on the overlapping reads. As the mapping of short reads is time and memory consuming, LoRDEC avoids the mapping phase by building a de Bruijn graph (DBG) of the short reads and then threading the long reads through this graph to correct them. Jabba is a recent tool that is also based on building a DBG of short reads. While LoRDEC finds matches of complete k-mers in the long reads, Jabba searches for maximal exact matches between the k-mers and the long reads allowing it to use a larger k in the DBG. In this paper, we present a self-correction method for long reads that is based on DBGs and multiple alignments. First our method performs initial correction that is similar to LoRDEC, but uses only long reads and performs iterative correction rounds with longer and longer k-mers. This phase considers only the local context of errors and hence it misses the long-distance dependency information available in the long reads. To capture such dependencies, the second phase of our method uses multiple alignments between carefully selected reads to further improve the error correction. Our experiments show that our method is currently the most accurate one relying on long reads only. The error rate of the reads after our error correction is less than half of the error rate of reads corrected by PBcR using long reads only. Furthermore, when the coverage of the read set is at least 75, the size of the corrected read set of our method is at least 20% higher than for PBcR.