Motivation: 3 0 end processing is important for transcription termination , mRNA stability and regulation of gene expression. To identify 3 0 ends, most techniques use an oligo-dT primer to construct deep sequencing libraries. However, this approach can lead to identification of artifactual polyadenylation sites due to internal priming in homopo-lymeric stretches of adenines. Although heuristic filters have been applied in these cases, they typically result in a high proportion of both false-positive and-negative classifications. Therefore, there is a need to develop improved algorithms to better identify mis-priming events in oligo-dT primed sequences. Results: By analyzing sequence features flanking 3 0 ends derived from oligo-dT-based sequencing, we developed a naı¨venaı¨ve Bayes classifier to classify them as true or false/internally primed. The resulting algorithm is highly accurate, outperforms previous heuristic filters and facilitates identification of novel polyadenylation sites.
INTRODUCTION3 0 end processing of pre-mRNAs influences transcription termination, mRNA stability and localization and dynamic regulation of translation. In plants, yeast and metazoans, sequence elements in the 3 0 untranslated region (3 0 UTR) direct cleavage and polyadenylation (reviewed in). Among these elements is the polyadenylation signal (PAS), a defined hexameric sequence located 1030 nucleotides (nt) upstream of the cleavage and polyadenylation site (pA site), which binds Cleavage and Polyadenylation Specificity Factor complex (). The PAS predominantly comprises the sequence AAUAAA (), although single nucleotide variants are also functional (). In addition to the PAS, a guanine/uracil-or uracil-rich downstream sequence element can be found 2040 nt downstream of the pA site that is recognized by Cleavage Stimulatory Factor (). In some instances, a uracil-rich sequence element is present upstream of the PAS, which may also act to enhance usage of a specific PAS by recruiting Cleavage Factor I (). In combination, these sequence elements help define the site of cleavage and polyadenylation at the 3 0 end of a pre-mRNA. Most efforts to identify 3 0 ends of mRNAs have relied on priming with an oligonucleotide of deoxythymines (oligo-dT). These efforts include early studies relying on expressed sequence tags (ESTs;), as well as more recent work using deep sequencing (reviewed in). These include Poly(A) Site sequencing (PAS-Seq;) and PolyA-Seq (), which rely on oligo-dT containing primers for first strand cDNA synthesis. While these approaches are technically straightforward, oligo-dT binding can occur in internal homopolymeric stretches of adenines () leading to identification of false-positive pA sites. A more selective method is poly(A)-position profiling by sequencing (referred to as 3pseq), where a splint RNA:DNA oligonucleotide with overhanging thymines is hybridized and ligated to the polyadenylated tail of mRNAs to prevent internal priming (). However, 3pseq is technically demanding and most laboratories are more likely to use oligo-dTprimed approaches. In these latter cases, internal priming events are generally filtered from datasets based on the number of adenines in the genomic sequence downstream of the cleavage site (). However, the strict definition of these heuristic filters inevitably misses some internal priming events (false positives) and also excludes true 3 0 ends (false negatives;). Thus, additional methods are needed to easily analyze oligo-dT primed deep sequencing data to identify true pA sites. A navenave Bayes classifier, based on Bayes theorem, is a supervised learning algorithm in which the features used to predict the class are considered conditionally independent (). NaveNave Bayes classifiers are computationally efficient, require relatively small training datasets, handle both continuous and discrete features and ignore non-relevant features (). Here, we demonstrate the effectiveness of a navenave Bayes classifier to identify internal priming events in oligo-dT primed sequencing data. We find that our trained algorithm outperforms heuristic filters and enriches for 3 0 ends in oligo-dT sequencing data that bear canonical motifs important for cleavage and polyadenylation. Biological validation shows that our method is highly accurate, facilitating identification of novel 3 0 UTRs and 3 0 ends in multiple animal species.