Motivation: Techniques that are capable of automatically analyzing the information structure of scientific articles could be highly useful for improving information access to biomedical literature. However, most existing approaches rely on supervised machine learning (ML) and substantial labeled data that are expensive to develop and apply to different sub-fields of biomedicine. Recent research shows that minimal supervision is sufficient for fairly accurate information structure analysis of biomedical abstracts. However, is it realistic for full articles given their high linguistic and informational complexity? We introduce and release a novel corpus of 50 biomedical articles annotated according to the Argumentative Zoning (AZ) scheme, and investigate active learning with one of the most widely used ML models— Support Vector Machines (SVM)—on this corpus. Additionally, we introduce two novel applications that use AZ to support real-life literature review in biomedicine via question answering and summarization. Results: We show that active learning with SVM trained on 500 labeled sentences (6% of the corpus) performs surprisingly well with the accuracy of 82%, just 2% lower than fully supervised learning. In our question answering task, biomedical researchers find relevant information significantly faster from AZ-annotated than unannotated articles. In the summarization task, sentences extracted from particular zones are significantly more similar to gold standard summaries than those extracted from particular sections of full articles. These results demonstrate that active learning of full articles information structure is indeed realistic and the accuracy is high enough to support real-life literature review in biomedicine. Availability: The annotated corpus, our AZ classifier and the two novel applications are available at http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/
INTRODUCTIONTechniques that can help biomedical scientists access information in the rapidly growing body of biomedical literature are much needed. Especially, those capable of automatically identifying specific types of information in literature (e.g. information related to the methods or results used in different studies) can be particularly helpful. We focus on techniques that aim to identify the discourse or information structure of scientific documents () because such techniques have yielded promising results and have proved to benefit important tasks such as information extraction, summarization and scientific literature review (). However, most existing approaches use fully supervised machine learning (ML), which requires a large body of annotated data that is difficult and costly to obtain. This limits the applicability of the approaches to different domains and tasks in biomedicine. A more practical approach would use only minimal supervision for the learning process. A recent experiment shows that active learning using only a small amount of labeled data can identify the information structure of biomedical abstracts reliably (). However, most scientific tasks require access to full-text articles instead. Full articles are considerably more complex linguistically and in terms of information structure than abstracts. For example, their sentences tend to be longer and their structure more complex than in abstracts, including, for example, more frequent use of coordination, negation, passive and anaphora (). The information provided is richer () and the categories of information more numerous and less evenly distributed than in abstracts (see also our analysis in section 2.1). As a result, information structure analysis has proved more challenging for full articles than for abstracts (). We will investigate whether despite these challenges, weakly supervised learning could be used to identify the information structure of full-text biomedical articles with useful accuracy. We focus on Argumentative Zoning (AZ)a scheme that describes the rhetorical progression in scientific text ()because it has been successfully applied to various disciplines () and tasks (). However, as none of the AZ-annotated full-text corpora were publicly available, we developed our own corpus including 50 biomedical articles (consisting of 8171 sentences and 234 619 words). We use active learninga method that aims to reduce the cost of annotation by iteratively selecting the most informative instances to be labeledfor learning AZ of biomedical articles in our new corpus. Active learning was used for AZ of biomedical abstracts earlier byand it has been applied to various text classification tasks (e.g.), achieving performances close to that of fully supervised learning. In this study, we investigate its performance with one of the most widely used ML modelsSupport Vector Machines (SVM). In comparison with the related work on biomedical abstracts (), we deal with the complexity of full articles by performing a more detailed linguistic analysis (from sentence splitting to feature extraction), by making use of features that take context information into account, and by introducing a wider range of active learning strategies (e.g. Query-byCommittee). Trained on 500 labeled sentences (6% of the corpus) our method yields impressive accuracy of 82% on full articles, just 2% lower than that of fully supervised learning. In addition, we introduce two novel applications where the idea is to use AZ to support real-life literature review in biomedicine. We apply them to the area of cancer risk assessment, and use them for taskbased evaluation of our AZ approach. The first application focuses on question answering. We investigate whether biomedical researchers find relevant information faster from AZ-annotated than from unannotated full articles. The results show that the AZ-annotations accelerate the process by 2730%, making literature review considerably faster. The second application focuses on customized summarization. We use the application to create customized summaries for the conclusions of full articles as many biomedical scientists are particularly interested in these. The results show that sentences extracted from the Conclusion zone are significantly more similar to gold-standard summaries, with 4% higher ROUGE-1 F-score, than those extracted from the Discussion section of articles. In sum, our investigation shows that active learning can yield highly accurate results for AZ of full-text articles and that its performance is high enough to benefit real-life tasks in biomedicine. We make our AZ-annotated corpus available with this article, together with our novel applications so that they can benefit further research in this area where publicly available resources are scarce.