Motivation: There is a growing need in bioinformatics for easy-to-use software implementations of algorithms that are usable across platforms. At the same time, reproducibility of computational results is critical and often a challenge due to source code changes over time and dependencies. Results: The approach introduced in this paper addresses both of these needs with AlgoRun, a dedicated packaging system for implemented algorithms, using Docker technology. Implemented algorithms, packaged with AlgoRun, can be executed through a user-friendly interface directly from a web browser or via a standardized RESTful web API to allow easy integration into more complex workflows. The packaged algorithm includes the entire software execution environment, thereby eliminating the common problem of software dependencies and the irreproducibility of computations over time. AlgoRun-packaged algorithms can be published on http://algorun.org, a centralized searchable directory to find existing AlgoRun-packaged algorithms. Availability and implementation: AlgoRun is available at
IntroductionUsing software tools developed by the bioinformatics community presents several challenges, beginning with the installation of the software itself and its dependencies. Reproduction of computational results by others faces the challenge of frequent modifications in either the implementation of the algorithm itself or in one of its dependencies, or both (). Although code sharing is possible through online code repositories like GitHub, it is hard to share the entire computational environment that a given software implementation of an algorithm depends on.investigated the two main approaches to overcome these issues. The first approach is workflow software (). Although it provides technical solutions to the challenges of dissemination, it is marked by relatively low total adoption rates (). The second approach is the use of virtual machines (VMs) running on cloud services (). While this approach addresses the problem by capturing the entire software environment, it is sometimes perceived as being a 'black box' not well suited to ensuring reproducibility. Also, researchers cannot easily build on virtual machines in a consistent and scalable way (). A more recent approach to solve this problem is to use software containers, particularly Docker, an open source technology used to package applications and their dependencies into a standardized software container.showed that using Docker will overcome the problems related to dependency, documentation inaccuracy and code changes. In this paper, we present an enhancement to the software container approach by introducing AlgoRun. AlgoRun is aDocker-based software container template designed to provide traditional command-line algorithms with standard web capabilities: a web user interface and a RESTful web API to allow easy integration of algorithms into complex workflows. In the following sections, we introduce AlgoRun and we show how it can be used to package Bowtie (), a well-known bioinformatics software. For better readability, the term 'AlgoRun container' will now be used to refer to a 'Docker-based software container created with the AlgoRun template'.