Transposable elements constitute a large fraction of vertebrate genomes and, during evolution, may be co-opted for new functions. Exonization of transposable elements inserted within or close to host genes is one possible way to generate new genes, and alternative splicing of the new exons may represent an intermediate step in this process. The genes TMPO and ZNF451 are present in all vertebrate lineages. Although they are not evolutionarily related, mam-malian TMPO and ZNF451 do have something in common—they both code for splice isoforms that contain LAP2alpha domains. We found that these LAP2alpha domains have sequence similarity to repetitive sequences in non-mammalian genomes, which are in turn related to the first ORF from a DIRS1-like retrotransposon. This retrotransposon domestication happened separately and resulted in proteins that combine retrotransposon and host protein domains. The alternative splicing of the retrotransposed sequence allowed the production of both the new and the untouched original isoforms, which may have contributed to the success of the colonization process. The LAP2alpha-specific isoform of TMPO (LAP2a) has been co-opted for important roles in the cell, whereas the ZNF451 LAP2alpha isoform is evolving under strong purifying selection but remains uncharacterized.
IntroductionVertebrate genomes, like those of other eukaryotes, are largely constituted by transposable elements (TEs)up to two-thirds of the human genome according to a recent estimate (). The evolutionary history of TEs runs parallel to that of the host genome. All life forms are endowed with mechanisms to defend against the threat posed by the activity and expansion of TEs. Despite their threatening character, many TEs have been co-opted for new functions during evolutionary history, in what is considered a form of domestication (). Some TEs have contributed non-coding regulatory sequences, whereas others have given rise to new protein-coding genes.Basically, there are two means of co-opting TEs into genes. First, a TE (or part of one) may form a new whole gene. This is probably what occurred with TERT, the telomerase of eukaryotes, which probably originated from the reverse transcriptase (RT) of a nonLTR retrotransposon (). Alternatively, a TE can insert within or close to a pre-existing gene and combine with it to produce a new protein. This is what happened in the case of the histone methyltransferase SETMAR in the ancestor of primates. Here, a mariner-like DNA transposon inserted downstream of the SET CDS producing an exon that combined with the original exons to form a chimeric protein (SETMAR) with a new DNA-binding domain ().