Motivation: Some recent comparative studies have revealed that regulatory regions can retain function over large evolutionary distances, even though the DNA sequences are divergent and difficult to align. It is also known that such enhancers can drive very similar expression patterns. This poses a challenge for the in silico detection of biologically related sequences, as they can only be discovered using alignment-free methods. Results: Here, we present a new computational framework called Regulatory Region Scoring (RRS) model for the detection of functional conservation of regulatory sequences using predicted occupancy levels of transcription factors of interest. We demonstrate that our model can detect the functional and/or evolutionary links between some non-alignable enhancers with a strong statistical significance. We also identify groups of enhancers that are likely to be similarly regulated. Our model is motivated by previous work on prediction of expression patterns and it can capture similarity by strong binding sites, weak binding sites and even the statistically significant absence of sites. Our results support the hypothesis that weak binding sites contribute to the functional similarity of sequences. Our model fills a gap between two families of models: detailed, data-intensive models for the prediction of precise spatio-temporal expression patterns on the one side, and crude, generally applicable models on the other side. Our model borrows some of the strengths of each group and addresses their drawbacks. Availability: The RRS source code is freely available upon publication of this manuscript: http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/ systemsbiology/staff/ott/tools_and_software/rrs Contact
INTRODUCTIONCis-regulatory modules (CRMs) can drive precise spatio-temporal gene expression patterns. Some recent studies show that CRMs may function similarly in different species despite substantial sequence divergence (). This implies that, first, alignment-based sequence comparison tools are not applicable for further decoding the conserved function of such CRMs and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. second, some CRMs must share common patterns that drive almost identical regulatory outputs but possibly with different arrangements of binding sites. When different, but functionally related enhancer loci in the same species are considered, then alignment-based tools are not normally suitable for regulatory sequence comparisons as these sequences are not orthologous. Here, we present an alignment-free regulatory sequence comparison model called Regulatory Region Scoring (RRS) model, which is based on the potential distribution of transcription factors (TFs). Our goals are:(1) To be able to detect functionally similar enhancer regions even if the enhancer regions do not align.(2) To find groups of similar enhancers and determine relevant sequence features shared among enhancers within a group.