Motivation: Evolutionarily conserved non-coding genomic sequences represent a potentially rich source for the discovery of gene regulatory region such as transcriptional enhancers. However, detecting orthologous enhancers using alignment-based methods in higher eukaryotic genomes is particularly challenging, as regulatory regions can undergo considerable sequence changes while maintaining their functionality. Results: We have developed an alignment-free method which identifies conserved enhancers in multiple diverged species. Our method is based on similarity metrics between two sequences based on the co-occurrence of sequence patterns regardless of their order and orientation, thus tolerating sequence changes observed in non-coding evolution. We show that our method is highly successful in detecting orthologous enhancers in distantly related species without requiring additional information such as knowledge about transcription factors involved, or predicted binding sites. By estimating the significance of similarity scores, we are able to discriminate experimentally validated functional enhancers from seemingly equally conserved candidates without function. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach on a wide range of enhancers in Drosophila, and also present encouraging results to detect conserved functional regions across large evolutionary distances. Our work provides encouraging steps on the way to ab initio unbiased enhancer prediction to complement ongoing experimental efforts.
INTRODUCTIONThe identification of functional regulatory elements present in non-coding DNA sequences is complicated by the fact that such elements are highly variable and the sequence features are not sufficiently understood. However, functional elements tend to evolve at slower rates than non-functional regions because they are subject * To whom correspondence should be addressed. to selection. Due to this slower rate of evolution, comparisons among evolutionarily distant genomes make it possible to use sequence conservation to identify functional regions in the sea of non-coding DNA (;). The performance of this 'phylogenetic footprinting' strategy depends on the evolutionary distance between given species and on the conservation level of individual regulatory regions. A number of methods have used cross-species alignments to identify regulatory regions or elements (); in addition, standard tools such as BLAST () are regularly used to identify conserved (segments of) enhancers as well (). The availability of complete genomes also allows for applying general approaches to detect regions under selection in a multiple alignment, such as PhastCons which is based on a phylogenetic hidden Markov model (). Despite many individually successful applications, conservation based on sequence alignments can be a poor predictor of functional enhancers (). In contrast to protein-coding sequences, functional non-coding sequences are frequently not constrained in the ordering and number of functional elements within them (). Comparative sequence analysis have identified significant smallscale insertions, deletions and rearrangements of transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) within functional modules (). Tracking the evolutionary path of such noncoding elements is proving difficult with current alignment-based methods. A recent study on the conservation of the best characterized eukaryotic enhancers of the even-skipped gene, between Drosophila and the highly diverged sepsid flies shows that BLAST finds some short stretches of sequence similarity but scores too low to confirm the evolutionary relationship between those species (). It has also been shown that, especially in distantly related species, the enhancer sequences are simply not alignable (). The basic problem we address here thus poses itself as follows: given a regulatory region such as an enhancer without any prior knowledge of functional sites within, can we devise a way to identify its location in a (distantly) related species? And, given a candidate region, can we predict its functionality as an enhancer based on its conservation? With the availability of enormous sets of uncharacterized putative regulatory regions (e.g. based on assays detecting regions of open chromatin), methods tailored to these problems would be immensely useful for providing complementary evidence, and for studying the evolution of gene regulation at a larger scale. We address these two questions based on so-called alignment-free methods. These methods work under the assumption that similar sequences will share their word (k-mer) composition to some extent, comparing two sequences based on co-occurring words regardless of their order and orientation, thus making no prior assumptions on the presence of particular TFBSs. Vinga and Almeida (2003) performed an early systematic review on a number of different word frequency measures to identify similar regions between two given sequences. Recent studies have proposed and applied alignment-free methods to regulatory sequence problems:introduced the 'D2Z' score and used it to identify enhancers ab initio for genes with similarly annotated function in benchmark Drosophila melanogaster data ().combined motif detection in a set of enhancers with a score allowing for local permutations of motifs to identify conserved enhancers. Our work is based on vanwho introduced a Poisson-based metric which relies on probability theory for comparing sequences on the basis of pattern counts. In the original study, sets of yeast promoters of co-expressed genes were used to identify overrepresented words. The metric, restricted to this subset of words, was then successfully applied to cluster genes based on promoter similarity. In summary, previous approaches use alignment-free metrics in the same genome to either compare and cluster promoters (van), or to identify enhancers for sets of genes known to share regulatory patterns (); some also use sets of enhancers with similar function to first determine a subset of words on which similarity is calculated (). Different from these approaches, we here apply alignment-free approach on phylogenetic footprinting problems. Each candidate enhancer is regarded separately, eliminating the need of any additional information on known or predicted motifs, or on similarly regulated genes. We extend the Poisson-based metric to work with multiple related genomes and show that it successfully identifies the location of enhancer orthologs in distantly related species. We also show that appropriate significance values allow for separating functional from non-functional candidates, a task on which other alignment-based methods fail. We evaluate our approach on different sets of validated enhancers from the D.melanogaster genome, a well-studied model system for gene regulation.
CONCLUSIONWe show that candidate orthologous enhancers in multiple Drosophila and non-Drosophila genomes can be identified by an unbiased alignment-free method which uses no information of predicted or known functional motifs. Our results show promise in the effort to characterize non-coding sequence conservation on a higher functional rather than the nucleotide level. Since our method showed encouraging results in a wide range of Drosophila enhancers with different functions and active at different life stages, it will be interesting to explore its application for the discovery of regulatory modules in other organisms with larger and more complex non-coding sequence spaces.