Motivation: Prediction of synergistic effects of drug combinations has traditionally been relied on phenotypic response data. However, such methods cannot be used to identify molecular signaling mechanisms of synergistic drug combinations. In this article, we propose an enhanced Petri-Net (EPN) model to recognize the synergistic effects of drug combinations from the molecular response profiles, i.e. drug-treated microarray data. Methods: We addressed the downstream signaling network of the targets for the two individual drugs used in the pairwise combinations and applied EPN to the identified targeted signaling network. In EPN, drugs and signaling molecules are assigned to different types of places, while drug doses and molecular expressions are denoted by color tokens. The changes of molecular expressions caused by treatments of drugs are simulated by two actions of EPN: firing and blasting. Firing is to transit the drug and molecule tokens from one node or place to another, and blasting is to reduce the number of molecule tokens by drug tokens in a molecule node. The goal of EPN is to mediate the state characterized by control condition without any treatment to that of treatment and to depict the drug effects on molecules by the drug tokens. Results: We applied EPN to our generated pairwise drug combination microarray data. The synergistic predictions using EPN are consistent with those predicted using phenotypic response data. The molecules responsible for the synergistic effects with their associated feedback loops display the mechanisms of synergism. Availability: The software implemented in Python 2.7 programming language is available from request.
INTRODUCTIONA combination of drugs, or a drug cocktail, is a common therapeutic strategy used in oncology. The strategy reduces drug toxicology caused by high doses of single drugs and generates enhanced effects with lower doses of combined drugs. A combination of two drugs may generate same effect (simple additive), blunted effect (subadditive) and exaggerated effect (super-additive or synergistic). Drug combination focuses on the relationship between dosages and effects as well as the methodology distinguishing between additive and non-additive combinations. Methods of analysis for distinguishing between simple additivity and other non-additive outcomes include Lowe dose additivity (), Bliss independence (, Gaddum's non-interaction (highest single agent) () and Potentiation (). Among them, Lowe dose additivity is the most common model used in prediction of drug combination. Lowe dose additivity distinguishes additive and non-additive drug combinations by the combination index), where in case of an inhibitory drug, X refers to a specific percent inhibition level (e.g. 50%), C a,r and C b,r are the concentration of drugs A and B given in a combination of the two drugs, and IC X,a and IC X,b are the concentration of drugs A and B yielding the same effect level, when treated alone, as the combination. If CI  1, the drug combination has a subadditive effect, and if CI  1, the drug combination has a synergistic effect. However, the existing methods for prediction of synergistic effects of drug combinations restrict to the phenotypic response data, and, therefore, cannot be used to describe the underlying mechanisms of signal transductions or signaling pathways. The studies on signaling pathways and related interaction molecules would make it possible to recognize downstream effect of a drug or a drug combination on the targets. Exogenous signals are initially imposed on the receptors, which then carry the signals to second messengers, and eventually the signals are led to transcription-related molecules of DNA in the nucleus, such as transcription factors, RNA polymerases or histone modification complexes. Many drugs target on the upstream of signaling pathways, for example, membrane receptors or second messengers. They assert a long-term effect, called off-target effect (), on gene transcription-related molecules through the downstream signals along the pathway. Since the studies on drug targets alone are not sufficient to indicate the off-target effects, we need to develop computational models in order to simulate the effects of drugs on the signaling pathways. Many models have been established for network modeling on biological systems, such as ordinary differential equations (ODE), Fuzzy logic system (FLS) and Petri net (PN). ODE is to encode a network as a system of differential equations, which generates a detailed and biochemically realistic representation. However, the ODE model suffers the cost of many free parameters, which must be estimated. If the number of the nodes of the network reaches tens or hundreds, parameter estimation would become challenging. FLS modeling has the same parameter issue. Comparing with these quantitative models, PN model is a better choice to describe biological systems qualitatively. PN has been recently applied in metabolic (), genetic () and signaling networks () where few accurate kinetic data are accessible.
DISCUSSIONIn this article, we developed a new model, EPN, to predict the synergistic effects of pairwise drug combinations using drug-treated gene expression microarray data. The effects of drugs on molecule expressions and the associated pathways are simulated by the defined tokens and transitions in different colors in the model. Synergism is predicted using enhanced synergistic molecules recognized by EPN. The activated drug transitions help to interpret the mechanisms of the synergistic effects of the combinations.The application of EPN to the microarray profile for gefitinib and docetaxel not only predicts the synergistic dose pairs but also illustrates the mechanism for the synergistic effects. We identified that gefitinib dominates the synergistic effects while docetaxel assists gefitinib to achieve that. The results are also confirmed by the phenotypic response data as shown in. We tested another two dosages, 2.5 and 10 Mol, for genfitinib and another two dosages, 0.3 and 2.4 Mol, for docetaxel in the response data. We could see that the proliferation inhibition rates are significantly decreased along with the increase of dosage of gefitinib, and the tendency is, however, not with docetaxel. The molecule, KRT8, helps us to make it clear how the two drugs generate the synergistic effect. While the drugs treat the cells separately, gefitinib is known to inhibit the Ras pathway by its target, EGFR, so that the drug prevents the proliferation of cells. On the other hand, docetaxel binds to another target, TUBB1, instead of BCL2, which stabilizes microtubules and prevents depolymerization from calcium ions, decreased temperature and dilution, preferentially at the plus end of the microtubule. For the mechanisms of the synergistic combination of two drugs, it remains unclear. Our analysis indicates that gefitinib still uses the target EGFR and its downstream Ras pathway, while docetaxel alternatively imposes its effects on the target, BCL2, so that it helps gefitinib generate the synergistic effects on KRT8. KRT8 is also known as cytokeratin-8 (CK-8) or keratin-8 (K8) is a keratin protein that in human is encoded by the KRT8 gene. It is overexpressed in the patients of breast cancer. So it has been a prognostic biomarker for the patients of triple negative breast cancers () and invasive breast cancer (). Therefore, it is the synergistic molecules, such as KRT8, to help gefitinib and docetaxel to generate the synergistic effects. The proposed method of EPN is suitable for studying the targettherapy drugs. The model works best if the targets with their downstream signaling pathways are already known. Otherwise, one has to ask for assistance from other types of computational methods to simulate the downstream signaling network for the targets, for example, drugtarget identification or pathway simulation based on Bayesian network, Boolean network or other gene interaction network using the microarray or protein array data from the patients tissues or disease cell lines.