The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) code specified nearly 25 years ago provides a nomenclature for incompletely specified nucleic acids. However, no system currently exists that allows for the informatics representation of the relative abundance at polymorphic nucleic acids (e.g. single nucleotide polymorphisms) in a single specified character, or a string of characters. Here, I propose such an information code as a natural extension to the IUPAC nomenclature code, and present some potential uses and limitations to such a code. The primary anticipated use of this extended nomenclature code is to assist in the representation of the rapidly growing space of information in human genetic variation.
INTRODUCTIONThe International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) code specified nearly 25 years ago provides a nomenclature for incompletely specified nucleic acids (). The correct origin of the code is with the International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (IUBMB) but it has become more widely known as the IUPAC code. The IUPAC code, presented in, has been applied in a wide-ranging manner, contributing to many biologically and chemically meaningful representations, including: (i) recognition sequences (e.g. restriction enzymes, protein and RNA binding sites, consensus signals); (ii) codon degeneracy; (iii) sequence base calling ambiguity; (iv) representation of ancestral states in phylogenetics; and (v) to a vast extent in the fields of genetics and genomics in representing polymorphic nucleic acids, e.g. single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). However, no system currently exists that allows for the informatics representation of the relative abundance at polymorphic nucleic acids (e.g. SNPs) in a single specified character or a string of characters. Here I propose such an information code, displayed in, as a natural extension to the IUPAC nomenclature code, and present some potential uses and limitations to such a code. The original IUPAC code remains useful in all its previous applications and is also compatible as a subset of the extended code proposed here. The extended IUPAC code allows for new nucleic acid representations, in single characters or character strings,with potential applications in genetics, cross-species or crossstrain comparison, sequence alignment, bioinformatics, genome assembly, database design and querying and chemical sequencing and synthesis. The primary anticipated use of this extended nomenclature code is to assist in the representation of the rapidly growing space of information on human genetic variation.
DISCUSSIONThe development of an extended IUPAC code was primarily motivated by informatics issues within the realm of databases and research relating to genetic variability. It is predicted that in the near future full genome sequencing of many humans may be feasible and cost-effective, and that patients may approach clinicians, counselors and researchers for interpretations of their primary sequence data. While much attention has been paid to developing technologies to make such a situation feasible, little attention has been paid to the informatics challenges that would accompany it. Assembling and storing this volume of data is feasible with current computing standards, although perhaps not trivial whenmany genomes are considered (e.g. the 1000 Genomes Project, www.1000genomes.org). However, we currently have an incomplete and evolving picture of human genetic variation. A recent survey of CLIA-tested variants indicates that the majority of these arePage: 1388 13861389