Motivation: Abrupt reduction/resumption of thermal fluctuations of a force probe has been used to identify association/dissociation events of protein–ligand bonds. We show that off-rate of molecular dissociation can be estimated by the analysis of the bond lifetime, while the on-rate of molecular association can be estimated by the analysis of the waiting time between two neighboring bond events. However, the analysis relies heavily on subjective judgments and is time-consuming. To automate the process of mapping out bond events from thermal fluctuation data, we develop a hidden Markov model (HMM)-based method. Results: The HMM method represents the bond state by a hidden variable with two values: bound and unbound. The bond association/ dissociation is visualized and pinpointed. We apply the method to analyze a key receptor–ligand interaction in the early stage of hemo-stasis and thrombosis: the von Willebrand factor (VWF) binding to platelet glycoprotein Ib (GPIb). The numbers of bond lifetime and waiting time events estimated by the HMM are much more than those estimated by a descriptive statistical method from the same set of raw data. The kinetic parameters estimated by the HMM are in excellent agreement with those by a descriptive statistical analysis, but have much smaller errors for both wild-type and two mutant VWF-A1 domains. Thus, the computerized analysis allows us to speed up the analysis and improve the quality of estimates of receptor–ligand binding kinetics.
INTRODUCTIONDuring the early stage of hemostatic and thrombotic processes, platelets tether to and roll on the immobilized von Willebrand factor (VWF), which is mediated through binding between the 45 kDa N-terminal domain of the alpha subunit of the GPIb-IXV complex (GPIb) and the A1 domain of the VWF (). Disease-related mutations in the VWF have been found to change the mechanical regulation of platelet adhesion, resulting in the bleeding disorder von Willebrand disease (VWD) (). From a biophysical perspective, these mutations alter VWFGPIb binding kinetics. It has been shown that single-residue mutation R1450E that exhibits the type 2B VWD phenotype increases VWFGPIb binding affinity and supports the rolling of more platelets at slower velocities without a minimum shear requirement (). Another single-residue mutation G1324S that exhibits the type 2M VWD phenotype decreases the binding affinity between these two molecules (). The binding affinity is the ratio of the on-to off-rates, which quantifies the net effects of receptorligand association and dissociation. To measure the on-and off-rates separately, mechanical methods, such as the thermal fluctuation assay, that use ultrasensitive force probes, e.g. the biomembrane force probe (BFP;) and optical tweezers (), have been developed to measure the interactions of proteins immobilized on surfaces. The idea stems from the observation that force probes used for single-molecule experiments are usually susceptible to thermal fluctuations. The formation of a molecular bond spanning across the gap between the force probe and the target physically connects the two surfaces and reduces the thermal fluctuation of the force probe. In other words, the newly formed bond is equivalent to adding a constraint to the force probe (). In the analysis of experimental data, bond formation is detected from the reduction in the thermal fluctuation of the probe position, and bond dissociation is detected from the resumption of thermal fluctuation, as judged by the sliding standard deviation moving below or above certain thresholds. Although this descriptive statistical method is simple, it has several disadvantages: it is time-consuming, not robust, susceptible to noise and subjective. To overcome these drawbacks, we developed a Hidden Markov model (HMM)-based algorithm that provides an automatic and systematic procedure for analyzing thermal fluctuation data efficiently. We first assume a hidden state, bound or unbound, for each observed probe position. Given the hidden states, the probe positions are assumed to be independent and normally distributed with unknown parameters. The forwardbackward algorithm () was used to estimate the underlying states and unknown parameters. Because of its versatility in modeling and robustness in prediction performance, HMM has wide applications in computational biology. For example, HMMs can detect tumor subtypes with *To whom correspondence should be addressed. yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. microarray data () and identify protein-binding sites in DNA (). However, to the best of our knowledge, no HMM-based computer algorithm has been developed for analyzing thermal fluctuation data. In the thermal fluctuation assay, if the probe is in either the bound or unbound state at one moment, it is more likely to be in the same state at the next moment. This memory effect can be successfully captured by assuming a Markovian structure at the transition of the underlying states (Y.Hung et al., submitted for publication). Furthermore, HMM enables us to provide statistical inference such as the confidence interval and the prediction interval. In particular, by using the likelihood ratio test based on the fitted HMM, we can verify the memory effect objectively and rigorously in repeated adhesions (Y. Hung et al., submitted for publication). This article is organized as follows. Sections 2.1 and 2.2 describe the experiment setup and the existing method. Section 2.3 illustrates the procedures to analyze thermal fluctuation data. Sections 2.42.7 discuss the modeling and computation of HMM. In Section 3, we use the HMM to derive kinetic rates by analyzing thermal fluctuation data obtained for the interaction of VWF-A1 and glycocalicin (GC), the extracellular portion of GPIb. We also show the performance of the HMM method in comparison to the manual method based on descriptive statistics. In addition to running a performance test of the HMM method with the dataset of wild-type (WT) A1, we ran more performance tests with datasets of two single-residue A1 VWD mutants, R1450E (type 2B) and G1324S (type 2M). All above show that the HMM method is far easier to use. Section 4 presents the discussion and concluding remarks.
DISCUSSIONIt has long been recognized that changes in thermal fluctuation can be used to identify single-molecule events. This idea was implemented in early work to probe the duration and contact stiffness of myosin motors interacting with actin filament (). More recently, it was used to analyze 2D kinetics of adhesion molecules interacting with their ligands (), to measure molecular elasticity (), and to determine protein conformational changes (). Some studies used BFP that was customdesigned and home-made in a handful of laboratories (). Others used optical tweezers () and atomic force microscope () that are commercially available in many laboratories. Therefore, these methods have high potential for a broad range of applications by many investigators. Unfortunately, previous analyses were done using merely eyeballing () or descriptive statistical analysis (). The drawbacks of these primitive analyses may limit the applications of the thermal fluctuation methods because the descriptive statistical-based algorithm is time-consuming, subjective and prone to noise and error. In this study, we developed a computational algorithm based on analytical statistics rather than descriptiveThe relative error of off-rate versus P 0 by comparing the HMM with descriptive statistical method with the same data as the whole sequence statistics. The HMM-based algorithm automates and highthroughputs the processing of data and has the advantage of being rigorous and objective. We used the VWF-A1GC system to test the HMM method. The estimates from HMM are comparable with those from the descriptive statistical method (manual analysis) (Figs 1C and 3A) with the same tuning parameters (Figs 4 and 5). This article compares the on-() and off-() rates of GC interactions with WT and two mutant A1 domains. At static conditions, platelet GPIb does not bind WT VWF unless a modulator ristocetin is added to induce the conformational activation of the A1 domain (). By comparison, the type 2B VWD mutant R1450E binds GPIb spontaneously without ristocetin (), whereas the type 2M VWD mutation G1324S abolishes the ristocetin-induced binding to GPIb (). Our kinetics measurements correlate well with these biochemical characterizations in that the R1450E mutant gains the function with an increased on-rate, whereas the G1324S mutant loses the function with a decreased on-rate (). The data indicate that the association kinetics reflect the conformational states of VWF-A1. There has recently been significant progress in correlating protein structure and binding kinetics. A web server has been developed for prediction of association rate constant by incorporating the protein conformational changes based on the archived proteinligand complex structures (). Complementing such efforts, the HMM method combined with the thermal fluctuation assay provides experimentally measured binding kinetics and their correlation to protein structure and function. The HMM method consistently shows higher accuracy than the manual method regardless of the biological variation embedded inside the datasets (and B). Furthermore, it also detects far more waiting time and bond lifetime events than the descriptive method (and D). Possible reasons for the descriptive method to capture less events include the following: first, the calculation of sliding standard deviation 90 may not resolve short bonds if their lifetimes are shorter than the chosen length of the sliding window. Thus, the calculation mixes both bound and unbound observations, which may miss many waiting times and short bond lifetime events; second, the decision rule (bound versus unbound) of the descriptive statistical method heavily relies on an empirical threshold. In most cases, this threshold will be manually drawn in a conservative way to avoid false positive annotation caused by noise. Because the reduction of variance by bond formation is relatively small and may not be detected sometimes, the manual method tends to miss bonds when experimental noise is not well controlled. Aside from its advantage of robustness in prediction (), the HMM method is more convenient and requires less learning times than the descriptive method (). The comparison was made after an automated prescreening process to eliminate erroneous data resulted from the experimental errors, drifting and noises (). It should be noted that the HMM method shares the same biophysical rationales as the descriptive method, but provides the statistical basis to computerize the manual analysis. Yet, it requires on average 30 s for the HMM to finish annotation of one data trace but it takes 5 min for the manual method to do so (Figs 1C and 3A).