Motivation: Unraveling the molecular mechanisms that underlie disease calls for methods that go beyond the identification of single causal genes to inferring larger protein assemblies that take part in the disease process. Results: Here, we develop an exact, integer-programming-based method for associating protein complexes with disease. Our approach scores proteins based on their proximity in a protein– protein interaction network to a prior set that is known to be relevant for the studied disease. These scores are combined with interaction information to infer densely interacting protein complexes that are potentially disease-associated. We show that our method outperforms previous ones and leads to predictions that are well supported by current experimental data and literature knowledge. Availability and Implementation: The datasets we used, the executables and the results are available at
IntroductionThe association of genes with disease is a fundamental problem with important medical applications. Gene prioritization techniques are based on different types of data ranging from sequence and homology information to function and molecular interactions (see Bromberg, 2013 for a review). State-of-the-art methods for prioritization employ proteinprotein interaction (PPI) information, based on the empirical finding that genes that cause similar diseases tend to lie close to one another in the PPI network. Many methods have been developed following this reasoning.score a candidate gene in a linkage interval according to the clinical overlap between the phenotypes associated with its interactors and the disease in question.perform a random walk on the PPI network, starting at the known disease genes, and rank candidate genes by the steady state probabilities induced by the walk.apply a propagation algorithm that starts at causal genes, weighted by the phenotypic similarity of the disease they cause and a query disease, and compute a strength-ofassociation function that is smooth over the network.focused on the tissue where a given disease is manifested and executed the same propagation algorithm over a tissue-specific network that was inferred by gene expression data. Another approach for performing gene prioritization is via inference from existing functional annotations. For example,rank candidate genes by the semantic similarity of their GO annotations () to the GO terms associated with the known disease genes. This approach, however, relies on the availability of gene annotations and thus could miss related genes with yet unknown function. A related line of works relies on the description and comparison of phenotypes using ontologies (). In particular,computed all the pairwise similarities between phenotypes in several organisms as well as phenotypes associated with human diseases. A model organism phenotype that exhibits high similarity to a human phenotype may suggest the corresponding genotype as a candidate for the human disease.integrated this approach with exome sequence analysis by considering both the phenotypic relevance of a gene as well as evidence from its sequence reflecting the rarity and pathogenicity of the gene's variants. Despite the availability of numerous methods for exposing the genomic basis underlying human diseases, most of these methods are limited to the discovery of individual genes. Many studies, however, link diseases to dysfunctions of assemblies of proteins working in concert. A well-known example is the Leigh syndrome, an inherited neurometabolic disorder caused by deficiencies in mitochondrial complexes (