Motivation: Metabolic flux analysis (MFA) is a commonly used approach for quantifying metabolic fluxes based on tracking isotope labeling of metabolite within cells. Tandem mass-spectrometry (MS/ MS) has been recently shown to be especially useful for MFA by providing rich information on metabolite positional labeling, measuring isotopic labeling patterns of collisional fragments. However, a major limitation in this approach is the requirement that the positional origin of atoms in a collisional fragment would be known a priori, which in many cases is difficult to determine. Results: Here we show that MS/MS data could also be used to improve flux inference even when the positional origin of fragments is unknown. We develop a novel method, metabolic flux analysis/un-known fragments, that extends on standard MFA and jointly searches for the most likely metabolic fluxes together with the most plausible position of collisional fragments that would optimally match measured MS/MS data. MFA/UF is shown to markedly improve flux prediction accuracy in a simulation model of gluconeogenesis and using experimental MS/MS data in Bacillus subtilis.
INTRODUCTIONMetabolic flux analysis (MFA) enables the determination of in vivo metabolic fluxes and is commonly used to address problems in biotechnology and medicine (). It is based on feeding cells with isotopelabeled nutrients, measuring isotopic labeling patterns of intracellular metabolites and applying computational approaches that analyze metabolite labeling data to estimate fluxes (). Biotechnological applications of MFA are especially diverse and include metabolic engineering, pathway discovery, filling gaps in annotated genomes and mapping of environmental microbial metabolism (). The measurement of isotopic labeling patterns uses either NMR () or mass-spectrometry coupled with liquid (LC-MS) or gas (GC-MS) chromatography (). NMR provides detailed information on positional labeling of metabolites. However, NMR analysis requires a large amount of sample, long analysis times and expensive equipment (). On the other hand, mass spectrometry is more readily accessible, although it typically provides limited information on positional labeling, as isotopomers (i.e. distinct labeling patterns) with the same number of labeled atoms have the same mass regardless of their position. A set of isotopomers with the same mass is referred to as massisotopomers, whereas the relative abundance of a metabolite's mass-isotopomers is denoted as mass-isotopomer distribution. Tandem mass-spectrometry (MS/MS; e.g. GC-MS/MS and LC-MS/MS) provides information on metabolite positional labeling that can be used to improve flux inference (). It works by isolating a single parent ion from the full spectrum and measuring its mass, followed by a collision that yields product ions whose mass is also measured. We denote the mass-isotopomers of a parent ion by M0 (having no labeled atoms), M1 (having one labeled atom) and so forth, and the mass-isotopomers of a product ion by m0, m1 and so forth. Various MS/MS ion scanning modes enable to measure the mass-isotopomer distribution of a parent molecule as well as that of a fragmented product. Ruhl et al. have recently used LC-MS/MS to measure the mass-isotopomer distribution of various metabolite fragments in Bacillus subtilis, which were shown to improve flux inference (). MS/MS can further measure the abundance of specific collisional transitions from certain parent to product mass-isotopomers, referred to as tandem mass-isotopomers [e.g. a transition from parent mass-isotopomer M1 to product mass-isotopomer m1, denoted (M1 4 m1)]. The relative abundance of all tandem mass-isotopomers is referred to as tandem mass-isotopomer distribution. The importance of tandem mass-isotopomer distribution data for flux inference was also recently demonstrated (). A current limitation of using MS/MS data for MFA is that the positional origin of atoms in a collisional fragment must be known a priori, which in some cases may be difficult to infer. One method for inferring fragment positions involves injecting the mass-spec with multiple isotopically labeled standards (). However, this approach is limited by the lack of availability of such standards for most metabolites, as well as the high price of existing isotopic labeled standards. Another approach is to computationally predict fragment positions using rule-based and combinatorial fragmentation methods *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com (). Ruhl et al. have recently applied such methods to examine the position of 172 MS/MS collisional fragments of 20 metabolites in B.subtilis. However, considering that these methods predicted multiple possible positions for most fragments and that further experimental validation of predicted positions is of need, the unique position of just $10% of the fragments was determined and used for flux inference. Here, we show that MS/MS data can be highly valuable for MFA, even when fragment positions are unknown. Specifically, we suggest an extension to the standard MFA approach, metabolic flux analysis/unknown fragments (MFA/UFs), which uses steady-state MS/MS data to jointly infer the most likely fluxes in a metabolic network and the positional origin of fragment atoms. The method is first applied to predict fluxes in a simulation model of gluconeogenesis given metabolite tandem massisotopomer distribution data. Then, it is applied to predict fluxes in B.subtilis given measured mass-isotopomer distributions for both intact metabolites and their collisional fragments. In both cases, an improved flux prediction performance of MFA/UF in comparison with the standard MFA approach is demonstrated.