Motivation: Repeats detection problems are traditionally formulated as string matching or signal processing problems. They cannot readily handle gaps between repeat units and are incapable of detecting repeat patterns shared by multiple sequences. This study detects short adjacent repeats with interunit insertions from multiple sequences. For biological sequences, such studies can shed light on molecular structure, biological function and evolution. Results: The task of detecting short adjacent repeats is formulated as a statistical inference problem by using a probabilistic generative model. An Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm is proposed to infer the parameters in a de novo fashion. Its applications on synthetic and real biological data show that the new method not only has a competitive edge over existing methods, but also can provide a way to study the structure and the evolution of repeat-containing genes. Availability: The related C++ source code and datasets are available at http://compbio.cs.wayne.edu/software/squeezamblerl.
INTRODUCTIONIn the past decades, the identification of repetitive patterns in biological sequences, especially approximate tandem repeats in DNA sequences, has attracted researchers from many fields. Yet, it still remains as a challenging problem. A tandem repeat in DNA is a sequence segment containing two or more contiguous, approximate copies of a pattern of nucleotides (). In this article, we expand our views by relaxing the constraint of consecutiveness and allowing of short gaps, i.e. interunit insertions, between neighboring units because gaps have been frequently observed in natural repeats. We name this type of repeats with short gaps as short adjacent repeats. An example of short adjacent repeat would be AT ATgCG ATCCGt ATCCGcc ATCCcTC , where a gap composed of one background nucleotide t is inserted between the second repeat unit and the third repeat unit, and another gap composed of two background nucleotides cc is inserted between the third repeat unit and the fourth repeat unit. The consensus of its sequence pattern ATCCG has a width of 5 bp and the copy number * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of this repeat equals to 4. The lower case highlights the variations from the consensus. The detection of short adjacent repeats is of considerable significance. Taking tandem repeats as an instance, in recent decades, more and more researches have suggested that tandem repeats play an important role in genetic mapping (), gene regulation () and human diseases (). Almost all repeats detection methods formulated it as either a string matching problem or a signal processing problem. To avoid excessive running time, most of the string matching algorithms are composed of two steps (). They first filter out obvious non-repetitive regions of the sequence using some statistical properties or find out repetitive regions using some heuristical methods, and then search locally for a match between a pattern and a subsequence in those candidate repetitive regions. Recently, more and more signal-processing-based methods have been proposed (). Signal-processing techniques, such as discrete Fourier transform, short-time periodicity transform, exact periodic subspace decomposition and autoregressive modelling, are used for spectral analysis. The above formulations often suffer from two constraints:(i) as they largely rely on the periodicity of a short segment, they cannot readily handle gaps between repeat units; (ii) they could be used to detect tandem repeats in one sequence only, in other words, they are blind to the enriched repetitive pattern shared by multiple sequences where the polymorphic nature might contribute to specialization and generation of diversity in biological functions (). This article attempts to tackle both issues. Specifically, we not only generalize the repeat model by introducing gaps between neighboring repeat units, but also expand the scope of identifying short adjacent repeats to multiple sequences. This is especially helpful in the case where interunit insertions appear to be common and where the sequence pattern shared by multiple sequences from some particular loci shed light on molecular structure, biological function and evolution. Our full probabilistic model for repeats detection was inspired by, which used the sequence motif model to detect the enriched dispersed pattern in multiple sequences. In the scenario of repeats detection, the same pattern is also enriched in a local neighborhood within each sequence. Our model is built to make use of the two levels ofPage: 1773 17721779
CONCLUSIONIn this article, we expand the views of tandem repeats by introducing short adjacent repeats. In order to handle gaps between neighboring repeat units, we design a baseG+1 numeral vector data structure. Also, we expand the scope of identifying short adjacent repeats to multiple DNA sequences, by relaxing the implicit assumption of a single DNA sequence in existing methods. This is helpful for analyzing the relationship among input sequences, e.g. DNA sequences of different species in the course of evolution. To detect short adjacent repeats, we introduce a full probabilistic generative model to model repeats in multiple sequences. In this article, we only considered the case where each sequence contains only one repeat segment. If there are indeed more than one repeat segment in one sequence, BASARD is likely to report the most probable one. It is also possible that no repeat segment exists in some sequence. In this case, BASARD might report a repeat segment made up of only one repeat unit and its starting position might vary randomly. In order to help exclude this kind of false positive, BASARD also reports the significance level of each estimated repeat unit, i.e. the P-value of such repeat unit under the background distribution. If the P-value is larger than a prespecified threshold, it is recommended to deny the corresponding estimated repeat units and conclude that the corresponding sequence actually does not contain the repeat pattern. Similar to the motif discovery problem in, our algorithm can be extended to allow multiple repeat segments per sequence by introducing an indicator vector for each sequence,indicates that a repeat segment occurs from position l within the n-th sequence; otherwise  n,l = 0. We introduce a Bayesian approach to detect short adjacent repeats in a de novo fashion. To improve computing efficiency, we use a collapsing technique to reduce the dimension of the parameter space. After the MCMC chain converges, the sampled parameter values give us a whole picture of their joint posterior distribution. In the end, we demonstrate the effectiveness of BASARD through experiments on both synthetic data and real data. The Bayesian model and its Metropolis-in-Gibbs sampling strategy for identifying short adjacent repeats in multiple sequences can find many applications, not only in areas of biology, but also in other fields. Our work takes the initial step to enable this repeat identification across multiple sequences and serves as a call for participation. Many interesting and important directions are worth exploring. For example, our work is limited by not allowing intraunit insertions and deletions. We might refer to motif discovery work byto deal with this kind of variations. Same as most existing purely likelihood-based methods, the length-bias Page: 1779 17721779