Motivation: Circadian rhythms are prevalent in most organisms. Identification of circadian-regulated genes is a crucial step in discovering underlying pathways and processes that are clock-controlled. Such genes are largely detected by searching periodic patterns in microarray data. However, temporal gene expression profiles usually have a short time-series with low sampling frequency and high levels of noise. This makes circadian rhythmic analysis of temporal microarray data very challenging. Results: We propose an algorithm named ARSER, which combines time domain and frequency domain analysis for extracting and characterizing rhythmic expression profiles from temporal microarray data. ARSER employs autoregressive spectral estimation to predict an expression profiles periodicity from the frequency spectrum and then models the rhythmic patterns by using a harmonic regression model to fit the time-series. ARSER describes the rhythmic patterns by four parameters: period, phase, amplitude and mean level, and measures the multiple testing significance by false discovery rate q-value. When tested on well defined periodic and non-periodic short time-series data, ARSER was superior to two existing and widely-used methods, COSOPT and Fishers G-test, during identification of sinusoidal and non-sinusoidal periodic patterns in short, noisy and non-stationary time-series. Finally, analysis of Arabidopsis microarray data using ARSER led to identification of a novel set of previously undetected non-sinusoidal periodic transcripts, which may lead to new insights into molecular mechanisms of circadian rhythms. Availability: ARSER is implemented by Python and R. All source codes are available from http://www.bioinformatics.csiro.au/Blue.These
INTRODUCTIONCircadian rhythm is one of the most well-studied periodic processes in living organisms. DNA microarray technologies have often been applied in circadian rhythm studies (). Thus, we can monitor the mRNA expression of the whole-genome level, which is an effective way to simultaneously identify many hundreds or thousands of periodic transcripts. The matter to be addressed is which genes are rhythmically expressed based on their gene expression profiles. This can be classified as a periodicity identification problem. However, there are computational challenges when dealing with this issue: sparse determination of sampling rate, and short periods of data collection for microarray experiments (). Circadian microarray experiments are usually designed to collect data every 4 h over a course of 48 h, generating expression profiles with 12 or 13 time-points (Yamada and Ueda, * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
CONCLUSIONIn this study, we present an automated algorithm for identifying periodic patterns in large-scale temporal gene expression profiles. It employs harmonic regression based on AR spectral analysis to identify and model circadian rhythms. Compared with separate frequency-domain or time-domain methods, our methodology is a joint strategy which analyzes the time-series through both frequency and time domains. Testing on synthetic and real microarray data showed that our novel method was computationally optimal and substantially more accurate than two existing and widely-used rhythmicity detection techniques (COSOPT and Fisher's G-test).In addition, our method identifies a novel set of rhythmically expressed Arabidopsis genes which may supply more valuable information for further study of plant circadian systems.