Motivation: Alternative splicing is an important mechanism in which the regions of pre-mRNAs are differentially joined in order to form different transcript isoforms. Alternative splicing is involved in the regulation of normal physiological functions but also linked to the development of diseases such as cancer. We analyse differential expression and splicing using RNA-sequencing time series in three different settings: overall gene expression levels, absolute transcript expression levels and relative transcript expression levels. Results: Using estrogen receptor a signaling response as a model system, our Gaussian process-based test identifies genes with differential splicing and/or differentially expressed transcripts. We discover genes with consistent changes in alternative splicing independent of changes in absolute expression and genes where some transcripts change whereas others stay constant in absolute level. The results suggest classes of genes with different modes of alternative splicing regulation during the experiment. Availability and Implementation: R and Matlab codes implementing the method are available at https://github.com/PROBIC/diffsplicing. An interactive browser for viewing all model fits is available at
IntroductionAlternative splicing is an important mechanism for increasing proteome complexity in eukaryotes. A great majority of human genes have been found to exhibit alternative splicing with a growing number of annotated spliceforms (). Changes in splicing are important for cell differentiation (). Abnormal splicing has been associated with many diseases, including cancer () as well as neurodegenerative diseases (). Our ability to study and understand alternative splicing is limited by the technology to measure it. The most widely used method is RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq). There are emerging sequencing techniques that enable sequencing of full-length mRNAs (), but they do not match the sequencing depth and economy of short-read sequencing technologies which are needed at least to complement the long read sequencing for more reliable quantification of low-abundance genes and transcripts. Analysis of short-read RNAseq data raises a difficult problem to identify and infer the expression levels of transcript isoforms from reads that are too short to uniquely map to a single isoform. Several methods have been developed to solve this problem (e.g.), whereas others have focused on inference of individual alternative splicing events instead of full transcript quantification (). A recent evaluation found that especially the transcript assembly problem is currently too difficult to solve reliably from short-read data (), and recommended quantification based on known annotated transcripts. Even for this problem there is significant variation between alternative methods (). Our study is motivated by the desire to understand the principles of the regulation of splicing. On a large scale, DNA/RNA sequence motifs () and epigenetics () are important factors in regulation of splicing
ConclusionIn this article, we have presented a method for detecting temporal changes in gene expression and splicing as well as transcript expression patterns that successfully incorporates uncertainty arising from RNA-seq quantification in the analysis. We evaluated the performance of our method under different experiment designs in a simulation study. Our results again confirm the importance of replication in genomic analyses. In our clean synthetic data adding a second replicate gives a dramatic boost but improvements from having more than two replicates of the entire time course are modest. Things may of course not be as simple for real data where a third replicate could at least be very useful for detecting corrupted and otherwise significantly diverging measurements that could otherwise decrease the power. We compared approaches based on noise variances inferred only from the data and using posterior variance from BitSeq as a lower bound on the noise for the GP. The BitSeq variances were found to be very useful in unreplicated case as well as for transcript-level analyses. We also experimented with a computational method for modeling variances to fill in missing replicates with information propagated from a single replicated time point. The results indicate that this method can increase the accuracy of the analyses. However, in the case of transcript relative expression there are still unsolved technical challenges that may have a role in the performance. As the variance of the relative transcript expression levels depends on the variances of the overall gene expression levels and the absolute transcript expression levels as well as the covariance between them, which we did not take into account here, it is not straightforward to model the variance for the relative transcript expression levels and it would require more powerful methods which would be suitable for compositional data. Application of our method to the analysis of splicing patterns during estrogen receptor signaling response in a human breast cancer cell line lead to the discovery of classes of genes with different kinds of splicing and expression changes. We found several genes for which the relative expression levels of different transcripts remain approximately constant whereas the total gene expression level changes and for which the relative expression levels change apparently independently of the total expression level, consistent with a i154 H.Topa and A.Honkela model of independent regulation of total expression level and relative splicing levels. There appears however to also be a potentially more interesting set of genes where the absolute expression of some transcripts remains constant whereas the expression level of others changes. These examples suggest a link between regulation of gene expression and splicing, but further research with careful controls is needed to assess how common this phenomenon is. The finding nevertheless suggests that alternative splicing analyses need to combine both absolute and relative transcript expression analyses.