Motivation: Increasing rates of publication and DNA sequencing make the problem of finding relevant articles for a particular gene or genomic region more challenging than ever. Existing text-mining approaches focus on finding gene names or identifiers in English text. These are often not unique and do not identify the exact genomic location of a study. Results: Here, we report the results of a novel text-mining approach that extracts DNA sequences from biomedical articles and automatically maps them to genomic databases. We find that ∼ 20% of open access articles in PubMed central (PMC) have extractable DNA sequences that can be accurately mapped to the correct gene (91%) and genome (96%). We illustrate the utility of data extracted by text2genome from more than 150 000 PMC articles for the interpretation of ChIP-seq data and the design of quantitative reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR experiments. Conclusion: Our approach links articles to genes and organisms without relying on gene names or identifiers. It also produces genome annotation tracks of the biomedical literature, thereby allowing researchers to use the power of modern genome browsers to access and analyze publications in the context of genomic data. Availability and implementation: Source code is available under a BSD license from http://sourceforge.net/projects/text2genome/ and results can be browsed and downloaded at http://text2genome.org.
INTRODUCTIONA common challenge encountered by many biomedical researchers is to obtain a summary of the relevant literature pertaining to a particular gene or genomic region. With nearly 2000 articles added to MEDLINE on a daily basis (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/ bsd/index_stats_comp.html), it is increasingly difficult to keep up with the rapid pace of publication outside ones immediate domain of expertise. The problem of finding relevant articles for a particular locus is becoming more acute as researchers increasingly adopt high-throughput genomic technologies (microarrays, genomewide association studies, high-throughput sequencing, etc.). These * To whom correspondence should be addressed. genome-wide approaches often generate low-level data on thousands of genes or genomic regions, the interpretation of which becomes much more valuable when integrated with previously published studies on individual loci. The challenge of linking articles to genes is partially solved for a limited number of model organisms, where dedicated teams of curators scan the literature and link publications to gene records in individual model organism databases such as FlyBase (), or through federated multi-organism databases such as Entrez Gene (). However, these collections are not comprehensive and for the majority of species, including human, efforts to curate genearticle associations remain incomplete. In principle, automatic linking of articles to genes could be achieved by developing text-mining tools that detect gene names or identifiers in abstracts or full-text articles. However, gene names are not consistently used and are often not unique and developing accurate methods to resolve and disambiguate gene names in text and link them to database identifiers remains an active area of research (). Even with curated or automatically generated links between articles and genes, the exact genomic sequences referred to in an article currently can only be determined by human interpretation of the full text. Furthermore, specific questions such as 'which transcript was cloned?', 'which exon was amplified?' or 'where in the genome is a particular mutation found?' can take considerable time for an individual researcher to answer, often requiring laborintensive manual interaction between the literature and genomic databases. For publications where authors report DNA sequences directly, these problems could be solved if all published sequences were systematically sent to primary sequence databases such as GenBank (). However, in the post-genomic era fewer articles report primary DNA sequences directly and instead only report primers used for polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based techniques that are designed from published genome sequences. Furthermore, in contrast to longer DNA sequences, journals generally do not require deposition of short primer sequences in databases, and the minimum sequence length required for a GenBank submission is 50 bp (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ Sitemap/samplerecord.html). As such, many DNA sequences that could provide unique tags to link articles to specific genes and genomes remain locked in the biological literature. The possibility that DNA and protein sequences can be extracted from biomedical text was first demonstrated byand subsequently by several other groups ().[
DISCUSSIONIn an age of rapidly increasing amounts of DNA sequence data and published literature, finding peer-reviewed experimental results for a sequence of interest is more time consuming than ever. Here, we show that DNA sequences in full-text articles provide a rich source of 'unique identifiers' that can be automatically extracted and mapped to genomic data in order to link articles to species, genes and genomic regions. We confirm recent findings that a substantial number of OA articles in PMC contain extractable DNA sequences (), and provide the first quantitative estimate of the proportion of PMC-OA articles with DNA sequences ( 22%), the majority of which we show are short sequences that are not found in GenBank. Our study is also unique in that it presents the first attempt to apply sequence extraction techniques at a large scale to all types of both full text and supplementary data files, and in fact may be the first systematic application of text mining to supplementary files in any domain. Our observation that the majority of nucleotides in the PMC-OA corpus were extracted from supplementary files underscores the increasing reliance of authors to deposit important information contained in these files (), as well as the importance of using these resources for biological data mining and requiring ancillary research data to be persistently stored together with the main publication (). Future work will be necessary to determine if the quality of data from full text differs in any way from that obtained in supplementary files. We find that 96% of speciesarticle and 91% of genearticle associations predicted using text2genome match those based on GenBank submissions from articles discussing a single species or gene. When compared with a state-of-the-art text-mining method that attempts to associate articles to species or genes by named entity recognition, text2genome exhibits much higher performance than GNAT for species (72%) or gene (51%) prediction. Thus, if researchers are looking for genes specifically investigated at the molecular level in an article, our results indicate that DNA sequences in text provide a richer source of information than gene names. It is important to point out that our evaluation of these systems is benchmarked against genes from associated GenBank sequence submissions spanning a wide range or organisms. Since many more genes are mentioned in the literature than are actually studied experimentally and since GNAT only recognizes genes for a limited set of species, the performance of GNAT on our GenBank evaluation set may be reduced relative to benchmarks performed on gene names (). For both text2genome and GNAT, system performance is related to the number of predictions made per paper. The effects of multiple predictions are greater for genes relative to species for both systems, and influence precision and recall differentially for text2genome and GNAT. The difficulty that both systems have for gene prediction in documents that discuss many genes is consistent with the fact that human annotators do not always agree when asked to curate genes in articles [6991% depending on the dataset (. Despite these differences, there is a substantial degree of overlap between GNAT and text2genome genearticle mappings for some species such as human, suggesting that future full-text mining systems could fruitfully integrate sequence extraction together with named entity recognition to predict genearticle associations (). In addition to providing bidirectional links between articles and genes or species, text2genome allows accessing the biomedical literature using the powerful tools of modern genome browsers. In this manner, text2genome joins a limited number of other hybrid text-mining/genome bioinformatics systems that provide mechanisms to interpret the biomedical literature via genome browsers, such as PosMed () and LitTrack (http://littrack.chop.edu/cgi-bin/hgTracks). However, since PosMed and LitTrack rely on gene name recognition methods and therefore can only map articles to the gene level, genomic coordinates must be inferred indirectly by these systems, whether they are appropriate or not. By mapping at the DNA sequence level itself, text2genome can directly identify the exact set of nucleotides in a genome sequence that is analyzed in a study. This distinguishing feature of our system is critical for researchers studying non-genic sequences such as cis-regulatory regions or miRNA binding sites. Database curators in these and other areas could use our system to aid in the prioritization and extraction of experimental data from papers. Only  1% of all MEDLINE articles are available at the moment for full-text mining in the OA section of PMC. If we were to mine the full text and supplementary files of all 16.5 million articles inPage: 986 980986