Motivation: An effective docking algorithm for antibody–protein anti-gen complex prediction is an important first step toward design of biologics and vaccines. We have recently developed a new class of knowledge-based interaction potentials called Decoys as the Reference State (DARS) and incorporated DARS into the docking program PIPER based on the fast Fourier transform correlation approach. Although PIPER was the best performer in the latest rounds of the CAPRI protein docking experiment, it is much less accurate for docking antibody–protein antigen pairs than other types of complexes, in spite of incorporating sequence-based information on the location of the paratope. Analysis of antibody–protein antigen complexes has revealed an inherent asymmetry within these interfaces. Specifically, phenylalanine, tryptophan and tyrosine residues highly populate the paratope of the antibody but not the epitope of the antigen. Results: Since this asymmetry cannot be adequately modeled using a symmetric pairwise potential, we have removed the usual assumption of symmetry. Interaction statistics were extracted from antibody–pro-tein complexes under the assumption that a particular atom on the antibody is different from the same atom on the antigen protein. The use of the new potential significantly improves the performance of docking for antibody–protein antigen complexes, even without any sequence information on the location of the paratope. We note that the asymmetric potential captures the effects of the multi-body interactions inherent to the complex environment in the antibody–protein antigen interface. Availability: The method is implemented in the ClusPro protein docking server, available at http://cluspro.
INTRODUCTIONProteinprotein docking methods have significantly improved in the last few years. According to the last round of the blind protein docking experiment CAPRI (), automated protein docking servers performed comparably well with the top human predictor groups, without the use of biological information. In particular, our protein docking server ClusPro was the top protein docking server, as well as within the top 10 of all predictors. Despite these improvements, the docking of an antibody to its protein antigen, an important first step toward computational design of biologics and vaccines, remains particularly challenging for both ClusPro and other methods (). We note that although we focus on interactions between antibodies and proteins, for simplicity we define the problem as antibody antigen docking. It is no doubt that the relatively weak performance represents the state of art in protein docking. In fact,found ClusPro to better predict epitopes than methods that have been specifically developed for such predictions, although they used an earlier and less accurate version of the server. It is easy to see why docking antigenantibody pairs is much more difficult than docking inhibitors to enzymes. Enzymeinhibitor complexes generally exhibit excellent surface complementarity, with the convex inhibitor matching the concave binding site of the enzyme (). Most of the native enzymeinhibitor interfaces also have favorable hydrophobic and polar interactions, which facilitate docking and scoring (). In contrast, the interfaces in antibodyantigen complexes are mostly flat and less hydrophobic (). The flat interface implies that searching for surface complementarity provides little help in docking. In addition, the polar interactions are more sensitive to atomic positions than the hydrophobic ones, and hence scoring based on molecular mechanics energy functions including electrostatics becomes less reliable due to the inevitable conformational differences between free and bound protein structures. Thus, it is very important to develop scoring functions that account for these specific properties of the interface and can help finding near-native complex structures. It was shown by several groups that the inclusion of structure-based potentials in the energy function used for the docking can significantly improve performance (). Here, we describe the development and testing of an accurate pairwise interaction potential specific to antibodyantigen complexes. Based on statistical mechanics, structure-based potentials are traditionally derived from the 'inverse Boltzmann' principle (), assuming that frequently observed structural states are low energy states. In the first-order approximation, *To whom correspondence should be addressed. **The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. molecular interactions can be decomposed as the sum of pairwise atomatom interactions. The energy of interaction can be written as:where k is the Boltzmann constant, T the temperature, p obs IJ the probability of interactions between atoms of types I and J in an observed set (e.g. crystal structures) and p ref IJ is the probability of atoms of types I and J being within the interaction distance, in a state without any atom-type-specific interactions, the 'reference state'. We have recently reported a pairwise interaction potential called Decoys as the Reference State (DARS) (). The idea of DARS is generating a large set of docked conformations with good shape complementarity but without accounting for atom types, and using the frequency of interactions extracted from these DARS. In principle, the resulting potential is ideal for finding near-native conformations among structures obtained by docking and can be combined with other energy terms to be used directly in docking calculations. Accordingly, we incorporated DARS into the energy function used by our docking program PIPER (). Based on the fast Fourier transform (FFT) correlation approach, PIPER can perform global docking of unbound protein structures without any a priori information on the structure of the complex and was the best performing method in the latest round of the CAPRI protein docking experiment (). DARS improved the docking results for all classes of complexes. For enzymeinhibitor pairs, DARS provides both excellent discrimination and docking results, even with very small decoy sets. With a few exceptions, the DARS docking results are also good for complexes that occur in signal transduction pathways. However, for antibodyantigen pairs, results were substantially worse than for other types of complexes, although DARS performed slightly better than some earlier interaction potentials. The results were poor even when the location of the complementarity determining regions (CDRs) on the antibody was determined based on sequence information and the search was constrained to include the CDRs in the interface. Analyzing the potential sources of poor performance for antibodyantigen pairs, we arrived at the conclusions that the main problem is the inherent asymmetry of the interface in these types of complexes (). We recall that the pairwise structure-based potentials to model proteinprotein interactions automatically assume the symmetry of interactions between atoms on the two sides of the interface, i.e. that " IrecJlig  " JrecIlig , where I rec , J rec are atom types on the receptor and I lig , J lig are atom types on the ligand. However, it is easy to show that the assumption of symmetry limits the performance of the potential in antibodyantigen docking. As shown in, there is usually a large, hydrophobic region on the paratope of the antibody, containing a large number of tyrosines, tryptophans and phenylalanines, thus these three residues occur with high frequency in the interface. This is supported by residue interaction statistics gathered on the antibodyprotein interaction dataset, as shown in Supplementary Table S1. Based on these statistics, interactions between the atoms of these residues and any other atom on the other side of the interface appear to be favorable, resulting in a large negative pairwise energy term. Addition of this term will improve the location of the interface and thus the near-native conformation if these residues are on the paratope of the antibody. However, the tyrosines, tryptophans and phenylalanines on the antigen side are not found in the epitope with any higher frequency than on any other part of the protein. Thus, a favorable interaction term for these residues on the antigen leads to false positives, incorrectly predicting that any region of the antigen rich in these residues is likely to be part of the epitope, which is generally not the case. The concept of symmetry is generally accepted for pairwise potentials because interaction forces between two isolated atoms or molecules are symmetric. Most structure-based potentials have been derived from folded protein structures () where the symmetric pairwise assumption, ignoring multi-body interaction terms, was the natural first choice. These potentials proved to be successful for folding and, later on, for docking, so the assumption of symmetry has not been questioned. As discussed, antibodyantigen interactions clearly do not fit this framework. Although the deviation from symmetry may be surprising, it is important to note that interactions between atoms are not pairwise, and the latter assumption is just a convenient approximation. Thus, the). The antibody fragment is shown as the white solid model, with magenta patches representing the regions with maximum hydrophobicity. The HPr antigen is shown as a gray cartoon, with dark red patches as regions of maximum hydrophobicity. In the figure, the antibody CDR is oriented upward, showing that the CDR region includes strongly hydrophobic patches, but these do not interact with regions of maximum hydrophobicity on the HPr antigen pairwise energy terms, extracted from the frequency of specific interactions observed in protein structures or complexes, represent an empirical measure of interaction strength rather than real physical forces. Developing multi-body interaction potentials would be a more rigorous approach than restricting consideration to pairwise interaction, but we have far from enough data for the parameterization of such potentials. Here, we suggest an alternative approach, simply removing the requirement of interaction symmetry. The resulting potential preserves the general form and computational simplicity of statistical potentials, but to a certain degree accounts for the local environment of an atom and thus introduces some elements of multi-body potentials. To our knowledge, no asymmetric potentials have been previously reported for predicting proteinprotein interactions. We describe the development of the asymmetric DARS-type potential, called ADARS, based on a nonredundant dataset of antibodyantigen complexes extracted from the Protein Data Bank (PDB). ADARS has been integrated into the energy function used in the docking program PIPER, and tested on an antibodyantigen docking benchmark. We demonstrate significant improvements in the docking results, when compared with earlier symmetric potentials. The resulting antibodyantigen docking protocol is included in our ClusPro protein docking server, which is freely available.
CONCLUSIONAntibodyantigen complexes present a challenge for protein protein docking due to their less favorable desolvation free energies and more planar interfaces when compared with enzyme inhibitor complexes. The less favorable desolvation free energies are due in part to their less hydrophobic interfaces. Interestingly, there are a number of hydrophobic atoms in the interface, but mostly on the antibody side, whereas the epitope on the antigen may be less hydrophobic. In fact, this should be the case, as antibodies can be developed against almost any surface of a given protein, in spite of some of these surfaces being fairly polar. To take advantage of these properties, we have developed an aADARS potential. This potential shows that the atom types YC and FC from Tyr, Trp and Phe residues () have a high probability of being in the paratope and favorably contribute to the interaction energy, regardless of the type of the atoms of the epitope they interact with. To test our newly developed potential, we have performed a docking test on the antibodyantigen complexes of the protein protein docking benchmark (). Our results demonstrate that this potential is generally quite successful in discriminating near-native structures of antibodyantigen complexes. In fact, the potential is able to discriminate the paratope of the antibody using only biophysical methods, i.e. adding a priori information on the location of the CDR regions did not improve the docking results. We believe that more data (i.e. more resolved crystal structures of antibodyantigen complexes) would improve the potential even further. As we noted, there were relatively few contacts for a number of the atom types. More structures would ameliorate this problem, possibly allowing for the introduction of additional atom types and thus enabling the development of more detailed antibodyantigen potentials. We note that the asymmetric properties of interfaces are not constrained to antibodyantigen complexes. In particular, many signal transduction complexes of the docking benchmark set exhibit similar features. This is a topic of our current research. Another direction of research in docking antibodies which needs improvement is the ability to work with the models rather than experimental structures. Despite the fact that antibody models are usually extremely precise, the quality of docking results tends to drop drastically when using models rather than real structures. Accordingly, CAPRI targets that involve docking based on homology models () are not modeled well. The reason for this drop in performance can be explained by the fact that standards for modeling proteins and the quality of the structures needed for docking are very different. For example, we know that side-chains placement is extremely important for protein docking and it is totally ignored in assessment of quality for protein models. Also side-chain placement strongly depends on the backbone and slight deviation of the backbone, which will be unnoticeable in the protein model quality, will strongly affect side-chain distribution, and hence the docking results.*Masking of non-CDR of the antibody.