Motivation: Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) are effective for describing genetic complexities of common diseases. Phenome-wide association studies (PheWASs) offer an alternative and complementary approach to GWAS using data embedded in the electronic health record (EHR) to define the phenome. International Classification of Disease version 9 (ICD9) codes are used frequently to define the phenome, but using ICD9 codes alone misses other clinically relevant information from the EHR that can be used for PheWAS analyses and discovery. Results: As an alternative to ICD9 coding, a text-based phenome was defined by 23 384 clinically relevant terms extracted from Marshfield Clinics EHR. Five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with known phenotypic associations were genotyped in 4235 individuals and associated across the text-based phenome. All five SNPs genotyped were associated with expected terms (P  0.02), most at or near the top of their respective PheWAS ranking. Raw association results indicate that text data performed equivalently to ICD9 coding and demonstrate the utility of information beyond ICD9 coding for application in PheWAS.
IntroductionThe genetic complexities of common diseases have been well-defined by the use of the genome wide-association study (GWAS). Aside from only a few examples, GWASs have failed to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that reach a threshold, where they can be used to predict, prevent or even treat complex diseases. This may be due in part to disease heterogeneity and the fact that most SNPs genotyped during a GWAS represent tag SNPs for unknown and ungenotyped causal variants (). As a complementary or alternative strategy to GWAS, phenome-wide association studies (PheWASs) have demonstrated their effectiveness for rediscovering GWAS associations while also identifying novel disease-SNP correlations (). Whereas GWAS is a phenotype-to-genotype strategy, PheWAS reverses this paradigm by exchanging the disease and genome in a GWAS with a specific genetic variant and phenome in a PheWAS. As such, PheWAS is a genotype-to-phenotype strategy. The first PheWAS was published in 2010 byIn this first proof-of-principle study, five disease-associated SNPs previously identified by GWAS were genotyped in a cohort of 6005 patients from Vanderbilt University Medical Center. Each SNP was associated with hundreds of International Classification of Disease version 9 (ICD9) codes that defined the ICD9-based phenome. Of the five SNPs, four demonstrated that the PheWAS technique was able to rediscover the expected associations (). The advantage of PheWAS over GWAS is that PheWAS has the capacity to identify multiple diseases that share a common genetic V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 1981doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv076
DiscussionPheWASs are quickly proving effective at rediscovering and discovering new gene-disease associations. Thus far, most PheWASs have focused on genetic variants with predetermined SNP-disease associations (), the largest of which was conducted on 3144 SNPs previously identified by GWAS (). PheWAS exhibits the power to identify novel associations and link multiple conditions to a shared genetic etiology (). A commonality for the majority of PheWASs published to date is the use of ICD9 coding to define the phenome. An advantage of ICD9-based phenomes is the logical architecture of the codes such that similar conditions have similar codes. For example, ICD9 codes 390459 define diseases of the circulatory system, ICD9 codes 410414 define different sub-types of ischemic heart disease, ICD9 codes 410.0410.9 define acute myocardial infarctions and at the highest phenotypic resolution, ICD9 codes 410.00410.02 define acute myocardial infarctions of anterolateral wall. It is not surprising that ICD9-based PheWASs have utilized a collapsing strategy to define cases and controls at varying levels of phenotypic resolution (). The current text-based phenome was arranged alphabetically, and as such, lacks intuitive structure. Another challenge of a text-based phenome is the interpretation of the word strings. Cases and controls in an ICD9-based phenome are defined by the existence of a given ICD9 code. Although errors exist in the coding, it is assumed that ICD9 coding is assigned based on clinical manifestations. In comparison, phenotypes described by text data may be less clear. Cases and controls may be incompletely assigned because of misspellings or alternative word usage, such as abbreviations. Furthermore, words defining a text-based phenome may capture a term, yet context beyond the term may be lacking. For example, non-specific terms such as 'positional' (Supplementary) are captured in the text-based phenome. Further curation of the text-based phenome to remove such terms may improve the effectiveness of a text-based PheWAS. Using biomedical named entity recognition tools may be one approach (). In addition to non-specific terms, it is conceivable that association results from clinically meaningful terms may still be difficult to interpret. Some clinical notes may indicate that a 'patient has atrial fibrillation', 'patient does not have atrial fibrillation' and/or 'patient has a family history of atrial fibrillation'. Under these circumstances, all individuals with the word string 'atrial fibrillation' will be lumped together independent of meaning. This may explain why 'atrial fibrillation' was not the top word string for rs2200733, although it was still in the top 20 (P  7.1E-4). The application of natural language processing techniques, such as negation analysis () and ontology-driven concept extraction (), may be effective when addressing these challenges. Regardless, raw association results indicate that text data performed equivalently to ICD9 coding, and in some instances, clinical text data outperformed ICD9 coding (and). Like GWAS, PheWAS is challenged by multiple comparison testing. The current standard for adjusting multiple comparison testing has been the application of a Bonferroni correction (). Unique to PheWAS is the correlative structure in the phenotypic data. As described earlier, in an ICD9-based PheWAS, similar ICD9 codes may be correlated, especially in phenomes that use a collapsing strategy to define cases and controls at different phenotypic resolutions. Furthermore, correlations may also exist across codes (). This text-based PheWAS is no different. A good example of the correlative structure in the text data may include the atrial fibrillation SNP rs2200733 where the bigram 'fibrillation with', is rooted in the trigram 'atrial fibrillation with', with both showing similar associations (). Of all SNPs tested, the AMD SNP rs1061170 not only passed a SNP-dependent Bonferroni correction (P  2.1E-6) but also passed an experiment-wise correction [P  4.3E-7 assuming a  0.05 and 116 920 total tests (total tests  5 SNP  23 384 phenotypes)] (). Like ICD9 codes, clinical text data can be efficiently extracted from an EHR system and can be effectively applied to a PheWAS (). With all of the words in a text-based phenome rooted to standard terms from a medical dictionary (), this approach may be easily translatable to other EHR systems. Clinical text data has the capacity to describe phenotypic information at a high resolution, while also allowing the use of drug information that may provide additional insights into the interpretation of the PheWAS result, as demonstrated by the AMD-associated SNP and its Application of clinical text dataassociation with the AMD drug Visudyne (). Because ICD9 codes are used primarily for billing, only those conditions that arise during a clinical visit are recorded. For patients who come in and out of a service area, or for conditions that predate an EHR system, ICD9 coding may not provide a comprehensive assessment of a patient's disease history. In comparison, clinical notes may capture both current and in-depth historical health information. This may explain in part the larger case sizes for clinical text data compared with ICD9 coding. Of interest, text data and ICD9 coding demonstrated similar associations, yet both datasets had incomplete correlations between the cases and controls identified by either text data or ICD9 coding (). In general, a larger percentage of cases are unique to text data compared with cases identified by ICD9 coding. For example, cases of ankylosing spondylitis and MS were dramatically different in the text-based approached compared with the ICD9-based approach suggesting the potential for increased false positives in a text-based phenome. Conversely, SNP rs12678919, known to be associated with triglyceride metabolism, was associated with 508 patients with the word string 'elevated triglycerides' (P  4.2E-5), whereas rs12678919 genotype was associated with 322 patients diagnosed with pure hyperglyceridemia (P  1.4E-4). The correlation between cases and controls for this example was 0.35 with 67% of cases unique only to text data and 48% of cases unique only to ICD9 data (). This result may suggest that neither text data, nor ICD9 coding, can comprehensively identify all cases. Improvement in a text-based phenome may be achieved by implementing concept identification approaches, such as negation analysis, word sense disambiguation, and abbreviation expansion. Furthermore, further improvement may be achieved by combining different data types. In conclusion, this study demonstrates for the first time that raw text data from clinical notes in an EHR system can be used effectively to define a phenome. This study also validates that clinical text data, including drug data, can be applied to PheWAS as a complementary approach to a GWAS and ICD9-based PheWAS. The future of the PheWAS strategy may not be limited to either clinical text data or ICD9 coding. A potential name for this approach might be called a text-wide association study (TextWAS). The future of the PheWAS strategy may rely on multiple structured and unstructured data types. This is particularly relevant as EHR systems become standardized, bio-repositories continue to grow and genomic medicine becomes widely applied.