ArchSchema is a Java Web Start application that generates a dynamic 2D network of related Pfam domain architectures. Each node corresponds to a different architecture (shown as a sequence of coloured boxes) and indicates whether any 3D structural information is available in the PDB. Satellite nodes can show either the UniProt codes or the PDB codes of proteins having the given architecture. Search options allow search by UniProt code or Pfam domain identifier, and results can be filtered by domain, organism, or by selecting only proteins in the PDB. Availability: ArchSchema can be freely accessed at
INTRODUCTIONDomains are the fundamental evolutionary building blocks of proteins (), some occurring particularly frequently, allowing the assembly of myriad proteins from a modest stock of units (). A given sequence of domains defines a protein's domain architecture. Many different proteins, in terms of sequence and/or function, can have the same, or very similar, architectures. The Pfam database () identifies protein domains on the basis of sequence alignments, hidden Markov models and manual curation. It can list all the architectures containing any domain and, in turn, all sequences belonging to any of these architectures. There are several other resources that exploit the Pfam data, focusing on domain architectures. PfamAlyzer () provides a graphical user interface that allows searches for domain patterns, listing the architectures that match. CDART () and DAhunter () both identify homologous proteins based on the similarity of their domain architectures. The web server d-Omix () can show static 2D graphs of similarities in domain architectures for a user-submitted set of protein sequences. Here, we describe ArchSchema that shows related Pfam domain architectures as a dynamic graph rather than as a list of matches. It provides a clear 2D visualization of how the architectures are related. A further advantage over other methods is that it flags any * To whom correspondence should be addressed. nodes which have associated 3D structural information in the Protein Data Bank, PDB ().), and nearest-neighbours are joined by edges, as described in the program's online documentation.