ART is a set of simulation tools that generate synthetic next-generation sequencing reads. This functionality is essential for testing and benchmarking tools for next-generation sequencing data analysis including read alignment, de novo assembly and genetic variation discovery. ART generates simulated sequencing reads by emulating the sequencing process with built-in, technology-specific read error models and base quality value profiles parameterized empirically in large sequencing datasets. We currently support all three major commercial next-generation sequencing platforms: Roches 454, Illuminas Solexa and Applied Biosystems SOLiD. ART also allows the flexibility to use customized read error model parameters and quality profiles. Availability: Both source and binary software packages are available at http://www.niehs.nih.gov/research/resources/software/art Contact:
INTRODUCTIONIn the past few years, high-throughput next-generation sequencing technologies have effectively replaced earlier data types for genomewide studies measuring gene expression changes and discovering genomic/epigenetic variations, and many tools were developed for analyzing such datasets. Simulated data is indispensable for guiding tool development and evaluating tool performance, and therefore it is essential to develop simulation software that can produce next-generation sequencing reads that captures the most essential characteristics of real data. Currently available read simulation programs include Wgsim from the Samtools package () for generating Illumina sequencing reads, MetaSim () for simulating metagenomic data, Mason (http://seqan .de/projects/mason.html) for both Illumina and 454 reads, SimSeq (https://github.com/jstjohn/SimSeq) for Illumina reads and FlowSim () for 454 reads. Although these programs work well in their domain, there is a need for a read simulation program that can deal with all major sequencing platforms, and generate sequence reads with both substitution and insertion deletion (INDEL) errors, as appropriate for the error modes of each specific platform. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  Present address: Department of Biological Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623, USA.As a general simulator, our ART software was initially developed for simulation studies helping to design data collection modalities of the 1000 Genomes Project (). ART has been subsequently used by many users worldwide to facilitate sequencing software development. ART takes a set of DNA sequences (representing e.g. a reference genome), and generates 'synthetic' sequencing reads in a way that mimics the technologyspecific sequencing process. ART comes with a set of technologyspecific read error profiles, but it can also take user-supplied profiles to generate sequencing data with customized read length and error characteristics. ART can report simulated reads in the standard SAM alignment format and UCSC BED files.