Motivation: Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) is now routinely used for the detection and identification of genetic variants, particularly single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in humans, and this has provided valuable new insights into human diversity, population histories and genetic association studies of traits and diseases. However, this relies on accurate detection and genotyping calling of the polymorph-isms present in the samples sequenced. To minimize cost, the majority of current WGS studies, including the 1000 Genomes Project (1 KGP) have adopted low coverage sequencing of large number of samples, where such designs have inadvertently influenced the development of variant calling methods on WGS data. Assessment of variant accuracy are usually performed on the same set of low coverage individuals or a smaller number of deeply sequenced individuals. It is thus unclear how these variant calling methods would fare for a data-set of $100 samples from a population not part of the 1 KGP that have been sequenced at various coverage depths. Results: Using down-sampling of the sequencing reads obtained from the Singapore Sequencing Malay Project (SSMP), and a set of SNP calls from the same individuals genotyped on the Illumina Omni1-Quad array, we assessed the sensitivity of SNP detection, accuracy of genotype calls made and variant accuracy for six commonly used variant calling methods of GATK, SAMtools, Consensus Assessment of Sequence and Variation (CASAVA), VarScan, glfTools and SOAPsnp. The results indicate that at 5Â coverage depth, the multi-sample callers of GATK and SAMtools yield the best accuracy particularly if the study samples are called together with a large number of individuals such as those from 1000 Genomes Project. If study samples are sequenced at a high coverage depth such as 30Â, CASAVA has the highest variant accuracy as compared with the other variant callers assessed.
INTRODUCTIONFueled by rapidly decreasing costs and advancements in highthroughput sequencing technologies, it is now possible to sequence one complete human genome at a fraction of the time and cost of the initial Human Genome Project. These developments have thus transformed the field of human genomics studies and have contributed significantly to our knowledge and understanding of human diversity () and population histories (), as well as aided the identification of causal variants for human diseases () and traits (). The successful application of whole-genome sequencing (WGS) in these diverse fields of studies, however, relies on the accurate detection and genotype calling of the polymorphisms present in the individuals studied. Compared with the traditional Sanger sequencing technology, WGS by next-generation sequencing technologies have much shorter reads and higher per-base sequencing error rates, which confounds true polymorphisms from sequencing errors (). Intuitively, having high sequencing coverage data where each base in the genome is sequenced multiple times will allow the true polymorphisms to be better distinguished from the sequencing errors. As such, single-sample variant calling methods will usually perform well with high coverage depth, but fare poorly when applied to individuals sequenced at low coverage depths (). However, deep WGS on a large number of individuals is currently not feasible economically. Based on the results from a simulation study conducted (), it was found that for a given fixed amount of sequencing performed, sequencing a large number of individuals at low coverage depths of 46 provide higher power in detecting rare single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) than compared with sequencing a smaller number of individuals at high coverage depth. The former design is what has been adopted by the 1 KGP. This, thus, resulted in the development of different variant calling methods that seek to generate accurate genotype calls at variant sites identified across multiple individuals that have been sequenced at low coverage depths. However, the assessment of these variant calling methods are performed mainly on simulated data and on a small number of individuals who have been sequenced to high coverage depths of at least 30. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.In this work, we thus seek to investigate the following issues: given a population-based sample of individuals such as the Southeast Asian Malays that are not present in 1 KGP and are deep whole-genome sequenced (), which of the variant calling methods (i) GATK (); (ii) SAMtools (); (iii) Consensus Assessment of Sequence and Variation (CASAVA); (iv) VarScan (); (v) glfTools (http://www.sph.umich.edu/csg/abeca sis/glfTools); or (vi) SOAPsnp () will have the best performance in (i) variant discovery or detection; (ii) genotype calling and (iii) overall variant accuracy defined as a product of the two above metrics across sequencing coverage depths from 5 to 30.