Motivation: Assessing the false positive rate of function prediction methods is difficult, as it is hard to establish that a protein does not have a certain function. To determine to what extent proteins with similar sequences have a common function, we focused on photosynthesis-related proteins. A protein that comes from a non-photosynthetic organism is, undoubtedly, not involved in photosynthesis. Results: We show that function diverges very rapidly: 70% of the close homologs of photosynthetic proteins come from non-photosynthetic organisms. Therefore, high sequence similarity, in most cases, is not tantamount to similar function. However, we found that many functionally similar proteins often share short sequence elements, which may correspond to a functional site and could reveal functional similarities more accurately than sequence similarity. Conclusions: These results shed light on the way biological function is conserved in evolution and may help improve large-scale analysis of protein function.
INTRODUCTIONHomology is believed to allow large-scale functional annotation. Since the 19th century, similarity between biological entities is defined as homology, in case that they evolved from a common ancestor, and as analogy, in case that they share a common function (). Later definitions made these terms mutually exclusive by defining analogy as convergence from two different ancestors (). Historically, these terms were introduced by naturalists and were based on anatomy and morphology. On the molecular level, however, they are used more loosely (), and homology is often used interchangeably with sequence similarity and is commonly believed to reflect similar function (). Thus, although the vast majority of known proteins were never experimentally characterized, or even observed as RNA transcripts (), many of them have functional annotations that are based on sequence similarity to experimentally annotated proteins. These predicted functions are often used to perform functional comparisons between genomes and to analyse metagenomic data (). One such analysis reported that by using BLAST, they were able to assign a function reliably to 70% of the gene products in new genomes (). Despite the wide use of this approach, the performance of homologybased methods for function prediction was rarely assessed systematically. Assessment of function prediction is sometimes considered 'not possible'. Assumptions regarding the relationship between sequence homology and functional analogy are difficult to assess. Many, if not most, of the proteins are multi-functional (), making existing annotations partial. Therefore, when a predicted function does not correspond to an experimentally verified function of a protein, it is hard to determine whether it is a false prediction or a true prediction of a yet-unobserved function of that protein. Several collaborations and community-wide efforts have attempted to establish standards for assessment of computational annotation of protein function (). The genome annotation assessment project (), an early attempt at quality assessment of genome-wide annotation, concluded that 'function predictions are the most difficult annotations to produce and to evaluate' and that owing to the incompleteness of existing annotation, 'a consistent and correct assessment of function predictions. .. was not possible'. CASP, which was originally designed to assess structure prediction methods, has widened its scope to assess also the function predictions (). The assessors concluded, however, that except for the identification of ligand-binding residues, which is in essence structural, they could not find a procedure that allows quantitative assessment of performance (). AFP/CAFA, another community-wide effort to establish a framework for assessing function prediction, was held five times since 2005 (). The organizers based their experiments on proteins whose functions were experimentally determined but not yet published. Assessment is based on measuring the distance between predicted and experimental annotations on the Gene Ontology (GO) graph. The benchmark sets that were established using this approach are small and do not allow for statistically significant assessment. The lack of clear definition of function is also a major drawback in assessing function prediction. Studies that have assessed sequence similarity as a means for determining functional similarity gave contradicting results. Some concluded that sequence identity 580% (*To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com or, by other accounts, 60% () do not allow for reliable functional inference. Similarly, several studies have warned against blindly trusting homology as a proxy for functional identity (). Studies that explored the potential for errors in genomic scale computational annotations () reported error rates of between 5% and 460%. Motifs and patterns identify similarity that is not based on homology. Another widely used tool for function assignment is sequence motifs, domains and patterns using tools such as Prosite (), Interpro (), Pfam (), MEX () or MEME (). These tools typically provide a statistical measure for the significance of the specific motif, similar to BLAST's E-value. For instance, MEME's E-value, which is based on log likelihood ratio, width, sites, the background letter frequencies and the size of the training set, is an estimate of the expected number of motifs with the given log likelihood ratio (or higher), and with the same width and site count, that one would find in a similarly sized set of random sequences. Typically, these tools do not search for homology. Rather, they assume that common sequence motifs, which may reveal very distant homology or may be convergent analogy, constitute functional determinants, biologically important residues, binding sites or active sites in the protein (). The precision and recall of Pfam as a means for function prediction was assessed in one study together with that of PSI-BLAST () as a benchmark for a GO-based function prediction method. Several other studies analysed the relationship between sequence similarity, domain conservation and function prediction (). Some of them concluded that tools such as ProDom could reach accuracy of 87% in their functional assignments (). Function prediction of ORFans is particularly difficult. Many, possibly most, known protein sequences come from metagenomic projects that produce sequences of unidentified species, and include substantial numbers of ORFans, novel protein families and remote homologs to known proteins (). It has been suggested that metagenomic data can shed new light on many biological processes, including photosynthesis (PS) (), as many marine organisms are believed to be photosynthetic (), and their divergence from known terrestrial photosynthetic organisms may be large. Indeed, metagenomic data have led to the identification of novel proteins that provide insights into PS (). Identifying novel families of photosynthetic proteins that are not obvious homologs of known PS proteins is a non-trivial task. However, when it comes to ORFans, the lack of homologs precludes the use of homology-based methods altogether. PS provides a way to assess function prediction. We focus our analysis on PS-related functions not only for the importance of identifying novel photosynthetic proteins but also because they provide a way to assess functional assignments. An assignment of photosynthetic annotation to a protein that comes from an organism that is not photosynthetic is, without doubt, an error. Thus, it is possible to unequivocally identify false assignments and assess the possibility of finding novel photosynthetic families and remote homologs to known PS-related proteins. We used GO to compile a list of functions that are unique to PS (i.e. GO terms that describe functions, which are essential to PS but are also part of other biological processes, were not included in the analysis, see Section 2). We also created a non-redundant set of proteins that were experimentally verified to be involved in PS. Finally, we identified all Pfam domains that are related to PS. These lists of proteins, GO terms and Pfam domains allowed us to assess function assignments by Pfam, BLAST and PSI-BLAST. In addition, using MEME, we generated a list of short motifs (69 characters) for the experimentally verified PS proteins and used these motifs to predict the functions of new proteins. We thus explore conservation of function by assessing the performance of widely used methods that rely on completely different biological rationales.