Motivation: Structural genomics initiatives are increasingly leading to the determination of the 3D structure of target proteins whose catalytic function is not known. The aim of this work was that of developing a novel versatile tool for searching structural similarity, which allows to predict the catalytic function, if any, of these proteins. Results: The algorithm implemented by the tool is based on local structural comparison to find the largest subset of similar residues between an input protein and known functional sites. The method uses a geometric hashing approach where information related to residue pairs from the input structures is stored in a hash table and then is quickly retrieved during the comparison step. Tests on proteins belonging to different functional classes, done using the Catalytic Site Atlas entries as targets, indicate that the algorithm is able to identify the correct functional class of the input protein in the vast majority of the cases. Availability and implementation: The application was developed in Java SE 6, with a Java Swing Graphic User Interface (GUI). The system can be run locally on any operating system (OS) equipped with a suitable Java Virtual Machine, and is available at the following
INTRODUCTIONIn recent years the dogma 'one geneone proteinone function' had to be corrected based on the observation that a wealth of proteins thought in the past to carry out a unique specific function show a multifunctional or 'moonlighting' character (). In addition, the flourishing of structural genomics initiatives () is leading to the determination of the 3D structure of a number of target proteins whose precise catalytic function is not known. On the other hand, the availability of a huge number of enzymes' 3D structures has allowed to code structurefunction relationships in databases, among which the Catalytic Site Atlas (CSA) () is the most prominent example. The possibility to predict the function of a protein based on its sequence or structure would be of great utility in the aforementioned cases, and prediction of proteins' functional sites by using sequence information is a long sought goal with early attempts dating back to several years ago such as the PROSITE () and PRINTS () databases.potentially similar to known catalytic sites. Basically, given an input protein P, the program tries to find sets of similar structures, or alignments, between P and a list of known catalytic sites, which can be either functional sites or structural motifs. These alignments are detected by means of geometric and chemical similarity among groups of residues coming from the input protein and from the known sites, at different and configurable structural levels (side chain, backbone or both). The execution flow of the system is made up of the following phases.(1) A preliminary setup phase, where catalytic sites are retrieved and stored, by analyzing the information available online in the CSA and the corresponding information from the Protein Data Bank.(2) A preprocessing phase, where the input protein is scanned and its pairs of residues are stored into a hash table according to their amino acid types and the distance between their geometric centers. This is done via a technique called geometric hashing, where information related to the protein's residues, taken as pairs, is indexed and mapped into a 3D hash index in terms of a so-called ninetuple, which includes the name of the input protein and the name, number, chain id and geometric center of the residues from the pair; therefore, each 3D point of the hash structure will potentially contain a list of nine-tuples from the input protein. The 3D hash index thus built is exemplified in.(3) An alignment recognition phase, where the data structure created during the previous phase is compared with the known catalytic sites earlier acquired, so that a list of suitable alignments between those sites and the input protein are returned (if any) and filtered by several criteria (minimum score, maximum rmsd, etc).(4) A result display phase, where the alignments found are presented to the user, who is given a number of options for sorting them, analyzing them and graphically displaying them as 3D models: this includes visualization via the JMol program (). A more detailed description of the aforementioned phases can be found in the Supplementary Materials.
DISCUSSIONIn this article, the development of ASSIST, a software tool to search for local structural similarities between a protein structure and a set of structural motifs, has been reported. Its application to the problem of function recognition has been presented, demonstrating that, notwithstanding the simplicity of its approach, ASSIST correctly predicts the specific catalytic function of a given input protein in the vast majority of the cases analyzed. Particularly interesting from this point of view is the case of the protein BfR192 (presented in the Supplementary Materials), which does not share any significant sequence or structure homology with proteins whose function is known. In this case, the exclusively structure-based approach of ASSIST is able to recognize the local structural similarity between BfR192 and the proline-specific aminopeptidase active site even in a different sequence/structure context. The tests also underlined the limits of ASSIST when coupled to the current CSA in which, for each enzyme, only residues directly involved in the catalytic reaction are present. To improve the performance of ASSIST, the tool should be used in conjunction with a collection of active sites in which also substrate binding residues and cofactors are present, a sort of 'Active Site Atlas'. The development of an Active Site Atlas according to the aforementioned criteria requires careful analysis of the literature related to all the CSA entries and, as such, is a long term effort. Currently this work has been undertaken and completed for 10% of all the CSA entries. Finally, as reported in the 'Sample usage cases' section of the Supplementary Materials, ASSIST can be readily adapted to other biological problems involving local structure similarity searches by simply plugging in different structural motif databases in the place of the CSA.