Motivation: Although many methods and statistical approaches have been developed for protein identification by mass spectrometry, the problem of accurate assessment of statistical significance of protein identifications remains an open question. The main issues are as follows: (i) statistical significance of inferring peptide from experimental mass spectra must be platform independent and spectrum specific and (ii) individual spectrum matches at the peptide level must be combined into a single statistical measure at the protein level. Results: We present a method and software to assign statistical significance to protein identifications from search engines for mass spectrometric data. The approach is based on asymptotic theory of order statistics. The parameters of the asymptotic distributions of identification scores are estimated for each spectrum individually. The method relies on new unbiased estimators for parameters of extreme value distribution. The estimated parameters are used to assign a spectrum-specific P-value to each peptide-spectrum match. The protein-level confidence measure combines P-values of peptide-to-spectrum matches. Conclusion: We extensively tested the method using triplicate mouse and yeast high-throughput proteomic experiments. The proposed statistical approach improves the sensitivity of protein identifications without compromising specificity. While the method was primarily designed to work with Mascot, it is platform-independent and is applicable to any search engine which outputs a single score for a peptide-spectrum match. We demonstrate this by testing the method in conjunction with X!Tandem.
INTRODUCTIONImprovements in specificity, sensitivity and throughput of protein identifications progress at unprecedented pace. However, the scope of available mass spectrometric and informatics technologies and divergence of their physicochemical and algorithmic bases contributes to growing concern regarding the reproducibility, transparency and statistical reliability of the proteome analysis. In bottom-up proteomics, the identification proceeds via matching peptide MS/MS spectra to a database of sequences. The identity of proteins present in the sample is then inferred from individual peptide matches. While many peptide identifications are seemingly undisputed within any statistical framework, a large fraction of hits fall into 'borderline' significance range. The ability to accurately assess the statistical significance of these identifications would increase specificity and sensitivity of mass spectrometry analyses. More importantly, at the protein level, a single estimate of statistical significance should combine evidence from all tandem mass spectra matched to the same protein. Arbitrary conventions () that are employed for maintaining protein identification consistency will be rendered unnecessary by such estimate. At the peptide level, current identification methods can be classified into false discovery rate (FDR) approaches, P-value-based approaches, and posterior probability-based approaches. FDRs are typically estimated by searches against a decoy database (e.g. a database of reversed and/or randomized protein sequences) (). A threshold determining statistical significance is selected specifically for a given dataset and a given peptide-to-spectrum scoring metric. More sophisticated statistical approaches involve simulations and analytical approximations (). However, a single FDR threshold is applied to all spectra from the dataset. Therefore, it is not informative about statistical significance of individual matches and the estimate of the FDR threshold usually has a large variance. Specificity and sensitivity of identifications can be increased by stratifying peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) using properties of spectra () or peptide length () in a statistical or machine learning framework. A number of recently developed methods report P-values specific to individual spectra. These methods are primarily basedPage: 1129 11281134
DISCUSSION
CONCLUSIONWe propose a method and software to assign statistical significance to peptide and protein identification by mass spectrometry. A single probabilistic confidence measure (P-value) is assigned to each identification. This P-value is spectrum-specific and independent of instrumentation or software scoring method. The platform independence is achieved because the method makes very few assumptions about the distribution of the PSM scores. It is based on the asymptotic extreme value distribution. The parameters of the extreme value distribution are estimated using newly obtained analytical unbiased estimates.