Motivation: There is now a large literature on statistical methods for the meta-analysis of genomic data from multiple studies. However, a crucial assumption for performing many of these analyses is that the data exhibit small between-study variation or that this heterogeneity can be sufficiently modelled probabilistically. Results: In this article, we propose assumption weighting, which exploits a weighted hypothesis testing framework proposed by Genovese et al. to incorporate tests of between-study variation into the meta-analysis context. This methodology is fast and computationally simple to implement. Several weighting schemes are considered and compared using simulation studies. In addition, we illustrate application of the proposed methodology using data from several high-profile stem cell gene expression datasets.
INTRODUCTIONIn recent years, with the extensive usage of microarray and other high-throughput technologies in biomedical research, there has been a rapid growth in the amount of publicly available datasets. The NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/), the EBI ArrayExpress (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/) and the Stanford Microarray Database (SMD, http://smd.stanford.edu/) are a few examples of widely used public internet repositories. These resources allow researchers to further exploit the information in these data, especially in the form of meta-analysis. How to effectively integrate information of microarray datasets from multiple studies is becoming an increasingly important problem. The other area of genomics that has increasingly relied on the use of meta-analysis has been genome-wide association studies (GWAS); some seminal studies in this field are. Returning to the microarray example, the most common type of analysis is the detection of differentially expressed genes, especially for the case of two groups of samples, namely treatment and control. Combining information from multiple datasets is expected to increase the power for differential expression analysis. Many methods for meta-analysis addressing this type of problem have been proposed and reviewed in recent years. An incomplete list * To whom correspondence should be addressed. includes the P-value combining approach of, the GeneMeta method by, RankProd method by, the metaArray approach of, a hierarchical model put forth byand the mDEDS algorithm of Campain and Yang (2010). In this latter paper, a comparison between several meta-analysis approaches was considered as well. One important issue that has received limited discussion in most of this literature is the assessment of the concordance of data among different studies and the integration of this information into further analysis. This problem is very well understood in the classical meta-analysis problem and tests for between-study heterogeneity have been accordingly developed; see Normand (1999) for a discussion. However, it becomes conceptually problematic to extend this approach directly to the genomic meta-analysis problem, as one has to perform G tests of heterogeneity and then determine based on the result of the tests whether or not meta-analysis is feasible for every single gene. It will be the case that there will be some genes that will show significant evidence for between-study heterogeneity. Thus, the meta-analysis will be done on a subset of genes, contrary to the approaches described in the previous paragraph. In addition, there are issues of 'pre-testing' and model selection that arise which complicate the analysis and interpretation of such a meta-analysis. The evidence for between-study heterogeneity in these highthroughput genomic data settings is growing. One potential cause is errors in mapping the proper gene to the microarray annotation (). This can be viewed as a technical mistake that leads to between-study variation. A more biologically oriented cause is that samples being profiled actually represent subtypes of different disease groups. This has been mostly famously explored in breast cancer (), prostate cancer () and leukaemia (). Thus, the presence of subtypes of samples leads to the between-study heterogeneity. A final reason is the fact that due to the diversity of labs generating these data, there will inherently exist between-lab variation and more generally, batch effects. A recent review bydemonstrates the existence of batch effects in a variety of high-throughput genomic datasets. Two questions then naturally arise from these findings. First, how does one assess between-study variation using high-throughput genomic data? Second, how can one incorporate the betweenstudy variation into the analysis. Measures of reproducibility have been proposed by. Implicitly, once these measures are calculated, one would then calculate a summary measure on genes that were 'sufficiently' reproducible. Another approach would be to model thethat entails assessment of global concordance. In contrast, the approach developed in this article will utilize measures of gene-wise or local concordance. Other methods have been proposed to assess the global concordance of studies, such as the concordance correlation coefficient (CCC) byproposed a multi-class correlation measure to seek for genes of concordant inter-class patterns across studies. The between-study variation can also be modelled as variance components or other parameters in the joint modelling frameworks of GeneMeta () and. These algorithms will tend to be more computationally intensive than what is proposed in this article. In this article, we focus on meta-analysis of microarray datasets for differential expression analysis. We take the viewpoint that the major goal in these studies is selection and prioritization of genes for further validation studies. We exploit the weighted hypothesis testing framework proposed by) and propose an 'assumption weighting' methodology. To be specific, we will use weights that assess between-study heterogeneity and incorporate them into a multiple testing procedure. We also note in passing that the use of weights for characterizing the assumptions needed for meta-analysis is a novel application of this weighted hypothesis testing framework. We proposed four different weighting schemes, including two based on an assessment of the concordance of the test statistics of different studiesthe I 2 index ()and two based on a newly proposed measure of expression correlation between studies. The performance of these methods are assessed through simulation studies as well as applications to a set of stem cell studies.