AStream, an R-statistical software package for the curation and identification of feature peaks extracted from liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC/MS) metabolomics data, is described. AStream detects isotopic, fragment and adduct patterns by identifying feature pairs that fulfill expected relational patterns. Data reduction by AStream allows compounds to be identified reliably and subsequently linked to metabolite databases. AStream provides researchers with a fast, reliable tool for summarizing metabolomic data, notably reducing curation time and increasing consistency of results. Availability: The AStream R package and a study example can be freely accessed at
INTRODUCTIONRecent improvements in chromatographic technologies and spectrometry analysis techniques have increased the use of metabolomics for disease diagnosis and in systems biology (). Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC/MS) is a powerful and widely used method for identifying and quantifying metabolites in biological samples. After applying a data pre-processing algorithm, a large set of feature peaks is usually obtained for each sample; each feature is characterized by a particular retention time, mass-to-charge (m/z) value and an intensity measurement that is correlated with the relative concentration of the particular metabolite. Bioinformatic methods such as XCMS () can perform these complex pre-processing steps. However, once the set of feature peaks is obtained, a time-consuming and error-prone manual curation step is required, particularly when an untargeted metabolomic analysis needs to be performed. The main objectives of the curation step are to reduce redundancy between the various chemical forms detected in one compound (e.g. carbon isotopes, adducts, fragments) and to identify characteristics with a higher probability of being true biological features rather than being generated by noise artifacts or potential sample contamination. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.AStream has been developed in order to facilitate the curation step of the analytical flow of metabolomic experiments. Using robust measures from relational patterns, AStream quickly identifies the set of metabolites that most reliably represents the metabolomic profile of each sample.Page: 1340 13391340