Motivation: The centrosome is a dynamic structure in animal cells that serves as a microtubule organizing center during mitosis and also regulates cell-cycle progression and sets polarity cues. Automated and reliable tracking of centrosomes is essential for genetic screens that study the process of centrosome assembly and maturation in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Results: We have developed a fully automatic system for tracking and measuring fluorescently labeled centrosomes in 3D time-lapse images of early C.elegans embryos. Using a spinning disc microscope, we monitor the centrosome cycle in living embryos from the 1-up to the 16-cell stage at imaging intervals between 30 and 50 s. After establishing the centrosome trajectories with a novel method involving two layers of inference, we also automatically detect the nuclear envelope breakdown in each cell division and recognize the identities of the centrosomes based on the invariant cell lineage of C.elegans. To date, we have tracked centrosomes in over 500 wild type and mutant embryos with almost no manual correction required. Availability: The centrosome tracking software along with test data is freely available at http://c.pcons.net/
INTRODUCTIONGenetic screens that produce and require analysis of massive amounts of image data are becoming a major tool in functional genomics. Here, we do so to study the assembly and maturation of centrosomes, an organelle in animal cells that serves as a microtubule organizing centre () during mitosis, in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. In principle, centrosomes can be of any size. The embryo, however, exhibits remarkable precision in setting centrosome size in relation to cell size that get progressively smaller through development. This is crucial because centrosome size in turn sets the length of the mitotic spindle () and is involved in signaling activities within the cell (). Several studies () have identified genetic factors of centrosome size but the molecular mechanism of how a cell adopts the size of its dynamic organelles remains poorly understood. In these studies, only the spatial but not the temporal information of centrosome growth has been considered and so we aim to overcome this shortcoming by * To whom correspondence should be addressed. frame: 59 P2:-240 s (NEBD in frame 65) EMS: 0 s (NEBD in frame 59) ABp: +200 s (NEBD in frame 54) ABa: +200 s (NEBD in frame 54)EMS(p)precisely quantifying the kinetics of centrosome growth in wild type and mutant embryos. To visualize centrosomal proteins of interest in living C.elegans embryos, we use fluorescent markers such as GFP and reduce their levels by RNA interference (RNAi) in order to assay function. We then produce 3D time-lapse images of such labeled and/or genetically altered centrosomes. In this article we present a suite of algorithms that analyze these images (). In the earliest related work,report a system that identifies and tracks nuclei and meta-phase chromosomes in C.elegans via histone-GFP. Their goal is to trace the cell lineage up to hundreds of cells in one color channel and use a second color channel to monitor gene expression. Compared to our problem, the objects tracked are large, their phase easily distinguished by their shape, and their frame-to-frame movement is small, none of which are true for centrosomes. Recently,present an algorithm for tracking centrosomes in neuron cells for the study of neuron migration. Short sequences of only 20 time points at 16 s intervals are recorded and the analysis cannot handle multiple centrosomes at the same x/y-location. These circumstances are thus considerably simpler than those considered here 1. To robustly solve the problem of tracking centrosomes in developing C.elegans embryos, we have extended a bipartite