Motivation: Phylogenetic profiling methods can achieve good accuracy in predicting protein–protein interactions, especially in prokaryotes. Recent studies have shown that the choice of reference taxa (RT) is critical for accurate prediction, but with more than 2500 fully sequenced taxa publicly available, identifying the most-informative RT is becoming increasingly difficult. Previous studies on the selection of RT have provided guidelines for manual taxon selection, and for eliminating closely related taxa. However, no general strategy for automatic selection of RT is currently available. Results: We present three novel methods for automating the selection of RT, using machine learning based on known protein– protein interaction networks. One of these methods in particular, Tree-Based Search, yields greatly improved prediction accuracies. We further show that different methods for constituting phylogenetic profiles often require very different RT sets to support high prediction accuracy. Availability: The datasets and software used in the experiments can be found at
INTRODUCTIONWith the advent of next-generation technologies, genomic data are now appearing at a rate that renders manual annotation and analysis of genome sequences infeasible, thus motivating the development of automated computational methods. Prediction of proteinprotein interactions (PPIs) is a key problem in systems biology, and methods based on e.g. interactions between protein domains (), gene-fusion events () and phylogenetic profiling () (PP) support genome-scale inference at low computational cost. The application of PP in PPI prediction is based on the hypothesis that gene products which function together are likely to exhibit a common pattern of occurrence across taxa. The phylogenetic profile of a gene or gene product represents its pattern of presence and absence across a set of taxa, and thus similarity between profiles can be used as an indicator of functional linkages. PPI prediction using PP has * To whom correspondence should be addressed. proven to be fairly accurate in prokaryotes but has been much less successful in eukaryotes, a situation attributed to the modularity of eukaryotic proteins, large-scale evolutionary trends including secondary endosymbioses and parasitism and the limited diversity of sequenced genomes (). Many studies identify the choice of reference taxa (RT) as critical for accurate prediction and suggest that accuracy can be improved by matching the RT to the interaction network under investigation. Representatives of all three domains of life (bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes) should be used for highly conserved networks, whereas close relatives are best suited for predicting more specialized functions. Furthermore, inclusion of too many closely related taxa, and taxa with derivative or biased gene complements, can diminish the prediction accuracy (). Balancing these considerations greatly complicates manual RT selection, thus motivating the development of automatic selection approaches. Here we introduce three novel machine-learning methods for selection of informative RT based on known PPI networks. We compare the accuracy with which PPIs in one prokaryote and three eukaryotes are predicted with the resulting taxon sets, and demonstrate that one of the methods in particular, Tree-Based Search (TBS), supports highly accurate predictions. Four different PP methods are used in the PPI prediction experiments, and we show that no single taxon set achieves top accuracy with all PP methods. Finally, we show that taxon sets can be optimized using PPI networks from other taxa without substantially affecting the prediction accuracy.