Motivation: Complete, accurate and reproducible analysis of intracellular foci from fluorescence microscopy image sequences of live cells requires full automation of all processing steps involved: cell segmentation and tracking followed by foci segmentation and pattern analysis. Integrated systems for this purpose are lacking. Results: Extending our previous work in cell segmentation and tracking, we developed a new system for performing fully automated analysis of fluorescent foci in single cells. The system was validated by applying it to two common tasks: intracellular foci counting (in DNA damage repair experiments) and cell-phase identification based on foci pattern analysis (in DNA replication experiments). Experimental results show that the system performs comparably to expert human observers. Thus, it may replace tedious manual analyses for the considered tasks, and enables high-content screening. Availability and implementation: The described system was implemented in MATLAB (The MathWorks, Inc., USA) and compiled to run within the MATLAB environment. The routines together with four sample datasets are available at http://celmia.bigr.nl/. The software is planned for public release, free of charge for non-commercial use, after publication of this article.
INTRODUCTIONThe ability to perform analyses on individual cells presents evident advantages over the traditional averaging over the whole cell population (). In many studies, such analyses are mainly performed manually, which is very tedious and often lacks accuracy, completeness and reproducibility. To improve this, automated methods are essential. In this article, we present a new system for performing intracellular analysis in time-lapse fluorescence microscopy image data of cell colonies. The system consists of two main modules: cell analysis and foci analysis. The first is more generic and can be applied to a large variety of biological data acquired for cell analysis. The second is naturally a * To whom correspondence should be addressed. more application-dependent step and requires specialized methods depending on the structures of interest. A number of cell segmentation and tracking algorithms have been presented in the recent literature (and the references therein;). However, very few can potentially satisfy the requirements imposed by live cell imaging and analysis at the individual cell level. Specifically, a candidate algorithm should have the capability to handle 3D timelapse image datasets, it should provide full segmentation (detection only is insufficient) and tracking, be able to handle cell divisions, and show good performance even in the presence of significant noise and inhomogeneous intensity distributions (whether in the background or within cells). To this end, we use our robust level-set-based cell segmentation and tracking algorithm () as a starting point. Here, we present an extension of the algorithm that allows registration of each cell to a common coordinate system by applying motion correction after segmentation and tracking. This is necessary to study the true relative dynamics of intracellular processes. As for the subsequent step of intracellular analysis, we focus here on fluorescent foci, which appear in many biological studies. Representing high concentrations of the corresponding fluorescently labeled protein, foci are usually the main indicator of an underlying biological process occurring at these locations (). Consequently, this makes foci analysis the main tool for studying protein-related processes by means of fluorescence microscopy. Examples of biological research based on foci analysis include fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) experiments (), analysis of DNA replication and repair (), and classification of cell-cycle phases (). In this article, we present a novel foci segmentation algorithm, and evaluate its robustness in segmenting foci of different size and intensity, as well as clustered foci. In addition to presenting the algorithms used in different steps, we also validate the complete system by showing its ability to reproduce findings from two biological studies that were based on expert manual analyses. In the first experiment, we investigate the time course of nuclear foci formation and disappearance upon treatment with ionizing radiation of the 53BP1 DNA repair protein.