Motivation: Predictive tools that model protein–ligand binding on demand are needed to promote ligand research in an innovative drug-design environment. However, it takes considerable time and effort to develop predictive tools that can be applied to individual ligands. An automated production pipeline that can rapidly and efficiently develop user-friendly protein–ligand binding predictive tools would be useful. Results: We developed a system for automatically generating protein–ligand binding predictions. Implementation of this system in a pipeline of Semantic Web technique-based web tools will allow users to specify a ligand and receive the tool within 0.5–1 day. We demonstrated high prediction accuracy for three machine learning algorithms and eight ligands. Availability and implementation: The source code and web application are freely available for download at http://utprot.net. They are implemented in Python and supported on Linux.
IntroductionThe identification of proteinligand binding sites is important for understanding protein function. Many bioinformatics methods have been proposed for ligand-binding site identification or prediction. Computational methods are useful because they can be applied rapidly and at low cost, compared with biochemical experiments. They have a wide range of applications in enzyme design, drug discovery, chemical genetics, and other fields. The ligand-binding site prediction methods can be classified into sequence-based and structure-based methods. With high-throughput sequencing technologies yielding large amounts of sequence data, sequence-based methods can be applied to a wide range of proteins, even those whose structures have not been determined, and can be used for genome-wide analysis. In this study, we focused on sequence-based methods.When the structure of a target protein is known, structurebased methods can achieve high accuracy. However, if modeled structures are used, additional computation time is required and accuracy depends on model quality. The Critical Assessment of Protein Structure Prediction (CASP) () and the Continuous Automated Model EvaluatiOn (CAMEO) () are world-wide experiments for protein structure prediction, and they have the category of ligand-binding site prediction. Many structure-based or model-based prediction methods have been assessed in this category. Some structure-based methods use structure similarity to template libraries. COFACTOR threads the structure through the BioLiP protein function database using local and global structure matches to identify functional sites and homologies (
ConclusionWe present a user-friendly automatic production pipeline for proteinligand-binding site predictive tools using multi-omics big data. The pipeline's core data is organized by ontology as an evidence. Implementation of this system in a pipeline of Semantic Web technology-based Web tools allow users to specify a ligand and receive the tool within 0.51 day. We have demonstrated its high prediction accuracy for several ligands. The present pipeline system has backend-linked open data comprising $30 billion triples as an RDF graph. It is available as a Web application that can be accessed and used at URL http://utprot.net, UTProt Galaxy. We evaluated the software by automatically generating binding-site predictors for eight types of ligand using SVM and GA-based parameter optimization. We also evaluated performance for three types of ligand and three machine learning algorithms: SVM, RF and NNs, and two parameter optimization methods: GA-based and grid search. We are now developing methods to extract only biologically relevant ligands; in this study we excluded only ligands that are apparently buffer media used for crystallization. A general method that accommodates similarity among ligands should be designed. Our reasoning search of ligands based on ontology hierarchies partially addresses this need, but more general ligand grouping based on stereochemistry or minor substituents can be conceived. The combination of our system with homology-based or template-based methods is also a subject of future work.The best parameters found are as this table. The test dataset was 15% of the full dataset for each ligand and was same as used in.