Motivation: Determination of the binding affinity of a protein– ligand complex is important to quantitatively specify whether a particular small molecule will bind to the target protein. Besides, collection of comprehensive datasets for protein–ligand complexes and their corresponding binding affinities is crucial in developing accurate scoring functions for the prediction of the binding affinities of previously unknown protein–ligand complexes. In the past decades, several databases of protein–ligand-binding affinities have been created via visual extraction from literature. However, such approaches are time-consuming and most of these databases are updated only a few times per year. Hence, there is an immediate demand for an automatic extraction method with high precision for binding affinity collection. Result: We have created a new database of protein–ligand-binding affinity data, AutoBind, based on automatic information retrieval. We first compiled a collection of 1586 articles where the binding affinities have been marked manually. Based on this annotated collection, we designed four sentence patterns that are used to scan full-text articles as well as a scoring function to rank the sentences that match our patterns. The proposed sentence patterns can effectively identify the binding affinities in full-text articles. Our assessment shows that AutoBind achieved 84.22% precision and 79.07% recall on the testing corpus. Currently, 13 616 protein–ligand complexes and the corresponding binding affinities have been deposited in AutoBind from 17 221 articles. Availability: AutoBind is automatically updated on a monthly basis, and it is freely available at http://autobind.csie.ncku.edu.tw/
INTRODUCTIONDetermination of the binding affinity is essential for quantifying the protein interactions with other bio-molecules. For example, actually estimating the proteinDNA-binding affinity is an important step * To whom correspondence should be addressed. in understanding the regulation mechanisms of cells (). In the field of drug design, the binding affinity of a ligand to a given protein target is used to judge whether this ligand can be considered as a potential drug candidate. Several databases of proteinligand-binding affinities have been proposed, including Ligand-Protein Database (LPDB) (), Protein Ligand Database (PLD) (), PDBbind (), Binding MOAD (), AffinDB () and BindingDB (). These databases depend on structure databases () and require much time and cost for the manual inspection of the literature. Until September 2011, more than 21 million articles indexed contain the descriptions of binding affinity in the MEDLINE database. The time-consuming manual extraction cannot timely accommodate the astonishingly increasing number of full-text articles. Therefore, there is an immediate demand for automatic extraction of protein ligand-binding affinities. Information Retrieval (IR) is a computational technique aiming at extracting information from the literature without manual intervention (). Summarization is a widely seen IR application in various areas, which can automatically compile extractive summaries that include the important aspects of full-text articles (). In the biomedical field, this technique is used to generate gene annotations () and to search bio-images (). In recent years, IR has been used to extract biological entities of interest and their relationships (). For example, 'activate' and 'interact' are two common relation terms that connect molecule entities. This technique has been applied to proteinprotein interactions (), pathway networks () and drug interactions (). However, so far there have been only a few studies that attempted to extract biological values or parameters. For example, SpasicSpasic et al. used terminology concept to index and select literature, then a score function was implemented to rank the retrieved articles by relevance of parameters for kinetic modeling of yeast metabolic pathways ();used a rule-based approach to collect kinetic information of enzymes (). In general, the experimental procedures or results described in fulltext articles are hard for researchers to re-use (). The fact that comparisons with events, values and parameters are usually recorded in a more flexible way in the literature makes the). In this article we describe the construction of AutoBind, an automatic information extraction system dedicated to protein ligand-binding affinity. Our system includes four patterns to identify candidate sentences describing proteinligand-binding affinity and a scoring function to rank the identified sentences for extracting binding affinities. We applied AutoBind on the primary citations of all entries in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). Many primary citations contain multiple affinities corresponding to different experimental conditions, such as wild-type and mutated proteins, but only one represents the actual binding affinity of the crystal structure. In this study, we focused on the affinity corresponding to the structure in each primary citation since 1996, whose full-text references can be easily retrieved. Finally, the extracted proteinligand-binding affinities and the corresponding complex structures were organized as a public database named AutoBind. Note that AutoBind in this article refers both the extraction algorithm and the database. The extraction algorithm is completely automatic. However, the binding affinities deposited in the database have been approved manually, in order to refine them and eliminate possible errors and inconsistencies. On the other hand, all the reported performances (in Tables 36 and Sections 4.1 and 4.2) were evaluated on the results obtained before the manual approval. In short, this article presents an automatic extraction algorithm to expedite constructing and maintaining a database, but the database construction was not fully automatic. The AutoBind database currently contains 13 616 proteinligand complexes. To our knowledge, this is the largest collection of protein-binding affinities. The database will be updated regularly.
CONCLUSIONThis work presents a new automatic system, AutoBind, for extracting protein-binding affinity from literature. Overall, our automatic extraction method collected almost twice binding affinities compared to other databases of similar data. The automatic extraction process contains four NER methods for protein and ligand names, four sentences patterns for sentence extraction and a ranking method to pick sentence that correctly describes binding affinities. The experimental results show that hybridizing multiple NER methods improved the performance of binding affinity extraction. These sentence patterns can quickly identify candidate sentences that may contain a protein-binding affinity. These patterns were designed to ensure minimal false negatives for, as shown in the experimental results, high extraction recall. Finally, the proposed ranking method ensures minimal false positives for high precision. The rank-based design facilities the following manual checking step. Biologists can start from the highest ranked sentences and stop immediately after a correct sentence is found. The entire system significantly reduces the extraction time while preserving the quality of the extracted binding affinities.