Motivation: Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry has been broadly adopted by routine clinical microbiology laboratories for bacterial species identification. An isolated colony of the targeted microorganism is the single prerequisite. Currently, MS-based microbial identification directly from clinical specimens can not be routinely performed, as it raises two main challenges: (i) the nature of the sample itself may increase the level of technical variability and bring heterogeneity with respect to the reference database and (ii) the possibility of encountering polymicrobial samples that will yield a mixed MS fingerprint. In this article, we introduce a new method to infer the composition of polymicrobial samples on the basis of a single mass spectrum. Our approach relies on a penalized non-negative linear regression framework making use of species-specific prototypes, which can be derived directly from the routine reference database of pure spectra. Results: A large spectral dataset obtained from in vitro mono-and bi-microbial samples allowed us to evaluate the performance of the method in a comprehensive way. Provided that the reference matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry fingerprints were sufficiently distinct for the individual species, the method automatically predicted which bacterial species were present in the sample. Only few samples (5.3%) were misidentified, and bi-microbial samples were correctly identified in up to 61.2% of the cases. This method could be used in routine clinical microbiology practice. Availability and implementation: The complete dataset including both the reference database and the mock-up mixture spectra is available at
INTRODUCTIONMatrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) () has been introduced as a genuine paradigm shifting technology in microbiology (). Between 2005 and 2010, this has been facilitated by the release of commercial systems integrating instrument, reference bacterial spectral databases and user-friendly reporting software (). Although MALDI-TOF MS identification still requires to isolate bacterial colonies on solid culture media, it provides clear advantages: (i) it requires a small amount of reagents reducing cost and waste per sample and (ii) 93% of the isolates are identified within 24 h after inoculation versus 10% for classical techniques (). Identifying a species on the basis of a new MALDI-TOF MS spectrum is a complex multiclass prediction problem. Current commercial systems can identify several hundreds of bacterial species and a significant number of fungi (). This depends on efficient algorithms that ensure reliable identification results. To address this classification task, first approaches relied on similarity-based ranking algorithms (), but the application of machine learning algorithms such as support vector machines and random forests has more recently been reported as well (). Every classification algorithm requires a reference (or training) database including multiple spectra from bacterial reference strains and species. The ongoing improvement of MALDI-TOF MS methods and databases should drive the introduction of innovative MS-based applications into clinical microbiology. This may include direct sample testing, microbial typing () and antimicrobial susceptibility testing (). MALDI-TOF MS for the detection of pathogens directly from clinical specimens is possible but only for a limited number of primary specimens and species. Improvement of such methods would constitute a major breakthrough in bacteriology. Currently, these approaches suffer from difficulties in sample preparation resulting in a low sensitivity and difficulties with polymicrobial samples. The available algorithms, tailored to identify bacteria from a pure colony, are not able to characterize a bacterial mixture (). Only a limited number of methods have been proposed to overcome this limitation, and their performance has not been studied in detail (). We propose a new method for automatic bacterial mixture characterization from a single spectrum using a reference database developed for routine bacterial identification and evaluate it using an original in vitro spectral dataset.
CONCLUSIONWe have developed a fully automatic procedure to characterize a polymicrobial sample on the basis of a single mass spectrum that uses the same reference database as the one used to identify pure cultures in clinical routine. Therefore, this method could be used in routine clinical microbiology practice. When evaluated on a in vitro mock-up dataset, the procedure exhibited an encouraging performance when the reference bacterial fingerprints were distinct enough, which is the case for most of the species of clinical. Real dataset: mixture identification performance. Panels A and B, respectively, show the mixture identification performances obtained on the actual dataset and on the second simulated dataset, when they were analyzed at the hybrid level defined from. The left-hand figures show the mixture identification performances obtained globally and on mixed and pure spectra. The center and right figures, respectively, detail the identification performance obtained for mixed spectra within each mixture and according to the relative concentration on the major species. At the hybrid level, mixtures A and D were considered to be 'pure' because they involved pairs of species of the same genera that were considered to be too similar interest. Few spectra were misidentified and mixtures were always at least partially identified. More than 60% of the mixtures were detected and correctly identified. The method was first evaluated by an extensive simulation study, which helped us in turn to optimally set its parameters. This simulation study revealed that the reference panel and the mock-up dataset considered in this study were relatively challenging. Interestingly, we noted also that the results obtained on the actual dataset were consistent with those obtained by simulation. Some discrepancies were observed for two mixtures, but they could be traced back: an insufficient biological coverage of the reference database in the first case and a bias in the sample preparation that lead to an overestimation of the concentration of a Gram-positive species. For these reasons, we believe that the performance truly attainable for this particular mixture panel lies between those obtained on the actual and simulated datasets and would be higher for a less challenging panel. In terms of perspective, a natural question raised by this study is that of mixtures involving more than two species. Although we could not evaluate our method on real spectra in this setting, a simulation study described in Suppplementary Materials (Section S7) suggested that the approach could work reasonably well for balanced mixtures involving two to five species fingerprints. The proportion of mixtures correctly or partially identified was $85% of more, and only a single component was missed in most cases of partial identification. We note also that an estimation of the relative concentrations c i of the bacterial species i  1,. .. , K predicted to be present in the sample can be empirically derived from the model parameters estimated by the Lasso, according for instance to b c i  ^ i = P K j1 ^ j. This possibility was not investigated in this work, but the results obtained suggested that when a mixture was correctly identified, this estimation could be reasonably accurate in some cases (see Supplementary Materials, Section S9). Our future work will be to evaluate the relevance of this approach for blood culture or urine samples without preculture. This set up is likely to bring new challenges because the number of candidate bacterial species may be larger, and a stronger heterogeneity between the culture-based reference database and the spectra to analyze can be expected due to the matrix effects of blood or urine. Although these barriers have still to be overcome, the lessons learned in this study and the simulation framework proposed will be valuable assets toward this goal. Therefore, we think that our method provides an encouraging step toward future automated applications in clinical microbiology based on direct sample mass spectrometry. Conflict of Interest: The authors are employees of bioMerieuxbioMerieux, a company creating and developing infectious disease diagnostics, and in particular the VITEK-MS system involved in this study. No further potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article are reported.