Motivation: Production and degradation of RNA and proteins are stochastic processes, difficulting the distinction between spurious fluctuations in their numbers and changes in the dynamics of a genetic circuit. An accurate method of change detection is key to analyze plasticity and robustness of stochastic genetic circuits. Results: We use automatic change point detection methods to detect non-spurious changes in the dynamics of delayed stochastic models of gene networks at run time. We test the methods in detecting changes in mean and noise of protein numbers, and in the switching frequency of a genetic switch. We also detect changes, following genes silencing, in the dynamics of a model of the core gene regulatory network of Saccharomyces cerevisiae with 328 genes. Finally, from images, we determine when RNA molecules tagged with fluorescent proteins are first produced in Escherichia coli. Provided prior knowledge on the time scale of the changes, the methods detect them accurately and are robust to fluctuations in protein and RNA levels.
INTRODUCTIONGene regulatory networks (GRNs) are stochastic. However, their behavior is, to some extent, robust, e.g. when responding to environmental changes. The behavior is determined by the structure of the genetic circuits. Thus, when structural changes occur, in many cases there are changes in the dynamics of RNA and protein numbers of some genes. Some such structural changes (e.g. a mutation) can be rare, occurring once in a cell's lifetime. It is thus important to develop robust methods for detecting permanent changes in the dynamics of genetic circuits, and distinguish these from spurious fluctuations in RNA and protein numbers. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.We apply automatic change detection methods to simulated and real gene expression data, to recognize candidate change points in RNA and protein numbers'dynamics. Automatic detection of change points is the discovering of points in time where the properties of the time series change. Earliest approaches were based on the Behrens Fisher problem, a statistical hypothesis test of equal means (). A widely used approximation to solve this problem is the Welch's t-test. However, these approaches assume normal distributions, typically causing them to be too sensitive for heavy-tailed distributions. The dynamics of RNA and protein production are usually not normal like, especially if a structural change occurs in the GRN during the observations. We use two recent change point detection methods, namely, the density ratio method and the kernel change point analysis (). Our choice is based on their reported good performance compared with alternative methods. These methods use different approaches: the density ratio method has its roots in statistics and density estimation, while the kernel change point analysis is based on the theory of kernel machines and classification. In our understanding, they represent state-of-the-art approaches to the problem. To assess the accuracy of the methods, knowing the ground truth signal is needed. For this, we require realistic simulations of RNA and protein expression dynamics. The dynamics of the models ought to be as realistic as possible so as to mimic accurately the temporal dynamics of RNA and protein numbers in real cells. Recently, a delayed stochastic modeling strategy of gene expression and GRNs was proposed (). It is based on the delayed stochastic simulation algorithm (delayed SSA) (), and thus it accounts for the key dynamical features of real GRNs, namely, the stochasticity of the chemical kinetics (), and the duration of events such as the promoter complex formation () and transcription elongation (). This modeling strategy was shown to match the dynamics of RNA and protein production at the single molecule level (). Delayed stochastic models of GRNs can be simulated by SGNSim (), which also allows introducing changes in the structure of the GRN at run time, needed to test the change point detection methods. We apply and test the accuracy of the automatic detection of change points methods to model GRNs subject to a permanent
CONCLUSIONGenetic networks are subject to various structural changes and external signals, which alter their dynamics in various degrees. The detection of changes requires observing the dynamics of gene expression at the single cell, single molecule level. So far, very few direct or indirect methods allow this observation (), and usually the extraction of the data from the measurements is cumbersome. Further, the ground truth signal is commonly unknown, further enhancing the need of using models to develop new methods for detecting changes in the dynamics of genetic circuits. Changes in gene expression can be complex and diverse, e.g. in time scale. To detect them it is necessary to combine the use of adequate algorithms to particular changes, and provide information of the nature of the change one wishes to detect, which requires prior knowledge of the dynamics of gene expression at the molecular level combined with the development of new data analysis methods to distinguish real changes in signals from spurious fluctuations. We applied recently developed point change detection methods to this problem. We tested their ability in detecting changes at run time in the dynamics of stochastic models of GRNs. The changes implemented mimic naturally occurring ones. A change in the mean expression level of a gene can occur, e.g. due to gene duplication or to silencing of a gene expressing a repressor. A change in noise in protein levels can occur, e.g. due to changes in the rate of RNA degradation. A change in the switching frequency of a two-gene switch can occur, e.g. due to a change in the number or binding affinity of the repressor proteins. Finally, the silencing of a gene that is part a large gene network can occur as a response to an external signal, and will affect the expression levels of multiple genes in the network. In most of our test cases, KCpA outperforms uLSIF. This is likely a result of the nature of the changes that we aimed to detect and of the dynamics of protein and RNA levels. uLSIF has problems with cross-validated parameter selection and its results suffer from the sensitivity to the choice of parameter. The best kernel for detection is the linear kernel. This is probably because the changes in our examples are simple changes in mean levels or, for the more complicated cases (Models 2 and 3), the data can be cast to a change in mean level. In theory, the other kernels may detect more complex changes, which is probably the cause for multiple false matches in our case. Future studies may determine which algorithms are more appropriate to which type of change. When applying KCpA to a model of an inferred core network of 328 genes of S.cerevisiae (), we found Page: 2720 27142720