Bambino is a variant detector and graphical alignment viewer for next-generation sequencing data in the SAM/BAM format, which is capable of pooling data from multiple source files. The variant detector takes advantage of SAM-specific annotations, and produces detailed output suitable for genotyping and identification of somatic mutations. The assembly viewer can display reads in the context of either a user-provided or automatically generated reference sequence, retrieve genome annotation features from a UCSC genome annotation database, display histograms of non-reference allele frequencies, and predict protein-coding changes caused by SNPs. Availability: Bambino is written in platform-independent Java and available from https://cgwb.nci.nih.gov/goldenPath/bamview/ documentation/index.html, along with documentation and example data. Bambino may be launched online via Java Web Start or downloaded and run locally. Contact: edmonson@nih.gov.
INTRODUCTIONThe SAM format () along with BAM, its compressed equivalent, is an emerging standard for efficient storage and retrieval of second-generation sequencing data and their associated mapping results. Reference sequence alignment programs such as mapping and assembly with qualities (MAQ) and burrows-wheeler alignment tool (BWA) () support SAM either directly or via conversion with samtools. Our program, 'Bambino', can detect SNPs, insertions and deletions directly from BAM files, leveraging a wide range of SAM sequence annotations during the process. This is an advantage over tools such as VarScan () which are driven from intermediate files in the sparser 'pileup' format. Because SAM provides an ideal interchange format, it is desirable to have visualization and analysis tools that not only support SAM, but also can work with collections of files. Bambino's variant detector and assembly viewer are capable of pooling and analyzing data from multiple BAM files simultaneously. Dynamic pooling of * To whom correspondence should be addressed.BAM data facilitates integrated analysis of paired tumor/normal samples as well as data from multiple runs or platforms, and obviates the need for expensive construction of combined files for these analyses. This is an advantage over programs such as MagicViewer () which can only work with a single file at a time.