The standard method used by high-throughput genome sequencing facilities for detecting misla-belled samples is to use independently generated high-density SNP data to determine sample identity. However, as it has now become commonplace to have multiple samples sequenced from the same source, such as for analysis of somatic variants using matched tumour and normal samples, we can directly use the genotype information inherent in the sequence data to match samples and thus bypass the need for additional laboratory testing. Here we present BAM-matcher, a tool that can rapidly determine whether two BAM files represent samples from the same biological source by comparing their genotypes. BAM-matcher is designed to be simple to use, provides easily inter-pretable results, and is suitable for deployment at early stages of data processing pipelines. Availability and implementation: BAM-matcher is licensed under the Creative Commons by Attribution license, and is available from: https://bitbucket.org/sacgf/bam-matcher.
IntroductionSample mislabelling or mix-up is a common problem, particularly in projects and facilities that have high sample throughput (), with several recent studies placing the error rate at around 1% (). When working with next generation sequencing (NGS) data, a mislabelled sample can lead to incorrect data processing and analysis, resulting in conflicting results or false conclusions. Even if the error is identified, valuable data resources have typically been wasted, delaying analysis or diagnosis. A common practice in major genome centres is to use custom high density SNP panels to generate a SNP profile for each sample (), and SNP panels specifically designed for sample identification have recently become available commercially. The principle behind these panels is to provide an independently generated SNP profile of each sample that can be used for sample matching.comparison of binary Sequence Alignment/Map (BAM) files (http:// samtools.github.io/hts-specs) by comparing the sample genotypes at pre-determined genomic locations. BAM-matcher has the following features: first, it is easy to use and can be deployed at early stages of processing pipelines. Second, BAM-matcher is very fast: by limiting genotype-calling to predetermined positions, a comparison between two samples can be made in $2 min using the provided default set of variants (Intel Xeon E5, 3.6 GHz). As BAM-matcher caches sample genotype data, subsequent comparisons involving previously calculated samples can be much faster ($1 s), thus significantly reducing overall processing time for large cohorts. Third, BAMmatcher is flexible; it can compare different types of NGS data, including whole-genome sequencing (WGS), whole-exome sequencing (WES) and RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) data. If an appropriate genome reference and suitable list of SNPs are provided, BAMmatcher can also be used for non-human genomes.