Motivation: Protein signaling networks play a key role in cellular function , and their dysregulation is central to many diseases, including cancer. To shed light on signaling network topology in specific contexts , such as cancer, requires interrogation of multiple proteins through time and statistical approaches to make inferences regarding network structure. Results: In this study, we use dynamic Bayesian networks to make inferences regarding network structure and thereby generate testable hypotheses. We incorporate existing biology using informative network priors, weighted objectively by an empirical Bayes approach, and exploit a connection between variable selection and network inference to enable exact calculation of posterior probabilities of interest. The approach is computationally efficient and essentially free of user-set tuning parameters. Results on data where the true, underlying network is known place the approach favorably relative to existing approaches. We apply these methods to reverse-phase protein array time-course data from a breast cancer cell line (MDA-MB-468) to predict signaling links that we independently validate using targeted inhibition. The methods proposed offer a general approach by which to elucidate molecular networks specific to biological context, including , but not limited to, human cancers. Availability: http://mukherjeelab.nki.nl/DBN (code and data).
INTRODUCTIONProtein signaling plays a central role in diverse cellular functions, and aberrations in signaling are implicated in almost every aspect of cancer biology. Indeed, an emerging literature suggests that signaling networks may be 'rewired' in specific contexts, including cancer (). That is, the network may differ in a cancer cell compared with a normal cell, for example due to genetic alterations. Yet the manner in which genomic alterations in specific cancers are manifested at the level of signaling networks is not currently well understood. Elucidating signaling networks in a data-driven manner, specific to a context of interest (such as a cell line or tissue type), requires the ability to probe post-translational modification states in multiple proteins through time and across samples. However, proteomic analyses on this scale remain challenging. At the same time, the modeling of signaling connectivity poses statistical challenges. Noise, both intrinsic and experimental, is ubiquitous in this setting and network components may interact in a complex, non-linear manner. Candidate networks may differ with respect to model dimension, which in turn means that analyses that do not account for this run the risk of preferring networks that are over-complex, yet not predictive. This makes the trade-off between fit-to-data and model parsimony a crucial one in network modeling. In this article, we present a data-driven approach to the characterization of context-specific signaling networks (). We exploit reverse-phase protein array technology () to interrogate dynamic signaling responses in a defined set of 20 phospho-proteins. We use directed graphical models known as dynamic Bayesian networks (DBNs) (), to probabilistically describe relationships between variables. DBNs have previously been applied to gene expression data for inference of gene regulatory networks (), but to the best of our knowledge have not been applied to inference of protein signaling networks. Static Bayesian networks (BNs) have previously been employed to infer both protein signaling networks () and gene regulatory networks (), but unlike DBNs, do not incorporate an explicit time element. We perform inference regarding network topology within a Bayesian framework, with existing signaling biology incorporated through an informative prior distribution on networks (following; Mukherjee and Speed (2008), see). Model averaging over network structures is *To whom correspondence should be addressed. used to score network features (), highlighting those links that are common to many, relatively high-scoring topologies. The calculations required for model averaging are performed exactly. This is done by exploiting a connection between variable selection and network inference (), echoing work in undirected graphical models (). An empirical Bayes approach is used to objectively weight the contribution of the prior relative to proteomic data. This is related to the approach proposed byin which full Bayesian inference for the prior weighting is performed using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). We perform a simpler maximum marginal likelihood empirical Bayes analysis, but do so within an exact framework that is computationally fast at the moderate data dimensions that are typical of phospho-proteomic data. We follow recent work () in using a continuous formulation, thereby avoiding lossy thresholding of data. We use a variant of the Bayesian prior known as the 'g-prior' () to obtain a closed-form score (marginal likelihood) for the networks; in contrast to the widely used 'BGe' score () this gives an analysis that is essentially free of user-set parameters and invariant to data rescaling. Further, we permit interactions between parents through product terms. A number of authors, including Sachs et al. (2005) and, have used statistical approaches to explore signaling network topology; this article is in this vein. However, we note that statistical network inference approaches typically use linear models that are a coarse approximation to the underlying chemical kinetics. When network topology is known, ordinary differential equations (ODEs) offer a powerful framework for modeling signaling. Our work complements ODE-based approaches by providing a tractable way to explore large spaces of candidate network topologies in a data-driven manner. In principle, statistical network inference can be explicitly based on biochemically plausible ODE models. However, due to severe computational constraints such approaches are currently limited to investigating only a handful of hypothesized networks () and not the large number of possible networks considered here. A recent study () also proposes a method for inference of cancer signaling networks from reverse-phase protein array time-series data after external perturbation of network components. This work is similar in spirit, but differs methodologically in that it uses DBNs, Bayesian model averaging, and network priors to incorporate existing biological knowledge. Thus, we combine protein array technology with dynamic network inference to shed light on signaling networks in samples of interest. We apply these approaches to the breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-468. MDA-MB-468 is an adenocarcinoma, originally from a 51-year-old patient, belonging to the well-characterized basal breast cancer subtype (); the line is EGFR amplified and PTEN, RB1, SMAD4 and p53 mutant. We learn a network model that is specific to this line; focusing on an individual cell line allows us to generate hypotheses that are coupled to a specific well-defined genomic context and are readily testable. We predict a number of known and unexpected signaling links which we validate using independent inhibition experiments.