Motivation: Today many non-coding RNAs are known to play an active role in various important biological processes. Since RNAs functionality is correlated with specific structural motifs that are often conserved in phylogenetically related molecules, computational prediction of RNA structure should ideally be based on a set of homologous primary structures. But many available RNA secondary structure prediction programs that use sequence alignments do not consider pseudoknots or their estimations consist on a single structure without information on uncertainty. Results: In this article we present a method that takes advantage of the evolutionary history of a group of aligned RNA sequences for sampling consensus secondary structures, including pseudoknots, according to their approximate posterior probability. We investigate the benefit of using evolutionary history and demonstrate the competitiveness of our method compared with similar methods based on RNase P RNA sequences and simulated data. Availability: PhyloQFold, a C++ implementation of our method, is freely available from
INTRODUCTIONSince the first discovery of catalytic RNA activity in the early 1980s a great number of structural and enzymatic RNAs have been found, which are involved in a large variety of tasks concerning highly topical fields of research including gene regulation (), tumor biology () and epigenetic phenomena (). A fundamental condition for the biological function of RNA is the ability to adopt complex tertiary structures. These molecule comformations are encoded to some extent by the sequence of the molecule's nucleotides, i.e. the primary structure (). Since structure determination by experimental techniques like X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy are time consuming and costly (), * To whom correspondence should be addressed. researchers are interested in computational methods to predict the molecule's conformation based on its primary structure. In cases when several similar functional RNA sequences of evolutionarily related organisms are available, their structure can be inferred by comparative sequence analysis. Since the biological function of ncRNAs is determined by their molecular structure, RNA sequence evolution is constrained by the secondary structure. Changes in the molecules primary structure have less influence on selection pressure as long as the secondary and tertiary structure is maintained. This is the case when compensatory mutations conserve complementarity between base pairings (). Thus, in a multiple sequence alignment where structurally similar parts are grouped together, pairs of columns can be found that provide these co-varying signals. Comparative structure prediction methods use information like this to predict the structure that a group of related RNA sequences share (i.e. the consensus secondary structure). If a structurally correct or at least a high quality alignment is given, methods of this category, e.g. Pfold () and RNAalifold (), achieve very good results (). () describe the algorithms implemented in Pfold in terms of Stochastic Context-Free Grammars (SCFGs), which generate secondary structures with nested base pairings. This means that if position i is paired with position i  i, and j is paired with j  j, then either i  j  j  i or j  i  i  j must hold. Also many other RNA secondary structure reconstruction methods, including RNAalifold, focus on secondary structures that fulfill this assumption. An remaining problem is given by structural elements called pseudoknots, which contain non-nested base pairings. Even if they occur rather rarely, pseudoknotted RNAs are known to be essential for a large variety of functional processes in the cell (). Several methods have been proposed to reconstruct secondary structures with pseudoknots (see, for example,). The program IPKnot of () reconstructs pseudoknotted consensus structures from homologous RNA sequences. Benchmarks like CompaRNA () reveal that we cannot expect to find for every primary structure the correct secondary structure with any of the available prediction approaches, even if pseudoknots are neglected. For this reason, it is important to assess the reliability of a prediction. One possibility is to use Bayesian sampling, see () for a primer.