The biomedical literature is a knowledge-rich resource and an important foundation for future research. With over 24 million articles in PubMed and an increasing growth rate, research in automated text processing is becoming increasingly important. We report here our recently developed web-based text mining services for biomedical concept recognition and normalization. Unlike most text-mining software tools, our web services integrate several state-of-the-art entity tagging systems (DNorm, GNormPlus, SR4GN, tmChem and tmVar) and offer a batch-processing mode able to process arbitrary text input (e.g. scholarly publications, patents and medical records) in multiple formats (e.g. BioC). We support multiple standards to make our service interoperable and allow simpler integration with other text-processing pipelines. To maximize scalability, we have preprocessed all PubMed articles, and use a computer cluster for processing large requests of arbitrary text. Availability and implementation: Our text-mining web service is freely available at http://www. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CBBresearch/Lu/Demo/tmTools/#curl Contact: Zhiyong.Lu@nih.gov
IntroductionManaging the rapid growth of biomedical knowledge buried in text such as literature, medical records and patents makes the development of automated text-mining technology increasingly important. For instance, the biomedical literature contains the latest reports of scientific discoveries, but is represented in a highly unstructured format. Many text-mining systems have thus been developed in recent years to help unlock this information, both for information retrieval and for novel computational analyses. Text-mining approaches to automatically recognize and extract key biological concepts are of particular interest as this task is often considered to be a building block for many integrated and sophisticated information extraction and retrieval solutions. Over the years, a number of biomedical named entity recognition (NER) tools have been developed. The entities targeted include genes/proteins (), chemical/drug (), disease (), sequence variation () and species/taxonomy(). To use these tools, and in particular integrate them into existing pipelines, one has to install the software and address many issues including 'lack of modularity, operating system incompatibility, tool configuration complexity, and lack of standardization of interprocess communications' (). Web-based text mining services provide an alternative solution where the details of the tool are hidden from users and no system installation or maintenance is required. Although one can access text-mining applications like Reflect () and MyMiner () through web page visits, we are only aware of a few that offer programmatic web APIs and can therefore be integrated easily: Whatizit (), BeCAS (), Cocoa (http://npjoint.com/) and Acromine (). In comparison to these tools, our web services are unique in several aspects: (i) the entity taggers used offer highly competitive performance in benchmarks for both mention and concept level results, typically via hybrid systems, as opposed to use dictionaries in the previous systems; (ii) for system scalability, our method allows immediately with a unique session ID, which can be used to check the processing status. Once finished, the user can use the same session ID to retrieve the result, as shown in. The text-mining output can be directly visualized using PubTator as shown inwhere computer-tagged entities are highlighted in various colors throughout the document. To improve system interoperability, we support multiple formats including BioC/XML (), PubTator/TXT () and PubAnnotation/JSON (). By doing so, our service becomes interoperable for different applications. To simplify programmatic access to our web services, we also provide sample client code in Perl, Python and Java.