Motivation: Many studies have investigated the differential expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) in disease states and between different treatments, tissues and developmental stages. Given a list of perturbed miRNAs, it is common to predict the shared pathways on which they act. The standard test for functional enrichment typically yields dozens of significantly enriched functional categories, many of which appear frequently in the analysis of apparently unrelated diseases and conditions. Results: We show that the most commonly used functional enrichment test is inappropriate for the analysis of sets of genes targeted by miRNAs. The hypergeometric distribution used by the standard method consistently results in significant P-values for functional enrichment for targets of randomly selected miRNAs, reflecting an underlying bias in the predicted gene targets of miRNAs as a whole. We developed an algorithm to measure enrichment using an empirical sampling approach, and applied this in a reanalysis of the gene ontology classes of targets of miRNA lists from 44 published studies. The vast majority of the miRNA target sets were not significantly enriched in any functional category after correction for bias. We therefore argue against continued use of the standard functional enrichment method for miRNA targets. Availability and implementation: A Python script implementing the empirical algorithm is freely available at http://sgjlab.org/empirical-go/.
IntroductionMicroRNAs (miRNAs) down-regulate abundance and translation of target mRNAs through complementary binding to target sites. miRNAs play important roles in regulating gene expression in response to stimuli and during development and their expression patterns can be predictive of disease states (). For this reason, a large number of studies have investigated the expression of miRNAs in a wide range of biological conditions. Microarray assays, qRT-PCR and high-throughput sequencing have all been used to identify differentially expressed miRNAs in disease states, between different tissues and during development (). Unfortunately, the interpretation of miRNA differential expression is not straightforward. The roles of individual miRNAs in cellular pathways are still poorly understood. Each miRNA has the potential to target hundreds of different genes, meaning that perturbation of a single miRNA may affect many biological functions (). This motivates a broad view: given a list of differentially expressed miRNAs, we must look for the functions or pathways on which they converge. Here, we examine the most common method of miRNA functional enrichment analysis, used in hundreds of published studies. This method consists of three steps: finding which genes are targeted by selected miRNAs, annotating target genes for their participation in pathways and processes, and statistical testing for over-representation of a biological process in the set of targeted genes ().
DiscussionOur comparison of the hypergeometric and empirical distributions showed that certain functional categories are preferentially targeted by miRNAs, regardless of whether those miRNAs are differentially expressed in a biological state or not. It is not helpful to report a GO term as enriched for targets of differentially expressed miRNAs if an equally strong enrichment would be obtained for randomly picked miRNAs. This justifies an empirical sampling approach, which measures enrichment relative to other miRNAs, in comparison to the standard method, which does not take into account the background level of targeting of a GO term. There are several possible explanations for the phenomenon of preferential targeting by miRNAs, including bias in target prediction algorithms, similarities among seed sequences, correlations between genes that are regulated together and genuine preference for control of certain biological processes by different mechanisms. One clear source of bias is average 3 0 UTR length of genes annotated to specific GO terms. When we use the P-value of the mean of the empirical distribution on the hypergeometric distribution () as a measure for bias of a GO term, we observe a strong negative correlation with average 3 0 UTR length of genes assigned to that GO term (Pearson's r  0.36; P  5.3  10 287 ). We also note that many GO terms were invariably returned together as enriched. This may reflect underlying correlations between targeting of processes as well as the hierarchical structure of the GO. The simplest use of functional enrichment tests examines a set of genes with a common characteristicfor example, a set of differentially expressed genes, or a set of genes with particular genomic properties. The test described here is subtly different: a set of miRNAs is defined by differential expression and that set is one step removed (by miRNA target prediction) from the set of genes whose functional enrichment is tested. The bias in the underlying expected distribution of functional categories comes from the process of linking miRNAs with their target genes. While we have examined only a specific use of the functional enrichment test, similar biases may affect other genomic enrichment tests (). For example, ChIP-seq identification of transcription factorbinding sites followed by functional enrichment of the target gene set is analogous to the analyses described here. Further investigation is therefore required to determine the appropriateness of the hypergeometric distribution for other types of functional enrichment studies. In our literature survey, we identified 44 journal articles that used the standard method. However, our list was not exhaustive and excluded studies with relatively minor deviations from the standard method, such as those that implemented more complex filters for selection of target genes () and those that performed tests based on combined targeting by miRNAs (). Altogether, we estimate that hundreds of published articles are likely to be affected by the bias described here. In the application of the empirical algorithm to miRNA lists from these studies, we do not attempt to directly replicate methods used and instead show a pattern in results that strongly suggests that most reported enrichments would not be found with correction for bias. We also do not directly compare the significant enrichments output by our algorithm with those reported, as the specific types of functional categories assayed, such as GO term collections assembled by DAVID (), vary greatly and full lists of significant terms are rarely published. Our results do not imply that differentially expressed miRNAs do not converge on functions of interest. It is notable that the number of significantly enriched GO terms increased with the number of miRNAs input to our algorithm. This may be because noise dominates for smaller lists, whereas a larger number of input miRNAs provides more signal of convergence on a process. While modest enrichment of a function for a single miRNA is undetectable, the combination of many small enrichments for a larger collection of miRNAs passes significance thresholds. Five of the largest input miRNA lists () had extremely convergent miRNA target sets (for example () had a predicted target set significantly smaller than expected). Convergent target sets mean that any GO term hit by chance will contain a higher proportion of the target set, causing more significant GO terms to be returned. There have been other proposals to try to harness the convergence of miRNAs and to improve enrichment analysis. The miRSystem tool gives a P-value based on the tendency for the standard method to consistently find the same significant GO terms (). By comparing the order of enrichment for a new sample with the order for random miRNAs, outstanding changes can be identified. Although use of a pre-computed distribution limits the flexibility of miRSystem, the approach escapes the problem of bias reported here (). In general, however, there remains an unfulfilled need for more powerful and accurate bioinformatic tools to link miRNAs to functions.
ConclusionWe have highlighted critical problems with the most common general approach to functional enrichment analysis of miRNA target genes. We have shown that testing with the hypergeometric distribution sampling from all GO annotated genes in the genome is inappropriate. Our literature survey showed that a large number of studies reported significant results that are unlikely to stand after correction for the bias in the distribution of targets of randomly sampled miRNAs. We believe that our results provide a strong argument against continued use of the standard method.