Mate pair library sequencing is an effective and economical method for detecting genomic structural variants and chromo-somal abnormalities. Unfortunately, the mapping and alignment of mate-pair read pairs to a reference genome is a challenging and time-consuming process for most next-generation sequencing alignment programs. Large insert sizes, introduction of library preparation protocol artifacts (biotin junction reads, paired-end read contamination , chimeras, etc.) and presence of structural variant breakpoints within reads increase mapping and alignment complexity. We describe an algorithm that is up to 20 times faster and 25% more accurate than popular next-generation sequencing alignment programs when processing mate pair sequencing.
INTRODUCTIONLarge genomic chromosomal rearrangements play an important role in the development and progression of many cancers. Amplifications, inversions, deletions and translocations can modify the expression and/or functionality of many tumor suppressors and oncogenes. Thus, identification of large genomic rearrangements in cancer cells can greatly aid in our understanding of the mechanisms underlying cancer progression. Mate pair (MP) library sequencing offers an efficient, a costeffective and a comprehensive method to detect the presence of and to determine the fine grain structure of structural variants throughout the entire genome. MPs' large 25-kb fragment size increases the likelihood that a read pair will span a structural variant and minimizes the number of read pairs required to detect and characterize an event. Multiple samples can be processed on a single lane of a flow cell, reducing costs without degrading accuracy. Coverage analysis can accurately determine aneuploidy, amplification and deletion on multiplexed samples. For a detailed description of the MP sequencing protocol, please refer to http://www.illumina.com/technology/mate_pair_sequen cing_assay.ilmn. The MP library preparation protocol introduces several sequencing artifacts that complicate MP read pair mapping and alignment. After shearing, biotin end-labeling and size selection, 25-kb DNA fragments are circularized by joining two ends of a single fragment. In the circularization step, chimeras, or false MPs, can be generated when two separate fragments ligate. Before sequencing, the circularized DNA is randomly sheared into 500-bp fragments, and the biotin-containing fragments are isolated. Because shearing is random, the biotin junction can be within the sequencers' read length of either end of the fragment, producing reads containing sequence from two different genomic locations. Finally, the biotin isolation step is not 100% efficient, 1015% of the sequenced read pairs consist of paired-end reads. The use of large insert sizes and the presence of paired-end reads, biotin junctions, chimeras and breakpoint junctions in MP sequencing make alignment more difficult and time-consuming. Large insert sizes and chimeric reads increase the expected paired read mapping search space. Sequencing through biotin junctions (2025% of 100-bp reads) and structural variant breakpoint junctions produces reads containing sequence from multiple genomic locations. The presence of pair-end reads, chimeras and discordant read pairs spanning structural variants increases the complexity of correctly scoring paired genomic locations. To address the difficulties of MP sequencing alignment, we have created Binary Indexing Mapping Algorithm (BIMA) V3, the latest version of a mapping and alignment tool designed to handle MP sequencing artifacts. Building on BIMA's proven track record (), V3's enhancements allow it to accurately align up to 25% more reads in up to 1/20 the time of currently popular next-generation sequencing (NGS) alignment programs.