Motivation: In genetic science, large-scale international research collaborations represent a growing trend. These collaborations have demanding and challenging database, storage, retrieval and communication needs. These studies typically involve demographic and clinical data, in addition to the results from numerous genomic studies (omics studies) such as gene expression, eQTL, genome-wide association and methylation studies, which present numerous challenges, thus the need for data integration platforms that can handle these complex data structures. Inefficient methods of data transfer and access control still plague research collaboration. As science becomes more and more collaborative in nature, the need for a system that adequately manages data sharing becomes paramount. Results: Biology-Related Information Storage Kit (BRISK) is a package of several web-based data management tools that provide a cohesive data integration and management platform. It was specifically designed to provide the architecture necessary to promote collaboration and expedite data sharing between scientists. Availability and Implementation: The software, documentation, Java source code and demo are available at http://genapha.icapture .ubc.ca/brisk/index.jsp. BRISK was developed in Java, and tested on an Apache Tomcat 6 server with a MySQL database.
INTRODUCTIONIn biomedical studies, statistical power is important because some associations can be undetected if statistical power is low. A simple way to improve power is to increase the sample size; this drives scientists to collaborate and share their data. Several consortia have been created to facilitate collaborative scientific efforts on national and international scales. Large-scale collaborations generate substantial amounts of data that is useful for analysis but can be difficult to manage. Delegating access and managing information for such large sets of data can be problematic if not appropriately handled. Labs can adequately manage large amounts of data by using laboratory information management systems. However, delegating access to data can be a problem as some groups may want to limit access to unpublished data (). Studies of scientific publications, from the past 20 years, have shown a continuous increase in collaboration between scientists * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(). New tools need to be developed to account for the increasingly collaborative nature of science. We were driven to develop Biology-related Information Storage Kit (BRISK) to facilitate collaboration and simplify data sharing for investigators in the AllerGen (The Allergy, Genes and Environment Network) consortium (http://www.allergen-nce.ca/ and http://genapha.icapture.ubc.ca/index.do). BRISK is an opensourced software package that provides the infrastructure necessary for efficient communication between collaborators regarding data and sample storage, data formats and data retrieval. It has the ability to handle and organize large datasets, including data generated in longitudinal studies. BRISK has been used by investigators to retrieve information from high-throughput GenomeWide Association Studies (GWAS) with hundreds of thousands of markers (500 000), to smaller scale Illumina Golden Gate arrays with 1536 markers.
DISCUSSIONBRISK was built taking into account the growing collaborative nature of science. Data management in collaborative research involves working with restrictions and protocols that are not routinely found in research carried out in a single laboratory. Researchers must consider how the data will be stored and distributed so anyone that needs to access the data can do so without difficulty. On the other hand, they must also restrict access to sensitive and undisclosed data. Data integrity is ensured through a multi-tier login system; each user account can only access data in their account tier. By providing efficient data storage and features that cater to the needs of researchers, BRISK sets itself apart from other database management tools. There is a similar open-sourced data management package called SIMBioMS (). The feature set offered by SIMBioMS is oriented toward storage and retrieval-related functions used in collaborative studies; many of these features are also present in BRISK. However, in addition to these basic features, BRISK contains tools that help researchers organize, mine and analyze study data. Furthermore, there are tools in BRISK that allow researchers to test and explore additional data for further analysis. These features enable BRISK to act as a centralized hub where users can go to access information. BRISK is an advance from BioWarehouse () in that BRISK unifies information from clinical (phenotypes), laboratory (SLIMS biological samples) and GWAS association results with electronic online database resources. BioWarehouse compiles information from a variety of electronic resources such as ENZYME, KEGG and BioCyc and integrates the information from these sources using a mulitdatabase approach. BioWarehouse does not incorporate analysis tools, clinical or genotype information. BioWharehouse retrieves and stores information locally. The advantages of this approach are that users can select which version of a database they wish to interrogate and they are not limited in the types of databases that can be queried. The disadvantage is that the data is stored locally and may not be up to date. Similar to BioMediator and the BioConductor platforms that have been developed for the analysis of gene expression arrays () BRISK uses a semantic architecture such that the data stays at the source (NCBI resources). This architecture has several advantages; the data is stored, managed and maintained at the source rather than locally. This avoids data warehousing, which helps to manage and maximize local resources by cutting down on the storage space necessary for BRISK. It also ensures that at query time, when the data is accessed, the data is up to date and accurate. We are able to do this because the NCBI resources can be queried via the internet, although the number of queries per user per minute is limited. Genetics is a rapidly evolving and changing discipline and information is being changed, compiled and updated daily, given these conditions dynamic access is preferred over data warehousing. Also similar to BioMediator and BioConductor, BRISK is an open source project, we anticipate that ongoing development will be collaborative. BRISK has been proven in heavy use and has been developed and maintained by a professional development team. To facilitate the ongoing development of BRISK we have published the project on Google Code see (http://code.google.com/hosting/). Each service has its own project site Investigator Services (http://code.google.com/p /brisk-investigator-services/), Web Information Services (http:// code.google.com/p/brisk-web-information-services/) and BRISK Sample-based Laboratory Information Management System (http:// code.google.com/p/brisk-slims/). This will allow BRISK to further evolve to meet the needs of its users and developers world-wide. Limitations: BRISK currently manages and maintains genotype, clinical and laboratory information. It works well with GWAS level data but we acknowledge that BRISK does not address all the needs of 'omics' studies. We have not addressed gene-expression, methylation or sequence level data concerns in this release as these utilities are currently in development. Data integration platforms are an emerging endeavor and there is no 'one size fits all' approach at this time. This is likely because the development of these platforms has been driven by the research needs of the groups they serve. BRISK and Genapha (www.genapha.ca) were developed to meet the needs of an emerging genetics consortium whose needs were the management of laboratory samples, clinical phenotypes, exposure and questionnaire data and genotypes from candidate gene and GWAS. BRISK has numerous utilities to address these needs. However, sequence level data will soon be the 'norm' for genetic consortium studies, and new data models will need to be developed that can handle the complexity and size of genome-wide sequence data. Data import and exporting of genome-wide sequence data within a MySQL database framework is unlikely to be feasible, as it will be prohibitively time consuming. Data management needs are growing rapidly and the need for new tools that can organize and integrate data from diverse data structures and sources are urgently needed.