Motivation: Bisulfite sequencing (BS-seq) has emerged as the gold standard to study genome-wide DNA methylation at single-nucleotide resolution. Quality control (QC) is a critical step in the analysis pipeline to ensure that BS-seq data are of high quality and suitable for subsequent analysis. Although several QC tools are available for next-generation sequencing data, most of them were not designed to handle QC issues specific to BS-seq protocols. Therefore, there is a strong need for a dedicated QC tool to evaluate and remove potential technical biases in BS-seq experiments. Results: We developed a package named BSeQC to comprehensively evaluate the quality of BS-seq experiments and automatically trim nucleotides with potential technical biases that may result in inaccurate methylation estimation. BSeQC takes standard SAM/ BAM files as input and generates bias-free SAM/BAM files for downstream analysis. Evaluation based on real BS-seq data indicates that the use of the bias-free SAM/BAM file substantially improves the quantification of methylation level. Availability and implementation: BSeQC is freely available at: http:// code.google.com
INTRODUCTIONDNA methylation, an epigenetic modification affecting the organization and function of the genome, plays an important role in several key biological processes, including transcriptional regulation, X-chromosome inactivation, genomic imprinting, silencing of repetitive elements and chromatin structure (). Bisulfite conversion followed by next-generation sequencing (BS-seq) has emerged as a powerful technique for detecting genome-wide DNA methylation at single-nucleotide resolution (). Ideally, BS-seq experiment should be able to directly and exactly quantify the methylation level of every cytosine in the genome. However, current BS-seq protocols possess several intrinsic technical biases, which may impact methylation level estimation. These biases include overhang end-repair, 5 0 bisulfite conversion failure, sequencing into the adaptor and 3 0 low sequencing quality (). Although the last two biases are also present in other next-generation sequencing data, the first two biases, i.e. end-repair and 5 0 bisulfite conversion failure, are highly specific to BS-seq protocols. BS-seq reads with the first two biases can be perfectly mapped to the reference genome; however, they will result in biased methylation estimation. First, after sonication, the overhangs of DNA fragments are normally end-repaired with unmethylated cytosines to restore the double stranded DNA (Illumina WGBS for Methylation Analysis Guide). This may introduce artificially low methylation rates at both ends of the DNA fragments. Second, bisulfite conversion failure is known to be enriched at the 5 0 end of reads, most likely caused by the re-annealing of sequences adjacent to the methylated adapters in bisulfite conversion (). This may bring in artificially high methylation rates at the 5 0 end of reads. Most quality control (QC) tools, such as htSeqTools () and FastQC (), only focus on the general sequence quality and adaptor trimming, or other next-generation sequencing applications such as RNA-seq (). To the best of our knowledge, BSmooth and Bis-SNP are the only two tools that support QC specific to BS-seq (). However, their QC functions are highly limited. The QC model in BSmooth was designed to work with its own alignment and analysis pipeline, and thus cannot take standard BAM/SAM files as input. Furthermore, BSmooth can detect but not correct the biases. Bis-SNP only supports the correction of 5 0 bisulfite conversion failure. Because BS-seq experiments are widely used and the resulting data will continue to grow exponentially in the near future, there is a strong need for a dedicated QC tool to assess and improve the quality of BS-seq experiments. BSeQC, the tool we developed, is focused on the technical biases specific to BS-seq experiments. BSeQC can automatically evaluate and remove the biases based on a user defined statistical cutoff. Evaluation based on real BS-seq data indicates that, after bias removal, the quantification of methylation level is significantly improved.