We have developed Cake, a bioinformatics software pipeline that integrates four publicly available somatic variant-calling algorithms to identify single nucleotide variants with higher sensitivity and accuracy than any one algorithm alone. Cake can be run on a high-performance computer cluster or used as a stand-alone application.
INTRODUCTIONThe development of next-generation sequencing technologies has made it possible to generate more comprehensive catalogues of somatic alterations in cancer genomes than ever before. Software tools to find these variants deploy different mathematical approaches to interrogate the genome sequences of tumour/ germline paired samples. For example, the variant detectors Bambino () and VarScan 2 () both identify somatic variants by comparing alternative allele frequencies between tumour and normal sequences. VarScan 2 uses a Fisher's exact test and Bambino a Bayesian scoring model to identify somatic variants in paired samples. Other algorithms include CaVEMan () and SAMtools mpileup (), which compute the genotype likelihood of nucleotide positions in tumour and normal genome sequences by use of an expectation-maximization method. Putative raw variant calls made by these algorithms typically undergo further filtering. For example, known single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) present in dbSNP () or in the 1000 Genomes project (The 1000 Genomes Project), or sites with low mapping qualities are usually filtered from the final somatic call set. Validation rates ultimately depend on the stringency of this filtering of putative sites. Intriguingly, applying different variant-calling algorithms to the same data often results in a set of only partially overlapping somatic single nucleotide variant (SNV) calls. To illustrate this phenomenon, we deployed four publicly available somatic variant-calling algorithms (Bambino, CaVEMan, SAMtools mpileup and VarScan 2) on a dataset composed of 24 human hepatocellular carcinoma tumour/germline exome pairs (). Because this study reported 994 validated somatic variants identified using the independent CASAVA pipeline, we used these data to gauge the performance of each algorithm. This analysis revealed at best a 43.8% overlap between SNV calls made by any two of these widely used callers, and at worst a 6.45% overlap (Supplementary). Notable, however, was the fact that the majority of validated calls were identified by two or more algorithms, suggesting that a merging approach may improve both the sensitivity and accuracy of somatic variant calling. See the Supplementary Material for details. In an effort to take advantage of existing software tools and to improve variant detection, we developed Cake (Supplementary). Cake is a fully configurable bioinformatics pipeline that integrates four single nucleotide somatic variant-calling algorithms (Bambino, CaVEMan, SAMtools mpileup, and VarScan 2) and deploys an extensive collection of fully customizable post-processing filtering steps. We show that the performance of Cake exceeds any one algorithm for somatic SNV detection, making it an optimal tool for cancer genome analysis.(). The performance of each variant-calling algorithm was evaluated by running each one individually using their default settings and filtering the results using the post-processing filters implemented in Cake. The results are summarized in.