CalMaTe calibrates preprocessed allele-specific copy number estimates (ASCNs) from DNA microarrays by controlling for single-nucleotide polymorphism-specific allelic crosstalk. The resulting ASCNs are on average more accurate, which increases the power of segmentation methods for detecting changes between copy number states in tumor studies including copy neutral loss of heterozygosity. CalMaTe applies to any ASCNs regardless of preprocessing method and microarray technology, e.g. Affymetrix and Illumina. Availability: The method is available on CRAN (http://cran.r-project. org/) in the open-source R package calmate, which also includes an add-on to the Aroma Project framework (http://www.aroma-project. org/).
INTRODUCTIONSeveral analytical pipelines for identifying total copy number (TCN) events from DNA microarrays are available. However, certain types of genomic alterations cannot be detected from TCNs, e.g. copy neutral LOH events. The identification of such events can be key to our biological understanding of cancer development and our ability to set up a personalized treatment plan (). Genotyping microarrays () quantify not only TCNs but also allele-specific copy numbers (ASCNs), which are necessary to identify CN states such as copy neutral loss of heterozygosity LOH. ASCNs are the CN estimates of each allele variant (here A and B) at a particular (bi-allelic) singlenucleotide polymorphism (SNP). For the purpose of displaying ASCNs along the genome and also for detecting CN changes, ASCNs are often represented by their TCNs and B-allele fractions (BAFs) (). For instance, for diploid SNPs in a * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  All authors contributed equally.normal region, the expected TCN is 2 and expected BAFs are 0 (AA), 1/2 (AB) or 1 (BB). In a region of copy neutral LOH, the expected TCN is 2 and the expected BAFs are 0 or 1. For a single-copy gain, expected TCN is 3 and expected BAFs are 0, 1/3, 2/3 and 1. In, observed TCNs and BAFs are displayed along the genome for a normal region, a gain and a region of copy neutral LOH. Based on these type of data, segmentation methods () identify regions of constant CN state. Their performances depend greatly on the signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) of TCN and BAF (), which in turn depend on the preprocessing method used, e.g. dChip (), CN5 (), CRMA v2 (), ACNE (Ortiz) and 'Illumina' (). Some of these