Motivation: Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy is one of the most versatile tools to study protein folding and to validate the proper fold of purified proteins. Here, we aim to provide a readily accessible, user-friendly and platform-independent tool capable of analysing multiple CD datasets of virtually any format and returning results as high-quality graphical output to the user. Results: CAPITO (CD Anaylsis and Plotting Tool) is a novel web server-based tool for analysing and plotting CD data. It allows reliable estimation of secondary structure content utilizing different approaches. CAPITO accepts multiple CD datasets and, hence, is well suited for a wide application range such as the analysis of temperature or pH-dependent (un)folding and the comparison of mutants. Availability:
INTRODUCTIONThe past 20 years have witnessed a dramatic growth of the number of high-resolution protein structures deposited in the protein data bank (PDB:). The progress in structural biology has been driven by developments in recombinant protein expression technology, as well as by advances in methodology, data analysis and bioinformatics. Escherichia coli is, so far, the most widely used host for structural studies, which in turn require significant amounts of recombinant protein. Before resource-intensive detailed structural and functional studies, it is extremely helpful, if not essential, to validate the proper fold of purified recombinant proteins and one of the most versatile tools to study protein fold(ing) constitutes circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. Compared with X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, the structural information obtained from CD is limited. However, CD spectroscopy carries a number of advantages: it is a wellestablished label-free technique requiring comparably small amounts of material, and a short time is necessary for assessing structural parameters of proteins like secondary structure, conformational changes, (un)folding and interactions (). A broad range of mathematical methods have been devised to extract structural information from CD spectra to provide for an estimate of the secondary structure composition of proteins via multilinear regression (), singular value decomposition (), ridge regression (), principal component factor analysis (Pribic`Pribic`, 1994), convex constraint analysis (), neural network-based analysis () and the self consistent method (), respectively. All these methods are based on the assumption that the CD spectrum of a given protein represents a linear combination of basis spectra. Different secondary structural elements give rise to bands characteristic in wavelength and intensity ().The CD spectrum of a given protein can be represented by the molar ellipticity  l as a function of wavelength l, where f n is the fraction of each secondary structure n, and S ln is the ellipticity at each wavelength of each nth secondary structural element (). The sum of all fractional weights P f n is equal to 1 in constrained fits. The quality of the output of the aforementioned methods relies on the availability of a reference database of CD spectra of proteins whose 3D structure is known (). With the advent of the Protein Circular Dichroism Data Bank (PCDDB), a public repository for far ultraviolet (far-UV) and synchrotron radiation CD spectral data and their associated experimental metadata, the number of publicly available CD spectra increased enormously (). In the PCDDB, each entry contains sequence and experimental information for the respective protein and includes the PDB code for proteins of which 3D structures are available. During the recent past, different web services () or programmes () for analysing of CD data and estimating secondary structure content became available. Recently, Janes and co-workers () launched the tool DichroMatch for matching spectra against reference data. Here, we describe a novel web server-based tool combining different methods for estimating secondary structure content and analysing far-UV CD data based on a selected set of far-UV CD data as available from the PCDDB.
CONCLUSIONWe have developed CAPITO, a novel web server-based analysis tool for interpreting CD spectra. It allows the simultaneous evaluation of multiple datasets. Hence, it is suitable for the investigation of a protein in question under different conditions (temperature, pH, buffer solvent and mutations). Our approaches (basis spectra and matching-based method) to extract secondary structure information from a CD spectrum take advantage of a recent significant increase in the availability of well-calibrated far-UV CD spectra linked to available tertiary structures. The accuracy of our methods in predicting-helical,-strand or irregular content is reliable compared with other frequently used programmes or web services. In summary, we here provide a freely accessible, user-friendly and robust tool for the analysis of CD spectra.