Motivation: CRISPR-derived RNA guided endonucleases (RGENs) have been widely used for both gene knockout and knock-in at the level of single or multiple genes. RGENs are now available for forward genetic screens at genome scale, but single guide RNA (sgRNA) selection at this scale is difficult. Results: We develop an online tool, Cas-Database, a genome-wide gRNA library design tool for Cas9 nucleases from Streptococcus pyogenes (SpCas9). With an easy-to-use web interface, Cas-Database allows users to select optimal target sequences simply by changing the filtering conditions. Furthermore, it provides a powerful way to select multiple optimal target sequences from thousands of genes at once for the creation of a genome-wide library. Cas-Database also provides a web application programming interface (web API) for advanced bioinformatics users. Availability and implementation: Free access at
IntroductionRNA guided endonucleases (RGENs) derived from the Type II clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-Cas (CRISPR associated) system, an adaptive immune response in bacteria and archaea, have been usefully harnessed in many genome engineering applications such as gene knockout and knock-in in various organisms (). Recently, a few groups have undertaken genome-wide Cas9-mediated genetic screens () in human and other mammalian cells. The selection of target sequences is an initial, rate-limiting step in RGEN applications. We and other groups have developed a number of web-based online tools or command-line programs for single-guide RNA (sgRNA) design or off-target site identification (). Although they are very useful for choosing sgRNAs that target one gene, selection of sgRNAs at the genome scale is still challenging. Previously, two genome-wide databases for SpCas9 design () have been built conceptually. However, although they are useful for selecting sgRNAs that target a small number of genes, neither offers an easy way to select optimal target sequences at once from thousands of genes for genome-wide library construction in a variety of organisms. Here we describe Cas-Database, a web-based genome-wide gRNA design tool for SpCas9 nucleases for genome-scale screening V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.