We present Cas-Designer, a user-friendly program to aid researchers in choosing appropriate target sites in a gene of interest for type II CRISPR/Cas-derived RNA-guided endonucleases, which are now widely used for biomedical research and biotechnology. Cas-Designer rapidly provides the list of all possible guide RNA sequences in a given input DNA sequence and their potential off-target sites including bulge-type sites in a genome of choice. In addition, the program assigns an out-of-frame score to each target site to help users choose appropriate sites for gene knockout. Cas-Designer shows the results in an interactive table and provides user-friendly filter functions. Availability and implementation: Free access at
IntroductionTargeted genome editing based on the type II clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) and CRISPR-associated (Cas) protein system from the prokaryotic adaptive immune response is now widely used for biomedical research and biotechnology (). CRISPR RNA-guided endonucleases (RGENs) consist of the Cas9 protein and guide RNAs (gRNAs), which are provided as two small RNAs [sequencevariable crRNA and invariable trans-activating CRISPR RNA (tracrRNA)] or as single-chain gRNAs in which essential portions of crRNA and tracrRNA are linked. RGENs cleave target DNA in a sequence-dependent manner; the repair of the resulting doublestrand breaks (DSBs) by endogenous mechanisms gives rise to targeted genome modifications in cells and whole organisms. In addition to the base pairing between gRNAs and target DNA, Cas9 also contributes to RGEN specificity by recognizing a protospaceradjacent motif (PAM) downstream of the gRNA target sequence. Cas9 proteins derived from different organisms recognize distinct PAM sequences. However, RGENs can also cleave off-target DNA sites with several mismatches () or with missing or additional nucleotides (), compared to gRNA sequences. We and others have presented computer programs that help researchers choose appropriate target sites for Cas9 nucleases (). To the best of our knowledge, however, there is no web-based tool for providing the list of all possible gRNAs in a given input DNA sequence with their potential off-target sites with a DNA or RNA bulge in a genome of choice and with customizable PAM sequences appropriate for Cas9 derived from species other than S. pyogenes. Here we present Cas-Designer, a quick gRNA designing tool for various type II Cas9 nucleases, which lists all possible gRNA sequences from a given input DNA sequence along with their potential off-target sites in a genome of interest. Notably, Cas-Designer rapidly searches for potential off-target sites with a DNA or RNA bulge (). Furthermore, Cas-Designer provides an out-of-frame score () for each gRNA to help choose appropriatesites for gene knockout. Cas-Designer is available as a commandline program or at our website.