Motivation: Cellular networks usually consist of numerous chemical species, such as DNA, RNA, proteins and small molecules, etc. Different biological tasks are generally performed by complex interactions of these species. As these interactions can rarely be directly measured, it is widely recognized that causal relationship identification is essential in understanding biological behaviors of a cellular network. Challenging issues here include not only the large number of interactions to be estimated, but also many restrictions on probing signals. The purposes of this study are to incorporate power law in cellular network identification, in order to increase accuracy of causal regulation estimations, especially to reduce false positive errors. Results: Two identification algorithms are developed that can be efficiently applied to causal regulation identification of a large-scale network from noisy steady-state experiment data. A distinguished feature of these algorithms is that power law has been explicitly incorporated into estimations, which is one important structural property that most large-scale cellular networks approximately have. Under the condition that parameters of the power law are known and measurement errors are Gaussian, a likelihood maximization approach is adopted. The developed estimation algorithms consist of three major steps. At first, angle minimization between subspaces is utilized to identify chemical elements that have direct influences on a prescribed chemical element, under the condition that the number of direct regulations is known. Second, interference coefficients from prescribed chemical elements are estimated through likelihood maximization with respect to measurement errors. Finally, direct regulation numbers are identified through maximizing a lower bound of an overall likelihood function. These methods have been applied to an artificially constructed linear system with 100 elements, a mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway model with 103 chemical elements, some DREAM initiative in silico data and some in vivo data. Compared with the widely adopted total least squares (TLS) method, computation results show that parametric estimation accuracy can be significantly increased and false positive errors can be greatly reduced. Availability: The Matlab files for the methods are available at http://bioinfo.au.tsinghua.edu.cn/member/ylwang/Matlabfiles_CN
INTRODUCTIONInferring causal relationships of a cellular network is one of the fundamental problems in understanding cell behaviors. Major reasons behind extensive attentions to this problem appear to lie upon two facts. One is that cellular networks are generally of a large scale and there are a huge number of causal interactions to be estimated. The other is that there are many restrictions on probing signals in biochemical experiments. For example, the perturbations must be non-negative and some chemical elements may not be directly affected, and so on. These make the problem of estimating a cellular network much more difficult than identifying an industrial process (). With significant development of high-throughout technologies and proteomics analysis methods, several approaches have now been proposed for unraveling the interactions of a cellular network, such as Boolean network methods (), Bayesian network methods (), partial correlation analysis (), differential equation-based time series analysis () and so on. However, when applying these methods to large-scale cellular networks, several difficulties may arise (). For example, with the number increment of chemical elements in a network, computational burden of most of the methods increases exponentially. To overcome this difficulty, some methods limit the maximum direct regulation number, but this may restrict application ranges of the method itself and give rise to a problem of selecting principal chemical elements. On the other hand, statistical methods such as partial correlation analysis rely on a variety of pairwise correlation measures. This means that an indirect effect may be wrongly recognized as a direct one, and therefore leads to a high false positive rate. In addition, a 'top-down' approach is proposed infor causal regulation inference from steady-state concentration changes of chemical species. This strategy is based on the total differential formula and total least square (TLS) estimations. Afterwards, the results have been extended to time series data, quasi-steady-state data, etc. (), and the 'non-direct effect' condition on experiment designs has been significantly weakened (). Our computation experiences, however, show that when data length is of a moderate size, it is very rare that an identified regulation
CONCLUSIONIn this article, possibilities have been investigated for incorporating the so-called power law into identification of direct causal regulations in a large-scale cellular network. Under the assumption that measurement errors are independently and normally distributed, a likelihood maximization approach is suggested. On the basis of relations between subspace angles and matrix singular values, two procedures are suggested to estimate these interactions. These methods are applied to an artificially constructed linear large-scale network, a MAPK pathway model, some recently developed performance assessment networks and the in vivo data set of a nine-gene network and a five-gene network. Comparisons with the widely adopted TLS method show that the suggested methods have distinguished advantages on both reduction of false positive errors and improvement of parametric estimation accuracy. Moreover, one of the supposed algorithms has a much faster convergence speed when either estimation error or estimation bias is considered. While most of the reported results are encouraging, the developed estimation procedures are still far from satisfaction of practical application requirements. This has been made very clear by the unsatisfactory performances with the sub-challenges of DREAM4. As further researches, it is interesting to investigate parameter estimation from experiment data for the power law, simultaneous identification of direct causal regulations for multiple species, appropriate statistical descriptions of noise and measurement errors, as well as extending the procedures to estimations with other kinds of experiment data, such as quasi-steady-state data, time series data with non-uniform sampling, etc.