Huge amount of metagenomic sequence data have been produced as a result of the rapidly increasing efforts worldwide in studying microbial communities as a whole. Most, if not all, sequenced metagenomes are complex mixtures of chromosomal and plasmid sequence fragments from multiple organisms, possibly from different kingdoms. Computational methods for prediction of genomic elements such as genes are significantly different for chromosomes and plasmids, hence raising the need for separation of chromosomal from plasmid sequences in a metagenome. We present a program for classification of a metagenome set into chromosomal and plasmid sequences, based on their distinguishing pentamer frequencies. On a large training set consisting of all the sequenced prokaryotic chromosomes and plasmids, the program achieves ∼92% in classification accuracy. On a large set of simulated metagenomes with sequence lengths ranging from 300 bp to 100 kbp, the program has classification accuracy from 64.45% to 88.75%. On a large independent test set, the program achieves 88.29% classification accuracy. Availability: The program has been implemented as a standalone prediction program, cBar, which is available at
INTRODUCTIONOne of the major challenges in analyzing a metagenome lies in the reality that metagenomic data are generally very complex in terms of their composition, often consisting of sequence fragments from numerous genomes possibly from different kingdoms (). While analyses of a metagenome as a whole could definitely reveal useful information about a microbial community, more detailed analyses generally requires the binning of the metagenomic sequences into multiple taxonomical groups according to some criteria (). There have been a number of published computer programs designed to bin metagenomic sequences into multiple groups, each of which consists of sequences from the same taxonomical group (; * To whom correspondence should be addressed.), e.g. from the same genera. Another important metagenome binning problem that has not been well addressed by metagenome sequence analysts is to separate chromosomal from plasmid sequences. This problem is important because sequence features associated with various classes of genomic elements in chromosomal and plasmid genomes are generally different (); hence separation of these two classes of sequences is the prerequisite to accurate computational identification of such genomic elements. For example, identification of genes in chromosomal and plasmid sequences represents two different problems even when they are from the same organism, since their di-codon frequency biases in coding versus noncoding regions, the basis for computational gene finding, could be substantially different (). For genome sequencing projects, this has not been a general problem since plasmids have been typically extracted using alkaline lysis () or removed using nuclease () so they can be sequenced separately from chromosomal sequences. However, microbial community sequencing projects typically do not separate chromosomes from plasmids in advance due to various technical reasons. So the sequenced metagenome is generally a mixture of chromosomal and plasmid sequences, hence raising the needs to computationally separate them. Here, we present the first computer program for classification of a given metagenome into chromosomal and plasmid sequences, based on observed differences in their pentamer frequencies. Using the pentamer frequencies collected from 881 completely sequenced prokaryotic genomes, including both chromosomal and plasmid sequences, we have trained an sequential minimal optimization (SMO)-based model () to separate chromosomal from plasmid sequences, which achieved consistent accuracies at 90% in our 10-fold cross-validations (10FCVs) on our training data, on an independent testing dataset and on the simulated metagenomes.