Motivation: Direct analysis of microbial communities in the environment and human body has become more convenient and reliable owing to the advancements of high-throughput sequencing techniques for 16S rRNA gene profiling. Inferring the correlation relationship among members of microbial communities is of fundamental importance for genomic survey study. Traditional Pearson correlation analysis treating the observed data as absolute abundances of the microbes may lead to spurious results because the data only represent relative abundances. Special care and appropriate methods are required prior to correlation analysis for these compositional data. Results: In this article, we first discuss the correlation definition of latent variables for compos-itional data. We then propose a novel method called CCLasso based on least squares with  1 penalty to infer the correlation network for latent variables of compositional data from metagenomic data. An effective alternating direction algorithm from augmented Lagrangian method is used to solve the optimization problem. The simulation results show that CCLasso outperforms existing methods, e.g. SparCC, in edge recovery for compositional data. It also compares well with SparCC in estimating correlation network of microbe species from the Human Microbiome Project. Availability and implementation: CCLasso is open source and freely available from https://github. com/huayingfang/CCLasso under GNU LGPL v3.
IntroductionMicrobes play an important role in the environment and human life. Bacteria and archaea have been found in extreme conditions such as deep sea vents with high temperatures and rocks of boreholes beneath the Earth's surface (). The microorganisms affect environments where they exist, and vice versa. It is estimated that there are about 10 times microbe cells inhabiting our human body than human cells (). Microbes affect the human life on our food, health and medicine (). The way in which microbes affect the human health remains largely unknown. Analysis of the human microbiome may help us better understand our own genome. The increasing quality and reducing cost of sequencing technologies provide great opportunity to analyze the microbe communities through sequencing. This represents a great improvement over traditional microbe studies which are hindered by several V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 31723180 doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv349
DiscussionAlthough compositional data arise naturally in many practical problems, researchers are generally more interested in the latent variables that underlie these data. For example, in genomic survey studies, it is of great interest to infer the dependency among different bacteria from the observed relative abundance, instead of the absolute abundance, of the bacteria. Therefore, there is a need to infer the correlation matrix among the latent variables for the compositional data. In this article, we have proposed a novel method to infer the correlations among the latent variables for compositional data. We use the sparse assumption to help estimate the correlation matrix of latent variables through solving the constant sum constraint problem. The simulation results show that CCLasso has better performance than SparCC, the only available method in the literature that we are aware of that attempts to solve this problem from a latent variable viewpoint. For the HMP data, CCLasso has similar consistent accuracy and reproducibilities as SparCC. But from the shuffled HMP datasets, we find that SparCC always gives some nonzero estimations. Though CCLasso performs better than SparCC in simulation studies, it has similar difficulties as SparCC such as reliable component fraction estimation and only linear relation explained. We adopt the simple pseudo count 0.5 to avoid 0 components for HMP datasets. There are other normalization methods that accounts for under sampling such asintroduced a methodology to assess differential abundance in sparse high-throughput microbial marker-gene survey data. Recently,proposed a Poisson-multivariate normal hierarchical model to learn direct interactions removing confounding predictors' effect from metagenomics sequencing experiments. The assumption ofis similar to CCLasso from the latent model view, but the essential difference between them is the compositional assumption. Future work will concentrate on improvement of the components estimation accounting for under sampling and exploring nonlinear relationships among microbes.