Motivation: Recent breakthroughs in protein residue–residue contact prediction have made reliable de novo prediction of protein structures possible. The key was to apply statistical methods that can distinguish direct couplings between pairs of columns in a multiple sequence alignment from merely correlated pairs, i.e. to separate direct from indirect effects. Two classes of such methods exist, either relying on regularized inversion of the covariance matrix or on pseudo-likelihood maximization (PLM). Although PLM-based methods offer clearly higher precision, available tools are not sufficiently optimized and are written in interpreted languages that introduce additional overheads. This impedes the runtime and large-scale contact prediction for larger protein families, multi-domain proteins and protein–protein interactions. Results: Here we introduce CCMpred, our performance-optimized PLM implementation in C and CUDA C. Using graphics cards in the price range of current six-core processors, CCMpred can predict contacts for typical alignments 35–113 times faster and with the same precision as the most accurate published methods. For users without a CUDA-capable graphics card, CCMpred can also run in a CPU mode that is still 4–14 times faster. Thanks to our speed-ups (http://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/british/speed-up) contacts for typical protein families can be predicted in 15–60 s on a consumer grade GPU and 1–6 min on a six-core CPU.
INTRODUCTIONEvolutionary pressure to maintain a stable protein structure gives rise to correlated mutations between contacting residue pairs. These correlated mutations can be observed in a multiple sequence alignment (MSA) of the protein family and can be used to predict residueresidue contacts. A recent breakthrough was achieved by applying methods from statistics and statistical physics that aim at disentangling direct couplings from mere correlations between MSA columns (). This has resulted in a boost in contact prediction accuracy, thanks to which it is now possible to reliably predict protein structures using only sequence information if enough homologous sequences are available (). Currently, 30% of Pfam families meet a reasonable criterion of having three homologous sequences per residue in the chain (see Supplementary Section 7 for details). Modern contact prediction methods differ by their strategy in the disentangling step: the most accurate class of methods () such as plmDCA () and GREMLIN () learn the direct couplings as parameters of a Markov random field by maximizing its pseudo-likelihood, which has runtime complexity of O(NL 2 ) where N is the number of homologous sequences in the MSA and L its number of columns. The less accurate methods based on sparse covariance matrix inversion such as PSICOV () or Mean Field Direct Coupling Analysis use the sequence information only in a preprocessing step, while the main computation in O(L 3 ) is independent of N. This makes them fast for short alignments (small L) but slow for large alignments. Whereas most protein families used for benchmarking so far have been relatively short, in practice, longer alignments are more relevant, for example, to predict interdomain or even interprotein contacts (). Still, existing methods would take 29 CPU years to complete large-scale studies such as the computation of contact predictions for the 30% of Pfam with sufficient sequence coverage (see Supplementary Section 7).
CONCLUSIONCCMpred is a fast GPU and CPU implementation of a top-performing PLM-based contact prediction approach that runs in a fraction of the time of comparably accurate methods. The speed increase is particularly important for long proteins and large-scale applications. Because CCMpred is free and open-source software, we hope that it also can serve as a basis for further methods development in this field.