CePa is an R package aiming to find significant pathways through network topology information. The package has several advantages compared with current pathway enrichment tools. First, pathway node instead of single gene is taken as the basic unit when analysing networks to meet the fact that genes must be constructed into complexes to hold normal functions. Second, multiple network centralities are applied simultaneously to measure importance of nodes from different aspects to make a full view on the biological system. CePa extends standard pathway enrichment methods, which include both over-representation analysis procedure and gene-set analysis procedure. CePa has been evaluated with high performance on real-world data, and it can provide more information directly related to current biological problems. Availability: CePa is available at the Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN): http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/CePa/
INTRODUCTIONBiological pathways are basic integrated circuits to actualize specific biological process in regular biological system. Identifying significant pathways in which genes are perturbed is important for researchers to focus on the most relevant sets of genes. Finding significant pathways from expression data is a fundamental task in bioinformatics analysis, which is always named pathway enrichment analysis or gene-set enrichment analysis. Currently, there are two categories of methodologies on this subject: over-representation analysis (ORA) and gene-set analysis (GSA). The former takes a list of differentially expressed genes and tries to find which pathways are enriched in the gene list compared with background genes by a 2  2 contingency table (). One representative tool is DAVID (). The GSA procedure uses the whole-gene expression matrix from microarray experiments, by first calculating gene-level statistics in a pathway and then integrating into a pathway-level score (). ORA procedure is convenient for microarray data with few replications, and GSA procedure can generate more reliable conclusions on the analysis. However, current standard enrichment methods are limited for revealing significant pathways because genes are treated identical in these procedures. It should be noted that pathways are represented as networks, thus importance of genes varies from different views of network structure. Currently, there are only a few works considering pathway topology. The first category is to use topological information through a global network, which is always constructed from the entire genome (). The drawback is that such global network, e.g. constructed from public proteinprotein interaction database or predicted interactions, would contain a lot of noise and is also not specific to biological conditions. The second category is to design a pathway score to cover certain aspect of genes (e.g. genes are called important when they locate in the upstream of pathways, or when they directly regulate many other genes) (). The limitation is that because of the complexity of biological pathways, such single measurement cannot fully capture the characteristics of different genes. Here, we proposed the R package CePa that extends standard gene-set enrichment methods (both of ORA and GSA procedure) with pathway topology information. In our previous work, we have proved ORA extension shows better performance than the standard one (). Our method has two advantages. First, we take nodes rather than genes as the basic units when analysing pathways. It is to the fact that genes must be assembled into complexes to achieve normal biological functions. Also, one single gene may locate in different nodes in real biological systems. According to our previous study on an existing pathway database (), there are $50% genes located in multiple nodes, and 50% nodes contain more than one gene. Second, we use network centralities in the pathway as the weight of nodes and do not set a fixed measurement for the importance of genes, but we allow multiple choices tested simultaneously. This feature enables users to look at the system from multiple aspects, thus users can make more complete conclusions on current biological problems. The package is designed to be flexible so that it can implement many current gene-set enrichment methods and various centrality measurements. Finally, CePa generates informative and interactive report for the analysis and also supports parallel computing. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.