The Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip is a new platform for high-throughput DNA methylation analysis. Several methods for normalization and processing of these data have been published recently. Here we present an integrated analysis pipeline offering a choice of the most popular normalization methods while also introducing new methods for calling differentially methylated regions and detecting copy number aberrations. Availability and implementation: ChAMP is implemented as a Bioconductor package in R. The package and the vignette can be downloaded at
INTRODUCTIONDNA methylation is the most studied epigenetic modification. Changes in DNA methylation patterns have been implicated in the development of a number of diseases and have been defined as a major hallmark of cancer (). Technological developments for the genome-wide detection of DNA methylation have grown rapidly in recent years, and several options exist (). Although bisulphite conversion combined with next-generation sequencing is the most comprehensive approach, it is currently feasible for only small sample sizes, and application to large-scale studies remains challenging. The Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (www.illumina.com) offers this rapidly moving field an attractive balance with respect to throughput, coverage and cost. It extends the previous 27k array, providing an assessment for 4480 000 CpG loci, covering key features of the human genome, including CpG islands, shores and shelves as well as promoters, gene bodies, intergenic and imprinted regions (). Based on Pubmed and GEO submissions, the 450k array has established itself as the platform of choice for epigenome-wide association studies (). The challenge with this new technology is in the analysis.There are several important steps a 450k analysis pipeline should include: normalization, batch effect analysis, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) flagging, detection of copy number aberrations (CNAs) and segmentation of methylation variable positions (MVPs) into biologically relevant DMRs. Normalization is especially important, as the 450k platform combines two different assays, Infinium I and Infinium II (). A number of normalization methods are now available that deal with this issue in slightly different ways (). In chronological order of development, they are Peak Based Correction (PBC) (), SQN (), Subset-quantile within array normalisation (SWAN) () and Beta-mixture quantile normalization (BMIQ) ().
DESCRIPTIONThe Chip Analysis Methylation Pipeline (ChAMP) package is a pipeline that integrates currently available 450k analysis methods and also offers its own novel functionality. It is implemented in R and can be run on any platform with an existing R (version 43.0) and Bioconductor installation. ChAMP takes the raw IDAT files as input, using the data import, quality control and normalization options offered by minfi (). By default, raw data are filtered for probes with a detection P40.01 in at least one sample. If raw data are not available, users are able to upload a matrix of M-, beta-or raw intensity values. The user can decide to filter out individual probes or probe sets such as the X and Y chromosomes. An option to filter SNPs based on a user-specified minor allele frequency in one of four populations as defined by the 1000 genomes project (The 1000) is also available. This prevents biases due to genetic variation in downstream statistical analyses aimed at identifying differentially methylated CpGs. The batch effect analysis is performed on raw data and can be more thorough if the user provides additional covariate information available for the particular study (i.e. age, gender, etc). Following preprocessing, subsequent steps include normalization, DMR calling and CNA detection, which are illustrated inand described in more detail later.
DISCUSSIONThe bottleneck for researchers using the 450k platform as part of systems and disease-oriented projects is the need for an integrated analysis pipeline. We have addressed this need by developing ChAMP and making it publicly available. ChAMP incorporates already published and novel tools and complements existing 450k analysis pipelines such as Illumina Methylation Analyzer (), RnBeads () and wateRmelon (), providing users a choice for their analyses. The advantage of ChAMP is that it offers three additional methods for the analysis of batch effects, DMR calling and CNA detection over and above the standard functionalities. ChAMP has been tested on studies containing up to 200 samples on a personal machine with 8 GB of memory. For larger epigenome-wide association studies, the pipeline requires more memory, and running it in steps as described in the vignette can break up the time requirements.An integrated map of genetic variation from 1,092 human genomes. Nature, 491, 5665. Touleimat,N. and Tost,J. (2012) Complete pipeline for infinium((r)) human methylation 450k beadchip data processing using subset quantile normalization for accurate DNA methylation estimation. Epigenomics, 4, 325341.IMA: an R package for high-throughput analysis of illumina's 450k infinium methylation data. Bioinformatics, 28, 729730. Zhuang,J. et al. (2012) A comparison of feature selection and classification methods in DNA methylation studies using the illumina infinium platform. BMC Bioinformatics, 13, 59.