ENSEMBLE is a computational approach for determining a set of conformations that represents the structural ensemble of a disordered protein based on input experimental data. The disordered protein can be an unfolded or intrinsically disordered state. Here, we introduce the latest version of the program, which has been enhanced to facilitate its general release and includes an intuitive user interface, as well as new approaches to treat data and analyse results. Availability and implementation: ENSEMBLE is a program implemented in C and embedded in a Perl wrapper. It is supported on main Linux distributions. Source codes and installation files, including a detailed example, can be freely downloaded at http://darwin.informatics.indiana.edu/MultiGlycan/.
INTRODUCTIONA detailed understanding of biology requires structural and dynamic information for the proteins in the cell and their dynamic excursions for enzymatic and other functions, as well as their interactions, both transient and long-lived. There has been an explosion of structural and dynamic information on folded protein states that has coincided with the development of computational tools for incorporation of experimental data into algorithms to describe the dominant conformations populated by stable proteins [CNS (), XPLOR-NIH () and CCP4 (. However, unfolded and intrinsically disordered states have not been extensively characterized, although they are highly relevant to both normal and pathological function. Knowledge of unfolded states is important for understanding protein stability, and these states are required to traverse the membrane and are involved in aggregation or degradation in many diseases (). Intrinsically disordered proteins often mediate regulatory protein interactions and can act as entropic springs or steric gates, as well as aggregate in disease (). Descriptions of the ensembles of highly heterogeneous conformations within disordered states are thus required for correlating dynamic structure with function. A number of algorithms to calculate such ensembles have been developed (). Our ENSEMBLE approach () was created to facilitate the incorporation of a large number of different types of experimental data into the generation of structural ensembles of disordered protein states. ENSEMBLE makes use of a switching Monte-Carlo algorithm to choose, from a large set of conformations, an ensemble for which the in silico back-calculated data fit all available experimental data. Since its first version (), we have developed a more robust algorithm, enhanced the sampling of conformational space and expanded the types of experimental data used. Applications of ENSEMBLE to the unfolded state of the drkN SH3 domain () and the intrinsically disordered states of the cell cycle protein Sic1 () and various protein phosphatase 1 regulators () have also been described. Importantly, using crossvalidation and synthetic experimental restraints calculated from simulated ensembles, we demonstrated that ENSEMBLE is capable of accurate modeling of the secondary structure, molecular size distribution and tertiary contacts of disordered proteins, if sufficient data is incorporated; tertiary structure, in particular, is highly dependent on the number of distance restraints used (). Most recently, we have significantly improved the user interface and the stability of the program. Thus, we are now making the first official distribution (version 2.1) available online at http://abragam.med.utoronto. ca/JFKlab.