Motivation: Advances in the field of cheminformatics have been hindered by a lack of freely available tools. We have created Chembench, a publicly available cheminformatics portal for analyzing experimental chemical structure–activity data. Chembench provides a broad range of tools for data visualization and embeds a rigorous workflow for creating and validating predictive Quantitative Structure–Activity Relationship models and using them for virtual screening of chemical libraries to prioritize the compound selection for drug discovery and/or chemical safety assessment. Availability: Freely accessible at: http://chembench.
INTRODUCTIONWithin the last decade, cheminformatics has emerged as a burgeoning discipline combining computational, statistical and informational methodologies with key concepts in chemistry and biology (). Cheminformatics addresses the fundamental problem of structureactivity (property) relationships as applied to many areas of chemical and biological research, providing the ability to use models for imputation of target activities or properties of untested compounds. Opportunities for cheminformatics research have grown significantly with the advent of parallel chemical synthesis and high-throughput screening and publicly available data from projects such as the Molecular Libraries Initiative (). For instance, PubChem (http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) currently contains nearly 27 million chemical compound records; almost one million of these have been tested in over 2600 bioassays with nearly 300 000 found active. Many other similarly structured databases have emerged recently (), providing a corpus of data rivaling the size and complexity of biological databases that established the need for bioinformatics. Despite the abundance of databases of biologically active compounds in the public domain, the data remain largely underexplored because of the dearth of public domain tools for data analysis. Along with other recently emerging tools and toolkits such as CDK () and OCHEM (http://ochem.eu/), Chembench is poised to advance experimental research in chemical genomics, drug discovery and chemical safety assessment. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.