Next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have enabled de novo gene fusion discovery that could reveal candidates with therapeutic significance in cancer. Here we present an open-source software package, ChimeraScan, for the discovery of chimeric transcription between two independent transcripts in high-throughput transcriptome sequencing data.
INTRODUCTIONHigh-throughput transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) facilitates detection of aberrant, chimeric RNAs (). Methods for chimera detection have already uncovered recurrent classes of clinically relevant gene fusions in prostate () and lymphoid cancers (). Therefore, the continued development of accurate and efficient software tools for chimera discovery is of major clinical significance. To this end, we have developed a chimera discovery methodology, or ChimeraScan, and offer it as open-source software package for the community to utilize for their own sequencing efforts. ChimeraScan includes features such as the ability to process long (75 bp) paired-end reads, processing of ambiguously mapping reads, detection of reads spanning a fusion junction, integration with the popular Bowtie aligner (), supports the standardized SAM format and generation of HTML reports for easy investigation of results. Overall, we believe that the ChimeraScan will facilitate the discovery of additional gene fusions that may serve as clinically relevant targets in cancer.
CONCLUSIONHere, we present an optimized publicly available chimera discovery methodology for identifying novel therapeutically targetable gene fusions in human cancers. Our results suggest that ChimeraScan produces a stringent list of predictions that are enriched with true positives. Furthermore, due to its trimmed alignment steps we believe ChimeraScan will be scalable when longer reads are available to provide increased coverage of fusion junctions. Overall, we feel that with the existing features ChimeraScan is a user-friendly tool that will enable other research groups to make discoveries within their own RNA-Seq data collections.