Cancer genomics data produced by next-generation sequencing support the notion that epigenetic mechanisms play a central role in cancer. We have previously developed Chromohub, an open access online interface where users can map chemical, structural and biological data from public repositories on phylogenetic trees of protein families involved in chromatin mediated-signaling. Here, we describe a cancer genomics interface that was recently added to Chromohub; the frequency of mutation, amplification and change in expression of chromatin factors across large cohorts of cancer patients is regularly extracted from The Cancer Genome Atlas and the International Cancer Genome Consortium and can now be mapped on phylogenetic trees of epigenetic protein families. Explorators of chro-matin signaling can now easily navigate the cancer genomics landscape of writers, readers and erasers of histone marks, chromatin remodeling complexes, histones and their chaperones. Availability and implementation: http://www.thesgc.org/chromo hub/.
INTRODUCTIONChromohub is an online interface that allows the epigenetics research community to project biological, structural and chemical data on phylogenetic trees of protein families involved in chromatin-mediated signaling (). The interface is a useful hub for cell biologists to find chemical inhibitors targeting their proteins of interest, medicinal chemists to inspect the structural coverage of specific binding sites or structural biologists to visualize the disease association of phylogenetic neighbors to the construct they crystallized. We previously described how protein families were assembled, phylogenetic trees generated and biological, structural and chemical data extracted from public repositories and mapped on the trees (). We have now added to Chromohub a large section entirely focused on genomic data from cancer patients extracted from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC). Recent landmark next-generation sequencing campaigns of large cancer patient cohorts have revealed recurrent alterations of genes involved in epigenetic mechanisms (). These results support the notion that chromatin-mediated signaling may be central to cancer initiation and progression (). The data associated with most of these and other unbiased cancer genomic projects were deposited into TCGA and the ICGC repositories, and made publicly accessible to the scientific community. Chromohub users can now map cancer genomics data on phylogenetic trees of protein families involved in epigenetic mechanisms.
CONCLUSION