Motivation: Allele-specific expression (ASE) is a useful way to identify cis-acting regulatory variation , which provides opportunities to develop new therapeutic strategies that activate beneficial alleles or silence mutated alleles at specific loci. However, multiple problems hinder the identification of ASE in next-generation sequencing (NGS) data. Results: We developed cisASE, a likelihood-based method for detecting ASE on single nucleotide variant (SNV), exon and gene levels from sequencing data without requiring phasing or parental information. cisASE uses matched DNA-seq data to control technical bias and copy number variation (CNV) in putative cis-regulated ASE identification. Compared with state-of-the-art methods, cisASE exhibits significantly increased accuracy and speed. cisASE works moderately well for datasets without DNA-seq and thus is widely applicable. By applying cisASE to real datasets, we identified specific ASE characteristics in normal and cancer tissues, thus indicating that cisASE has potential for wide applications in cancer genomics. Availability and Implementation: cisASE is freely available at http://Iifecenter.sgst.cn/cisASE.Contact:
IntroductionAllele-specific gene expression (ASE) refers to the differential expression of two alleles in a diploid genome. ASE is primarily a result of the associated cis-element variation and allele-specific epigenetic modifications (). Germline ASEs are usually associated with the existence of regulatory elements, which exert a pronounced effect on human phenotypic polymorphism and common diseases. Somatic ASEs (ASEs of somatic mutations) in tumors are often genetically linked to tumor drivers. Thus, ASE studies provide an opportunity for the development of new therapeutic strategies that activate beneficial alleles or silence mutated alleles at specific loci (). Next-generation sequencing (NGS) allows for the genome-wide identification of ASE (); however, several problems exist. The first problem is technical and intrinsic allele bias, which we and others have previously demonstrated (). For example, reads carrying single nucleotide variants (SNVs) are less likely to be correctly mapped than those carrying reference genotype (). Another example is that, a large proportion of previously identified ASEs, especially in tumor samples, have been found a result of copy number variations (CNVs) rather than cis-regulation (). The second problem is that gene-level ASE detection usually requires phased-SNVs or parental genomes (), which are usually not available. Although methods to phase singlenucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) into individual haplotypes exist (), these methods cannot be applied to somatic mutations in tumors. The third problem relates to testing ASE with statistical confidence. Two simple statistical methods, i.e. binomial and chi-square tests, have been frequently used in SNV-level ASE detection (); however, these methods do not make full use of the information of these complex sequencing datasets. Although several tools have been developed for ASE detection, none has addressed all of these concerns (). To overcome the problems outlined above, we proposed a new computational method and developed a software tool, cisASE, based on a likelihood ratio test. cisASE uses DNA-seq data to make site-by-site adjustments for RNA allele imbalance assessment to reduce the effects of technical bias and CNV, and reports ASE putatively caused by cis-regulation. cisASE also considers the base quality of each base to reduce the influence of sequencing error. We tested cisASE on both simulated and real datasets, and compared it with other methods (). cisASE exhibits significantly improved accuracy and computational speed compared with existing methods. We applied cisASE to public colon tumor datasets, and observed several important features, i.e. germline ASE hotspots of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) loci, cancer somatic ASE genes in focal adhesion and extracellular matrix (ECM)receptor interaction pathways. These findings revealed a landscape of germline and somatic ASE in colon tumors and highlighted broad applications of our cisASE method in ASE detection.
DiscussionIn this work, we present a novel flexible computational method, cisASE, to detect ASE at the SNV, exon and gene levels. cisASE makes full use of information from DNA-seq and RNA-seq data to achieve an unbiased estimation of ASE. By default, cisASE adopts a site-by-site adjustment for ASE identification by using the DNA allele ratio. This procedure reduces the artifacts from technical and mapping bias () and CNVs (), making cisASE efficient for detecting putative cis-regulated ASEs. In the absence of matched DNA-seq data, cisASE performed moderately well. Additionally, the implementation of a pseudo-phasing function in cisASE allows the incorporation of unphased SNV data into an individual exon, gene or isoform. To evaluate the performance of cisASE for ASE detection, we performed extensive analyses based on both simulated and real data from multiple resources, i.e. human and mouse colon tumor celllines and a phased 1000 Genomes Project individual. cisASE outperformed the chi-square test in terms of accuracy, especially for genes with low sequencing depth. Additionally, cisASE exhibits greatly increased accuracy and computation speed compared with other previous methods based on complex models. By applying cisASE to a panel of paired tumor-normal human colon samples, we identified HLA loci as the most significant 'hotspot' of germline ASEs in both tumor and normal samples. In tumor samples, somatic ASE showed widespread overexpression of mutant alleles, indicating oncogenic roles of the mutant genes. These results confirmed the ability of cisASE to detect tumorassociated ASEs.