Motivation: The challenges of successfully applying causal inference methods include: (i) satisfying underlying assumptions, (ii) limitations in data/models accommodated by the software and (iii) low power of common multiple testing approaches. Results: The causal inference test (CIT) is based on hypothesis testing rather than estimation, allowing the testable assumptions to be evaluated in the determination of statistical significance. A user-friendly software package provides P-values and optionally permutation-based FDR estimates (q-values) for potential mediators. It can handle single and multiple binary and continuous instrumental variables, binary or continuous outcome variables and adjustment covariates. Also, the permutation based FDR option provides a non-parametric implementation. Conclusion: Simulation studies demonstrate the validity of the cit package and show a substantial advantage of permutation-based FDR over other common multiple testing strategies. Availability and implementation: The cit open-source R package is freely available from the CRAN website (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/cit/index.html) with embedded C þþ code that utilizes the GNU Scientific Library, also freely available (http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/).
IntroductionThe causal inference test (CIT) (), can play an important role in 'post GWAS' analyses that seek to identify molecular mediators of the effects of genetic variation on disease phenotypes. A growing number of groups have used the CIT to identify mediators such as methylation () and gene expression (). The previously published CIT function was limited in scope, accommodating a single discrete SNP-like variable, a continuous mediator and a continuous outcome. We have developed the 'cit' R package to extend software capabilities in a number of important ways: (i) binary as well as continuous outcomes, (ii) continuous as well as binary instrumental variables, (iii) multiple instrumental variables simultaneously and (iv) an approach for generating permutation-based q-values (the false discovery rate (FDR) analog to P-values) with confidence intervals.
ConclusionThe cit package provides a general and powerful tool for identifying the most likely molecular mediators of genetic effects. The permutation-based q-value method makes the CIT fully non-parametric. The ability to apply a permutation based FDR approach with confidence intervals has the potential to substantially increase the utility of the method by uncoupling statistical significance with the conventional .05 level. Results that do not achieve this threshold may nevertheless be biologically important, and the q-value estimate along with confidence intervals provides a quantitative measure of uncertainty in the results.), with the exception that the 'react' curve in the upper plot demonstrates low type I error in the presence of reverse causation. The y-axis represents the proportion of tests called significant at a significance threshold specified on the xaxis. 'FDR, JM-perm' and 'param' denote the permutation-based and parametric omnibus CIT FDR, respectively. The proposed FDR approach is consistently more powerful than the Benjamini and Hochberg (BH) and much more powerful than the Bonferroni correction (Bonf.).