Motivation: Recognizing words that are key to a document is important for ranking relevant scientific documents. Traditionally, important words in a document are either nominated subjectively by authors and indexers or selected objectively by some statistical measures. As an alternative, we propose to use documents words popularity in user queries to identify click-words, a set of prominent words from the users perspective. Although they often overlap, click-words differ significantly from other document keywords. Results: We developed a machine learning approach to learn the unique characteristics of click-words. Each word was represented by a set of features that included different types of information, such as semantic type, part of speech tag, term frequency–inverse document frequency (TF–IDF) weight and location in the abstract. We identified the most important features and evaluated our model using 6 months of PubMed click-through logs. Our results suggest that, in addition to carrying high TF–IDF weight, click-words tend to be biomedical entities, to exist in article titles, and to occur repeatedly in article abstracts. Given the abstract and title of a document, we are able to accurately predict the words likely to appear in user queries that lead to document clicks. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONFinding relevant publications is critical for individual researchers to keep pace with the state of the art in their fields. Most scholars in the biomedical domain use PubMed , a free web service provided by the US National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), to access over 20 million biomedical citations. Improving the retrieval effectiveness of PubMed while accommodating the exponential growth of biomedical literature is a challenging and critical task for the NCBI, as well as for the researchers in the field of biomedical information retrieval (). Interaction with PubMed is generally initiated by a user query and that contains three words on average. An intelligent system should be able to use this information efficiently to retrieve the citation(s), * To whom correspondence should be addressed. which the user is looking for. The user may click to view one or more abstracts, modify the original query, issue a different query or leave the system (). This sequence of interactions with PubMed is similar to what users experience with general web search engines. However, searching the biomedical literature in PubMed is also unique from at least two perspectives: (i) PubMed search is built as a Boolean systemby default, only the documents matching all the words in the query are retrieved; and (ii) PubMed results are listed in reverse chronological order. As a result, the top returned documents are the newly indexed citations but not necessarily the most relevant ones. On the other hand, 80% of retrievals are for the top 20 returned results in PubMed (). The search in PubMed, therefore, is much more sensitive to the user selection of query terms than in search systems that weigh and rank results by relevance. Although a PubMed article can be retrieved by various user queries, only certain queries lead to user clicks (retrievals) for that articlea strong indication of relevance between the query and the clicked document. In this work, we identify document keywords from a list of PubMed queries that resulted in user clicks, and we name such keywords as click-words. In document retrieval, a keyword refers to a term that captures the essence of the topic of a document. They are integral to the document management both for indexing and for retrieval. One type of keywords used in MEDLINE citations is known as Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) indexing terms, which are assigned by professional indexers. Another common type of keywords is author keywords, provided by authors when submitting an article. A third type of keywords may be computed using statistics, instead of relying on human annotation. For example, the classic term frequencyinverse document frequency (TFIDF) weighting schema can be used to identify highly weighted words that stand out in an article when compared to the other articles in the collection (). Comparing click-words with other document keywords we found that, although there was overlap, user click-words were quite different from other types of important keywords (seefor an illustration). Document keywords are all meant to capture the important contributions of a document, but they rely on different weighting mechanisms, which may be the reason for their difference. Click-words are the product of click-through logs and they represent the 'wisdom of the crowds' as to what terms in an article may be important from the users' perspective. Top weighted TFIDF words capture the importance of words with respect to other articles in a collection. In contrast, PubMed relies on indexers to assign. An example of click-words, top-scoring TFIDF words, author keywords and MeSH indexing terms for a PubMed article. User click-words are listed by the frequency in which they appear in user queries for this article. TFIDF words are listed in decreasing order of their TFIDF weight. MeSH terms follow the order in which they are listed in PubMed. Author keywords are listed as they appear in the article. the appropriate MeSH indexing terms to PubMed articles. As a result, these words are not immediately available for new articles. Moreover, they are not necessarily found in the title and abstract of the article. Author keywords, on the other hand, are not included in the MEDLINE citation. In addition, they are not easily procured we found that they are available for only 13% of the articles in the PubMed Central full text database. As an illustrative example, we randomly selected an article from MEDLINE (PubMed ID: 18309290) and identified the document keywords.illustrates the relationship between the click-words and other keyword types for this article. It also shows that the top five TFIDF words list has the largest overlap with the click-words list: three of the four click-words of this article: arp2, actin and cofilin, were also ranked in the top five TFIDF words of this article. In contrast, the other two words of the top five TFIDF list: lamellipodium and complex, were not popular in user queries. Our objective is to learn what characteristics make document words important from a collective user perspectivewords used as click-words. For each word, we consider several characteristics including the word itself, its part of speech (POS), its position in the title/abstract, etc. By learning the importance of each characteristic, we aim to build a learning system that will be able to predict which words are likely to become click-words for a given article. Thus, no search history would be required to automatically predict click-words in any documents, including those that lack user search history (e.g. new PubMed citations). The predicted click-words can not only serve as an alternative type of document keywords for indexing, but they can also provide assistance in curating MeSH terms or suggesting author keywords. Moreover, as briefly discussed in Section 6, predicted click-words could play important roles in many PubMed-related applications such as ranking relevant results and finding similar documents. Since top-weighted TFIDF words provided the largest overlap with the user click-words in the documents in our data, we built a machine learning model with novel features to recognize click-words from a pool of candidate words with high TFIDF weights. For example, take the five TFIDF words in. In our proposed approach, we aim to identify prediction scores such that the three click-words (arp2, cortactin and actin) are ranked higher than the other two words (lamellipodium and complex). The specific contributions of this article are the following: @BULLET We introduce click-words as representative document keywords. We observed that click-words (obtained from click-through logs) can represent the meaning of scientific text from a collective user perspective. Therefore, they are complementary to the current types of document keywords such as MeSH, and they may serve as an alternative type of keywords for document management.@BULLET We developed and evaluated a machine learning method with novel features for identifying the unique characteristics of click-words. The proposed approach is capable of automatically finding click-words in any document, regardless of its search history.@BULLET We performed empirical studies on large-scale real-world datasets (over 50 000 frequently accessed MEDLINE articles over the course of 6 months). Evaluation results show that the classifier is able to successfully perform automatic assignment of high-quality click-words.
DISCUSSIONIn this work, we proposed click-words as an alternative representation of document keywords. We built a click-word model able to identify the words of a document that conveyed the readers' interest.