We present the first parallel implementation of the T-Coffee consistency-based multiple aligner. We benchmark it on the Amazon Elastic Cloud (EC2) and show that the parallelization procedure is reasonably effective. We also conclude that for a web server with moderate usage (10K hits/month) the cloud provides a cost-effective alternative to in-house deployment. Availability: T-Coffee is a freeware open source package available from http://www.tcoffee.org/homepage.html Contact
INTRODUCTIONT-Coffee was the first package featuring an implementation of the consistency-based progressive alignment algorithm (for Reviews see). While the use of consistency is widely recognized as an important development in the field of multiple sequence alignment, this improvement comes at a cost. Consistencybased methods have increased CPU and memory consumption proportional to the number of sequences being processed. This overhead is incompatible with the size of the datasets being generated by next generation sequencing technologies. Heuristic solutions have been proposed () that rely on a pre-clustering of the sequences, but no effort had yet been reported to extensively parallelize consistency based algorithm and benefit from the widely available multi-core CPUs. To our knowledge this report is the first one describing a parallelization of all steps involving consistencybased alignments. The new implementation is available from version 8.00 and higher of T-Coffee. In practice, its usage is transparent to the user, with the package automatically and explicitly switching to parallel mode whenever multi-core processors are available. The procedure supports all modes of T-Coffee for aligning protein (O') or RNA () sequences. It runs on all the platforms where the standard T-Coffee can be compiled and installed (Windows, MacOSX, Linux, UNIX, etc.). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.We benchmarked this new implementation on the Amazon Elastic Cloud (EC2) in order to estimate its efficiency and also measure the cost associated with running this type of application on a cloud-environment. Cloud computation is providing the community with an increasingly popular alternative to in-house computational resources. It is therefore becoming an important question to determine the relative cost of these new environments when comparing them with more traditional infrastructures.