Motivation: Conformational diversity is a key concept in the understanding of different issues related with protein function such as the study of catalytic processes in enzymes, protein-protein recognition , protein evolution and the origins of new biological functions. Here, we present a database of proteins with different degrees of conformational diversity. Conformational Diversity of Native State (CoDNaS) is a redundant collection of three-dimensional structures for the same protein derived from protein data bank. Structures for the same protein obtained under different crystallographic conditions have been associated with snapshots of protein dynamism and consequently could characterize protein conformers. CoDNaS allows the user to explore global and local structural differences among confor-mers as a function of different parameters such as presence of ligand, post-translational modifications, changes in oligomeric states and differences in pH and temperature. Additionally, CoDNaS contains information about protein taxonomy and function, disorder level and structural classification offering useful information to explore the underlying mechanism of conformational diversity and its close relationship with protein function. Currently, CoDNaS has 122 122 structures integrating 12 684 entries, with an average of 9.63 confor-mers per protein. Availability: The database is freely available at http://www.codnas. com.ar/.
INTRODUCTIONIt is well established that the native state of a protein is represented by an ensemble of conformers in equilibrium (). Different factors, such as ligands, post-translational modifications or pH variations could shift this equilibrium toward a given conformer (). Following conformational selection theory, the change in the dynamic landscape and the re-distribution of conformer population is a key feature to understand protein function (). It has been shown that different structures for the same protein obtained under different conditions represent snapshots of protein dynamism and then characterize putative structural conformers (). Here, we describe the design, development and use of a database of proteins showing different degrees of conformational diversity. Conformational Diversity of Native State (CoDNaS) is a collection of redundant structures, obtained from different experimental protocols, for the same protein. CoDNaS is a database of complete proteins, linked with Protein Conformational DataBase (), a previous development from our group oriented to the analysis of conformational diversity in protein domains. The database is extensively linked with physicochemical and biological information, and it is designed to allow the user to explore how different parameters could modulate protein conformational diversity.
DISCUSSIONConformational diversity is a key feature to understand protein function and evolution (), enzyme catalysis and molecular recognition (). Recently, it has been shown that explicit consideration of conformational diversity improves prediction of disease-related mutations () and protein-protein interactions and molecular docking (). As computational prediction of large conformational changes could be challenging [e.g. using molecular dynamics (, CoDNaS database could provide a useful dataset to test new tools to predict and explore possible causes of conformational diversity in proteins.