Motivation: Conserved patterns across a multiple sequence alignment can be visualized by generating sequence logos. Sequence logos show each column in the alignment as stacks of symbol(s) where the height of a stack is proportional to its informational content, whereas the height of each symbol within the stack is proportional to its frequency in the column. Sequence logos use symbols of either nucleotide or amino acid alphabets. However, certain regulatory signals in messenger RNA (mRNA) act as combinations of codons. Yet no tool is available for visualization of conserved codon patterns. Results: We present the first application which allows visualization of conserved regions in a multiple sequence alignment in the context of codons. CodonLogo is based on WebLogo3 and uses the same heuristics but treats codons as inseparable units of a 64-letter alphabet. CodonLogo can discriminate patterns of codon conservation from patterns of nucleotide conservation that appear indistinguishable in standard sequence logos. Availability: The CodonLogo source code and its implementation (in a local version of the Galaxy Browser) are available at http:// recode.ucc.ie/CodonLogo and through the Galaxy Tool Shed at
INTRODUCTION'Sequence logos' are simple graphical representations of conserved elements in multiple sequence alignments. Sequence logos were first introduced by Tom Schneider and colleagues (). However, the popularity of sequence logos was greatly boosted by the advent of WebLogo (), which provides a web-based interface for sequence logo generation. WebLogo allows the processing of multiple sequence alignments and generates a logo where each column of the alignment is represented by a stack of letters. The height of the entire stack is proportional to its informational content (maximum2 bits for nucleotides and 4.32 bits for amino acids), whereas the height of each symbol is proportional to its frequency. Sequence logos inspired development of several other tools that use principles of Shannon's information theory () for graphical visualization of conserved biological elements. For