Motivation: A post-translational modification (PTM) is a chemical modification of a protein that occurs naturally. Many of these modifications, such as phosphorylation, are known to play pivotal roles in the regulation of protein function. Henceforth, PTM perturbations have been linked to diverse diseases like Parkinsons, Alzheimers, diabetes and cancer. To discover PTMs on a genome-wide scale, there is a recent surge of interest in analyzing tandem mass spectrometry data, and several unrestrictive (so-called blind) PTM search methods have been reported. However, these approaches are subject to noise in mass measurements and in the predicted modification site (amino acid position) within peptides, which can result in false PTM assignments. Results: To address these issues, we devised a machine learning algorithm, PTMClust, that can be applied to the output of blind PTM search methods to improve prediction quality, by suppressing noise in the data and clustering peptides with the same underlying modification to form PTM groups. We show that our technique outperforms two standard clustering algorithms on a simulated dataset. Additionally, we show that our algorithm significantly improves sensitivity and specificity when applied to the output of three different blind PTM search engines, SIMS, InsPecT and MODmap. Additionally, PTMClust markedly outperforms another PTM refinement algorithm, PTMFinder. We demonstrate that our technique is able to reduce false PTM assignments, improve overall detection coverage and facilitate novel PTM discovery, including terminus modifications. We applied our technique to a large-scale yeast MS/MS proteome profiling dataset and found numerous known and novel PTMs. Accurately identifying modifications in protein sequences is a critical first step for PTM profiling, and thus our approach may benefit routine proteomic analysis. Availability: Our algorithm is implemented in Matlab and is freely available for academic use. The software is available online from
INTRODUCTIONProteins are created through a biological process called protein biosynthesis. This process begins with transcription and splicing of genes into messenger RNA (mRNA) molecules, which are later translated into polypeptides. At the time of translation, a protein can either be active or inactive, and its subsequent activity is generally regulated by chemical modifications referred to as post-translational modifications (PTMs). PTMs, which may occur during or after translation, involve an enzymatic addition of a chemical group (e.g. a phosphate) or a larger moiety (e.g. an additional polypeptide such as ubiquitin) onto one or more amino acid side chains. Many PTMs, in particular, phosphorylation on serine (S), threonine (T) or tyrosine (Y), can regulate a protein's function by influencing its folding, stability or physical association with other proteins, thereby activating or suppressing it. Since PTMs have been shown to dynamically influence a wide range of important processes (e.g. catalysis of biochemical reactions, intracellular cell signaling and cell division), mapping of PTMs in a comprehensive proteome-wide manner remains a critical outstanding research problem. Although the biological importance of certain PTMs is well established, the diversity and the prevalence of PTMs and their targets remain to be fully elucidated. One recently developed approach to discover PTMs on a genome-wide scale is to analyze tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) data using an unrestricted (so-called 'blind') PTM search engine. Unlike traditional 'restricted' search methods;;;, blind search engines require no predetermined list of candidate PTMs, with pre-defined delta masses or preferred target residues. This allows blind PTM search engines to be able to consider a large number of potential PTMs at once, representing both previously known PTMs and new ones. A number of blind search engines have been reported that employ various different optimization techniques and sequence prediction approaches;;;; Havilio and Wool (2007););;;;. Reviews of protein mass spectrometry and the detection of PTM by mass spectrometry can be found in. Briefly, a typical proteomic MS/MS experiment begins with an enzymatic digestion of proteins into peptides. For a complex mixture, it is common to simplify the mixture by separating peptides based on their chemical properties, such as hydrophobicity using liquid chromatography, before they are ionized and injected into a mass spectrometer. Once in the spectrometer, peptides are grouped and isolated based on their massto-charge ratio (simply referred to as mass). Ideally, each group will contain one peptide variant. For each group, the peptides are further broken down by a fragmentation method, such as collisioninduced dissociation (CID), to produce ion fragments. The mass spectrometer captures the ion fragmentation pattern for each group in a mass spectrum. The presence of PTMs shifts the mass of the corresponding ions, which changes the ion fragmentation pattern significantly. Specialized PTM search engines, like those discussed above, are used to decipher these ion patterns and map each mass spectrum to a peptide sequence that best explains it. The use of real and decoy proteins is an established practice for estimating false predictions for MS/MS spectra analysis using database search approaches;, including blind PTM search methods (). Decoy proteins are generated by reversing the amino acid sequence of real proteins; this ensures that real and decoy proteins have the same distributions of amino acids and protein lengths. When using a protein reference database containing an equal number of real and decoy proteins, a random (false) peptide prediction (modified or unmodified) will have an equal likelihood of choosing a peptide from either a real protein or a decoy protein. This allows the number of decoy peptide hits as an estimate for false detection rate. In practice, blind PTM search methods suffer from two major sources of error: sequence-dependent uncertainty in the modification position (residue position along the peptide sequence where the modification is deemed to occur) and mass inaccuracy for the modification mass. The fragmentation process is often incomplete and the presence of labile PTMs may interfere with this process (). Both issues combined result in MS/MS spectra missing peaks that in turn may lead to ambiguous or erroneous modification predictions. The presences of natural stable isotopes, such as carbon-13, in addition to electronic noise are major contributors to inaccurate mass measurements. This is more prominent in spectra generated from low mass resolution mass spectrometers (e.g. ion trap mass spectrometers), which are still commonly used in today's mass spectrometry studies.shows a diagrammatic representation of the search results obtained from applying the blind PTM search engine SIMS () to a set of MS/MS spectra previously mapped to phosphopeptides (). Enriched for phosphopeptides using a strong cation exchange-based method, the spectra from the complex peptide mixture in the original study were analyzed by a restricted PTM search method designed to look for phosphorylation and were validated manually. The same dataset has been used in benchmark experiments in previous PTM studies;. Phosphorylation is known to occur at 80 Da and primarily on the amino acid serine (S) and less frequently on threonine (T). Yet the results show, even for those observed peptide sequences that match to the original reference study, that many of their modification (delta) masses and modified amino acid sites deviate from this reference. A closer look () shows that many of the amino acids misplaced are a few residues away from their corresponding reference modification position. In a globalscale PTM survey, these issues can make distinguishing true PTMfor spectra previously determined to be mapped to phosphopeptides (). They show that the statistics for modification mass and modified amino acid deviate from the reference, which determined that the PTM (phosphorylation) occurs at 80 Da and on serine (S) and threonine (T). (A) The distribution of the measured modification mass. (B) Identified amino acids that deviate from S and T. (C) The distribution of the distance (in residues) from the identified amino acid to the reference for misplaced modifications; this demonstrates that identified modifications are generally only a few residues away from the reference. matches from false detections non-trivial; therefore, identifying bona fide PTMs confidently remains difficult. While these errors can potentially be reduced by technological improvement in instrumentation (e.g. higher mass accuracy mass spectrometers or using alternate fragmentation mechanisms), we sought to develop an algorithm that can deconvolve errors associated with measuring masses and mapping of modification positions simultaneously to salvage both existing datasets and current experimental platforms. These two sources of error were acknowledged by, who briefly described a heuristic approach to account for 'shadows' (modifications that are misplaced by a PTM search engine), and later by the same group in the PTM refinement algorithm PTMFinder (). However, in the former method, their approach favors high abundance modified peptides, since it requires each peptide match to occur multiple times; discretizes observed modification masses, which introduces additional error with the mass measurements; and can handle only one type of error per peptide (namely either a modification mass error of exactly 1 Da or a modification position misplaced by exactly one Page: 799 797806
CONCLUSIONAccurate identification of protein modifications in protein sequences is a critical first step in any PTM study, and thus it may benefit the utility of proteomic profiling to address research problems in basic biology, as well as biomarker discovery and drug development in the clinical domain. A recently developed approach for PTM discovery is to analyze MS/MS data using a blind PTM search method. Genome-wide studies using SIMS, InsPecT and other blind PTM search engines have reported numerous PTM candidates (). However, these search methods suffer from two problems: mass measurement inaccuracy and uncertainty in predicting modification positions, which limit their accuracy and precision. We developed a novel machine learning algorithm called PTMClust for post-processing the results of blind PTM search engines and improving prediction performance, by simultaneously identifying the positions of the most likely modified amino acids and grouping peptides with similar modification mass and modified amino acid side chains. We demonstrated that PTMClust improved on both true positives (correct modification position predictions) and false positives (misplaces modification positions) when applied to the outputs of SIMS, InsPecT, MODmap, and InsPecT postprocessed with PTMFinder, a PTM refinement algorithm. The results showed that our algorithm was able to detect a number of previously annotated naturally occurring and artificially induced PTMs, most notably phosphorylation, but also acetylation (lysine), oxidization (methionine) and even the formation of non-covalent adducts (e.g. sodium/potassium salts). In addition, our algorithm facilitates the identification of terminal modifications, which is a feature not currently found in common blind PTM search engines. To our knowledge, this algorithm is the first technique that systematically and objectively addresses sequence-dependent variation in the PTM dataset at the PTM level, which can improve the reliability of individual PTM identification. For the task of PTM refinement, we have shown that PTMClust outperforms PTMFinder on the dataset of phosphopeptides. PTMFinder failed here because only 4% (69) of spectra map to modified peptides already detected in the dataset. This is expected since it is known that only a small portion of spectra in an experiment map to modified peptides () and current MS experimental protocols for genome-wide studies are designed to sample as many different peptides as possible (through the use of an exclusion list in the mass spectrometer). Moreover, many instances of the same modified peptide either share the same modification position (for both correct and misplaced cases) or have vastly different modification positions that point to different phosphorylation sites in the peptide. The former can be explained Page: 805 797806