Motivation: Logical (Boolean or multi-valued) modelling is widely used to study regulatory or signalling networks. Even though these discrete models constitute a coarse, yet useful, abstraction of reality, the analysis of large networks faces a classical combinatorial problem. Here, we propose to take advantage of the intrinsic modularity of inter-cellular networks to set up a compositional procedure that enables a significant reduction of the dynamics, yet preserving the reach-ability of stable states. To that end, we rely on process algebras, a well-established computational technique for the specification and verification of interacting systems. Results: We develop a novel compositional approach to support the logical modelling of interconnected cellular networks. First, we formalize the concept of logical regulatory modules and their composition. Then, we make this framework operational by transposing the composition of logical modules into a process algebra framework. Importantly, the combination of incremental composition, abstraction and minimization using an appropriate equivalence relation (here the safety equivalence) yields huge reductions of the dynamics. We illustrate the potential of this approach with two case-studies: the Segment-Polarity and the Delta-Notch modules. Availability and implementation: GINsim
INTRODUCTIONThe growing number of published models shows the suitability of qualitative logical modelling to study regulatory and signalling networks (e.g.). However, when dealing with large networks, a classical combinatorial explosion arises, hampering efficient analyses of the dynamical properties of these systems, in particular, reachability properties. Although efficient algorithms have been proposed to identify all stable states via static analysis (e.g. de; Dubrova and), reachability analysis is hard to perform because it requires exploring the dynamics. To address this issue, we propose to rely on the concepts of modularity and compositionality, focusing on the multi-valued logical formalism, initially defined by Thomas and co-workers (). Modularity has emerged as a key feature of molecular networks (e.g.), but a precise definition of functional regulatory modules is still lacking, let alone a method to decompose large intricate networks into such functional modules. Nevertheless, when cellular patterns are governed by both inter-cellular signals and intra-cellular regulatory networks, it is natural to consider each cellular network as a module. Moreover, based on previous knowledge, sub-networks are often attributed specific functions within complex cellular processes. This is the case of the cell cycle control for which specific modules are associated to check-points, entry or exit control of specific phases, etc. In, a logical model was defined by combining three modules involved in the control of the budding yeast cell cycle. Logical modelling was also applied to multi-cellular networks controlling early embryonic developmental processes in Drosophila (). The composed models cited above were manually defined from smaller modules. Indeed, little work on model composition has been carried out, although it has been identified as a major goal in systems biology (). Generally, existing composition procedures are not automatic and aim at properly defining a composed model, while little attention is paid to the analysis of the (potentially very large) associated dynamics (). In any case, these studies mainly focus on biochemical reaction networks. Concerning the composition of logical regulatory modules (LRMs), a framework based on high-level Petri nets has been developed, providing a formal and systematic procedure (). However, it does not solve the scalability issue of the analysis since the resulting composed models have still to be analysed in a monolithic manner. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.comconsider models in the form of sets of non-linear differential equations and propose three different ways of combining sub-models: composition, fusion and aggregation. Model composition and fusion, respectively, keep or eliminate references to the original sub-models, while model aggregation requires that individual sub-models come with their input and output ports (similar to our definition of LRMs). These notions are important to distinguish different types of model combination, but, again, they do not address the issue of analysing the resulting models. In this article, we simply refer to the combination of models as model composition. Process algebras aim at representing and analysing complex interacting (discrete) systems. This framework has led to the development of compositional approaches that mitigate the combinatorial explosion problem through the minimization of the individual dynamics while preserving properties of interest, and then by incrementally composing and minimizing intermediate dynamics, until a description of the global behaviour is obtained. Process algebras have already been considered for biological processes (see, e.g. Ciocchetta and Hillston, 2009 and references therein), adopting different modelling approaches. Recently, a compositional algorithm was proposed for gene regulatory networks modelled as piecewise-linear ODE systems to check the reachability of a specific steady state from an initial condition (). In contrast, we determine all stable states reachable from a given initial condition (see Section 4 for a comparison of the two approaches). In this article, we propose a new computational approach to cope with the combinatorial explosion that hampers proper analyses of models defined as compositions of LRMs. For simplicity, we restrict ourselves to the composition of identical modules, which is often the case of multi-cellular systems. In any case, this constitutes an important class of applications that notably includes most of the patterning problems in developmental biology. Furthermore, we are concerned with the reachability of stable states that is a property of real interest for differentiation regulatory networks. We thus define a framework to compose logical modules by means of logical integration functions describing how modules interact with their neighbours. We establish a constructive method to determine the dynamics of the composition from the dynamics of the individual modules and their interactions. Then, we rely on process algebra techniques to generate, abstract and minimize the behaviours of the modules, yet preserving reachability properties. These dynamics are iteratively combined and minimized, to obtain a final reduced description of the dynamics of the composed model. Minimization relies on an equivalence relation, which is chosen depending on the property to be preserved. Here, we rely on the safety equivalence that preserves the reachability of the stable states, while ensuring significant reductions of the dynamics. For the implementation, we use the CADP toolbox [Construction and Analysis of Distributed Processes (to specify the dynamics of the logical modules and to implement operations of abstraction, minimization and incremental composition. The article is organized as follows. First, in Section 2, we introduce the modelling framework with formal definitions of LRM, logical integration function, composition rules, as well as the corresponding dynamics. Section 3 presents the principles of abstraction and minimization, relying on classical process algebra operations; other implementation aspects are also briefly discussed. Section 4 includes the application of our procedure to the Segment-Polarity and the Delta-Notch modules. These case studies illustrate the potential of our approach to analyse crucial properties of composed LRMs dynamics that are far too large to be comprehensively tackled with currently available tools.