Motivation: Intrinsically disordered regions of proteins play an essential role in the regulation of various biological processes. Key to their regulatory function is the binding of molecular recognition features (MoRFs) to globular protein domains in a process known as a disorder-to-order transition. Predicting the location of MoRFs in protein sequences with high accuracy remains an important computational challenge. Method: In this study, we introduce MoRF CHiBi , a new computational approach for fast and accurate prediction of MoRFs in protein sequences. MoRF CHiBi combines the outcomes of two support vector machine (SVM) models that take advantage of two different kernels with high noise tolerance. The first, SVM S , is designed to extract maximal information from the general contrast in amino acid compositions between MoRFs, their surrounding regions (Flanks), and the remainders of the sequences. The second, SVM T , is used to identify similarities between regions in a query sequence and MoRFs of the training set. Results: We evaluated the performance of our predictor by comparing its results with those of two currently available MoRF predictors, MoRFpred and ANCHOR. Using three test sets that have previously been collected and used to evaluate MoRFpred and ANCHOR, we demonstrate that MoRF CHiBi outperforms the other predictors with respect to different evaluation metrics. In addition, MoRF CHiBi is downloadable and fast, which makes it useful as a component in other computational prediction tools. Availability and implementation:
IntroductionIntrinsically disordered protein regions (IDRs) are amino acid sequences that lack a unique 3D structure in solution. Proteins that are dominated by IDRs are called intrinsically disordered proteins. IDRs are enriched in binding sites that play significant roles in signaling and regulatory functions through binding to other proteins. Because of this functionality, their interactions need to be both specific and reversible (). The computational identification of candidate binding locations in IDRs is an important task in bioinformatics and an area of growing interest. Currently there are two main approaches to this problem being developed (). The first is based on the analyses of short linear sequence motifs (SLiMs). SLiMs are defined as conserved sequence stretches of 310 amino acids that are enriched in IDRs () and promote interactions with specific domains. The second line of research is based on the theory that long interaction-prone segments in IDRs, called molecular recognition features or MoRFs, fold upon interacting with partners. These MoRFs vary in size and can be up to 70 residues long ().Various computational methods have been developed to identify SLiMs and MoRFs in protein sequences including MoRFpred (), MFSPSSMpred (), PepBindPred (); ANCHOR (), SLiMpred (), SLiMDisc (), SLiMFinder () and Retro-MoRFs (). Despite the fact that both MoRFs and SLiMs are interaction-prone elements in IDRs, the methods used to identify them have been very different. Because of their short length, the identification of SLiMs is very challenging and associated with the risk of high false positive rates (FPRs). Therefore, reliable identification of novel instances of known SLiMs or the de novo identification of SLiMs often relies on evolutionary information or the use of nonsequence information such as protein interaction data. Predictors of MoRFs take advantage of the fact that they are on average longer than SLiMs, which increases the signal to noise level for sequence features that distinguish MoRFs in IDRs from their surroundings. It is clear that there are overlaps between what can be defined as SLiM or MoRF. However, in this study we focus only on computationally identifying MoRFs as defined initially by. All currently available MoRF prediction tools have been benchmarked by comparing their performances to those of two state-ofthe art predictors that use very different approaches: ANCHOR () and MoRFpred (). ANCHOR is a downloadable predictor that is based on three properties of the residues in a polypeptide chain: binding residues must be in a long disordered region, residues are not able to fold with their neighbors and residues are able to interact with globular domains (). A propensity value is generated by computationally predicting each of these three properties using the energy estimation approach of IUPred (), and finally, a weighted sum is used to join these three propensities into a single score. The weights of each of these three components and the neighborhood sizes of the first two (five values in total) are learned from a small training set. Unlike predictors that rely on traditional machine learning tools such as SVMs and Neural Networks, the chance of this training process to over-fit the training data is minimal. MoRFpred is a web based three-step predictor. First, an SVM with a linear kernel determines a MoRF propensity score based on nine sets of features: physiochemical properties of amino acids from the Amino Acid Index (), conservation information in the form of Position Specific Scoring Matrices (PSSM) generated with PSI_BLAST (), relative solvent accessibility estimated by the Real-SPINE3 predictor (), flexibility (B-factor) predicted by PROFbval (), and the results of five different intrinsic disorder predictors. Then, an alignment e-value is computed by aligning the input sequence to the training sequences using PSI-BLAST. Finally, the MoRF propensities of input sequence residues are adjusted by taking the alignment e-values into account. Performance evaluation using three different datasets provided area under the receiver operator characteristics (ROC) curve of $0.68 for MoRFpred and $0.61 for ANCHOR (). To the best of our knowledge, there is no predictor that has shown a significantly better performance than MoRFpred in a direct comparison. However, its software is not down-loadable, and therefore its use is limited to online submissions. It is significantly slower than ANCHOR; it can only process a maximum of five protein sequences at a time and it is limited to sequences with up to 1000 amino acids. Here, we introduce a new approach for predicting MoRFs in protein sequences that we call MoRF CHiBi. We developed MoRF CHiBi by taking into consideration several properties of MoRFs that have been identified in previous studies: The amino acid composition of MoRFs is different from that of the general protein population () and contrasts most with the sequences flanking them (Flanks). In addition, there are sequence similarities between MoRFs that can be exploited to improve MoRF predictions (). Finally, there is a very high level of noise in the data; the values of the top 5 features used byto identify MoRFs show a very high variance. In order to integrate this knowledge, we use a three-step approach in which we generate sets of features from the physicochemical properties of the amino acids that represent different regions of proteins, train two SVM models, one to target direct similarities between MoRF sequences, and the other to focus on the general contrast of the amino acid composition of MoRFs, Flanks, and the general protein population, and finally compute a propensity for each residue to be a MoRF residue by joining the propensities (as probabilities) generated by the two SVM models using Bayes rule. The final predictor, MoRF CHiBi , is down-loadable, fast, and has no upper limit on the size of protein sequences. Even though it is only uses the Amino Acid Index, MoRF CHiBi is more accurate than ANCHOR and MoRFpred.
DiscussionWe present a new approach, MoRF CHiBi , for predicting MoRFs within protein sequences. We compared its performance to that of ANCHOR and MoRFpred using three different test sets that have previously been assembled by. The results demonstrate that MoRF CHiBi outperforms both predictors in AUC, accuracy and success rate, with high efficiency.summarizesNote: AUC and success rate values of the three MoRF predictors using the three datasets; TEST, NEW and EXP6.and compares the properties and the performances of the three predictors using the TEST dataset. The increased performance of MoRF CHiBi is related to several points. First, two different types of information are targeted by MoRF CHiBi : sequence similarity information and composition contrast information. The search for the former is justified by the fact that there exist sequence similarities between MoRFs. Indeed, MoRFs from different proteins that bind the same target can have a significant level of sequence identity (). Hence, one can see SVM T as the part of MoRF CHiBi that targets new instances of 'known' MoRFs. Targeting purely composition contrast information with SVM S can, in contrast, be seen as a de novo search for MoRFs. This objective was achieved by using a synthetic dataset with only composition contrast information for the training of SVM S. Training on synthetic sequences may appear problematic. However, it is justified based on the premise that new MoRFs can be identified due to an inherent difference in amino acid composition between them and their surroundings. A second advantage of our approach is the use of a novel two step feature selection. In the first step, each SVM parameter is selected to best fit its target information, whereas in the second, a set of complementary features is selected to maximize the SVM performance. Finally, technical subtleties also contributed to the high performance of MoRF CHiBi : a weighted AUC as an objective function in feature selection to improve TPR at low FPR and SVM models with noise tolerance kernels to overcome the high level of noise in the data. While the outputs of both MoRF Pred and ANCHOR include a numeric propensity value as well as a binary categorical prediction for each residue of being part of a MoRF, the MoRF CHiBi output is limited to the numerical propensity values. We did not include a categorical prediction because different proteins are likely to have different levels of propensity scores and researchers are likely to require different cutoff values based on different applications. We believe that, although convenient, providing categorical predictions by assigning a static cutoff value can be a misleading oversimplification. However, if one needs such a cutoff, we suggest a value around 0.848. At this cutoff, MoRF CHiBi has a (TPR, FPR) of (0.395, 0.100) and (0.412, 0.101) on TEST and NEW, respectively. Overall, MoRF CHiBi is light fast, and the most accurate MoRF predictor available today, which makes it useful in the analysis of small and large datasets. As it is down-loadable, MoRF CHiBi can be used as an input component for other programs. We would like to stress again that there exist overlaps in the definition of MoRFs and SLiMs but that MoRF CHiBi , just like MoRFpred, has been trained to predict MoRFs only. Other predictors are better suited to identify SLiMs in IDRs and structured domains ().