Motivation: With rapid accumulation of sequence data on several species, extracting rational and systematic information from multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) is becoming increasingly important. Currently, there is a plethora of computational methods for investigating coupled evolutionary changes in pairs of positions along the amino acid sequence, and making inferences on structure and function. Yet, the significance of coevolution signals remains to be established. Also, a large number of false positives (FPs) arise from insufficient MSA size, phylogenetic background and indirect couplings. Results: Here, a set of 16 pairs of non-interacting proteins is thoroughly examined to assess the effectiveness and limitations of different methods. The analysis shows that recent computationally expensive methods designed to remove biases from indirect couplings outperform others in detecting tertiary structural contacts as well as eliminating intermolecular FPs; whereas traditional methods such as mutual information benefit from refinements such as shuffling, while being highly efficient. Computations repeated with 2,330 pairs of protein families from the Negatome database corroborated these results. Finally, using a training dataset of 162 families of proteins, we propose a combined method that outperforms existing individual methods. Overall, the study provides simple guidelines towards the choice of suitable methods and strategies based on available MSA size and computing resources.
IntroductionWith sequence data being generated at an ever increasing rate in the post-genomic era, it is becoming crucially important to develop efficient and accurate methods at the interface between evolutionary biology, computational biology and molecular biophysics to learn and make inferences from sequence data (). Structural and functional properties of proteins go hand-in-hand with their evolutionary properties. For instance, maintaining protein stability usually involves interactions between conserved residues at the core of the structure. Likewise, biochemical activities such as catalysis involve conserved residues. Recognition sites, on the other hand, may show correlated mutations that maintain the balance between specificity and adaptability (, b). Recent studies also highlight how sequence evolution correlates with structural dynamics (). Coevolution patterns derived from multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) provide valuable constraints that assist in structure prediction (). The idea of inferring inter-residue contacts for structure prediction, using sequence correlation data indeed goes back to the early 1990s (e.g.). Such applications may be particularly useful in the case of membrane proteins that can often be difficult to resolve (). Detection of correlated mutation sites could also assist in identifying hot spots, and provide guidance for protein design and engineering. In line with increased sequence data and, thereby, increased opportunity for detecting and interpreting sequence correlations across the members of protein families, a broad range of theory and methods have been introduced for correlated mutations analysis (CMA) in the last decade. Mutual information (MI) () from information theory was one of the first rigorous metrics adopted for quantifying the extent of cross-correlations between amino acid substitutions in proteins. A corrected version, MIp, where the background noise and phylogenetic effects were largely eliminated by subtracting an average product correction (APC) () proved to enhance signals associated with amino acids that are proximal in the structure. Also, non-MI-based methods have been shown to help identify correlated mutations, such as the observedminus-expected-squared (OMES) method () and the statistical coupling analysis (SCA) (). More recently, advanced approaches that require more expensive computations have been introduced, focused on removing indirect (or transitive) couplings that may obscure the detection of direct correlations between sequence positions. Such methods include direct coupling analysis (DCA or DI for direct information) (), Protein Sparse Inverse COVariance (PSICOV) (), a Bayesian network algorithm for disentangling direct from indirect dependencies between residues (), the pseudolikelihood maximization DCA (plmDCA) method due to, Gremlin's pseudo-likelihood method () and a network deconvolution approach based on spectral decomposition of the correlation matrix (). These studies have shown success in detecting correlations that relate to contacts in the three-dimensional (3D) structure, and in reverse engineering the 3D structure from correlations. In a control study, Horovitz and coworkers () demonstrated that CMA methods may erroneously yield coevolutionary signals even between non-interacting proteins. This study performed for a set of 16 non-interacting protein pairs (Supplementary) further showed that shuffling algorithms could be adopted to improve signal-to-noise ratio and reduce these false positives (FPs). Of interest is to see if methods developed for improving the detection of 3D contact-making residues are equally effective in eliminating intermolecular FPs. In a broader context, it is not often clear which method might be most suitable for a given set of data, or what are their limits of applicability. Which fraction of signals outputted by these methods can be reliably used for making structural or functional inferences? How does the size of the MSA affect the results? Can we estimate the minimum size of the MSA to achieve a certain level of accuracy? Can we design hybrid approaches, or combined methods, that take advantage of the strengths of different methods to outperform individual methods?In the present study, we present a critical assessment of the performance of nine methods/approaches developed for predicting pairwise correlations from MSAs. Proteins in Supplementary Table S1 (see also Supplementary Information (SI), Supplementary) are adopted as a benchmark dataset for a detailed analysis, which is further consolidated by extending the analysis to a dataset of 2330 structurally resolved protein pairs extracted from Negatome 2.0 database () of non-interacting proteins. Two basic performance criteria are considered: first, does the method correctly filter out intermolecular correlations (FPs) if the analyzed pairs of proteins are known to be non-interacting? Second, if one focuses on intramolecular signals, does the method detect the pairs that make tertiary contacts in the 3D structure (termed intramolecular true positives, TPs)? The study shows that the abilities of the existing methods to discriminate intermolecular FPs are comparable, but their abilities to identify intramolecular TPs vary, with DI and PSICOV outperforming others. We also analyse the relationship between the size of MSAs and the effectiveness of shuffling algorithm. We examine the similarities/dissimilarities, or the level of consistency, between the outputs from different methods, and provide simple guidelines for estimating how accuracy varies with coverage. Finally, using a navenave Bayesian approach with a training dataset of 162 families of proteins (SI, Supplementary), we propose a combined method of PSICOV and DI that provides the highest levels of accuracy. Overall, the study provides a clear understanding of the capabilities and deficiencies of existing methods to help users select optimal methods for their purposes.
ConclusionThe above comparative analysis led to the following conclusions summarized below in the context of three groups of outputs/regimes, colored light green, yellow and pink in Supplementary Figs. S2 and S7: strong coevolution signals (ranked in the top 0.5% subset), intermediate signals (0.55%) and relatively weak signals (520%). First, among all studied methods, PSICOV and DI yielded the best performance in the strong signal regime. Both methods were successful in accurately detecting coevolving pairs of residues thatmake contacts in the 3D structure (and b and Supplementary Figs. S2b and S4) including non-local contacts, or in eliminating the intermolecular FPs (and Supplementary). Their performance was particularly impressive when the strongest coevolutionary signals (top 0.1%) were considered. For a protein of N  300 residues, 0.1% means 0.001  N(N  1)/2 % 45 pairs. Thirty-nine of them predicted by these methods were, on average, observed to form inter-residue contacts in the structure; likewise, among the top 0.5% signals, 157 pairs (out of 224) would make contacts. The predictions thus help not only in elucidating evolutionarily relationships, but also in assisting in structure prediction. These methods are therefore uniquely useful in cases where no suitable template structures are available. DI indeed showed remarkable success in predicting the structures of membrane proteins (). Second, in the intermediate regime, while the proportion of contacts among coevolving pairs predicted by PSICOV and DI remains high, we note that the discriminatory ability of OMES and MIp (and their shuffled versions) between intermolecular and intramolecular interactions start to pick up and outperform that of DI. Notably, MIp (S) exhibits the highest performance in the relatively weak (but high coverage) regime, both in terms of elimination of FPs and identification of 3D contact-making TPs. This superior performance of MIp in situations where DI and PSICOV start to underperform is noteworthy. Two such situations are: (i) the search for a large number of predictions (or higher coverage) albeit at lower accuracy, and (ii) the search for coevolving pairs that potentially make 3D contacts, in the absence of a sufficient number of sequences (see Figs. 5 and Supplementary). MIp (S) emerges as the method of choice in those situations. For example, if one is interested in exploring coevolutionary patterns within a small (sub)family of 50200 sequences, one-third of predictions made by MIp (S) would be, on the average, making contacts in the 3D structure among the top 10% signals; see Supplementary). This subset of signals contains 4500 pairs for N  300, of which 1500 would be physically interacting. This is a large majority of native contacts, based on inter-residue coordination number of z  12 within 10 A . Third, the study highlights how the size m of MSA, a parameter known to be an important determinant of the statistical significance of results, affects different methods. It is well known that larger MSAs usually give better results, and some methods have specified lower bounds for m: 100 sequences for SCA, 250 for sensitive results from DI, and 1000 for full DI performance (). PSICOV doesn't specify a lower bound, but there is a clear correlation between performance and MSA size (). However, the present study further shows that the deficiency arising from small MSAs can be partially offset by the shuffling algorithm (). Shuffled MIp (S) in particular emerges as a better choice than DI and PSICOV when dealing with small MSAs. Generally speaking, we need more than m  250 sequences to justify the use of the computationally expensive DI and PSICOV methods; otherwise, MIp might be preferred together with a shuffling algorithm (and Supplementary). On a practical side, both PSICOV and DI involve the inversion of a covariance matrix and/or global optimization algorithms which may take hours, even days, depending on the size of the MSA. Specifically, PSICOV and DI need each about 2.5 GB memories to analyse a 400-residue MSA. The memory requirement increases quadratically with sequence size, and this O(N 2 ) dependence may become prohibitively expensive for large proteins. The computing time for inverting the DI covariance matrix scales between N 2.373 () and N 3 depending on the algorithm and parameters. MI, MIp and OMES, on the other hand, are very fast. As such, they lend themselves to high-throughput analysis, thus allowing for statistical inferences about sequence-structuredynamics-function relations (see e.g.). Even though shuffling is time-consuming, it needs very small memory and we could speed up the calculation by adjusting the number k of shuffles because the computing time scales linearly with k, as O(kN 2 m). So, vis-a `-vis the tradeoff between accuracy and efficiency, MIp (S) could serve as an optimal approach, especially for MSAs of large proteins containing a small number of sequences. Finally, our analysis permitted us to develop a hybrid method that takes advantage of the strengths of DI and PSICOV. The improvement in performance is incremental due to an already high overlap of 0.68 between the predictions of DI and PSICOV. Yet, one may advantageously adopt this hybrid method to maximize the fraction of contact-making predictions, especially in the intermediate coverage regime. Another useful recipe for case studies is to select the intersection of DI, PSICOV and MIp, which appears to be particularly useful for eliminating FPs. All methods are accessible via the Evol extension of ProDy ().