Motivation: PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) are a class of small non-coding RNAs that are highly abundant in the germline. One important role of piRNAs is to defend genome integrity by guiding PIWI proteins to silence transposable elements (TEs), which have a high potential to cause deleteri-ous effects on their host. The mechanism of piRNA-mediated post-transcriptional silencing was also observed to affect mRNAs, suggesting that piRNAs might play a broad role in gene expression regulation. However, there has been no systematic report with regard to how many protein-coding genes might be targeted and regulated by piRNAs. Results: We trained a support vector machine classifier based on a combination of Miwi CLIP-Seq-derived features and position-derived features to predict the potential targets of piRNAs on mRNAs in the mouse. Reanalysis of a published microarray dataset suggested that the expression level of the 2587 protein-coding genes predicted as piRNA targets showed significant upregulation as a whole after abolishing the slicer activity of Miwi, supporting the conclusion that they are subject to piRNA-mediated regulation. Availability and implementation: A web version of the method called pirnaPre as well as our results for browse is available at http://MANW.reguIatoryrna.org/software/piRNA/piRNA_target_mRNA/index.php.
IntroductionPIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), microRNAs (miRNAs) and short-interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are three major classes of small RNAs (). piRNAs differ from miRNAs and siRNAs in several aspects: (1) piRNAs show specific expression in germ cells (; (2) most piRNAs have lengths in the range of 2533 nt (Sai), greater than those of miRNAs and siRNAs, which are 2023 nt in most cases, although Caenorhabditis elegans piRNAs with the unusual length of 21 nt constitute an exception to the general rule (); (3) piRNAs do not show any conservation in either sequence or secondary structure(Le), except that there is a preference for a 5 0 uridine (U) residue and an adenosine as the tenth nucleotide(); (4) piRNAs bind to Piwi-clade Argonauts, whereas miRNAs and siRNAs associate with the Ago-clade Argonauts (); and (5) most piRNAs are derived from genomic piRNA clusters, which are discrete regions containing a large number of various types of transposable elements (TEs) (). Besides, piRNAs have distinguished biogenesis mechanisms which are independent of Dicer (). The recently reported phased manner of piRNA biogenesis further supports thatpiRNAs are more diverse than other classes of small RNAs (). The existence of piRNAs represents adaptive control mechanisms that protect the genomic architecture against TEs, which constitute a large fraction of the mammalian genome and are a constant threat to the host (). PIWI proteins participate in the piRNA pathway(Le). The mutation of Miwi in the mouse results in male infertility and the upregulation of LINE1 retrotransposon transcripts (). There have been similar observations made in flies when mutations in piwi, aub or Ago3 occurred (). The silencing machinery is similar to that of siRNAs and miRNAs (). A piRNA recognizes a transposon transcript target by complementarity, and the interacting PIWI protein then slices via its catalytic domain, cleaving the target at a position 10-nt downstream of the 5 0 end of the piRNA, generating a 5'-monophosphate containing fragment (). Recent studies suggest that piRNA-mediated cleavage acts not only on TEs () but also on mRNAs (). In silkworm,even discovered that a single piRNA is responsible for primary sex determination by mediating cleavage of the Masc mRNA, demonstrating the functional importance of piRNA-mediated cleavage on mRNA. Our previous study revealed widespread Miwi/piRNA-mediated mRNA cleavage events in mouse testes and demonstrated the functional importance of the temporal cleavage of piRNA target mRNAs for spermiogenesis (). Taking advantage of published global 5 0 RACE (rapid amplification of 5 0 complementary DNA ends) tags, we previously identified 169 piRNA-targeted mRNAs (). The role of piRNAs in mediating mRNA cleavage is also evidenced in C. elegans () and D. melanogaster (). However, there has been no systematic assessment with respect to how many protein-coding genes might be regulated by a piRNA-guided cleavage mechanism. In this study, we trained a support vector machine (SVM) classifier to predict potential piRNA targets on protein-coding genes. Because base-pairing recognition by piRNAs as well as the physical association of Miwi are both critical for piRNA-guided cleavage in mouse male germ cells, the anti-Miwi crosslinking immunoprecipitation coupled with deep sequencing (CLIP-seq) data that we produced recently was used to obtain both piRNAs and target fragments. In particular, we introduced a combination of CLIP-Seqderived features and position-derived features. In contrast to the previous identification of piRNA targets from 5 0 RACE tags, which is restricted to the sequencing depth, we have undertaken a genomewide scan across all sites of mRNA transcripts and computationally identified 3781 mRNAs of 2587 protein-coding genes as potential piRNA targets. This result was further validated by a microarray dataset that presented gene expression differences between catalytic mutant without Miwi slicer activity and the wild type. The dataset of piRNA targets in mRNAs is available for browsing, searching and download via http://www.regulatoryrna.org/software/piRNA/ piRNA_target_mRNA/index.php.
DiscussionUsing the piRNA targets that we previously identified () as positive examples of our training dataset, we madeComputational identification of piRNA targetsgenome-wide de novo predictions and provided a much larger list of mRNAs that might be targeted and cleaved by piRNAs. In this study, we took advantage of CLIP-Seq data, which are specific to fragments that are bound by the Miwi protein, whereas the previous study was based on 5 0 RACE sequencing data, which contains not only fragments that are produced by piRNA-mediated cleavage but also other biological processes. Moreover, the previous study was restricted to the coverage of 5 0 RACE sequencing data on mRNAs, whereas the depth of the CLIP-Seq data that were used in this study makes it possible to systematic explore piRNA targets on mRNAs. In addition, the incorporation of position-derived features enabled the discovery of piRNA target sites that might be missed by the absence of complementary piRNAs from sequenced reads. Our method presents robustness as repeated random selection of negative examples for training the model did not resulted in much difference with regarding to the predicted list of piRNA target genes. It could also be applied to other tissue types which have both training examples and anti-Miwi CLIP-Seq data. In addition to the repression of mRNAs by cleavage in this study, another repression mechanism is mediated by piRNAs that induces mRNA deadenylation, resulting in mRNA degradation. For example, piRNAs target the nanos 3 0 UTR with imperfect complementarity, thus facilitating nanos mRNA deadenylation and normal anteroposterior embryonic patterning in Drosophila (). Recently,reported that more than 7000 mRNAs were associated with Miwi, of which approximately 60% experienced destabilization by Miwi in the elongating spermatids of mouse. Together with mRNAs that are involved in piRNA-mediated cleavage, a catalog of nearly ten thousand protein-coding genes are potentially mediated by piRNAs, suggesting a prosperous role of piRNAs in gene expression regulation. Conclusively, piRNAs have mechanisms that act to repress protein-coding gene expression similar to miRNAs, either causing the cleavage of the target or the degradation of the target. Both the miRNA pathway and the piRNA pathway require recognition based on base-pairing and the participation of proteins from the Argonaute protein family. However, because piRNAs are restricted to expression in germ cells, piRNAmediated regulation might take place primarily during spermatogenesis.
ConclusionIt has been well accepted for a long period of time that the emergence of piRNAs plays a role in genome defense by silencing TEs; however, many recent studies have shown that piRNA-guided silencing mechanisms are also involved in the regulation of nontransposon transcripts. The first example of a piRNA targeting mRNA was described in the Drosophila embryo (). A similar phenomenon was also observed in C. elegans, mouse and silkworm (), suggesting that piRNAs could regulate gene expression via a mechanism similar to that of miRNAs. Although there have been many published programs aimed at predicting miRNA targets as well as public databases curating experimentally verified or computational predicted targets of miRNAs, there have been no studies assessing how many proteincoding genes might be regulated by piRNAs. In our study, piRNA targets on mRNAs were systematically identified at the genomewide level using an SVM classifier. The classifier was trained based on the incorporation of Miwi CLIP-Seq-derived features and position-derived features and achieved an area of the ROC curve of87.25% at the site level and 75.55% at the gene level. Of all of the features that were used, Miwi CLIP-Seq-derived features play a dominate role in the piRNA enrichment of the 5 0 end 10 nt downstream of the target site occupying the top ranked position. Of the position-derived features, the genomic annotation is highly ranked, with 3 0 UTR as a preferred choice, and nucleotide usage on the first and tenth positions downstream of the target site is the next highest ranked. Genome-wide prediction based on the trained classifier resulted in 3781 mRNAs of 2587 protein-coding genes as piRNA targets. These genes show significant upregulation as a whole after the slicer activity of Miwi was abolished, suggesting that the predicted list of piRNA targets is reliable. This work might provide valuable clues for biologists who are interested in the function of piRNAs in protein-coding genes. More details of the prediction results in this study and the online version of the method called pirnaPre are available at http://www.regulatoryrna.org/software/piRNA/piRNA_tar get_mRNA/index.php.