Motivation: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that are extensively involved in gene expression regulation. One major roadblock in functional miRNA studies is the reliable prediction of genes targeted by miRNAs, as rules defining miRNA target recognition have not been well-established to date. Availability of high-throughput experimental data from a recent CLASH (cross linking, ligation and sequencing of hybrids) study has presented an unprecedented opportunity to characterize miRNA target recognition patterns, which may provide guidance for improved miRNA target prediction. Results: The CLASH data were analysed to identify distinctive sequence features that characterize canonical and non-canonical miRNA target types. Most miRNA targets were of non-canonical type, i.e. without involving perfect pairing to canonical miRNA seed region. Different miRNAs have distinct targeting patterns, and this miRNA-to-miRNA variability was associated with seed sequence composition. Specifically, seed-based canonical target recognition was dependent on the GC content of the miRNA seed. For miRNAs with low GC content of the seed region, non-canonical targeting was the dominant mechanism for target recognition. In contrast to canonical targeting, non-canonical targeting did not lead to significant target downregulation at either the RNA or protein
INTRODUCTIONMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a family of small non-coding RNAs that play important regulatory roles in many physiological and disease processes (). About 2000 human miRNAs have been discovered to date (), and collectively these miRNAs regulate the expression of thousands of genes at both post-transcriptional and translational levels (). Thus, identification of gene targets is critical for functional characterization of miRNAs. Currently, most researchers rely on computational tools to initially identify target candidates for further experimental validation. Significant progress has been made in recent years for the identification of sequence features relevant to target prediction, such as the seed sequence at the 5 0 end of the miRNA as well as the sequence context surrounding the seed binding site of the target transcript (). However, despite the progress, current bioinformatics target prediction tools still have suboptimal performance with both high false-positive and false-negative rates (). One major obstacle in computational target prediction is the lack of guidance from experimental observations. To address this issue, multiple high-throughput studies have been performed in recent years to systematically identify miRNA targets at the transcriptome level. For example, one major experimental strategy is to identify target transcripts associated with functional RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC;). These methods were able to identify a large number of miRNA target transcripts that were bound to RISC by cross-linking immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput RNA sequencing (CLIP-seq). In addition, proteomics and ribosome studies have been performed to systematically characterize target expression at the translational level (). More recently, CLASH (cross linking, ligation and sequencing of hybrids), an improved CLIP-seq method, has been developed to directly identify miRNA-target pairs by ligation and sequencing of miRNA-target RNA duplexes ().This new method can simultaneously identify both the miRNAs and their cognate binding sites in the target transcripts, allowing direct characterization of sequence features relevant to miRNA target recognition. With CLASH, thousands of miRNA-target pairs were identified (). Interestingly, the majority of the target sites contained no canonical seed pairing site, suggesting that other sequence features of the miRNAs played a dominant role in target recognition. In our study, we systematically analysed the sequence composition of the miRNAs and paired target sites from the CLASH data, and identified sequence features that distinguished canonical from non-canonical miRNA targets.
DISCUSSIONMultiple experimental strategies have been established to identify both miRNAs and target transcripts that are bound to the RISC complex (). However, one major challenge of these strategies is that RNA sequences were identified after pooling miRNAs and target transcripts from all RICS complexes together, which represents a many-to-many relationship for miRNAs and their targets. Thus, information about specific miRNA-target pairs in each RISC complex was unknown. Although multiple computational algorithms were proposed recently for prediction of miRNA-target pairs from CLIP data (), the most straightforward and reliable way would be to directly identify miRNA-target pairs experimentally. Using the CLASH method,identified thousands of specific miRNA-target transcript pairs that were bound to the same RISC complexes. Their work presented an unprecedented opportunity to study miRNA target recognition patterns, especially those involving non-canonical target sites. Most previous miRNA target analyses were focused on target sites pairing to canonical miRNA seed region. The CLASH data indicate that many targets are not paired to any canonical miRNA seed. In fact, canonical miRNA targets represented only 22% of all targets in the CLASH dataset (). However, it was not clear why canonical or non-canonical targets were preferentially associated with certain miRNAs. A major novelty of this work is the identification of sequence determinants for miRNA-to-miRNA variability in target recognition patterns. Specifically, sequence features related to miRNA seed composition were identified that distinguish canonical miRNA targeting from non-canonical targeting. Our previous work on a limited number of miRNAs () suggested that there is significant miRNA-to-miRNA variability associated with target recognition patterns. Interestingly, reanalysis of the CLASH data containing a large number of miRNAs revealed that composition of the miRNA seed sequence was strongly correlated to targeting patterns. For miRNAs with weak seed binding stability, they recognized target transcripts mostly through non-canonical mechanisms without involving canonical seed pairing. Thus, the current work suggested that variability in seed sequence composition resulted in variable miRNA-dependent targeting patterns, and this seed variability issue should be taken into consideration when predicting targets for individual miRNAs. To this end, we are currently working on incorporating the seed composition feature into an improved target prediction algorithm for more accurate prediction of suppression of target gene expression. Overall, non-canonical targeting was the norm rather than exception when all miRNAs were considered collectively. However, the functional consequences of miRNA targeting were dependent on target recognition patterns. Canonical targeting, involving perfect pairing to the canonical seed region, generally led to significant downregulation of target transcripts. In contrast, only marginal transcriptional downregulation was observed for non-canonical types of targets based on microarray analysis (). Similarly, canonical targeting, but not any other targeting type, led to significant suppression of target protein expression based on proteomic analysis (). Thus, our target expression analysis agrees with previous observations that miRNAs typically suppress target expression at both the transcriptional and translational levels (). Consistent with our analysis, previous experimental studies demonstrated that miRNAs with weak seed binding stability had low proficiency on target downregulation (), which can be explained by our prediction that most targets of these miRNAs were of non-canonical type whose expression was not effectively impacted by miRNA binding. The target-type dependency for gene expression regulation raised an interesting question as to what constitutes an effective miRNA target. Non-canonical targets were bound by miRNA and this binding could be functionally important in ways other than direct target downregulation. For example, non-canonical targets may serve as competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs) to sequester miRNAs from regulating canonical targets (). If this is the case, non-canonical targets could behave more like a reservoir of 'miRNA regulators', rather than targets of miRNA. Thus, it is likely that concurrent interactions between miRNAs and canonical/non-canonical targets are important to maintain the steady state of gene expression regulation networks mediated by miRNAs.