Motivation: Comrad is a novel algorithmic framework for the integrated analysis of RNA-Seq and whole genome shotgun sequencing (WGSS) data for the purposes of discovering genomic rearrangements and aberrant transcripts. The Comrad framework leverages the advantages of both RNA-Seq and WGSS data, providing accurate classification of rearrangements as expressed or not expressed and accurate classification of the genomic or non-genomic origin of aberrant transcripts. A major benefit of Comrad is its ability to accurately identify aberrant transcripts and associated rearrangements using low coverage genome data. As a result, a Comrad analysis can be performed at a cost comparable to that of two RNA-Seq experiments, significantly lower than an analysis requiring high coverage genome data. Results: We have applied Comrad to the discovery of gene fusions and read-throughs in prostate cancer cell line C4-2, a derivative of the LNCaP cell line with androgen-independent characteristics. As a proof of concept, we have rediscovered in the C4-2 data 4 of the 6 fusions previously identified in LNCaP. We also identified six novel fusion transcripts and associated genomic breakpoints, and verified their existence in LNCaP, suggesting that Comrad may be more sensitive than previous methods that have been applied to fusion discovery in LNCaP. We show that many of the gene fusions discovered using Comrad would be difficult to identify using currently available techniques. Availability: A C++ and Perl implementation of the method demonstrated in this article is available at http://exon.ucsd.edu/ShortFuse.
INTRODUCTIONHigh-throughput sequencing of cDNA (RNA-Seq) is rapidly accelerating our understanding of the sequence content of the human transcriptome. RNA-Seq can be used for high-throughput quantification of transcript abundance as has been done previously using microarrays. However, microarray-based approaches require pre-existing knowledge of the transcriptome sequence. RNA-Seq, in contrast, can be used for de novo characterization of the transcriptome including unbiased discovery and nucleotide level characterization of novel transcripts. Compared to previous, Sanger sequencing-based approaches for discovering novel transcripts, RNA-Seq is higher throughput for lower cost (). Applied to cancer genomics, RNA-Seq can be employed for the discovery of novel aberrant transcripts with implications for cancer biology.used RNA-Seq to rediscover known gene fusions in chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML) and prostate cell lines, and also discovered novel gene fusions in prostate tumours. Similarly,applied RNA-Seq to the discovery of gene fusions in melanoma.used a newly developed method called FusionSeq () to discover gene fusions in RNA-Seq data from prostate tumours, anddeveloped PERAlign and used it to discover gene fusions in breast cancer cell lines. The general methodology used by all of these studies was the 'paired end' method:(i) RNA-Seq is used to sequence both ends of a set of cDNA fragments; (ii) the resulting sequence pairs are aligned to the reference genome or transcriptome; (iii) a chimeric transcript will produce chimeric fragments and those chimeric fragments will produce a pair of sequences (paired end reads) that align to different genes, thus, any paired end read for which one end aligns to one gene and the other end aligns to another gene is considered potential evidence of a gene fusion. Despite the aforementioned methodological advances and associated discoveries, accurate prediction of gene fusions from RNA-Seq data remains a difficult problem. The large amount of sequence data produced by high-throughput sequencing and the complexity of the transcriptome make RNA-Seq data difficult to interpret. High expression levels combined with sequencing errors and novel splicing produce many sequence pairs that appear to have been produced from chimeric fragments (). Furthermore, the reverse transcription step used to produce cDNA has been shown to produce chimeric fragments via the process of template switching (). Previous studies dealt with false positives produced by 'false' chimeric fragments with the application of heuristic filters (). Another common practise was to discard paired end reads with multiplePage: 1482 14811488
DISCUSSIONComrad provides the first accurate computational method for simultaneous analysis of RNA-Seq and low coverage WGSS data for the purposes of identifying fused genes, and for differentiating fusions of genomic origin from those fusions that are non-genomic, i.e. co-transcription of adjacent genes or trans-splicing events. We have used the C4-2 data and a theoretical analysis to show that Comrad is able to discover fusions that other methods would not be capable of discovering given the same data. The advantages of Comrad are 2-fold. First, Comrad is able to leverage unambiguous WGSS data in order to correctly identify a fusion transcript supported by multi-map RNA-Seq data, and visa versa. Second, Comrad is able to accurately identify genomic rearrangements that result in gene fusions, even if that genomic rearrangement is supported by only one WGSS read. This second advantage means that genomic rearrangements producing gene fusions can be accurately identified in low coverage genome data, i.e. a Comrad analysis can be performed for roughly twice the cost of an RNA-Seq experiment. As a proof of concept, we have shown that we are able to rediscover, in the C4-2 data, 4 of 6 fusions previously identified in the closely related cell line LNCaP. We then successfully validated the fusion transcripts and rearrangement breakpoints for 6 of the Page: 1488 14811488