Motivation: Protein complexes are of great importance for unraveling the secrets of cellular organization and function. The AP-MS technique has provided an effective high-throughput screening to directly measure the co-complex relationship among multiple proteins, but its performance suffers from both false positives and false negatives. To computationally predict complexes from AP-MS data, most existing approaches either required the additional knowledge from known complexes (supervised learning), or had numerous parameters to tune. Method: In this article, we propose a novel unsupervised approach, without relying on the knowledge of existing complexes. Our method probabilistically calculates the affinity between two proteins, where the affinity score is evaluated by a co-complexed score or C2S in brief. In particular, our method measures the log-likelihood ratio of two proteins being co-complexed to being drawn randomly, and we then predict protein complexes by applying hierarchical clustering algorithm on the C2S score matrix. Results: Compared with existing approaches, our approach is computationally efficient and easy to implement. It has just one parameter to set and its value has little effect on the results. It can be applied to different species as long as the AP-MS data are available. Despite its simplicity, it is competitive or superior in performance over many aspects when compared with the state-of-the-art predictions performed by supervised or unsupervised approaches.
INTRODUCTIONA protein complex is a group of two or more associated polypeptide chains. Most proteins participate in cellular processes by interacting with other molecules, often with other proteins in the assembly of operational complexes. To better understand and detect the cocomplexed relationship among proteins, the screening technique of affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry (AP-MS) has been designed and applied by two research groups to detect the full yeast interactome (). In an AP-MS experiment, a tagged protein is expressed in yeast and then 'pulled down' from a cell extract, along with any proteins * To whom correspondence should be addressed. associated with it, by co-immunoprecipitation or by tandem affinity purification. The set of pulled down proteins is then identified by MS in a laborious and expensive process. This procedure has been systematically applied to large sets of yeast proteins. The tagged protein in AP-MS is also typically called the bait and the proteins it pulls down are called the preys. AP-MS experiments measure complex co-membership, and the fact that a prey is found by certain bait means that there is either a direct physical interaction or an indirect physical interaction (functional interaction) mediated by a protein complex. Since AP-MS data provide us direct information about the co-complex relationships among proteins, it is thus more useful resources for complex detection compared with pairwise protein interaction data. However, AP-MS screening may not be good enough to detect protein complexes directly, because a single bait protein may be involved in more than one complex in a cell, it may therefore capture a set of prey proteins which actually never occur in the same complex. In addition, it is well known that real purification data are noisy and it contains many false positives and false negatives (). To deal with these problems, several notable computational approaches have recently been proposed to identify protein complexes from AP-MS data, which typically consist of following three steps. The first step is to assess the protein interaction affinities.assigned a probability to each pair of proteins by using a stacking algorithm (an advanced supervised learning algorithm from machine learning) based on experimental reproducibility and mass-spectrometry scores, with the hand-curated MIPS complexes as the training set.described the socio-affinity (SA) scores of comparing the number of cooccurrences of two proteins against the random expectation by using a combination of spoke and matrix model.developed the purification enrichment (PE) scores as a modified version of SA scores, in the probabilistic framework of a nave Bayes classifier.designed a matrixmodel scoring algorithm based on the hypergeometric distribution.proposed the dice coefficient (DC) to measure interaction affinity between two proteins based on similarity of their co-purification patterns. After the affinity scores are calculated, the second step is to construct a proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network by applying a threshold or cutoff value.tried all thresholds to determine the one that yielded the set of predicted complexes with the best performance of balanced accuracy and coverage against the set of manually curated MIPS complexes.tested a series of thresholds and chose the one that produced the best F 1-measure (the harmonic mean of recall and precision) on the MIPS complexes. Finally, the third step is