Motivation: Accurate detection of differentially expressed genes between tumor and normal samples is a primary approach of cancer-related biomarker identification. Due to the infiltration of tumor surrounding normal cells, the expression data derived from tumor samples would always be contaminated with normal cells. Ignoring such cellular contamination would deflate the power of detecting DE genes and further confound the biological interpretation of the analysis results. For the time being, there does not exists any differential expression analysis approach for RNA-seq data in literature that can properly account for the contamination of tumor samples. Results: Without appealing to any extra information, we develop a new method contamDE based on a novel statistical model that associates RNA-seq expression levels with cell types. It is demonstrated through simulation studies that contamDE could be much more powerful than the existing methods that ignore the contamination. In the application to two cancer studies, contamDE uniquely found several potential therapy and prognostic biomarkers of prostate cancer and non-small cell lung cancer. Availability and implementation: An R package contamDE is freely available at http://homepage.fudan.edu.cn/zhangh/softwaresl.
IntroductionThe primary goal of the ordinary differential expression (DE) analysis methods is to distinguish biological variation between various conditions from technical effects and random noises (). Since the clinical tumor samples obtained from patients are usually infiltrated with surrounding normal cells (), the traditional DE analysis cannot distinguish the expression variability resulting from the shifts in cell specific expression versus the cell proportion variation if the cellular contamination is ignored (). Ignoring the cellular contamination could also greatly lower the power of DE analysis (). Several experimental methods aiming at dissecting multiple distinct cell types have been developed to eliminate the effects caused by contamination, such as laser capture microdissection and cell sorting. However, these methods are expensive, time consuming and may introduce new confounders (). Computational approaches addressing the contamination issue could avoid such problems thus are much desired.The following linear equation is commonly used to model the microarray expressions of contaminated tumor cells ():where T, T C and T N represent the expression profile of the contaminated tumor cells obtained by experiments and those of the underlying tumor component and normal component, respectively, w is the pure tumor cell proportion in each contaminated tumor sample shared by all genes, while is the random error. RNA-seq data are inherently different from microarray data, and there is very limited work in literature focusing on the contamination issue for RNA-seq data, with a couple of exceptions (). Li and Xie (2013) used an online expectationmaximization algorithm to quantify the expression levels of purified tumor transcripts in a probabilistic fashion for better understanding the abundance of the tumor transcripts. Gong and Szustakowski (2013) developed a quadratic programming method to obtain sub-cell proportions by utilizing significantly differentially expressed genes of homogeneous samples as a prior. The above methods are subject to several limitations if they are used in DE analysis. First, it is hard to account for the variability of the purified expression profiles in the downstream DE analysis. Second, requiring extra information in the above methods greatly limits their applicability, since the extra information is expensive to obtain in practice. Third, additional bias could be introduced if the extra information is not accurate. To our best knowledge, there is no statistical method in literature that can properly account for the contamination of tumor samples in DE analysis using RNA-seq data, and we aim to fill this gap. In this article, we propose a new method 'contamDE', which is based on a novel statistical model for associating gene expression profiles and cell types. Based on this model, a rigorous and efficient statistical method is developed for DE analysis using RNA-seq data from contaminated tumor samples and normal samples. In contamDE, the normalized proportions of tumor cells in contaminated tumor samples are estimated, and DE analysis can be consequently carried out. The new method contamDE has several unique features. First, contamDE does not require any extra information that might be expensive to obtain in practice; second, the developed algorithm is computationally efficient; third, contamDE provides a unified procedure for DE analysis, which avoids the necessity of accounting for the variability of purified expression profiles required in the existing methods. The rest of this article is organized as follows. The technical details of the new method contamDE are described in Section 2. Some simulation studies and five real data applications are provided in Section 3 and Section 4, respectively, to demonstrate the advantage of contamDE over the existing methods. Some concluding remarks and future research topics are presented in Section 5.
DiscussionIn this article, we present a rigorous and efficient DE detection method contamDE using RNA-seq data from contaminated tumor samples, where the tumor samples could be either matched or unmatched with normal samples. Unlike most existing methods, contamDE does not require extra information. The normalized proportions reflect relative contamination intensities of the contaminated tumor samples, and the true proportions can be estimated if some pathology information or DNA sample is available. The proposed normalized proportion estimator was evaluated through both simulation studies and experimental/numerical mixture data. Through both simulation studies and real data applications, UNDO (an existing deconvolution algorithm originally designed for arraybased data without using additional information) performed well only when the samples were pure (and D) or the two samples used for deconvolution were perfectly matched (UNDO 2 in). In more practical situations, UNDO either greatly overestimated the proportions (UNDO 1 in Figs 1 and 4A) or had a much larger variance than contamDE (). In the presence of contamination, contamDE were shown through simulations to greatly outperformed the benchmarks edgeR and DESeq2 that ignored the contamination in terms of both powers and false discovery rates; in the absence of contamination, contamDE performed comparably with edgeR and DESeq2. In the application to a prostate cancer study and a lung cancer study, contamDE returned more biologically meaningful DE genes that were closely related to cancers, compared with edgeR and DESeq2. An R package implementing contamDE can be downloaded from http://homepage.fudan.edu.cn/zhangh/softwares/, which can be used to estimate the normalized contamination proportions of contaminated tumor samples, to conduct pseudo-likelihood ratio tests for detecting DE genes between tumor samples and normal samples, and to estimate fold changes. Using a desktop computer with a 3.20 GHz CPU, it took contamDE no more than 10 minutes to analyze all considered real datasets, revealing that the computational burden of contamDE was quite acceptable.