Here, we present ContEst, a tool for estimating the level of cross-individual contamination in next-generation sequencing data. We demonstrate the accuracy of ContEst across a range of contamination levels, sources and read depths using sequencing data mixed in silico at known concentrations. We applied our tool to published cancer sequencing datasets and report their estimated contamination levels. Availability and Implementation: ContEst is a GATK module, and distributed under a BSD style license at
INTRODUCTIONNext-generation sequencing methods are generating vast amounts of short sequence reads for the purpose of studying DNA sequence variations and identifying those that affect human disease. Many novel methods allow for the interrogation of the structure of the genome with unprecedented sensitivity due to the digital nature of the data (). Rare events present in only a fraction of the sequenced material, as is the case in somatic mutation discovery in cancer genome studies (), can be accurately detected by sequencing to greater read depth. Moreover, genome partitioning techniques () allow for even greater sensitivity at a lower cost by targeting only regions of interest. However, these methods can be heavily compromised by contamination. Three major classes of DNA contamination exist: cross-individual, within-individual and cross-species. Crossindividual is the most critical to control, as even small levels of contamination can cause many false positives, particularly in contrastive tumor versus normal cancer studies (). Withinindividual contamination, such as normal DNA contamination of tumor DNA in cancer studies, typically leads to decreased sensitivity. Cross-species contamination is easily detected by aligning to unique * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First authors. regions of potentially contaminating species. In order to address the most critical need, we developed ContEst within the GATK () to accurately estimate the cross-individual contamination level in next-generation sequencing data.