Motivation: The prediction of a proteins contact map has become in recent years, a crucial stepping stone for the prediction of the complete 3D structure of a protein. In this article, we describe a methodology for this problem that was shown to be successful in CASP8 and CASP9. The methodology is based on (i) the fusion of the prediction of a variety of structural aspects of protein residues, (ii) an ensemble strategy used to facilitate the training process and (iii) a rule-based machine learning system from which we can extract human-readable explanations of the predictor and derive useful information about the contact map representation. Results: The main part of the evaluation is the comparison against the sequence-based contact prediction methods from CASP9, where our method presented the best rank in five out of the six evaluated met-rics. We also assess the impact of the size of the ensemble used in our predictor to show the trade-off between performance and training time of our method. Finally, we also study the rule sets generated by our machine learning system. From this analysis, we are able to estimate the contribution of the attributes in our representation and how these interact to derive contact predictions.
INTRODUCTIONContact Map (CM) prediction is one of the most challenging problems within the field of protein structure prediction (PSP). This is due to the sparseness of the contacts (i.e. the positive examples) and the large training sets (millions of instances, GBs of disk space) that are generated by using just a few thousands of proteins. CM can provide crucial information for improving PSP methods in a variety of ways: providing restraints candidate conformations (), reconstructing approximate 3D structures from the CM () or selecting good models (). Most CM prediction methods use a sequence-based approach using machine learning methods. Through the years many techniques have been applied to CM prediction, such as neural networks (), support vector machines (), genetic programming () or random forests (). Moreover, many sources of information can be used for CM prediction. Beside evolutionary information, used by all methods, some use predicted secondary structure (SS), predicted solvent accessibility (SA), correlated mutations, contact propensity, statistics over the connecting segment between the pair of target residues or global protein information. The diversity of information sources, as well as the fact that CM datasets can easily reach millions of residue pairs requires the use of methods that can cope with both large instance sets and high dimensionality spaces. This article introduces the prediction methodology with which we have participated in the last two editions of the Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction (CASP) experiment under the name 'Infobiotics'. The main characteristics of this predictor are (i) an ensemble architecture designed to alleviate the sparseness and large training set sizes of the CM problem, (ii) the fusion of several predicted 1D structural features. Beside the usual SS and SA, we also use the less frequently used Coordination Number (CN) () and our own 1D metric called Recursive Convex Hull (RCH) (), which models the degree of burial of an amino-acid (AA) within a protein by modelling a protein's structure as a series of nested convex hulls and assigning each residue to a certain hull and (iii) a robust genetic algorithms-based rule learning system called BioHEL () (http://icos.cs.nott.ac.uk/software/biohel.html) that has been designed to cope with both large numbers of instances and large dimensionality spaces and has been successfully applied across a broad range of bioinformatics problems (). We assess the prediction capacity of our method first on a set of 3262 non-redundant protein chains and afterwards on the CASP8 and CASP9 free modelling targets. Finally, we compare the performance of our method against the top sequence-based methods in CASP9, showing that our method is very competitive, being the top ranked sequence-based method in most metrics. We also assessed the influence of the size of the ensemble architecture on its performance. Finally, the added benefit of using a rule-based machine learning system such as BioHEL is that we can study the human-readable solutions, it produces to understand 'how' the system predicts, identifying which attributes are the most useful and how they interact. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.