Motivation: The boost of next-generation sequencing technologies provides us with an unprecedented opportunity for elucidating genetic mysteries, yet the short-read length hinders us from better assembling the genome from scratch. New protocols now exist that can generate overlapping pair-end reads. By joining the 3 0 ends of each read pair, one is able to construct longer reads for assembling. However, effectively joining two overlapped pair-end reads remains a challenging task. Result: In this article, we present an efficient tool called Connecting Overlapped Pair-End (COPE) reads, to connect overlapping pair-end reads using k-mer frequencies. We evaluated our tool on 30Â simulated pair-end reads from Arabidopsis thaliana with 1% base error. COPE connected over 99% of reads with 98.8% accuracy, which is, respectively, 10 and 2% higher than the recently published tool FLASH. When COPE is applied to real reads for genome assembly, the resulting contigs are found to have fewer errors and give a 14-fold improvement in the N50 measurement when compared with the contigs produced using unconnected reads.
INTRODUCTIONWith the rapid development of high-throughput short-read sequencing technologies, a laboratory can now assemble a genome within a few weeks using only a few thousand US dollars (). Despite the fact that existing genome assembly algorithms () already designed to fully utilize the advantages of short reads, the short length of reads still deter us from a more comprehensive genome. Using longer reads will significantly improve the quality of not only genome assembly () but also transcriptome () and meta-genome assembly (). To overcome this problem, new protocols for library preparation now exist that can generate pair-end reads with an insert distance shorter than the total length of both reads, i.e. with the 3 0 ends of both reads overlapped. This enables us to extend the read length by authentically overlapping the ends of both reads to generate a longer overlapped read. These longer reads were shown to dramatically increase the quality of the assembled genome (). However, the insert distance cannot be controlled to be the same for all read pairs, instead it follows a distribution. Together with the sequencing errors, it becomes difficult to determine the correct position that the two reads overlap and what bases are in the overlapping region in case the two reads do not agree. The correctness of the connected reads is extremely important as existing assembly algorithms are sensitive to errors. Many assemblers are based on the approach of de Bruijn graph in which a read is sheared into k-bp long substrings (called k-mers) (). One single base error will introduce k spurious k-mer. The situation could be worse if a larger k is used. For Illumina sequencing technology specifically, the sequencing errors tend to intensify toward the 3 0 end of the reads, which makes the connection task more challenging. To deal with sequencing errors, a straightforward approach is to perform error correction before joining the reads. Many existing error correction algorithms () may require to trim the 3 0 end of a read if the correction fails. This will significantly reduce the number of reads that can be successfully connected. One of the most recently published read connection tools, FLASH (), follows the idea of performing error correction before joining the reads, and it is found that quite a few read pairs cannot be connected as they are trimmed. Other existing tools such as PANDAseq () and SHERA () also fail to provide a method to overcome the problem either. In this article, we present Connecting Overlapped Pair-End (COPE) reads, a novel approach to connect pair-end reads by utilizing k-mer frequency information directly to authenticate possible overlaps of reads. We remark that k-mer frequency information was also used in error correction in reads. *To whom correspondence should be addressed. yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. We evaluated the correctness of our tool on 30-fold simulated 100 bp paired-end reads with 1% error and found it surmounted FLASH on both accuracy and the number of reads connected. We also applied COPE to real reads for genome assembly and showed that the N50 of the resulting contigs is 14 times longer than the contigs produced using unconnected reads and even with fewer errors.