Cordova is an out-of-the-box solution for building and maintaining an online database of genetic variations integrated with pathogenicity prediction results from popular algorithms. Our primary motivation for developing this system is to aid researchers and clin-ician–scientists in determining the clinical significance of genetic variations. To achieve this goal, Cordova provides an interface to review and manually or computationally curate genetic variation data as well as share it for clinical diagnostics and the advancement of research. Availability and implementation: Cordova is open source under the MIT license and is freely available for download at http://ntfd.mit.edu/.
INTRODUCTIONCurated genetic variation data play a crucial role for researchers, genetic counselors, clinicians and patients alike. We have created Cordova (curated online reference database of variation annotations), an out-of-the-box solution for building and maintaining a curated online database of genetic variations integrated with pathogenicity prediction results from popular algorithms. Cordova provides a collection of tools for research and clinical genetic testing designed to (i) annotate variations from popular pathogenicity prediction tools; (ii) collect published allele frequencies; (iii) provide an interface for reviewing and curating variation, pathogenicity and allele frequency data; and (iv) share these annotations to inform fellow clinicians and researchers with up-to-date data. We originally designed this software for dissemination of information on variations in genes causally related to non-syndromic hearing loss as part of the OtoSCOPEV R diagnostic platform (). We then generalized the software to be applicable for management, curation and dissemination of any set of variations. The Leiden Open Variation Database (LOVD) () package is currently the only other software aimed at providing an out-of-the-box variation database management system. Therefore, we tested the latest version of the LOVD software (LOVD version 3, build 9) at the time of this writing and compared it with Cordova. A general comparison is provided in. LOVD is a popular and mature tool that stores variation data. However, we set out to develop a system that aids researchers and clinicians in the context of genetic testing and provides pathogenicity prediction results to aid in evaluation and determination of clinical significance of potentially diseasecausing variants. Cordova is written in PHP, built on the popular CodeIgniter 2 Web application framework and uses a MySQL database. Because Cordova is built with a popular Web framework, it is highly configurable and well-documented for development. LOVD is not based on a Web application framework. Our system provides a front-end Web interface for authenticated users to manage the database and a separate interface for browsing publicly available data. Standard Web security features are native to the CodeIgniter framework. In addition, Cordova includes a configurable Web API for quickly retrieving data in VCF, CSV, XML, JSON and tab-delimited formats. By comparison, the LOVD API output is not configurable and can only be viewed in Atom format. Current examples of Cordova installations include the Deafness Variation Database (DVDhttp://deafnessvariationdatabase.org) and the Vision Variation Database (VVDhttp://vvd.eng.uiowa.edu). The University of Iowa also hosts an internal Renal Disease Variation Database (RDVD) and a Dense Deposit Disease Database (DDDD) with plans for a public release in the future.