Datamonkey is a popular web-based suite of phylog-enetic analysis tools for use in evolutionary biology. Since the original release in 2005, we have expanded the analysis options to include recently developed algorithmic methods for recombination detection, evolutionary fingerprinting of genes, codon model selection, co-evolution between sites, identification of sites, which rapidly escape host-immune pressure and HIV-1 subtype assignment. The traditional selection tools have also been augmented to include recent developments in the field. Here, we summarize the analyses options currently available on Datamonkey, and provide guidelines for their use in evolutionary biology.
INTRODUCTIONRecent developments of high-throughput sequencing technologies have accelerated the rate at which genomic data are accumulating by orders of magnitude. Concurrent commoditization of cheap parallel computer systems (clusters, GPUs and multi-core systems) and rapid development of algorithmic, statistical and bioinformatics techniques have made it possible to analyze these genomic data with models of increased biological realism. To make such models developed by ourselves and other groups immediately useful to the life sciences community, we deployed a public web service to screen alignments of homologous sequences for signatures of natural selection using three different phylogenetic methods (Kosakovsky Pond and Frost, 2005a; Kosakovsky) on a 40-processor cluster in 2005. The server proved to be popular, processing over 100 000 submitted jobs, many of which would require days or weeks of desktop CPU time. Since the original release, we have completely redesigned the user interface, upgraded our cluster to one with 356 CPU cores, implemented 12 new analytical modules and a plethora of result processing and visualization features. Improvements to core algorithms in the HyPhy package (), have resulted in significant (up to 10) speedups and allowed us to increase the sizes of alignments that can be submitted. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
DISCUSSIONThe ever-accelerating pace of methodological research and development places a premium on resources that avail computational and evolutionary biologists and bioinformaticians of fast, maintained and documented modern tools with a consistent and easy-to-use interface. As evidenced by the popularity of the original Datamonkey server, our approach of providing a web-based front end for running computationally intensive statistical sequence analysis tools on a large computer cluster continues to be wellreceived by the community and we fully intend to develop and