Protein–nucleic acid interactions are among the most important intermolecular interactions in the regulation of cellular events. Identifying residues involved in these interactions from protein structure alone is an important challenge. Here we introduce the webserver interface to DNA Binding Site Identifier (DBSI), a powerful structure-based SVM model for the prediction and visualization of DNA binding sites on protein structures. DBSI has been shown to be a top-performing model to predict DNA binding sites on the surface of a protein or peptide and shows promise in predicting RNA binding sites. Availability and Implementation: Server is available at http://dbsi.mitchell
IntroductionProteinnucleic acid interactions are crucial to cellular events in the regulation of transcription, DNA replication and repair; and RNA splicing and post-transcriptional regulation. Identifying residues involved in nucleic acid binding is crucial to understand function. Cocrystal structures are often unavailable, and DNA/RNA binding sites may not be easily discernable from the protein sequence or unbound structure. Here we present the web interface to DBSI (http://dbsi.mitchelllab.org), a machine learning approach to classify surface residues as binders or non-binders of DNA. DBSI employs sequence-and structure-based features encompassing a range of physical, chemical, geometric and evolutionary properties of the protein surface (). DBSI also implements microenvironment features that allow for small-scale structural perturbation and the role of non-local cooperative effects. The webserver greatly simplifies the use of DBSI, eliminating the need for downloading, installing and configuring third-party software and requiring the upload of only one file. The DBSI server facilitates online visualization of results, and it ensures privacy of user jobs.with the DBSI classification and score for each surface residue is provided as well. Sample PBEQ archives and a user manual with directions for generating the tgz files, using the server and interpreting results are provided on the DBSI Server website. The DBSI server typically takes around 12 minutes for a 200 residue-sized protein, and is faster on machines with a solid state drive (Supplementary).