Motivation: Residue–residue contact prediction is important for protein structure prediction and other applications. However, the accuracy of current contact predictors often barely exceeds 20% on long-range contacts, falling short of the level required for ab initio structure prediction. Results: Here, we develop a novel machine learning approach for contact map prediction using three steps of increasing resolution. First, we use 2D recursive neural networks to predict coarse contacts and orientations between secondary structure elements. Second, we use an energy-based method to align secondary structure elements and predict contact probabilities between residues in contacting alpha-helices or strands. Third, we use a deep neural network architecture to organize and progressively refine the prediction of contacts, integrating information over both space and time. We train the architecture on a large set of non-redundant proteins and test it on a large set of non-homologous domains, as well as on the set of protein domains used for contact prediction in the two most recent CASP8 and CASP9 experiments. For long-range contacts, the accuracy of the new CMAPpro predictor is close to 30%, a significant increase over existing approaches. Availability: CMAPpro is available as part of the SCRATCH suite at
INTRODUCTIONProtein residueresidue contact prediction is the problem of predicting whether any two residues in a protein sequence are spatially close to each other in the folded 3D structure. Contacts occurring between sequentially distant residues, i.e. long-range contacts, impose strong constraints on the 3D structure of a protein and are particularly important for structural analyses, understanding the folding process and predicting the 3D structure. Even a small set of correctly predicted long-range contacts can be useful for improving ab initio structure prediction for proteins without known templates (). The performance of many contact predictors has been assessed every 2 years during the Critical Assessment of protein Structure Prediction (CASP) experiments since CASP2 in 1996. Unfortunately, the $20% accuracy for long-range contacts, routinely reported at CASP for the best predictors (), suggests that contact prediction is not yet accurate enough to be systematically useful for ab initio protein structure prediction or engineering. In broad terms, there are four main approaches for residue residue contact prediction. Machine learning approaches use methods such as neural networks (), recursive neural networks (), support vector machines () and hidden Markov models () to learn how to predict contact probabilities from a training set of experimentally determined protein structures. Inputs to these approaches typically include predicted secondary structure, predicted solvent accessibility as well as evolutionary information in the form of profiles. Template-based approaches use homology or threading methods to identify structurally similar templates from which residueresidue contacts are then inferred (). Correlated mutations approaches apply statistical measures, such as Pearson correlation () and mutual information (), to multiple alignments in order to identify pairs of residues that co-evolve and thus are likely to be in contact. Recently, a new elegant mutual information-based measure for correlated mutations, PSICOV, has been proposed inand used for fold recognition (). Although this method has been reported to yield significant accuracy improvements, its performance is very dependent on the availability and quality of multiple alignments. Finally, 3D model-based approaches rely on predicted 3D structures for deriving distance constraints through a consensus strategy. Although 3D model-based approaches have been reported to be the most accurate at CASP (), in practice, their applicability remain somewhat limited since the main goal of contact prediction is to improve ab initio structure prediction and not the converse. Here, we introduce several new ideas for contact prediction using primarily a multi-stage machine learning approach, with increasingly refined levels of resolution. First, we predict coarse contact maps corresponding to contacts between secondary structure elements. By itself, the idea of coarse contact maps is not new, and several useful methods have been developed (). Yet, none of these approaches has been able to convincingly demonstrate that coarse prediction is useful for residue residue contact prediction. Here, we both refine the previous coarse prediction methods, in part, by extending the notion of *To whom correspondence should be addressed. coarse contact beyond a simple binary value to include information about orientation (parallel versus anti-parallel) between contacting segments and demonstrate that coarse-grained prediction can be used to improve fine-grained prediction of contact maps. Second, we use a novel energy-based neural network approach to refine the prediction of the alignment and orientation of contacting secondary structure elements and predict residueresidue contact probabilities for residues in contacting pairs of alphahelices or beta-strands. Finally, we introduce a deep neural network architecture in the form of a deep stack of neural networks, with the same topology but different parameters, to predict all the residueresidue contact probabilities by integrating information both spatially and temporally. Spatial integration refers to the idea that contacts are spatially correlated; for instance, long-range contacts often include other long-range contacts in their neighborhood. Temporal integration refers to the idea that protein folding is not an instantaneous physical process. Although the stack is not necessarily meant to mimic the actual physical process, the stack is used to organize the prediction in such a way that each level in the stack is meant to refine the prediction produced by the previous level. Inputs at a given level of the stack include both information coming from the previous level in the stack as well as static information produced by the previous coarse prediction stages, as well as predicted secondary structure and solvent accessibility, and evolutionary profiles. Thus, these dynamic and static inputs are used to iteratively refine the contact prediction. We next describe these methods in detail together with the data used for rigorous training and assessment results.
CONCLUSIONHere, we have introduced a new approach for the prediction of protein contact maps. In particular, partly inspired by the observation that nature uses an iterative refinement approach to 'compute' the structure of proteins, we have developed modular deep architectures that can integrate information over multiple temporal and spatial scales. In rigorous tests, these architectures have been shown to predict contact maps with an accuracy close to 30%, a significant improvement. Although further improvements are necessary, it should be obvious that there are many generalizations and variations on the architectures and training methods we have described that remain to be explored, giving us hope that further progress lies ahead.