Motivation: The study of RNA virus populations is a challenging task. Each population of RNA virus is composed of a collection of different, yet related genomes often referred to as mutant spectra or quasispecies. Virologists using deep sequencing technologies face major obstacles when studying virus population dynamics, both experimentally and in natural settings due to the relatively high error rates of these technologies and the lack of high performance pipelines. In order to overcome these hurdles we developed a computational pipeline, termed ViVan (Viral Variance Analysis). ViVan is a complete pipeline facilitating the identification, characterization and comparison of sequence variance in deep sequenced virus populations. Results: Applying ViVan on deep sequenced data obtained from samples that were previously characterized by more classical approaches, we uncovered novel and potentially crucial aspects of virus populations. With our experimental work, we illustrate how ViVan can be used for studies ranging from the more practical, detection of resistant mutations and effects of antiviral treatments, to the more theoretical temporal characterization of the population in evolutionary studies. Availability and implementation: Freely available on the web at
IntroductionThe study of RNA virus populations is a challenging task. Each population of RNA virus is composed of a collection of different, yet related genomes often referred to as mutant spectra or quasispecies (). This genotypic diversity is the result of the high mutation rate of RNA viruses, which surpasses that of DNA organisms by orders of magnitude (). This intrinsic high error-rate is largely attributed to the viral RNA dependent RNA polymerases that replicate their genomes (). Recent studies demonstrate that this high-error rate is essential for viral adaptation and survival () and can have significant implications in vaccine and antiviral efficacy (). Changes in the rate at which these errors occur may affect virus infectivity, fitness and pathogenesis (). Moreover, it was shown that the diversity within an RNA virus population enhances tissue tropism and dissemination, possibly by improving adaptability and mutual support (). These studies suggest that characterizing RNA virus populations as a whole, rather than focusing on dominant viral haplotypes (e.g. sequences shared by a significant amount of members in the population) or consensus sequence is far more informative to study pathogenesis. Currently, RNA viruses are genetically characterized through a variety of techniques. The most basic and common method involves classic Sanger sequencing of cDNA produced by RT-PCR of total viral RNA (i.e. consensus sequencing). Although informative, the consensus sequence is the genetic average of all variants within the virus population and the limitations of this method include its low resolution and ability to detect only highly abundant variants. To increase sensitivity and obtain a small, representative sample of viral variants in a given population by Sanger sequencing, individual viruses can be isolated and amplified (biological clones) () or RT-PCR amplicons of the whole population can be subcloned into individual plasmids (molecular clones) (). An additional method is Single Genome Amplification in which viral RNA is extracted from a sample and copied into cDNA, which in turn is subjected to limiting dilution and PCR amplification. Thus the obtained PCR products are the result of the amplification of one single molecule of cDNA. These PCR products are then sequenced directly without cloning. Nevertheless, these three methods are time intensive and tedious. Furthermore, the limited coverage that can be sampled (generally 100 clones and 100 K nucleotides per population) is far from the range of variants (105109) typically found in virus samples. Newer high-throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies have expedited research in microbiology in general, including virology, due to their high throughput sequence data production (). The ultra-deep coverage afforded by HTS technologies provides obvious improvements to the characterization of RNA viruses. However, most HTS tools in virology are designed for virus discovery, de novo assembly of unknown viral genomes, and the characterization of viral biodiversity found in different organs, organisms or environments (virome) (). More recently, researchers have begun characterizing the intra-host and intra-strain virus diversity and population dynamics for a variety of viruses of clinical or agricultural relevance. For example, some studies addressed the temporal evolution of variants, the pre-existing presence of drug resistant mutants and the dynamics and emergence of escape mutations in the presence of various types of pressure (). However, virologists using HTS technologies for the purpose of rare variant detection, face major obstacles when studying virus population dynamics, both experimentally and in natural settings due to the relatively high error rates of these technologies (). In order to overcome these hurdles several methods have been proposed (). These methods can be split into two main categories. The first increases variant detection fidelity by modulating the library preparation step. Schmitt et al. tag and compare both strands of a DNA segment, efficiently pinpointing strand-discordant variants as errors.use unique identifiers for each sequenced template, facilitating the identification of PCR and sequencing introduced errors and biases. Acevedo et al. used circularized genomic RNA fragments to generate tandem repeats which originate from a single individual within the viral population. Variants that appear in every copy of a set of repeats are then considered true variants. The second category includes methods that utilize post-sequencing parameters in order to identify PCR and sequencing introduced errors. Ghedin et al. utilize the calculated overall baseline error rates while Flaherty et al. and Wilm et al. calculate these rates per sequenced base. Watson et al. apply a two step quality based filtration prior to variant calling and Macalalad et al. used covariation (i.e. phasing) between variants and an expectation maximization-based quality recalibration. Methods which aim to identify the genomes of individual haplotypes in the population () utilize clustering of overlapping reads and haplotype reconstruction in order to correct for sequencing errors. The performance of these methods depends upon the length of sequence reads with long reads enabling the reconstruction of entire viral genome sequences. Some methods () also include an additional test for strand bias () in order to further reduce false positive calls. Although these second category methods demonstrate very high specificity (positions without variance are correctly identified as such), sensitivity (pinpointing true variant positions) remains the major limiting factor (). All of the aforementioned tools focus on accurate variant detection and do not facilitate any downstream analysis and interpretation of the detected variants. Moreover, although the end-users for the aforementioned tools and methods are, for the most part, virologists studying highly diverse viral populations, these tools require the use of unix command line and other computational proficiencies which are not common in the field. In order to better integrate and utilize HTS technology in viral population studies, we developed a computational pipeline and web server, termed ViVan (Viral Variance Analysis). ViVan is a complete pipeline to facilitate the identification, characterization and comparison of sequence variance in deep sequenced virus populations (). ViVan performs per-sample allele rate analysis, translates the detected changes into amino acid changes, compares and outputs several informative metrics regarding each analyzed sample. Applying ViVan on deep sequenced data obtained from samples that were previously characterized by more classical approaches, we achieved superior sensitivity and uncovered novel and potentially crucial aspects of virus populations, which could not have been identified otherwise and in much shorter time scales. ViVan efficiently identified low-frequency minority variants across the entire viral genome and changes in population diversity that correlate with in vitro and in vivo data of previously described mutator and antimutator strains of RNA viruses. Additionally, it accurately determined dosage-dependent and drug-specific alterations in mutation frequency associated with mutagenic, antiviral compounds. More generally, we monitored temporal changes occurring within RNA virus populations during experimental evolution and pinpointed unique variable positions in viral genomes found in specific host environments that are indicative of positive selection and adaptation. Overall, we show that ViVan allows rapid characterization of the genetic composition and population dynamics of rapidly evolving viral mutant spectra.
DiscussionIt is becoming increasingly clear that studying only the consensus sequence of an RNA virus insufficiently summarizes the viral population. Often, increases in fitness and changes in adaptability are observed without changes in the consensus sequence (). This hints that minority variants within the viral population are responsible for this effect. Virus diversity represents a pool of randomly generated minority variants, available for adaptation and gradually amplified in frequency through selection. Only with the advent of HTS has studying such minorities become feasible but we are missing standard validated tools to mine, analyze and compare this information from multiple samples. Currently available tools require a high degree of computational savoir-faire, and for more detailed RNA virus population analysis, the user must write additional scripts. Our computational pipeline has several advantages over other methods. We use a robust algorithm, based on each variant allele's initial rate and read qualities, to differentiate between sequencingintroduced errors and actual population variants, facilitating accurate variant assessment even at extremely low rates. Another advantage of the pipeline is the set of different outputs we provide for analysis (. Temporal accumulation of variants found in viral populations. The total number of minority variants found in each CVB3 strain (wild type WT, high fidelity A372V and low fidelity S299T) was calculated for each sequenced passage (1, 60 and 120 replication cycles). Variation rates (the average proportion of variant alleles across covered bases in the genome sequence) 6 SEM are shown, from three biological replicates, (P  0.0001)Implementing our method on one of the CVB wild-type samples, and recording the changes throughout the passages (1, 60 and 120), the positions demonstrating the highest increase in variant allele rate was detected. Out of the top 10 most changing positions, only four were non-structural, one synonymous in the viral protease (3C) one nonsynonymous in 2B and two nonsynonymous in the viral polymerase (3D). The polymerase variants were then recognized as variants already known to modulate viral replication fidelity.