Motivation: The understanding of the genetic determinants of complex disease is undergoing a paradigm shift. Genetic heterogeneity of rare mutations with deleterious effects is more commonly being viewed as a major component of disease. Autism is an excellent example where research is active in identifying matches between the phenotypic and genomic heterogeneities. A considerable portion of autism appears to be correlated with copy number variation, which is not directly probed by single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array or sequencing technologies. Identifying the genetic heterogeneity of small deletions remains a major unresolved computational problem partly due to the inability of algorithms to detect them. Results: In this article, we present an algorithmic framework, which we term DELISHUS, that implements three exact algorithms for inferring regions of hemizygosity containing genomic deletions of all sizes and frequencies in SNP genotype data. We implement an efficient backtracking algorithm—that processes a 1 billion entry genome-wide association study SNP matrix in a few minutes—to compute all inherited deletions in a dataset. We further extend our model to give an efficient algorithm for detecting de novo deletions. Finally, given a set of called deletions, we also give a polynomial time algorithm for computing the critical regions of recurrent deletions. DELISHUS achieves significantly lower false-positive rates and higher power than previously published algorithms partly because it considers all individuals in the sample simultaneously. DELISHUS may be applied to SNP array or sequencing data to identify the deletion spectrum for family-based association studies.
INTRODUCTION
DISCUSSIONUsing Formulation 1, DELISHUS computes all inherited or de novo deletions with maximal clique size above a user-defined threshold and then ranks them according to a number of different properties. Work in progress focuses on further validation studies and the prioritization of small recurrent deletions with the most support for experimental wet-lab validation in Dr Morrow's Laboratory. However, researchers may want to find deletions that are large and rare instead of small and recurrent. DELISHUS is adaptable to this type of inference by essentially mimicking the behavior of thealgorithm by restricting edges to within trio only. Furthermore, statistical rankings are also supported by this framework. After potential deletions are called, statistical and discrete quantities may be used to score and rank the deletions based on, for example, parent-of-origin effects which have been shown to be associated to autism (); other examples of quantities to use for scoring include linkage disequilibrium, allele frequencies, size of deletion and number of evidence sites. While we have found Formulation 1 to be the most useful, it only considers the case for which an error might convert a normal inheritance pattern to a 1. However, all potential conversions between deletion categories are possible (). Formulation 3 represents an alternative to Formulation 1, which models deletions and genotyping errors without the usage of a threshold.Regardless of the formulation, there may still be other types of errors in SNP data such as technical artifacts producing completely erroneous SNPs. These are usually filtered in a preprocessing QC step, but it is often advantageous to allow DELISHUS to process the pre-QC data. For example, a small 1 SNP deletion that is associated to the phenotype of interest could mimic the behavior of a technical artifact and should not be removed prior to running DELISHUS. As sequencing becomes cheaper and the sequencing of thousands of individuals becomes feasible, DELISHUS may prove to be a reliable source for calling small deletions genome-wide at a higher resolution than array data. For example, the 1000 Genomes Project is currently sequencing the genomes of HapMap individuals. Some of the HapMap individuals sequenced belong to parentchild trios and pairs. When this full sequence data becomes available, DELISHUS can be used on the SNP call data to validate previous calls in the HapMap data.