A new pK a prediction web server is released, which implements DelPhi Gaussian dielec-tric function to calculate electrostatic potentials generated by charges of biomolecules. Topology parameters are extended to include atomic information of nucleotides of RNA and DNA, which extends the capability of pK a calculations beyond proteins. The web server allows the end-user to protonate the biomolecule at particular pH based on calculated pK a values and provides the downloadable file in PQR format. Several tests are performed to benchmark the accuracy and speed of the protocol. Implementation: The web server follows a client-server architecture built on PHP and HTML and utilizes DelPhiPKa program. The computation is performed on the Palmetto supercomputer cluster and results/download links are given back to the end-user via http protocol. The web server takes advantage of MPI parallel implementation in DelPhiPKa and can run a single job on up to 24 CPUs. Availability and implementation: The DelPhiPKa web server is available at http://compbio.clemson. edu/pka_webserver.
IntroductionBiological processes are affected by the pH of the cellular environment. For example, enzyme catalysis, protein folding and binding, protein-protein interactions are all pH-dependent (). Different protonation states of titratable residues within molecules due to pH changes can result in significantly different complex conformations and binding free energies. Fast and accurate predictions for pK a values of ionizable groups will facilitate investigations aiming at designing better drugs and more robust enzymes, which are active and stable over a wide range of pH. Although there are many programs for predicting pK a values of protein ionizable residues such as MCCE (), UHBD (), PROPKA (), H (), which are based on various methods, to the best of our knowledge, there is no pK a prediction web sever that provides pK a calculations for RNAs and DNAs () bases as well. Here, we developed a new pK a web server that implements the following features (i) calculates pK a values for the protein, RNA and single stranded DNA, (ii) protonates the structure at userspecified pH according to calculated pK a , (iii) provides the option of various force field parameters (AMBER, CHARMM, PARSE, GROMOS), (iv) calculates electrostatic free energy components with the Gaussian dielectric function without defining molecular surface and (v) provides different hydrogen conformations. The web server is implemented in DelPhiPKa program and built on the supercomputer cluster to take advantage of MPI parallelization, which improves the computation speed up to 20 times.