Motivation: Homology detection is a long-standing challenge in computational biology. To tackle this problem, typically all-versus-all BLAST results are coupled with data partitioning approaches resulting in clusters of putative homologous proteins. One of the main problems , however, has been widely neglected: all clustering tools need a density parameter that adjusts the number and size of the clusters. This parameter is crucial but hard to estimate without gold standard data at hand. Developing a gold standard, however, is a difficult and time consuming task. Having a reliable method for detecting clusters of homologous proteins between a huge set of species would open opportunities for better understanding the genetic repertoire of bacteria with different lifestyles. Results: Our main contribution is a method for identifying a suitable and robust density parameter for protein homology detection without a given gold standard. Therefore, we study the core genome of 89 actinobacteria. This allows us to incorporate background knowledge, i.e. the assumption that a set of evolutionarily closely related species should share a comparably high number of evolutionarily conserved proteins (emerging from phylum-specific housekeeping genes). We apply our strategy to find genes/proteins that are specific for certain actinobacterial lifestyles, i.e. different types of pathogenicity. The whole study was performed with transitivity clustering, as it only requires a single intuitive density parameter and has been shown to be well applicable for the task of protein sequence clustering. Note, however, that the presented strategy generally does not depend on our clustering method but can easily be adapted to other clustering approaches. Availability: All results are publicly available at http://transclust.mmci.uni-saarland.de/actino_core/
INTRODUCTIONFinding clusters of homologous proteins, i.e. clusters containing only paralogous and orthologous proteins, is a long-standing bioinformatics challenge in the post-genome era. Searching the exact phrase 'homology detection' with PubMed leads to 174 hits. The group of Peer Bork published one of the first review articles on 'Predicting functions from protein sequences' as early as 1998 (). The availability of next-generation sequencing technology provided us with almost 2000 whole-genome sequences, scattered over all domains of life (). The annotation of the emerging sequences is difficult, error prone and impossible to perform in the wet laboratory for each gene/protein of each organism individually without appropriate bioinformatics software (). To date, we have more than 5 million bacterial sequenced genes available for download from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database (). The usual starting point is a pairwise similarity matrix given by local alignment tools, such as Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) (), that assigns each pair of proteins a similarity value. Afterwards, we pipe this data into clustering tools, i.e. computational methods for partitioning data objects into groups such that the objects share common traits, which have been measured with the similarity function (). Over the past years, many tools have been developed for this purpose.outline further biological application areas. For protein homology detection, the following tools have proven useful, and their accuracy is well studied: k-means, affinity propagation, Markov clustering and FORCE, as well as transitivity clustering (TC) (). Although most research concentrated on developing new more sophisticated data partitioning methods, one of the major problems has been widely neglected: all clustering tools need a (set of) density parameter(s) that adjust the number and the size of the clusters. A clustering tool cannot 'know' a priori if we seek to find protein families (restrictive parameters) or protein superfamilies (weak parameters), for instance. Although these parameters are crucial they are hard to estimate without gold standard data at *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com hand. Furthermore, it is difficult and time consuming to define a good gold standard, which consequently limits us to a small number of proteins from a limited number of organisms. Clusters of homologous proteins across a number of organisms allow for studying lifestyle-specific genetic repertoires, i.e. the genes that have homologous counterparts in all organisms or in a specific set of organisms. Such studies can lead, for instance, to the discovery of mutual proteins shared only among pathogenic strains of a certain phyla, thus suggesting new drug targets and wet laboratory candidates for vaccine design. The quality of such studies is highly dependent on the quality of the clustering process and consequently dependent on the choice of the clustering method and a good estimate of the density parameter(s). In this study, we present a robust method for selecting a suitable density parameter for TC for the task of protein homology detection. TC is a clustering method that has been shown to perform well when trying to identify protein families and protein superfamilies based on sequence similarity. Using all protein sequences from 89 actinobacteria, we build our method upon two assumptions: (i) clusters of size equal to the number of input organisms (here 89) are likely to contain housekeeping genes and thus should be over-represented, and (2) clusters greater than the number of input organisms are more likely to contain many false positives (non-homologous genes). Maximizing (i) while minimizing (ii) allows us to estimate a meaningful threshold for discovering clusters of homologous proteins without manually curated gold standard associations for any of the 4300 000 proteins. Given this threshold, we compute and analyze the core genome of the 89 actinobacteria. We further divide them into four different groups of pathogenicity: non-pathogens (NPs), human pathogens (HPs), animal pathogens (APs) and opportunistic pathogens (OPs) (Supplementary). We then study the class-specific genetic repertoire of the 89 actinobacteria. The phylum actinobacteria is one of the biggest clades of bacteria. Their members show a high diversity throughout different lifestyles and can cope with a variety of different habitats (). Many of these bacteria are important for biotechnological production processes, as well as human and animal medicine (). Here, we focus on selected species of the following so-called CMNR group: corynebacteria, mycobacteria, nocardia and rhodococcus. Our main motivation for this study and our main focus of attention are the Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis. It causes caseous lymphadenitis in animals (), with dramatic effects on livestock all over the world. All CMNR organisms selected for this study share common properties with impact on the design of effective vaccinations; they all share a common cell wall organization (), for instance. For vaccine design, accurate homology information about the protein space in this group is important, e.g. for reducing drug target side effects and negative effects on the other microorganisms that are part of the host's microbiome. There have been several studies about the actinobacterial evolution [refer to. Most of them concentrated on phylogenetic tree reconstruction solely based on the DNA sequence information of the 16S RNA. Despite the many advantages of this method, it cannot provide insights into the evolutionary relationship on a species level (). Gao and Gupta (2012b) used only a limited dataset of only a few genes that were expected to be conserved along the phylum for phylogenetic tree reconstruction. In several recent studies, best bidirectional hits from genome-wide all-versus-all BLAST results of all genes were used for homology detectionor. This strategy, however, neglects the impact of careful BLAST cutoff evaluation, as well as the effect of transitive dependencies in the similarity function. Gene A may be similar to gene B, which is similar to gene C, but gene C is not similar to gene A. These problem instances can be 'repaired' with clustering tools, such as TC (). However, the problem of finding a reasonable density parameter remains with TC, as well as with any other clustering method. In the following section, we briefly describe the actinobacterial dataset used. Afterwards, we give a short introduction to TC followed by our main contribution: a robust method for estimating a meaningful similarity threshold (TC's density parameter). We will describe how we study the robustness of our approach. We further support our strategy by computing a revised phylogenetic tree based on the whole genetic repertoire of the 89 actinobacteria. We will discuss our results and present core genomes specific to the four aforementioned pathogenicity classes.
CONCLUSIONTo sum up, we studied the actinobacterial genetic repertoire with respect to four pathogenicity lifestyles. We used BLAST and TC for this purpose. Here, our main novel contribution was the estimation of a robust similarity threshold for TC. Therefore, we set the density such that we balance the size of the core genome (number of clusters with exactly 89 genes/proteins; putative true positives) and the number of unreasonably larger clusters (putative false positives) based on the cluster size distribution. We studied the robustness of our method by using random sampling and achieve stable and reasonable core genomes for similarity thresholds between 35 and 48. We receive similar results for the exclusive repertoire of the corynebacteria and mycobacteria, respectively. In conclusion, our results suggest that we may use the intrinsic information contained in the cluster size distribution, at least in the phylum actinobacteria, to deduce a reasonable density parameter for robust and accurate protein. Agreement with the OMA homology detection tool. Depicted is the development of the F-measure as a function of the clustering threshold. The red box marks the pick range derived by using our model Q(t). Remarkably, the best F-measures (agreements with OMA) are achieved for clustering results with thresholds in pick range that we suggested using our method. The red dotted line indicates the threshold 48. These Venn diagrams depict the number of shared clusters in each possible intersection of the four different kinds of pathogenicity with at least three proteins (for conservative and optimistic; see text). These intersections are disjoint; for example, the intersection of the non-pathogenic core genome and the human pathogenic core genome does not contain the human-pathogenic-only clusters. The core genome contains all clusters, which contain proteins of all species. We marked the NP/HP/AP/ OP-only clusters and the core genome itself with bold font; for an intersection of two areas, we used italic font homology clustering. For future work with bacterial genomes, we suggest using BLAST E-values between 10 35 (optimistic) and 10 48 (conservative) when using bidirectional BLAST hits only for homology detection. Remarkably, the same range is also suggested by comparing the agreement of our clustering result with the results from the OMA project. Our method, however, is limited by the level of biological diversity among the set of species to be studied. As we only use the intrinsic information that is 'hidden' in the dataset, we rely on a certain level of homogeneity. Hence, we can expect a reduced accuracy for more diverse sets of genomes. Here, we applied the methods to prokaryotes only. To use eukaryotic genomes, some adaptions would be necessary. Mainly, the factor that defines the number of false positives (unrealistically large clusters) must account for the fact that eukaryotes underwent more duplication events. We would suggest the training of this parameter against a small gold standard.