Motivation: The generation of a large volume of cancer genomes has allowed us to identify disease related alterations more accurately, which is expected to enhance our understanding regarding the mechanism of cancer development. With genomic alterations detected, one challenge is to pinpoint cancer-driver genes that cause functional abnormalities. Results: Here, we propose a method for uncovering the dominant effects of cancer-driver genes (DEOD) based on a partial covariance selection approach. Inspired by a convex optimization technique , it estimates the dominant effects of candidate cancer-driver genes on the expression level changes of their target genes. It constructs a gene network as a directed-weighted graph by integrating DNA copy numbers, single nucleotide mutations and gene expressions from matched tumor samples, and estimates partial covariances between driver genes and their target genes. Then, a scoring function to measure the cancer-driver score for each gene is applied. To test the performance of DEOD, a novel scheme is designed for simulating conditional multivariate normal variables (targets and free genes) given a group of variables (driver genes). When we applied the DEOD method to both the simulated data and breast cancer data, DEOD successfully uncovered driver variables in the simulation data, and identified well-known oncogenes in breast cancer. In addition, two highly ranked genes by DEOD were related to survival time. The copy number amplifications of MYC (8q24.21) and TRPS1 (8q23.3) were closely related to the survival time with P-values ¼ 0.00246 and 0.00092, respectively. The results demonstrate that DEOD can efficiently uncover cancer-driver genes. Availability and implementation: DEOD was implemented in Matlab, and source codes and data are available at http://combio.gist.ac.kr/softwares/.
IntroductionBy building systematic knowledge about genetic alterations in cancer, we can enhance our understanding concerning the mechanisms of cancer development and so can identify actionable target genes for cancer treatment. Genomic events in cancer are a mixture of driving events that promote cancer development and passenger events that represent random somatic alterations (). Hence, it is important to distinguish the two events since effective therapies against cancer should target dominant driver genes that promote cell migration and invasion into malignant derivatives(). Although many methods based on aberrations in genome sequences, such as copy number changes or mutations, have been proposed to address this challenge, limitations still remain. For example,developed an analytic approach (GISTIC) for identifying significantly aberrant regions of genomes that are frequently found in multiple tumors. However, the identified aberrant regions were often large and contained many neighborhood genes of cancer-driver genes. By incorporating prior knowledge, several frameworks were designed to represent the potential effects of disease-causing alterations. Using eight sequencebased and three structure-based predictive features, a prediction method was developed to estimate the probability of the damaging effect of a missense mutation (). A similar approach () was developed to assess the probability that a non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphism or a single amino acid substitution affects protein functions. A scoring function measuring the effect of a particular mutation was described to cover activation of neighborhoods in a local pathway (). However, following this method, pathway information was used to define the existence of edges in the network so that interactions in only known pathways were considered in the scoring function. Since disease-causing genetic alterations can be observed from several data types, such as copy numbers, gene expressions or mutations, various statistical approaches to integrate different data types were developed. Bayesian network-based methods such as CONEXIC () and Multi-Reg () recommend the highest scoring candidate driver within the aberrant regions. For example, in CONEXIC, genes in significant copy number aberrant regions were initially identified as candidate drivers by using the JISTIC method (), a modified version of GISTIC. Then, for each candidate, a Bayesian scoring function was used to measure the influences of the candidate driver on the genes in its module, which was constructed by the Module Networks algorithm (). In this process, relationships between driver genes and their target genes were calculated based on the expression levels of the genes. Hence, the effects of copy number changes of driver genes on the expression levels of target genes were not fully incorporated. In this study, we propose a method for uncovering the dominant effects of cancer-driver genes (DEOD) on their target genes by incorporating both chromosomal changes and expression changes. We first describe a statistical graph estimation model to construct a gene network from an integration of matched copy number, gene expression and mutation data. It is formulated as a convex optimization problem, which minimizes a least square error under a sparsity constraint. To measure the dominant effect of each gene throughout the entire network, a scoring function is proposed to compare the downstream consequences of a gene's activity to influences from upstream regulators. We first tested the performance of our method using the simulated datasets, which are generated based on the principle of a conditional multivariate normal distribution. Then, we applied the proposed method to breast cancer data. From TCGA, we collected genes from three groups, which consist of genes having significant genomic alteration of copy numbers, mutations or expression changes. Then, the method was used to uncover the driver genes that make a dominant contribution to the union of the three types of alterations. Based on the estimation of directional interaction behaviors, the dominant drivers are correctly pinpointed with the highest scores of contributions, which increase our confidence in the prediction of novel drivers. The results demonstrated that our method efficiently uncovers the dominant behaviors of driver genes under the investigated conditions.
DiscussionThe main advantages of DEOD are as follows: Based on an optimal combination of copy number deletions and amplifications with mutation effects, DEOD estimates a large-scale graph by integrating different data types. Different from other methods, DEOD measures genetic alterations and directional relationships between genes across different data types (copy number aberration with mutation effects of regulators to expression change of their targets). A convex minimization method with a strong theoretical validation of optimality, projected gradient, was implemented to select incoming edges of each gene as a partial correlation effect from the other genes in the entire network. A partial covariance is then taken into account as a combination of three statistical measurements, the partial correlation from a regulator to its target, copy number changes of the regulator, and differential expressions of the target to represent edge scores in the network. For each gene, the scoring function measures all effects of the candidate-driver gene on the entire network by comparing the accumulation of contributions in downstream cascades to the total direct incoming effect from its upstream. We further investigated the effect of mutations on gene expressions. For this task, we ran the complete procedure on the breast cancer data after removing the damaging coefficients of mutations, a ij , in Equation (1). In this modified experiment, 216 genes were selected as candidate-driver genes with the threshold score of 10.8609, and the driver scores of several genes with mutations in the multiple samples were significantly decreased. For example, the driver score of USH2A decreased from 24.2752 to 1.107 because 27 samples were mutated in this gene with a high probability of damaging effects. The numbers of samples with mutations in the driver genes are shown in Supplementary Table S1. Also, 47 genes were removed from the original list of drivers and are listed in Supplementary Table S11. When we manually checked the 10 genes in the list from literature in PubMed, they were previously known to be related to breast cancer, showing that mutation information is another important source in finding driver genes. Similarly, we investigated the effect of the PPI network. The binary interactions in the PPI network were used to describe the expected total incoming effect of each gene in the network. In Equation (1), genes that have high degrees in the PPI network would be expected to have more total incoming effects due to the inequality constraint. We ran the DEOD method on breast cancer without PPI. After excluding the PPI information, 32 candidate drivers whose driver scores were less than the threshold score of 10.2955 were removed from the original list of drivers and are listed in Supplementary Table S12. A comparison statistic for the incoming effects of genes is given in Supplementary Table S13. The incoming effects and degrees of the genes were higher when the PPI information was included than when the PPI information was excluded. This result shows that integration of the PPI information in DEOD successfully incorporated the observation that cancer genes have a higher degree in the PPI network (). Our results showed that only some of candidate-driver genes were related to the survival time in both breast cancer and GBM. For example, although PTEN is a well-known GBM-driver gene and the deletion of PTEN is one of the hallmarks in GBM development, the relationship between the copy numbers and the survival time was not significant in our study (P-value  0.0596) and its prognostic significance still remains controversial (). Also, the statistical significance of the survival analysis depends on the thresholds for copy number aberrations, as shown in Supplementary Tables S5 and S10. For example, in breast cancer, the copy numbers of FBXO31 were related to the survival time when the threshold was chosen based on 5% of all the copy numbers (P-value  0.04375, the number of samples with aberrations  262), while its P-value was not significant when 1% was used (P-value  0.22730, the number of samples with aberrations  61). There might be several complex relationships between genes and the survival time. One possible explanation might be the combined effects of a gene and other molecules () and another reason might be the chromosomal positions of aberrations or the role of aberrant domains within the gene (). More analyses are required to reveal the complex relationships between genes and the survival time. In this study, we explained the activities of genes based on copy number changes and mutations, although other molecules or genetic changes such as microRNAs, transcription factors and methylations also play significant roles in cancer development. Hence, the identified driver genes in this analysis may represent a partial list of those genes that drive changes of cellular activities in cancer. Indeed, the PCS method can be used to measure relationships between any explanatory factors and response variables. Hence, it is possible to extend the DEOD method so that driver genes can be identified from several different types of molecular changes. The extension of the DEOD method will be our future work to enhance the understanding of cancer development.The candidate drivers identified by Multi-Reg and DEOD were classified into the three molecular signature GBM subtypes: mesenchymal, proneural and proliferation.