Motivation: Somatic copy number aberrations (SCNAs) are frequent in cancer genomes, but many of these are random, passenger events. A common strategy to distinguish functional aberrations from passengers is to identify those aberrations that are recurrent across multiple samples. However, the extensive variability in the length and position of SCNAs makes the problem of identifying recurrent aberrations notoriously difficult. Results: We introduce a combinatorial approach to the problem of identifying independent and recurrent SCNAs, focusing on the key challenging of separating the overlaps in aberrations across individuals into independent events. We derive independent and recurrent SCNAs as maximal cliques in an interval graph constructed from overlaps between aberrations. We efficiently enumerate all such cliques, and derive a dynamic programming algorithm to find an optimal selection of non-overlapping cliques, resulting in a very fast algorithm, which we call RAIG (Recurrent Aberrations from Interval Graphs). We show that RAIG outperforms other methods on simulated data and also performs well on data from three cancer types from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). In contrast to existing approaches that employ various heuristics to select independent aberrations, RAIG optimizes a well-defined objective function. We show that this allows RAIG to identify rare aberrations that are likely functional, but are obscured by overlaps with larger passenger aberrations.
INTRODUCTIONCopy number aberrations (CNAs) are gains and losses of large segments of the genomeranging in size from a few kilobases to whole chromosomes. Somatic CNAs (SCNAs) that occur during the lifetime of an individual are a major contributor to cancer development, particularly for solid tumors (Cancer Genome Atlas Research). In the last decade, technologies with increasing resolution have been introduced to measure CNAs. Cytogenetic techniques such as comparative genomic hybridization were replaced by higher resolution array-comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and SNP genotyping arrays, and most recently these are being supplanted by high-throughput sequencing platforms. The latter identify CNAs as deviations from the expected number of reads aligned to an interval of the reference genome (), and depending on the sequencing depth and technology, can measure CNAs to single-nucleotide resolution. In parallel with the technological developments, numerous computational methods have been developed to identify CNAs in single samples (). A key challenge in applying these technologies to cancer genomes is that most SCNAs measured in tumor samples are random, passenger events that do not contribute to the cancer phenotype. A common strategy to distinguish functional, driver aberrations from such random, passenger events is to identify recurrent aberrations shared by multiple samples (). However, this is a notoriously difficult problem because SCNAs vary widely in length and position across different samples. For example, a tumor-suppressor gene might be deleted by a small focal aberration in one sample, while in another sample the same gene is deleted by a whole chromosome loss. The varying size and starting/ending positions of aberrations across samples create a complex pattern of overlapping aberrations. This makes it difficult to determine which gene or genomic locus (if any) is the target of the aberration, a necessary prerequisite for any statistical test of recurrence. Early methods for finding recurrent SCNAs used the straightforward approach of finding the minimum common region of aberrations across samples (). Subsequently, numerous methods with more complex models were introduced (). While these methods differ in important details, they all use variations of two basic steps: (i) compute a score at each genomic locus (typically a probe in microarray datasets) indicating the recurrence; (ii) examine correlations between recurrences scores of nearby loci to separate the true target region from other close, high-scoring regions. In addition, some approaches also compute the statistical significance of the resulting predictions, using either a fixed distribution or a permutation test that preserves the lengths of SCNAs. A major challenge in detecting recurrent SCNAs is that closely located driver aberrations lead to correlations between the recurrence scores. For example,shows SCNAs in 20 samples. The number of samples with an aberration at each locus gives a recurrence score across the genome. However, these peaks are correlated: e.g. the fifth peak results largely from intervals shared with the fourth and third peaks. Methods that predict recurrent SCNAs must address the problem of how to separate peaks, or high scoring regions, into independent copy number events. One of the most-widely used methods, GISTIC (), introduced a greedy procedure that removes the *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com aberrations contributing to the highest peak, and then rescores the remaining SCNAs, continuing this iterative procedure until no more significant peaks are found. While GISTIC has been very successful in identifying recurrent SCNAs, the greedy nature of the peel-off procedure reduces the sensitivity to discover real secondary driver events if they are close to another primary driver event. JISTIC () and GISTIC2 () proposed alternative peel-off procedures with better performance. GISTIC2 uses an arbitrated peel-off procedure that rescores secondary peaks by assigning weights to intervals in proportion to the number of peaks in which they contribute (). While this approach considers the correlations between high-scoring peaks, these correlations are considered in an iterative manner: there is no attempt to globally maximize an objective function. We observed that the peel-off procedure could fail to detect high-scoring recurrent regions that were composed of numerous intervals that are shared with other recurrent regions, e.g. peak 3 in. The continued development of peel-off procedures emphasizes the difficulty in identifying recurrent SCNAs, particularly secondary aberrations that are nested within larger aberrations. Indeed, the overlap between the predictions from different methods is generally fairly small (). Moreover, the peel-off procedures implemented in GISTIC, GISTIC2, JISTIC and related methods were originally developed for microarray data and rely on markers (probes) to define either boundaries or weights of peaks. This complicates the application of these approaches to high-throughput sequencing datasets. At the same time, existing methods for identifying SCNAs do not address the challenges of rare SCNAs that may not be statistically significant on their own. Recent cancer genome sequencing studies have shown that a relatively small number of genes are mutated at high frequency in a cohort of cancer patients with many genes mutated at lower frequencies (). This 'long tail' phenomenon implies that rare mutations/aberrations cannot be discarded and require further scrutiny. A promising approach to address this long tail is to analyze combinations of mutations/aberrations in various signaling and regulatory pathways (). While rare somatic mutations may be directly incorporated in pathway analyses, there is no corresponding approach to identify rare SCNAs: most approaches focus on the problem of identifying SCNAs that are individually significant. To address the limitations of current approaches in detecting rare and secondary aberrations, we were motivated to develop a new approach that identifies both recurrent and independent SCNAs by optimizing a score that considers the composition and the correlation between all SCNAs on a chromosome across a set of samples. We introduce RAIG (Recurrent Aberrations from Interval Graphs), an algorithm to detect independent and recurrent SCNAs by selecting an optimal subset of maximal cliques in an interval graph. In contrast to existing approaches that deconvolve the recurrence score, RAIG analyzes the combinatorial structure of the underlying intervals, and thus explicitly models the dependencies between the values of the recurrence score. RAIG uses a dynamic programming algorithm to optimize a rigorous objective function for the selection of recurrent aberrations. Moreover, RAIG is very efficient, as maximal cliques in an interval graph can be efficiently enumerated. We show that our RAIG algorithm performs very well on both simulated data and data from several cancer types from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). In particular, RAIG has higher sensitivity in detecting rare SCNAs and secondary aberrations that are missed by iterative peel-off procedures, while also retaining high specificity. RAIG is simple and fast, and readily adaptable for high-throughput sequencing data.
DISCUSSIONWe introduce RAIG, an algorithm to find independent and recurrent SCNAs. We demonstrate that RAIG performs well compared with the existing methods on synthetic and real datasets. On simulated datasets, RAIG achieved the highest precision and recall, and also made smaller, more focused predictions. On real datasets, RAIG predicted independent and recurrent SCNAs in a significantly smaller fraction of the genome than the widely used GISTIC2 algorithm and the GAIA algorithm. Overall, the overlap between different methods is modest, demonstrating the difficulty in identifying recurrent SCNAs. RAIG showed the highest enrichment of known cancer genes from The Cancer Gene Census, suggesting that RAIG has high specificity. While it is difficult to estimate the sensitivity of each method on real data, we found that a number of the genes that were unique to RAIG are known cancer genes. Finally, the efficient clique enumeration and optimization steps make RAIG perform more than thousand times faster than other methods, although total running times are influenced by the type of nature of the statistical test that is performed (Supplementary Table S2.2). At the same time, RAIG does miss some SCNAs that likely contain important cancer genes. In examining these cases, we found that the majority had relatively few boundary endpoints that surround the maximal clique containing these genes. However, the amplitude of the SCNAs in these samples was very high. One example is FGFR1 in BRCA, where the average frequency and amplitude are 0.12 and 0.98, respectively. We found that other intervals (with lower amplitude) obscure the high-amplitude intervals containing FGFR1. GISTIC2 use copy number amplitude in addition to number of samples for its recurrence score. Further improvements to RAIG may be obtained by running with higher amplitude thresholds, or by incorporating amplitude into the objective function optimized by RAIG; e.g. by creating a weighted score for intervals according to their amplitude. To test the former hypotheses, we ran RAIG on the BRCA dataset using only intervals whose amplitude was 40.5. RAIG returned a region on 8p containing FGFR1 and two other genes. Since RAIG considers all possible partitions of the data, it is able to detect rare SCNAs and secondary events that are obscured by complex, overlapping rearrangements and missed by iterative peel-off procedures used in all existing methods. Although such rare aberrations are not statistically significant on their own, one of the outcomes from recent cancer sequencing studies is the demonstration of extensive mutational heterogeneity in cancer with driver mutations distributed over a large number of genes (). Thus, obtaining a comprehensive view of the mutations that drive cancer requires the analysis of combinations of rare and common mutations in pathways and interaction networks ().