Motivation: Identifying the critical state or pre-transition state just before the occurrence of a phase transition is a challenging task, because the state of the system may show little apparent change before this critical transition during the gradual parameter variations. Such dynamics of phase transition is generally composed of three stages, i.e. before-transition state, pre-transition state and after-transition state, which can be considered as three different Markov processes. Results: By exploring the rich dynamical information provided by high-throughput data, we present a novel computational method, i.e. hidden Markov model (HMM) based approach, to detect the switching point of the two Markov processes from the before-transition state (a stationary Markov process) to the pre-transition state (a time-varying Markov process), thereby identifying the pre-transition state or early-warning signals of the phase transition. To validate the effectiveness , we apply this method to detect the signals of the imminent phase transitions of complex systems based on the simulated datasets, and further identify the pre-transition states as well as their critical modules for three real datasets, i.e. the acute lung injury triggered by phosgene inhalation, MCF-7 human breast cancer caused by heregulin and HCV-induced dysplasia and hepatocellular carcinoma. Both functional and pathway enrichment analyses validate the computational results. Availability and implementation: The source code and some supporting files are available at https://github.com/rabbitpei/HMM_based-method. Contacts:
IntroductionThere exist abrupt state changes in many biological processes, in particular, during the progression of complex diseases. For instance, in chronic diseases such as cancer, the malignant deterioration might take place merely within a few months, while the illness might progress gradually and be protracted for years before the onset of such transitions (). In other words, there exists a sudden catastrophic shift during the process of gradual health deterioration that results in a drastic transition from a normal state to a disease state. However, it is a difficult task to detect the critical state just before the phase transition of the system from the observed data due to the lack of apparent state change before the, generally disease progression can be modeled into three states or stages: (i) a normal state (or the before-transition state) with the high resilience and robustness to perturbations; (ii) a pre-disease state (or the pre-transition state) with the low resilience and sensitive to perturbations, which is the critical state just before the phase transition (); and (iii) a disease state (or the after-transition state), representing a seriously deteriorated stage possibly with high resilience and robustness (). It has been shown that even though there are no significant differences between the before-transition state and the pre-transition state in terms of static features (e.g. average values of state variables), there are significant differences between them in terms of dynamic features (e.g. deviations and correlations of state variables) as described in (). Specifically, a dominant group or dynamical network biomarkers (DNBs) appears among the observed variables when the system state approaches the pre-transition state, satisfying the following three conditions, i.e. high correlations between the variables among this group, low correlations between this group and other variables and high standard deviations of the variables among this group (). These theoretical results indicate that the pre-transition state and the before-transition state are dynamically different, but are statically similar. Thus, the dynamics of these two states can be considered as two different Markov processes, which can be explored to detect the critical state or the pre-transition state from the observed data. Actually, the whole phase transition dynamics can be represented as three different Markov processes, i.e. one stationary Markov process for the before-transition state due to its relatively stable dynamics insensitive to parameter changes (stationary feature), one time-varying Markov process for the pre-transition state due to its strong fluctuated dynamics sensitive to the parameter changes (time-varying feature), and another stationary Markov process for the after-transition state due to their relatively stable dynamics insensitive to parameter changes (stationary feature) (). In this work, by exploiting the different dynamical features between the before-transition and pre-transition states, we developed a novel computational method based on hidden Markov model (HMM) for identifying the pre-transition state before the critical point is reached during the biological process of complex diseases. Specifically, to identify the pre-transition state is then equivalent to detect the switching point from one stationary Markov process to one time-varying Markov process (). Utilizing the time-course or stage-course data, we presented the computational method and algorithm on estimating the inconsistence index of the switching or end point of the stationary Markov process at each candidate sampling point. Our study indicates that such novel index, which measures the inconsistence between observed samples and a stationary Markov process described by a trained HMM, is a model-free approach that can be theoretically applied to diseases or biological systems with clear transition events. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, we applied the algorithm to a simulated regulatory network, and three real datasets, i.e. the microarray dataset of acute lung injury with carbonyl chloride inhalation exposure (GSE2565), the microarray dataset of MCF-7 human breast cancer caused by heregulin (HRG) (GSE13009) and the microarray dataset of HCV-induced dysplasia and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (GSE6764). The pre-transition states were successfully identified for both numerical simulated dataset and real datasets, and the functional and pathway analyses also validated our theoretical detections on the early-warning signals of the imminent critical transitions for those diseases.
DiscussionComplex diseases significantly damage the health of many people all over the world. Detecting the early-warning signal of the sudden deterioration provides an opportunity to interrupt and prevent the continuing costly cycle of managing these diseases and their complications. Although it is crucial to detect the pre-transition state so as to prevent the qualitative deterioration by taking appropriate intervention actions, it is a challenging task to reliably identify the pretransition state because the state of the system may show neither apparent change nor clear phenomenon before this critical transition during the disease progression. This is also the reason why diagnosis based on traditional biomarkers may fail to indicate a pre-transition state. In this work, we presented a computational method with an inconsistence index based on HMM to identify the imminent critical transition, which has been shown to be effective by real datasets. It is worth noting that this method aims to detect the early-warning signal generating from the pre-transition state (or pre-disease state), rather than to find the indication of the after-transition state (or disease state) in which the qualitative deterioration has taken place. As shown inand in METHODS, generally there are significant differences between the before-transition state and the after-transition state, which is why we can find many molecular biomarkers to accurately diagnose the disease based on the differential expressions of those biomarkers. But there may be no significant differences between the before-transition state and the pre-transition state in terms of expressions, which requires the different types of biomarkers based on different signals. DNB theory provides such conditions of the pre-disease state, and we developed HMM-based method to quantitatively detect the signals of the pre-disease state based on those conditions. We applied our method to the identification of the pre-transition state based on both the simulated dataset and the microarray data from acute lung injury experiment. Given that the lung damage is not generally detectable until approximately 8 h after exposure to phosgene gas, we tested the hypothesis that the disease progression can be modeled into three states: (i) a before-transition state with high resilience and robustness to perturbations; (ii) a pre-transition state, defined as the prelude to catastrophic shift into the transition state, occurring just before the phase transition point is reached, therefore, with low resilience and robustness to perturbation due to its dynamical structure; (iii) an after-transition state, representing the seriously deteriorated stage possibly with high resilience and robustness to perturbation. Then, based on the microarray data, we indicated the existence of the pre-transition stage right before the critical transition induced by phosgene inhalation. Actually, an indicative early-warning signal is presented at 8 h after the expose to phosgene gas. The validation based on simulated dataset () and the microarray data of acute lung injury () demonstrates the sensitivity and effectiveness of our method. With the genomics or proteomics survey of the CD-1 model rats, we constructed bio-molecular networks () to gauge the dynamical regulations among genes at different hours after exposure to phosgene. Besides, we showed that some metabolic pathways respond to the phosgene-induced interruptions and become increasingly disordered. Therefore, the HMM-based method provides a computational way of prying into the underlying mechanism of cell differentiation and thus helping to achieve the timely intervention. Our dynamic network analysis suggests, in regard to lung injury, by focusing at the pre-transition state of the rat model, we are able to probe the in situ environment changes preceding the development of lung tissue abnormalities. This may not only lead to deep insights ofDetecting critical state by HMMexternal environment interactions, but also identify the effective time window for novel therapeutic strategies in phosgene-triggered lung injury. There are limitations of this work. First, the validity of the identified pre-transition state and the accurate result need further supports from animal experiments or clinical studies. Second, the method is insensitive when the genes are not differentially expressed. Although this work is merely a step forward towards detecting the early-warning signals of a critical transition during disease progression and the algorithm is expected to be improved in both sensitive and accurate ways, it opens a new way for identifying the earlywarning signals of a critical transition during the progression of complex diseases.