Motivation: Although many gene set analysis methods have been proposed to explore associations between a phenotype and a group of genes sharing common biological functions or involved in the same biological process, the underlying biological mechanisms of identified gene sets are typically unexplained. Results: We propose a method called Differential Regulation-based enrichment Analysis for GENe sets (DRAGEN) to identify gene sets in which a significant proportion of genes have their transcriptional regulatory patterns changed in a perturbed phenotype. We conduct comprehensive simulation studies to demonstrate the capability of our method in identifying differentially regulated gene sets. We further apply our method to three human microarray expression datasets, two with hormone treated and control samples and one concerning different cell cycle phases. Results indicate that the capability of DRAGEN in identifying phenotype-associated gene sets is significantly superior to those of four existing methods for analyzing differentially expressed gene sets. We conclude that the proposed differential regulation enrichment analysis method, though exploratory in nature, complements the existing gene set analysis methods and provides a promising new direction for the interpretation of gene expression data.
INTRODUCTIONWith the maturation of high-throughput techniques such as DNA microarrays () and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) () in gene expression profiling on a genome-wide scale, interpretations of the vast amount of gene expression data have now become a standard task in biological studies (). As a typical example, genes differentially expressed in normal and cancer samples are often identified as associated with the cancer of interest, thereby providing clues for finding biomarkers and drug targets for the diagnosis and treatment of the cancer (). Nevertheless, a biological function is usually raised by the collaborative effects of multiple gene products instead of individual proteins. With this understanding, methods have been proposed to find or rank sets of differentially expressed genes, forming the research direction of gene set analysis (). To mention a few,proposed a method called GSEA (Gene Set Enrichment Analysis) to detect pre-defined gene sets that are enriched with differentially expressed genes based on a weighted KolmogorovSmirnov statistic.put forward a method called OverRepresentation Analysis (ORA) to determine which part of a gene set is differentially expressed by making use of the hypergeometrical distribution.relied on a permutation approach to prioritize gene sets that are composed of a large proportion of marginally differential expressed genes and named their method Significance Analysis of Function and Expression (SAFE). Although the earlier methods are capable of providing a list of differentially expressed gene sets from a collection of pre-defined candidates, two important questions remain largely untouched in the gene set analysis literature. First, how to take regulatory relationships between genes in a candidate gene set into consideration? Second, what is the reason behind the observation that a gene set is differentially expressed? To answer the first question, several network-based methods have been proposed in the literature. For example, netGSA adopted a mixed linear model to test the significance of gene sets (). Gene Graph Enrichment Analysis (GGEA) detected consistency between transcriptional regulatory relationships and gene expression levels by using a Petri net with fuzzy logic (). PAthway Recognition Algorithm using Data Integration on Genomic Models (PARADIGM) incorporated pathway interactions as well as many types of omics data to infer activities of pathways in patients (). Differential Expression Analysis for Pathways (DEAP) was capable of detecting paths in input pathways with the most differential expression (). These methods addressed the first question by taking regulatory relationships (or interactions) between genes into consideration, but left the second question unanswered. The expression of a gene is a complicated process regulated by several factors, among which transcription factors (TFs) play a *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com crucial role. Therefore, the change of the expression level of a gene in an abnormal phenotype may mainly be attributed to the alteration of the gene's transcriptional regulatory pattern (). It has been reported that such alterations in transcriptional regulation, usually initiated by mechanisms such as genetic and epigenetic modifications, are often observed among abnormal phenotypes including the vast categories of cancers. For example, mutations occurring in TFs can lead to retargeting on the promoters of specific oncogenes in breast cancer (). Mutations occurring in the promoter region of the telomerase enzyme-coding gene can drive the development of melanoma (). More generally, TF-encoding genes with chromosomal translocations have been distinguished, resulting in mistargeting and transcriptional dysregulation among cancers (). Furthermore, by investigating transcriptional regulatory networks constructed for different cell lines with ChIP-seq experiments, it has been reported that a large proportion of regulatory interactions vary across different phenotypes (). However, such significant alterations in transcriptional regulation, which typically occur in specific cellular environments in response to stimuli accompanying abnormal phenotypes, can hardly be identified and explained by the traditional analysis of differential expression patterns of the genes involved. Indeed, in order to capture subtle changes of transcriptional regulatory patterns in abnormal phenotypes, a novel computational approach beyond the traditional identification of differentially expressed genes or gene sets is required. With the above motivation, we propose to connect the observed expression levels of a set of genes with their underlying transcriptional regulatory patterns and further detect alterations in the regulatory relationships from gene expression data. Specifically, we achieve this goal by putting forward an approach called Differential Regulation based enrichment Analysis for GENe sets (DRAGEN) that integrates gene expression data and a transcriptional regulatory network to identify differentially regulated gene sets. DRAGEN uses a linear regression model to explain the relationship between the expression level of a target gene and that of a TF, thereby connecting regulatory patterns between TFs and target genes to their expression profiles. With this rigorous statistical model, DRAGEN converts the problem of detecting differentially regulated gene sets to a series of hypothesis testing problems followed by the fusion of multiple P-values to obtain the statistical significance of each candidate gene set, thereby enabling the ranking of the candidates. We conduct comprehensive simulation experiments to demonstrate the superior performance of DRAGEN, apply it to an estradiol-treated MCF-7 cell line, an androgen-treated LNCaP cell line and a HeLa cell line at different cell cycle phases, and show the capability of this method in finding gene sets associated with relevant phenotypes.