Motivation: A sizeable fraction of eukaryotic proteins contain intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs), which act in unfolded states or by undergoing transitions between structured and unstruc-tured conformations. Over time, sequence-based classifiers of IDRs have become fairly accurate and currently a major challenge is linking IDRs to their biological roles from the molecular to the systems level. Results: We describe DISOPRED3, which extends its predecessor with new modules to predict IDRs and protein-binding sites within them. Based on recent CASP evaluation results, DISOPRED3 can be regarded as state of the art in the identification of IDRs, and our self-assessment shows that it significantly improves over DISOPRED2 because its predictions are more specific across the whole board and more sensitive to IDRs longer than 20 amino acids. Predicted IDRs are annotated as protein binding through a novel SVM based classifier, which uses profile data and additional sequence derived features. Based on benchmarking experiments with full cross-validation, we show that this predictor generates precise assignments of disordered protein binding regions and that it compares well with other publicly available tools. Availability and implementation:
IntroductionProteins experience more or less pronounced structural changes while performing their functions. In particular, completely unfolded states or transitions between structured and unstructured conformations are distinguishing features, which enable the physiological activities of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) and intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs). Our understanding of the biological importance and of the widespread occurrence of this phenomenon is gradually expanding, thanks to the fine-tuning of experimental techniques and to computational genome-wide surveys. The DisProt database () stores manually curated data for IDRs, but annotations are accumulating at a very slow rate: DisProt v. 6.02 reports 1539 IDRs and $40% of them still have unknown function. Therefore, bioinformatics plays a major role in researching the occurrence, the biological function, and the involvement of intrinsic disorder in phenotype and disease. Many computational methods can predict IDRs within protein sequences (). Propensitybased approaches were inspired by the observed enrichment of polar and charged amino acids and by the under-representation of hydrophobic and aromatic residues in IDRs (). Further comparative V C The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.
ConclusionWe have documented the DISOPRED3 program for protein disorder prediction and for protein-binding site annotation within disordered regions. The tool first identifies disordered residues through a consensus of the output generated by DISOPRED2 and two additional machine-learning based modules trained on large IDRs, and then annotates them as protein binding through an additional SVM classifier. The intrinsic disorder predictor attains fairly high levels of prediction accuracy across different test conditions, and can be regarded as state of the artas independently reported by the CASP9 and CASP10 assessment teamsthus confirming the usefulness of integrating multiple complementary approaches. Compared with its predecessor, DISOPRED3 shows improved sensitivity for IDRs with twenty or more amino acids, as well as increased overall specificity. Such predictions form a useful basis for the identification of proteinbinding regions mediating key transient interactions through a novel SVM, which compares well with existing tools for the same task. On these grounds, DISOPRED3 is expected to represent a useful addition to the toolbox for the functional annotation of proteins and proteomes. Notwithstanding, further advances are needed to enhance the sensitivity of IDR detection and of the protein-binding sites therein. Of course, the accumulation of additional experimental information and its availability in a structured, easy-to-parse manner will be beneficialas already witnessed in other areas of computational biology. However, new ideas will be crucial to make major progress, especially in the attempt to link the binary classifications of ordered and disordered residues to biological functions at different scales of complexity. In particular, initial system-level investigations of the role of protein disorder in cellular development and differentiation have already begun thanks to the increasing availability of genome-wide heterogeneous datasets. In this context, the design and implementation of reliable and more scalable tools will be of special relevance.DISOPRED3 no DPB SVM is a baseline method that considers all disordered residues identified by DISOPRED3 as involved in protein binding.