Motivation: The increased prevalence of multi-drug resistant (MDR) pathogens heightens the need to design new antimicrobial agents. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) exhibit broad-spectrum potent activity against MDR pathogens and kills rapidly, thus giving rise to AMPs being recognized as a potential substitute for conventional antibiotics. Designing new AMPs using current in-silico approaches is, however, challenging due to the absence of suitable models, large number of design parameters, testing cycles, production time and cost. To date, AMPs have merely been categorized into families according to their primary sequences, structures and functions. The ability to computationally determine the properties that discriminate AMP families from each other could help in exploring the key characteristics of these families and facilitate the in-silico design of synthetic AMPs. Results: Here we studied 14 AMP families and sub-families. We selected a specific description of AMP amino acid sequence and identified compositional and physicochemical properties of amino acids that accurately distinguish each AMP family from all other AMPs with an average sensitivity, specificity and precision of 92.88%, 99.86% and 95.96%, respectively. Many of our identified dis-criminative properties have been shown to be compositional or functional characteristics of the corresponding AMP family in literature. We suggest that these properties could serve as guides for in-silico methods in design of novel synthetic AMPs. The methodology we developed is generic and has a potential to be applied for characterization of any protein family.
IntroductionEscalating deaths due to increased exposure of living organisms to infectious diseases and the rapid evolution of multi-drug resistant (MDR) microbes spurred interest in alternative remedies that can treat the MDR microbes causing these diseases (). Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) have been pinpointed as one such remedy (), owing to their broadspectrum potent activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, fungi, protozoa, parasites, cancer cells and different kinds of enveloped viruses (). Their effective defense action against a broad spectrum of microbes and their ability to kill rapidly have rendered them highly effective substitute for conventional antibiotics (). Moreover, designed AMPs have been reported to kill MDR microbes (). AMPs interact with target microbes by membrane permeation and penetration (), subsequently affecting V C The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.
DiscussionIn this work, we developed a novel computational model for selection of AMP characteristics that discern AMP families via physicochemical and compositional properties. The identified AMP properties make them potential design guides for development of synthetic AMPs. Also, these properties can be used as a starting point to develop a classification model to determine the category of a new candidate AMP. In the subsequent text, enrichment and depletion are considered related to one target AMP family relative to all other AMP families. Here we comment on the properties selected for some of the AMP families. Discussion of properties of other families is in Supplementary Materials S5. Alpha-defensins. We found enrichment of cysteine (C) in the n3 and n4 regions, arginine (R) in the M region and arginine and tyrosine (Y) in the C region, whereas glycine (G) was found depleted in the n2 region as well as lysine (K) in the C region. Numerous studies have demonstrated that bactericidal activity is independent of highly conserved features, such as invariant disulfide array, Arg-Glu salt bridge or Gly residue at CysIII8 I, with exception to the high arginine content relative to lysine (), which complies with our finding. Moreover,demonstrated that the replacement of arginine with lysine decreases the activity of these peptides (). Also, AMPs disrupt membranes through a combination of electrostatic interactions between cationic amino acid side chains and electronegative components of the microbial cell envelope, followed by the insertion of hydrophobic patches into the nonpolar interior of the membrane bilayer (). The mouse alpha-defensin cryptdin-4 (Crp4) was demonstrated to induce bactericidal activity via this mechanism (). NMR structure of Crp4 demonstrated its cationic amino acids to be arginine, lysine and histidine (H) and its hydrophobic patches to include isoleucine (I), leucine (L), valine (V), phenylalanine (F) and tyrosine. Similar to these findings, we found for alpha-defensins the enrichment of cysteine in the N-region, which, taking into account their hydropathy index, may suggest that it is a key component of the hydrophobic patch. The enrichment of arginine and tyrosine likely adds to the electrostatic interaction that contributes to membrane disruption. Beta-defensins. We found arginine, valine, phenylalanine, asparagine (N), cysteine and glycine enriched in the n1, n2, n3, n4, n4 and n4 regions, respectively. Also, for the properties extracted from the n4 sub-region, an enrichment for the parameter of charge transfer donor capacity was found (). The M region exhibited enrichment, of cysteine, whereas the C region had enrichment of arginine and cysteine. It was proposed that the betadefensin N-terminal helix with many hydrophobic residues is inserted inside the micelle, whereas the C-terminal helix with one large positive charge patch is located outside the micelle and interacts with the charged head groups of the micelle (). Of the array of amino acids, we identified valine, phenylalanine and cysteine as key hydrophobic residues enriched in the N-terminal that likely facilitate the insertion of the beta-defensins N-terminal helix into the micelles, whereas for the C-terminal helix arginine is the key amino acid forming the positive charge patch. Finally, if we only consider amino acids that our study identified as enriched, we observe cysteine, glycine and arginine most enriched. Our findings are partly corroborated by the results of Midorikawa et al. and Chandrababu et al. as they demonstrated that the beta-defensins are characterized by the enrichment of cysteine. That is the existence of six conserved cysteine residues () and that the arrangement of cysteine residues in the three-dimensional space are important to the antimicrobial selectivity and salt-dependent activity by mutating all six cysteine residues of human beta-defensin-3 (HBD-3) (). Cathelicidins. We identified the enrichment of arginine in the n1 and n2 regions. Lysine was identified depleted in the C-region,the properties extracted from the n3 sub-region enrichment for the linker propensity from 1-linker dataset and normalized frequency of beta-sheet with weights was found (). Our findings are supported by cathelicidins being characterized as proline-rich and having a highly conserved N-terminal preprosequences followed by variable C-terminal sequences that are biologically active effectors (). Moreover, the proline was proved to sustain the antimicrobial activity of mammalian cathelicidins by resisting serine proteases cleavage of the scissile bond (). Our findings are further supported by cathelicidins from hagfish exhibiting four arginines positioned between the cathelin domain and the antimicrobial sequences (). The arginine tetrads of these latent zymogens are believed to be specifically processes by prohormone convertases such as furin proteases in specific cells as an activity switch (). Cecropins. We identified enrichment of lysine and glutamic acid (E) in the n3 and n4 regions, respectively, whereas alanine was enriched in the C-region.produced synthetic cecropin A that induces comparable antibacterial activity and is indistinguishable by chemical and physical criteria from the naturally occurring cecropin A. In partial corroboration with our findings, it has been demonstrated that cecropin analogs with an impaired N-terminal helix, such as cecropin A-(3-37) with removed lysine and tryptophan has reduced membrane disrupting abilities that correlate with their lower antibacterial activity that was rationalized in terms of reduced binding to bacteria (). Similarly,demonstrated via a chemically synthesized cecropin D analog (9-37) that no activity is observed without phenylalanine and glutamic acid in the N-terminal. Moreover,demonstrated that lysine, glutamic acid and arginine are conserved in cecropins and that alanine is enriched. Cyclotides. We only identified a few properties related to composition, such as enrichment of glutamic acid and glycine in the n4 and C-regions, respectively. For the properties extracted from the C-region enrichment for normalized frequency of turn in alpha  beta class was found (). Work bypartially supports these finding as they demonstrated that methylation of charged glutamic acid residue of cyclotide cycloviolacin O 2 decreased its potency 48-fold. They additionally showed conserved cysteine residues and demonstrated that acetylation of the two lysine residues also reduced the potency 3-fold (). Koehbach et al. elucidated the structure of kalata B7 to determine its associated ligandreceptor interaction. They inferred an interaction with the oxytocin receptor owing to loop 3 of kalata B7 (-CYTQGC-) being homologous to the six-residue ring sequence of oxytocin. They further exhibited the crucial role of the tyrosine and glutamine residues (loop 3) by generating mutated variants (Y replaced by A, S or F; Q was replaced by A or E), all of which were inactive or did not bind to the receptor (demonstrated that most cyclotides have a glycine positioned before the cysteine residue to form the f angle required for the type II b-turn needed for cyclization.
ConclusionThe increased demand of AMPs brought attention to in-silico methods to design novel AMPs. In this study, we identified properties that strongly discriminate AMPs families from each other using global optimization of unsupervised clustering by GA. Our results suggest that the identified features can be used to filter out unlikely synthetic candidate AMPs during the design process of novel AMPs. The methodology developed here is generic and with a potential to characterize arbitrary protein family.