The state of the art in promoter modeling for higher eukaryotes is predicting not single transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs), but their combinations. The new tool utilizes a previously developed method of distance distributions of TFBS pairs. We model the random distribution of distances and compare it with the distribution observed in the query sequences. Comparison of the profiles allows filtering out the noise and retaining the potentially functional combinations. This approach has proved its usefulness as a filtering technique for the selection of TFBS pairs for promoter modeling and is now implemented as a tool in R. As an input, it can use the outputs of three different TFBS-and motif-predictive tools (Gibbs Sampler for motifs, Match TM and MEME/FIMO for PWM-based search). The output is a list of predicted pairs on overrepresented distances with assigned scores, P-values and plots showing the distribution of pairs in the input sequences. Availability: The tool is available at https://www.omnifung.hki-jena.de/Rpad/Distance_Scan/index.htm Contact
INTRODUCTIONA promoter model is a combination of sequence elements modulating transcription and characterizing promoters of a certain gene or group of genes (). It is widely accepted that in higher eukaryotes transcription factors (TFs) tend to cooperate and act in most cases in a synergistic manner and that it is this cooperation that confers the required specificity of transcriptional regulation (). Therefore, co-regulation of genes entails the existence of a characteristic combination of transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) in their promoters. Such combination can be characterized not only by the set of TFBS, but also by the distances between the constituents: the distance between the binding sites should allow the cooperating factors to physically interact. We suppose that the false positive predictions of the TFBS are distributed randomly, whereas the distances in the functional TFBS combinations are non-random. The principle possibility to use distances as a distinguishing feature was proven in the investigation of the behavior of real, experimentally characterized TFBS pairs that have been shown * To whom correspondence should be addressed. to bind cooperating TFs. Such composite elements (CEs) are combinations of two or more TFBSs, which provide synergistic action of the TFs, qualitatively different from a purely additive effect. The most comprehensive collection of composite elements can be found in the TRANSCompel database (). We could show that each real CE can be characterized by a 'preferred' distance or set of distances (). We have also shown that the approach of distance distributions can correctly identify the distance in real CEs.