Motivation: New bioimaging techniques have recently been proposed to visualize the colocation or interaction of several proteins within individual cells, displaying the heterogeneity of neighbouring cells within the same tissue specimen. Such techniques could hold the key to understanding complex biological systems such as the protein interactions involved in cancer. However, there is a need for new algorith-mic approaches that analyze the large amounts of multi-tag bioimage data from cancerous and normal tissue specimens to begin to infer protein networks and unravel the cellular heterogeneity at a molecular level. Results: The proposed approach analyzes cell phenotypes in normal and cancerous colon tissue imaged using the robotically controlled Toponome Imaging System microscope. It involves segmenting the 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole-labelled image into cells and determining the cell phenotypes according to their protein–protein dependence profile. These were analyzed using two new measures, Difference in Sums of Weighted cO-dependence/Anti-co-dependence profiles (DiSWOP and DiSWAP) for overall co-expression and anti-co-expression , respectively. These novel quantities were extracted using 11 Toponome Imaging System image stacks from either cancerous or normal human colorectal specimens. This approach enables one to easily identify protein pairs that have significantly higher/lower co-expression levels in cancerous tissue samples when compared with normal colon tissue. Availability and implementation:
INTRODUCTIONTo understand cellular biology on a systems level, relationships between molecular components must be understood not only at a functional level but also localized in the spatial domain (). This is due to the fact that proximity of key proteins provides an indication of the possible existence of functional protein complexes. As a consequence, new bioimaging techniques have been recently proposed to visualize the colocation or interaction of several proteins in cells in intact tissue specimen. These include Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) imaging (), Raman microscopy (), Toponome Imaging System (TIS) (), multi-spectral imaging methods () and MxIF (). TIS is an automated high-throughput technique able to co-map up to a 100 different proteins or other tag-recognizable biomolecules in the same pixel on a single tissue section (). It runs cycles of fluorescence tagging, imaging and soft bleaching in situ. While colocation does not necessarily imply interaction, it has been consistently found that clusters containing particular proteins are found in specific sub-cellular compartments, hence allowing such a hypothesis to be generated (). Also, co-dependence between two proteins is a potential indication for an interaction that is not necessarily direct. TIS has a sub-cellular maximum lateral resolution of 206  206 nm/pixel (), which allows the determination of sub-cellular protein network architectures. The combination of proteomic information with spatial sub-cellular level topographical data has been termed 'toponomics' (). Biomarkers used in current clinical practice are limited to the simultaneous analysis of only a handful of proteins. Therefore, they fail to assess the true complexity of cancer, and the resulting biomarkers have a low prognostic value (). The capabilities of the TIS hold promise for developing a new generation of multiplex biomarkers (), which could aid the development of personalized medicine. Studying the protein interactions in cancer could uncover previously unknown mechanisms of tumour formation and could identify new potential drug targets in the form of protein interactions. It has been shown that TIS imaging can be used in cancer research for protein network mapping (). However, there is a need for new algorithmic approaches that analyze the co-expression patterns. The standard way to analyze TIS images is to apply a threshold to each image of the stack and thus reduce it to binary values (). However, while this step is straightforward and can be performed objectively (), by reducing the image to binary, a lot of potentially important information is *To whom correspondence should be addressed lost. Recently, such non-threshold methods have been presented (). These algorithms cluster molecular co-expression patterns on a pixel level and therefore lose the variation at a cell level. This can be crucial when analyzing cancerous samples due to the heterogeneity of cancer cells (). Furthermore, these algorithms are based on the raw expression levels, which are intensity dependent and hence may vary between different stacks. A similar approach is used in the Web-based Hyperbolic Image Data Explorer (WHIDE) (), which allows analysis of the space and colocation using a H2SOM clustering (). Although this tool is effective at identifying molecular co-expression patterns, the cellular structure is lost, and hence the method is unable to analyze the different cell phenotypes that may be present in the samples. More recently, focus has shifted towards cell-level analysis. One approach is to use K-median clustering to phenotype-segmented cells (). However, the conclusions in this study about pathways in colon cancer were drawn by only visual inspection of the phenotypes obtained and without considering any control samples. In another study (), cells were phenotyped after dimensionality reduction of their raw expression vector using t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (Van der). In this article, a new approach is proposed where the protein protein dependence profile (PPDP) is considered instead of the raw protein expression profiles. There has been evidence in the literature that despite the spherical and the exploratory cell states of rhabdomyosarcoma cells having identical average protein profiles, striking differences were found between the two states at the sub-cellular protein cluster level (). Hence, rearrangement, rather than up-or downregulation of proteins, is (or can be) the key to generating new cell functionalities (). This shows the importance of co-dependence of proteins rather than abundance on its own. Furthermore, we perform the analysis at cell level rather than pixel level, allowing for the cells to be phenotyped according to their PPDP. This enables us to gain a better understanding of the heterogeneity within the cancer cell population. Finally, two new measures are proposed to enable us to infer small-scale protein networks. These new measures highlight protein pairs that have different interaction in cancer and normal tissues and, hence, can be used as biomarkers to distinguish between different types of samples using protein co-dependence. To our knowledge, this is the first study of localized protein networks performed using multilabelling imaging techniques. An overview of the approach is presented in. Applying it to synthetically generated data gave the expected results, giving confidence in the new measures.