Motivation: Model selection and parameter inference are complex problems of long-standing interest in systems biology. Selecting between competing models arises commonly as underlying biochemical mechanisms are often not fully known, hence alternative models must be considered. Parameter inference yields important information on the extent to which the data and the model constrain parameter values. Results: We report Dizzy-Beats, a graphical Java Bayesian evidence analysis tool implementing nested sampling-an algorithm yielding an estimate of the log of the Bayesian evidence Z and the moments of model parameters, thus addressing two outstanding challenges in systems modelling.
IntroductionBayesian methods provide a sound basis for ranking alternative systems biology models and for characterizing the extent to which parameters are constrained by models and data (). Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods have been applied to model selection () and to parameter inference in systems biology (), but often require considerable algorithmic and conceptual development. Nested sampling promises to ease these complex computational tasks: Recent biological applications include (). General purpose code for nested sampling is available in R (), and biological applications of the MultiNest tool () have been reported (). A C-based commandline application implementing nested sampling and providing a Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) interface has recently been released (), but no graphical tool is currently available. Thus we sought to add nested sampling to the widely used Dizzy chemical kinetics simulation tool () (over 200 citations as of November 2014). In addition, we have added an optimization function and SBML 3.1 compatibility. However, as Dizzy's command language has operators that cannot be captured in SBML 3.1, and SBML 3.1 has features not supported by Dizzy, this feature is restricted to the intersection of the modelling languages.
DiscussionDizzy-Beats is a graphical application for simulating and optimizing systems models based on an established simulator () and its simple textual model syntax, to which we have added SBML 3.1 import/export functionality. Uniquely, Dizzy-Beats provides model comparison and parameter inference functions through the nested sampling algorithm in a graphical application. Comparable functions are implemented in BioBayes (); however, users must edit the XML representation of the model should they wish to make modifications. SYSBIONS () implements nested sampling but all interaction is via the command-line. The use of a likelihood based on the L 1-norm derived from biological replicate data makes fewer assumptions than a Gaussian error model (), and is less computationally complex than a transitional likelihood function derived from reaction propensities ().