This application note describes a new scalable semi-automatic approach, the Dual Point Decision Process, for segmentation of 3D structures contained in 3D microscopy. The segmentation problem is distributed to many individual workers such that each receives only simple questions regarding whether two points in an image are placed on the same object. A large pool of micro-labor workers available through Amazons Mechanical Turk system provides the labor in a scalable manner. Availability and implementation: Python-based code for non-commercial use and test data are available in the source archive at https://sites.google.com/site/imagecrowdseg/.
INTRODUCTIONThe improved resolution and amount of detail afforded by emerging electron microscopy (EM) techniques, such as serial block scanning EM (SBEM) (), is enabling researchers to explore scientific questions pertaining to morphology and network connectivity that were previously impossible (). SBEM techniques, coupled to new staining protocols (), are able to reveal cell boundaries, sites such as synapses, and many intracellular components, such as synaptic vesicles and mitochondria. Manual segmentation represents a well-recognized bottleneck in cellular imaging. In a typical scenario, segmentation involves a single trained expert using automated algorithms or manual methods to examine and mark up each individual slice and trace contours around the structures of interest using a program such as TrakEM2 () or other specialized software programs. Dual Point Decision Process (DP2) streamlines and parallelizes the process by distributing it to a large number of workers. Amazon's Mechanical Turk system enables rapid completion of jobs as a consequence of the large number of workers continuously available and attracted to this resource (In our tests, tens of thousands of decisions were accomplished in 51 day.). Average cost was 1.2 dollars per cubic micron for Dataset 1, a mouse optic nerve sample, and 56 dollars per cubic micron for Dataset 2, a mouse cerebellar neuropil sample (shown in Supplementary Information). The tests were performed with a payment of one cent (US Dollars) per decision.