DREAM: detecting RNA editing associated with microRNAs, is a webserver for the identification of mature microRNA editing events using deep sequencing data. Raw microRNA sequencing reads can be provided as input, the reads are aligned against the genome and custom scripts process the data, search for potential editing sites and assess the statistical significance of the findings. The output is a text file with the location and the statistical description of all the puta-tive editing sites detected. Availability and implementation: DREAM is freely available on the web at
IntroductionDeep sequencing has many possible applications; one of them is the identification and quantification of RNA editing sites. The most common type of RNA editing is adenosine to inosine (A-to-I) editing, catalyzed by enzymes of the adenosine deaminase that act on RNA family (). A prerequisite for this editing process is a double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) structure. Such dsRNAs are formed as part of the microRNA (miRNA) maturation process, and it is therefore expected that miRNAs are affected by A-to-I editing. Indeed, dozens of editing sites were found in miRNAs: A-to-I editing of primary miRNA (pri-miRNA) was shown to affect the processing of the pri-miRNA to precursor miRNA (premiRNA) or the processing of the pre-miRNA to mature miRNA (). Pri-miRNA and premiRNA editing events may lead to an edited version of the mature miRNAs. Mature miRNAs can bind to partially complementary targets located in the 3 0 untranslated region of specific mRNAs and block the translation or trigger degradation of the target mRNAs (). Editing at the 'seed' region, bases 28 at the 5 0 end of the mature miRNA that are critical for target recognition, is expected to change the set of target genes. A striking example is mouse miR-376 in which editing in the recognition site alters the target specificity of the miRNA and profoundly affects cellular processes (). Deep sequencing data analysis may unravel the full extent of A-to-I editing in miRNAs as well as other types of RNA editing. However, technical problems in the analysis of deep sequencing datasets may result in a false detection of miRNA modification events (). We have previously described a protocol which utilizes deep sequencing data to characterize RNA editing in mature miRNAs from human and mouse brain while avoiding technical data analysis problems (). Other groups have also detected miRNA editing events in the mouse brain during development, in Drosophila and in C. elegans, demonstrating that editing can add complexity to the miRNA gene regulation pathway (). However, so far there is no tool allowing researchers to detect mature miRNA editing sites without extensive use of data analysis procedures. The DREAM webserver is expected to make the editing detection procedure accessible to the large