Gene duplication and loss are important processes in the evolution of gene families. Moreover, growth of families by duplication and retention is an important mechanism by which organisms gain new functions. Therefore the ability to infer the evolutionary histories of families is an important step in understanding the evolution of function. We have recently developed DupliPHY, a software tool to infer gene family histories using parsimony and maximum likelihood. Here, we present DupliPHY-Web a web server for DupliPHY that implements additional maximum likelihood functionality and provides users an intuitive interface to run DupliPHY. Availability and implementation: DupliPHY-Web is available at www. bioinf.manchester.ac.uk/dupliphy/
INTRODUCTIONOhno (1970) first proposed that gene or genome duplication is a major mechanism for generating functional innovation and genome evolution. For eukaryotes it has been estimated that 50% of genes are expected to duplicate at least once in time scales of the order of 35350 million years (). Indeed, up to 30% of the yeast genome may have arisen by duplication events (). There is also evidence for whole genome duplication (WGD) in yeast (), which was followed by rapid and extensive gene loss (). Gene duplication also seems to have been important in the evolution of humans (). Determining the evolution of gene families and identifying the gain and loss events is, therefore, necessary to understanding the processes of gene family evolution. Previously, we have released the software DupliPHY () that provides weighted parsimony and maximum likelihood methods to accurately infer the evolutionary histories of gene families. The software has been used to identify lineage-specific expansions of gene families in yeast (). DupliPHY works on gene copy number counts to infer gene family evolution and is different from tree reconciliation methods that infer duplication and loss events based on gene and species trees (). The tool requires a file describing the membership of gene families for a range of species and a phylogenetic tree describing the evolutionary relationship between these species. The DupliPHY programs are written in Java v1.7 and are run from the command line. Here, we introduce DupliPHY-Web, a web interface for the DupliPHY programs that provides users with a visual method of running the programs without any local installation. There is substantial help documentation and a walkthrough for novice users, including advice on the interpretation of the results. Additionally, DupliPHY-ML has been updated with a new model of gene family evolution and to make the program more configurable. Ultimately, DupliPHY-Web will provide a useful tool for analysing gene family evolution.