
INTRODUCTIONMultiple methods based on matching gene expression signatures have been proposed to identify anti-correlated drug and disease profiles (). The central paradigm is that a drug compound, which shows the opposite effect on gene expression to the observed for a disease could be used to treat that particular disease. These methods have resulted in hypotheses of differential uses (repurposing) for existing compounds that have been validated experimentally. This highlights the potential power of mining existing safe compounds for repurposing, which does not require the expensive and extensive initial design and clinical phases of drug discovery. It is expected that analysing new and existing data from public repositories such as Array Express (www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/), Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) and the Connectivity Map (CMap) (www.broadinstitute.org/cmap/) using these methods will become increasingly popular in computational drug discovery (). Motivated by this, we have developed Drug versus Disease (DvD), an R package to 'match' drug and disease profiles. This is done by making use of gene set enrichment analysis () and visualizing the final results in networks containing clusters of similar drugs and diseases. DvD differs from existing web servers and databases (such as ProfileChaser, MARQ and SPIED, see Supplementary Material) in that it can dynamically access both Array Express and GEO to generate input profiles. With DvD, users can automatically compare input profiles to reference drug data from CMap and disease profiles curated from GEO. This reference data has associated networks where, unlike similar tools, drugs or diseases exerting similar effects on transcription are grouped into clusters. DvD is flexible, offering customizable and default data options for the input profiles and the reference data. The Cytoscape (www.cytoscape.org/) plug-in provides a user interface to the full DvD pipeline, as well as a visualization platform for the results. In the final networks, drug or disease nodes are linked to the DrugBank (www.drugbank.ca/) and Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/) web browsers, respectively.