Motivation: The enzyme nomenclature system, commonly known as the enzyme commission (EC) number, plays a key role in classifying and predicting enzymatic reactions. However, numerous reactions have been described in various pathways that do not have an official EC number, and the reactions are not expected to have an EC number assigned because of a lack of articles published on enzyme assays. To predict the EC number of a non-classified enzymatic reaction, we focus on the structural similarity of its substrate and product to the substrate and product of reactions that have been classified. Results: We propose a new method to assign EC numbers using a maximum common substructure algorithm, mutual information and a support vector machine, termed the Enzyme COmmission numbers Handler (ECOH). A jack-knife test shows that the sensitivity, precision and accuracy of the method in predicting the first three digits of the official EC number (i.e. the EC sub-subclass) are 86.1%, 87.4% and 99.8%, respectively. We furthermore demonstrate that, by examining the ranking in the candidate lists of EC sub-subclasses generated by the algorithm, the method can successfully predict the classification of 85 enzymatic reactions that fall into multiple EC sub-subclasses. The better performance of the ECOH as compared with existing methods and its flexibility in predicting EC numbers make it useful for predicting enzyme function. Availability: ECOH is freely available via the Internet at
INTRODUCTIONIn the automatic prediction of protein functions and their evolutionary relations on a large scale, the computational prediction of the catalytic function of enzymes has traditionally been based on sequence similarities (). The usefulness of this approach may be questioned because small changes in key residues may greatly alter enzyme function, which necessitates alternative approaches to assess enzyme similarities. Several researchers have focused on the similarity between functional motifs and protein structures and on the correlation between levels of protein expression in cells. Systematic annotation systems have been provided for generating and testing biological hypotheses, although one should note any propagation of functional mis-annotation in the systems (). For example, Gene Ontology (GO) is a controlled vocabulary that can be used to describe gene products (). Structural Classification Of Proteins (SCOP) () and Class, Architecture, Topology, Homologous superfamily (CATH) () regard any pair of enzymes that share protein domains as being similar. The Kyoto Encyclopedia for Genes and Genomes (KEGG) provides annotation of biochemical pathways for genes (). Other enzyme classification systems, such as the enzyme commission (EC) classification scheme (IUPAC-IUBMB) and the reaction classification (RC) system (), are based on the chemical reaction catalysed by the enzyme under consideration. An EC number consists of the letters 'EC' followed by four digits separated by periods (e.g. EC 1.1.1.1). The first, second and third number are termed class, subclass and sub-subclass, respectively. The EC system consists of six classes: oxidoreductase (EC 1), transferase (EC 2), hydrolase (EC 3), lyase (EC 4), isomerase (EC 5) and ligase (EC 6). The subclass and sub-subclass specify the type of enzymatic reaction and its substrate requirements, respectively. In this manner, a hierarchically structured system is developed on the basis of the main EC classes; for example, EC 1 is divided into 23 EC subclasses (ECs 1.11.22 and EC 1.97; version 2011). Although the system is designed to classify enzymatic reactions based on their EC numbers, enzymes themselves can be hierarchically grouped by their function (). Owing to the fact that EC numbers are manually assigned by the nomenclature committee of the International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (IUBMB), many enzymatic reactions have either incomplete EC numbers or no EC number at all (). Several studies have proposed methods to predict EC numbers (). A group of researchers attempted to use protein sequences and structures to predict EC numbers ().achieved an accuracy of 33% by using statistical analysis to predict the top EC class. Furthermore, Dobson and Doig (2005) andimproved the accuracy to 35% and 86%, respectively, by using a support vector machine (SVM). Recently,achieved an accuracy of 98% by using a k-nearest neighbour algorithm (k  1) and binary fingerprints, which indicate the presence or absence of specific sequence signatures, and focused on multi-label predictions. Further, the similarity of catalysed chemical transformations among protein families has been *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com discussed (). Some studies have proposed methods for automatically predicting EC numbers, by focusing on chemical transformations between substrates and products and ignoring protein sequences and structures. The RPAIR database was constructed to map information on atom types in three regions of the molecular structures of substrateproduct pairs (). Using the RPAIR database, E-zyme predicts possible EC number of a target reaction by comparing the correlation between vectors that represent the occurrence of atom mapping patterns (). These researchers achieved a prediction accuracy of 82.5%. E-zyme is a rule-based method. In two of their studies, Gasteiger's group converted reactions only within classes EC 1 and EC 3 to physicochemical descriptors relating to the reacting bonds and classified them into EC sub-subclasses by using a self-organizing neural network, a SVM, and hierarchical clustering (). Their SVM gave an accuracy of 97.7%.proposed a method for the mapping of atom and bond types between substrates and products in a reaction using matrices, and they obtained unique matrices for each EC sub-subclass. The use of a reaction graph kernel (RGK) along with a random walk kernel was proposed for performing approximate matching between atom mapping patterns (). The matching accuracy was 82.5%. Although this method also uses the RPAIR database to achieve high prediction performance, it is used to identify the main substrateproduct pairs in a reaction. Latino and Aires-de-Sousa (2009) proposed physicochemical and topological descriptors, named the MOLMAP descriptor, encoding bonding changes during chemical reactions using matrices. Their random forest predictors, a semi-supervised learning algorithm, gave an accuracy of 82.4% for EC sub-subclasses for a genome-wide set of reactions. Their work showed that the predictions were reliable if a full balanced description of the reaction is used.used typical chemoinformatics approaches to EC sub-subclasses, that is, a string-type descriptor and a Tanimoto similarity metric. Nath and Mitchell (2012) evaluated a combination of five descriptors and three machine learning algorithms; they used a SVM, random forest and k-nearest neighbour algorithm. They achieved accuracies of 74.4% and 83.7% in the case of the SVM and random forest, respectively. However, their tanning set was limited to 260 reactions, and it was derived from the MACiE database (). In this study, we investigated the automatic selection of important chemical transformations from reactions for predicting the EC numbers of the reactions; in the selection process, we removed outliers and noise from chemical transformations without any preconditions. We propose a new method to flexibly predict EC numbers from the chemical structure of substrates and products of unclassified enzymatic reactions by the use of a maximal common substructure (MCS) algorithm, mutual information (MI) and SVM through comparison of the structural fingerprint to a list of classified reactions.