Motivation and results: We have implemented ECplot, an online tool for plotting charts from large datasets. This tool supports a variety of chart types commonly used in bioinformatics publications. In our benchmarking, it was able to create a Box-and-Whisker plot with about 67 000 data points and 8 MB total file size within several seconds. The design of the tool makes common formatting operations easy to perform. It also allows more complex operations to be achieved by advanced XML (Extensible Markup Language) and programming options. Data and formatting styles are stored in separate files, such that style templates can be made and applied to new data-sets. The text-based file formats based on XML facilitate efficient manipulation of formatting styles for a large number of data series. These file formats also provide a means to reproduce published figures from raw data, which complement parallel efforts in making the data and software involved in published analysis results accessible. We demonstrate this idea by using ECplot to replicate some complex figures from a previous publication. Availability and implementation: ECplot and its source code (under MIT license) are available at https://yiplab.
INTRODUCTIONBioinformatics research usually involves large-scale datasets. Charts are commonly used to provide a succinct summarization of complex patterns in the data. There are many tools available for chart plotting. Some commercial products include Matlab, Microsoft Excel and Prism. Other tools include Google Chart Tools, Gnuplot and R. These tools vary substantially in terms of the level of programming skills required, cost and platform specificity. Although some of them provide graphical user interfaces, some others require mandatory programming knowledge from users. The costs of these tools range from free-of-charge to hundreds of US dollars per license. Some of the tools can only be run on specific operating systems (OSs), while others have versions for more OSs, or can be run on any platform through a Web interface. For bioinformatics publications, there are some specific requirements on chart-plotting software:(1) The software should be able to create plots from large amounts of data within a short period, ideally without strong requirements on the computing power of users' machines.(2) The software should allow users to easily format a large number of data series with exact style specifications. In particular, having long lists of formatting options distributed across many different sections of the user interface and asking users to repeat long sequences of mouse clicks at precise locations for every data series should both be avoided.(3) The software should facilitate seamless re-application of a given formatting style to another dataset, as it is common to have multiple main or supplementary figures of the same type for different sets of data.We have designed and developed a software tool, ECplot, which fulfills all these requirements. It is a free online tool that can be accessed using any contemporary Web browsers. It targets both users with and without programming experience. The most computationally intensive plotting operations are all performed at the server side, which avoids the need for powerful client machines.