Motivation: Advancing the search, publication and integration of bio-informatics tools and resources demands consistent machine-understandable descriptions. A comprehensive ontology allowing such descriptions is therefore required. Results: EDAM is an ontology of bioinformatics operations (tool or workflow functions), types of data and identifiers, application domains and data formats. EDAM supports semantic annotation of diverse entities such as Web services, databases, programmatic libraries, standalone tools, interactive applications, data schemas, datasets and publications within bioinformatics. EDAM applies to organizing and finding suitable tools and data and to automating their integration into complex applications or workflows. It includes over 2200 defined concepts and has successfully been used for annotations and implementations. Availability: The latest stable version of EDAM is available in OWL format from http://edamontology.org/EDAM.owl and in OBO format from http://edamontology.org/EDAM.obo. It can be viewed online at the NCBO BioPortal and the EBI Ontology Lookup Service. For documentation and license please refer to http://edamontology.org. This article describes version 1.2 available at http://edamontology.org/
INTRODUCTIONThe number and diversity of bioinformatics tools, including data resources, grows vastly. To aid users in finding, comparing, selecting and integrating tools into workflows or workbenches, it is important having the tools consistently described with respect to a number of categories. These include their application domain (e.g. protein structure, metagenomics), function (e.g. alignment construction), type of input and output data (e.g. accession, feature record) and available formats of the data (e.g. FASTQ, PDB format). In the absence of accepted standards for such tool descriptions, the categorization of tools has been left to providers of tool catalogues or workbenches. In this undesired situation, tools have to be described again every time they are integrated into a new framework. Not only duplicating efforts, this also leads to fragmented descriptions and inconsistent categorization. We present EDAM, an ontology of bioinformatics operations, types of data and identifiers, data formats and topics. Its name originates from 'EMBRACE Data And Methods', as it was initiated by the EMBRACE project (). Its primary goal is as a means of creating coherent, machine-understandable annotations for use within resource catalogues [such as BioCatalogue () or myExperiment (, information standards (such as BioDBCore,), Web services (http://www.w3.org/standards/webof services), collaborative infrastructures (such as Elixir, http:// www.elixir-europe.org), tool collections [e.g. Bio-Linux () and Debian Med (and integrated workbenches (e.g.). EDAM is also intended to complement standards for data exchange, enrich provenance metadata, offer a shared markup vocabulary for bioinformatics data on the Semantic Web and aid text mining by defining interrelated terms and synonyms. In addition, EDAM must be conveniently usable by annotators and tool users ranging from programmers to lab biologists. To ensure good coverage of common concepts, numerous tools and databases have been semantically annotated with EDAM. Functionality that makes use of EDAM annotations has been implemented in a set of representative frameworks: a suite of bioinformatics tools (EMBOSS,), an integrated workbench for data sharing and analysis (eSysbio, http://esysbio.org), and a workflow system (), thus testing the usability of EDAM.
CONCLUSIONWe have presented EDAM, the ontology that applies to semantic annotation of tool functions, types of data and identifiers, data formats and the domains of diverse resources within bioinformatics. The development of EDAM has been application driven, but EDAM is not application specific. Its usability has been tested by annotating a multitude of tools and data resources. EDAM's applicability to searching, categorizing and automatic handling of resources has been validated by implementations in eSysbio, Bio-jETI and EMBOSS, demonstrating its relevance to resource catalogues, tool libraries and integrative workbenches within bioinformatics. EDAM is also relevant to data provenance, text mining and the Semantic Web. Applicability of EDAM as one of the markup vocabularies for bioinformatics data in RDF was tested at the fourth BioHackathon in Kyoto (example at https://github.com/dbcls/bh11/wiki/BioXSDsequence-record-in-RDF). EDAM does not try to cover all aspects of computational biology. It focusses purely on the semantic 'axes' delineated by its four main sub-ontologies: Operation, Data (including Identifier), Topic and Format, in which it targets the common bioinformatics concepts, especially those reused in multiple contexts. Concepts from distinct EDAM sub-ontologies are related by a few basic relations in addition to generalization (is a) which constitutes the basic hierarchy. EDAM does not define theaggregation relation (is part of, has part, has a or contains). What particular computational steps are done inside an operation is defined by a particular algorithm or a workflow, and it may vary between different implementations of the same operation. In the same way for a type of data, what parts it must or may contain is defined by a concrete data model or format, an information standard or reporting requirement. The included parts of data, both mandatory and optional, differ between different formats of the same type of data. While not defining data and operation parts universally, EDAM does offer concepts for annotating the parts of a particular data format or dataset, and concepts for annotating the steps of a particular bioinformatics algorithm or workflow. Computational aspects that are not specific to bioinformatics should preferably be covered by independent information-technology ontologies, such as, for example, the SWO (http://theswo. sourceforge.net) and the WSIO (http://wsio.org), the development of both of which is coordinated with the development of EDAM and the boundary concepts are referenced. EDAM agnostically links to multiple upper ontologies, allowing a plurality of future semantic-integration approaches. Some specific detailed concepts of data and methods are in focus of other ontologies, such as in case of the CDAO devoted to phylogenetics. In these cases EDAM excludes detailed concepts and instead refers to the boundary ones in the more specialized ontology. Different ontologies focussing on different semantic 'axes' than EDAM are clearly useful for enriching the annotations of tools or datasets, such as the SO, which may denote particular sequence features in focus of a tool or a dataset. In obvious candidates for such annotations, the relevant ontologies are referred to, such as in Feature record and Feature prediction concepts in EDAM pointing to sequence_feature in SO. EDAM aims at being comprehensive for common concepts. Good coverage demands recurring input from the scientific community, in particular within specialized domains in which the core developers of EDAM lack expertise. For this purpose, a broader sustainable consortium should evolve in the future. EDAM will keep following the agile organic development model tested throughout the accomplished iterations. Thanks to the stable URIs and the deprecation mechanism, annotations remain valid with a release of a new version of the ontology. EDAM will continue being coordinated in harmony with related efforts, such as with SWO, WSIO, BioXSD and potentially others. The EDAM developers will continue improving EDAM, while being dependent on the community input and feedback from annotators, developers and users of bioinformatics tools. Additions and corrections can be suggested using a public issue tracker (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/panda/jira/browse/ BMB). The EDAM team will continue providing support to the annotators and the application developers.