Motivation: Recent completion of the global proteomic characterization of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) colorectal cancer (CRC) cohort resulted in the first tumor dataset with complete molecular measurements at DNA, RNA and protein levels. Using CRC as a paradigm, we describe the application of the NetGestalt framework to provide easy access and interpretation of multi-omics data. Results: The NetGestalt CRC portal includes genomic, epigenomic, transcriptomic, proteomic and clinical data for the TCGA CRC cohort, data from other CRC tumor cohorts and cell lines, and existing knowledge on pathways and networks, giving a total of more than 17 million data points. The portal provides features for data query, upload, visualization and integration. These features can be flexibly combined to serve various needs of the users, maximizing the synergy among omics data, human visualization and quantitative analysis. Using three case studies, we demonstrate that the portal not only provides user-friendly data query and visualization but also enables efficient data integration within a single omics data type, across multiple omics data types, and over biological networks. Availability and implementation: The NetGestalt CRC portal can be freely accessed at http://www. netgestalt.org.
IntroductionTechnology advancements have enabled comprehensive characterization of genomic, epigenomic, transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic changes in tumor specimens. A prime example is the TCGA project's generation of multiple types of omics data from hundreds of human tumor specimens for each of the more than 20 selected tumor types. Bridging the gap between data generation and investigators' ability to retrieve and interpret the data is essential to fully realize the biological and clinical value of the vast amount of omics data.To address this challenge, powerful but user-friendly data query systems such as the cBioPortal for cancer genomics () have been established. Moreover, the UCSC Cancer Genomics Browser () enables simultaneous visualization of various types of omics data within the context of genomic sequence, providing an excellent platform for integrating genomeanchored information. Biological networks provide excellent functional contexts for exploring omics data; however, node-link diagram-based network visualization becomes inadequate as network size and data V C The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.
DiscussionThe NetGestalt CRC portal brings together a comprehensive collection of CRC-related omics data. It not only provides easy query and visualization of the data but also enables efficient data integration within a single omics data type, across multiple omics data types, and over biological networks. Our case studies demonstrate the key features that distinguish NetGestalt from other related tools. Compared with typical network visualization tools, NetGestalt allows multi-scale representation and navigation of the data and enables simultaneous visualization of different types of data to facilitate data integration. Network visualization and analysis tools such as Cytoscape (), VisANT () and Osprey () have already become indispensible tools in systems biology studies. Nevertheless, node-link diagrams do not scale well with increasing network size and data complexity. First, when the number of nodes goes beyond a few hundreds, neither individual nodes and edges nor the modular structure of the network can be clearly visualized. Second, simultaneous visualization of multiple datasets in a network is inevitably problematic because of a lack of space. Efforts have been made to collapse all members of a module into a singe 'meta-node' (), extend the two-dimensional representation into three-dimension (), use animation to visualize data from multiple conditions (), use CircleMaps to represent data associated with individual nodes () or arrange multiple versions of the same network in a grid (). Despite enormous research efforts, it remains challenging to use networks as a framework for the visualization and integrative analysis of large and heterogeneous datasets. NetGestalt offers one solution to provide a network-centric view of multidimensional cancer omics data. Although the NetGestalt interface shares many similarities with that of the genome browsers, they are conceptually different and complement each other. Genome browsers are effective in integrating genome-anchored information such as gene structure annotation and copy number variation (). Nevertheless, they are not designed to reveal functional relationships among gene products (). NetGestalt brings functionally related genes together to facilitate the interpretation and integration of multi-omics data within the context of biological networks. Another unique aspect of NetGestalt is the enabling of seamless connections among the data query, visualization, and integration features, which can be used iteratively in different combinations to serve the needs of the users, maximizing the synergy among omics data, human visualization, and quantitative analysis. As a result, the portal can be used for both hypothesis generation and hypothesis testing, or a combination of both. Moreover, users can also upload their own datasets to the system for integrative analysis. The current version of the portal only includes three human proteinprotein interaction networks. Genes not included in the networks are not included for visualization and analysis in the portal. In the future, we will add functional association networks (e.g. STRING,) that do not require physical interaction in order to further improve gene coverage. Moreover, it has been shown that tissue-specific networks are more functionally relevant (). We will consider adding context-specific networks to the portal. Meanwhile, users can analyze the datasets using their own networks, which can be easily uploaded to the system. Using CRC as a paradigm, we have demonstrated the power of NetGestalt in facilitating easy access and interpretation of multidimensional cancer omics data. A natural extension is to expand the portal to cover data for other cancer types. Analysis across tumor types, as demonstrated by the Pan-Cancer initiative (Cancer Genome Atlas), has started to provide novel biological and clinical insights to human cancer. A NetGestalt pan-cancer portal will complement existing efforts within the Pan-Cancer initiative to facilitate the discovery of commonalities, differences and emergent themes across cancer types at gene, pathway, and network levels.