Motivation: Multiple high-throughput approaches have recently been developed and allowed the discovery of enhancers on a genome scale in a single experiment. However, the datasets generated from these approaches are not fully utilized by the research community due to technical challenges such as lack of consensus enhancer annotation and integrative analytic tools. Results: We developed an interactive database, EnhancerAtlas, which contains an atlas of 2,534,123 enhancers for 105 cell/tissue types. A consensus enhancer annotation was obtained for each cell by summation of independent experimental datasets with the relative weights derived from a cross-validation approach. Moreover, EnhancerAtlas provides a set of useful analytic tools that allow users to query and compare enhancers in a particular genomic region or associated with a gene of interest, and assign enhancers and their target genes from a custom dataset. Availability and Implementation: The database with analytic tools is available at http://www.enhan ceratlas.org/.
IntroductionEnhancers are distal regulatory DNA elements that regulate transcription levels of target genes. They play an important role in development and diseases (). Unlike promoters, enhancers often regulate expression of their target genes independent of their relative location, distance or even the gene orientation (). Furthermore, enhancers are often tissue-or cell type-specific (). Due to the relative location and tissue specificity, it is challenging to identify enhancers. Recently, many technologies were developed to map the enhancers on a genome scale. (i) Clusters of transcription factor (TF) binding sites often represent regulatory elements (), and chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP-seq) or ChIP-chip can be used to identify the binding sites of various TFs or other regulatory factors; (ii) A few enhancer-specific factors have been used to identify enhancers. For example, EP300, a histone acetyltransferase, activates transcription via acetylating the histones. Therefore, the binding sites of EP300 were often used to predict enhancers (); (iii) It was reported that RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) binds to thousands of enhancers (). Therefore, binding sites of POLR2A, the largest subunit of RNAPII, are considered to be the active regulatory regions; (iv) DNase I hypersensitivity sites (DHS) represent the open chromatin regions, many of which cover the enhancers (); (v) Formaldehyde Assisted Isolation of Regulatory Elements (FAIRE) coupled with sequencing is another method to identify large numbers of active regulatory elements including enhancers (); (vi) Some histone modification patterns reflect different chromatin states. For example, the combination of H3K4me1 and H3K27ac is a widely used mark for enhancers (); (vii) The DNA sequences of enhancers could also be transcribed and these transcribed enhancer RNAs (eRNAs) are an indicator of active enhancers (); (viii) Approaches to determine the threedimensional conformation of chromosomes (e.g. 5C and ChIA-PET, Capture-C) are able to provide enhancer-promoter interactions (). These above approaches have been demonstrated as powerful tools to detect enhancers on a genome-wide scale, and they have been applied to many cell types or tissues. However, the datasets generated by these approaches are not fully utilized by the research community due to several technical challenges. First, these datasets are often disseminated in different databases. A centralized data portal is still lacking that is specially designed for enhancer analysis. Second, enhancer annotations based on different technologies showed large discrepancies. A consensus of enhancers will provide more reliable annotation of enhancers. Third, although several genome annotation databases (e.g. UCSC Genome Browser) are currently available to visualize various datasets, they do not provide useful tools for enhancer analysis, such as comparing enhancers across different cell types, generating network views for enhancertarget interactions, and predict enhancers for a custom dataset. The goal of our work is of two-fold. First, we combined a large number of available datasets in each cell/tissue type to produce a 'consensus' of enhancers that represent the most reliable prediction of enhancers. For this purpose, we develop an unsupervised learning approach to evaluate the quality of each dataset in one cell type and generate a consensus for more reliable enhancer identification. Using this method, we produced enhancer predictions for 76 cell lines and 29 tissues. These enhancer predictions have high quality compared with single dataset. Second, we constructed a userfriendly, interactive online database, EnhancerAtlas.org, to facilitate the analysis of enhancers for different cell types. A series of analytic tools were developed to extract, compare and visualize the enhancers in different cell types.