
INTRODUCTIONThe influenza costs half a million lives annually. Despite availability of vaccines, there is always a threat of pandemic from newly emerging virulent strains. Current influenza vaccines, i.e. trivalent inactivated vaccine and live-attenuated vaccine, provide moderate protection, which is either greatly reduced or absent in some seasons (). Pandemics of flu in the past have indicated that these vaccines were not efficient against new virulent strains. The trivalent inactivated vaccine and live-attenuated vaccine influenza vaccines provide protection by producing neutralizing antibodies against surface structural glycoproteins, hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) (). But frequent mutations in these surface proteins result in escape of many virulent strains from antibody-mediated immunity (). The flu pandemic in 2009 and development of resistance strains to ribavirin and oseltamivir drugs () reignited the hunt for a universal influenza vaccine (UIV), which can effectively counter the epidemic and pandemics caused by the influenza virus. In recent years, epitope-based vaccines have shown their effectiveness against HIV, hepatitis B and influenza viruses in clinical studies (). Current approaches have been focusing on B-cell epitope (BCE)-and/or T-cell epitope (TCE)-mediated immune responses to develop a UIV (). Single conserved ectodomain (epitope) of M2 (M2e) protein was developed as a UIV against the influenza virus, but mutations in the middle part of the ectodomain eliminated its potential as a UIV (). A vaccine produced from a single conserved TCE or BCE may not provide broad-specific protection, but a vaccine developed from a cocktail of few conserved epitopes can take it closer to a UIV (). Multimeric-001, a vaccine developed by BiondVax and containing a trimeric combination of nine epitopes from the influenza virus, has provided broad protection and is currently in phase-II clinical trials (). Recent positive outcomes of epitopes-based vaccines have provided an opportunity that available enormous information (epitope and protein sequences, immunogenic data, strains, etc.) on known epitopes (TCEs) in public databases may be explored for the selection of epitopes and/or their combinations to design a potential UIV. Therefore, a Web resource named as 'EpiCombFlu' has been developed, which consists of the 'Epitope information resource' and the 'Epitope combination explorer'. The former is a database containing epitopes' strain coverage and their immunogenic data, whereas the latter explores combinations of epitopes for maximum strains' coverage using forward selection algorithm (FSA).
DescriptionThe Web resource provides a user-friendly interface to search and retrieve information related to influenza epitopes in 'Epitope information resource'. Output of the search is presented in a tabular format, which contains strain coverage and immunogenic information of epitopes. 'Epitope combination explorer' explores different combinations of influenza epitopes using FSA. There are two options to submit epitope sequences into this module: (i) Selection of an epitope from dropdown menu of corresponding proteins [mouse on epitope sequence in the 'list box' displays a hover showing information about its immune response, and coverage in strains (global, continents-wise and vaccine, strains), subtypes and their host organism] and (ii) insertion of epitope sequence is provided in the text box. The epitope combination explorer provides similar information as 'Epitope information resource' about conservation and immune response, but for a combination of selected epitopes.