Motivation: Information-theoretic and compositional analysis of biological sequences, in terms of k-mer dictionaries, has a well established role in genomic and proteomic studies. Much less so in epigenomics, although the role of k-mers in chromatin organization and nucleosome positioning is particularly relevant. Fundamental questions concerning the informational content and compos-itional structure of nucleosome favouring and disfavoring sequences with respect to their basic building blocks still remain open. Results: We present the first analysis on the role of k-mers in the composition of nucleosome enriched and depleted genomic regions (NER and NDR for short) that is: (i) exhaustive and within the bounds dictated by the information-theoretic content of the sample sets we use and (ii) informative for comparative epigenomics. We analize four different organisms and we propose a paradig-matic formalization of k-mer dictionaries, providing two different and complementary views of the k-mers involved in NER and NDR. The first extends well known studies in this area, its comparative nature being its major merit. The second, very novel, brings to light the rich variety of k-mers involved in influencing nucleosome positioning, for which an initial classification in terms of clusters is also provided. Although such a classification offers many insights, the following deserves to be singled-out: short poly(dA:dT) tracts are reported in the literature as fundamental for nucleo-some depletion, however a global quantitative look reveals that their role is much less prominent than one would expect based on previous studies. Availability and implementation: Dictionaries, clusters and Supplementary Material are available online at
IntroductionStudies investigating the information-theoretic content and composition, in particular in terms of k-mers, of sequences are pervasive in computational biology (). However, although it is well established that DNA sequence has a role in epigenomics (), there are very few studies that have systematically applied compositional and linguistic techniques for the identification of sequence features associated with epigenomic functions. They are reviewed by. To the best of our knowledge, no information-theoretic study is present in epigenomics.We focus on the following particular research area in epigenomics: the identification of mechanisms accounting for nucleosome organization and positioning in chromatin. It was initiated more than 30 years ago by Kornberg (1981) and, thanks to advances in microarray and sequencing technologies, it has prospered in the past few years. An extensive overview of its many aspects is provided in (). Particularly relevant for this paper are the findings outlined next. The chromatin organization of eukaryotic genomes has been successfully argued that it is DNA-encoded (). Therefore, it seems natural to complement such an argument with an information-theoretic study aiming at establishing the similarity and differences, in terms of their information-theoretic content, between NER and NDRs on a genomic scale. Such a study is not available. It is also a well established fact that sequence motifs and regularities influence nucleosome positioning. The ones that have been identified are: (i) the 10 bp periodicity of the dinucleotides AA/ TT/TA that oscillate in phase with each other and out of phase with a similar perodicity of the GC denuclotides (); (ii) poly(dA:dT) tracts (), i.e. stretches of A's or T's and (iii) the G  C content of a genomic region, with its A  T content also playing some role (). In terms of specific k-mers, studies about their role in favouring nucleosome positioning have only identified a handful of them, e.g. () and no systematic study seems to be available. The above state of the art clearly indicates that the literature has not addressed the following foundational issues:1. An information-theoretic characterization of the NER and NDR, highlighting similarities and differences. 2. A structural characterization of the 'world of k-mers' in terms of their involvement in the composition of genomic sequences rich or depleted of nucleosomes, with the possible identification of groups of similar k-mers that play a role in that composition.We provide contributions to both issues. In particular, we present the first information-theoretic analysis of NER and NDR. Among the other useful insights, it establishes that the information content of NER is surprisingly very close to that of NDR, yet such a difference is statistically very significant. As for the second issue, we provide a computational and statistical methodology that is used to build epigenomic dictionaries, for the case of nucleosome positioning in vivo. That is, catalogues of k-mers, each having a statistical score assessing to which extend it favours or inhibits nucleosome formation. Based on a sound information-theoretic argument, kmers of at most 10 basis are considered in this study. Interestingly, k-mers that are known to favour or inhibit nucleosome positioning from previous studies are correctly classified in our dictionaries, and a rich, never highlighted before, variety of k-mers involved in nucleosome positioning comes to light for the first time. A final introductory remark is in order. The only previous study, of which this one can be seen as its natural continuation, is the one by, where in vivo data have been used. We adhere to that choice here, pointing out the need for a genome-wide analysis comparing k-mer preferences for nucleosome formation in vitro and in vivo. The very discriminative and methodologically sound techniques given here are a relevant technical step forward for its successful realization, whose outcome would add another important tile to the puzzle of 'sequences and nucleosomes'.