Motivation: When genomic data are associated with gene expression data, the resulting expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) will likely span multiple genes. eQTL prioritization techniques can be used to select the most likely causal gene affecting the expression of a target gene from a list of candidates. As an input, these techniques use physical interaction networks that often contain highly connected genes and unreliable or irrelevant interactions that can interfere with the prioritization process. We present EPSILON, an extendable framework for eQTL prioritization, which mitigates the effect of highly connected genes and unreliable interactions by constructing a local network before a network-based similarity measure is applied to select the true causal gene. Results: We tested the new method on three eQTL datasets derived from yeast data using three different association techniques. A physical interaction network was constructed, and each eQTL in each dataset was prioritized using the EPSILON approach: first, a local network was constructed using a k-trials shortest path algorithm, followed by the calculation of a network-based similarity measure. Three similarity measures were evaluated: random walks, the Laplacian Exponential Diffusion kernel and the Regularized Commute-Time kernel. The aim was to predict knockout interactions from a yeast knockout compendium. EPSILON outperformed two reference prioritization methods, random assignment and shortest path prioritization. Next, we found that using a local network significantly increased prioritization performance in terms of predicted knockout pairs when compared with using exactly the same network similarity measures on the global network, with an average increase in prioritization performance of 8 percentage points (P510 À5). Availability: The physical interaction network and the source code (Matlab/Cþþ) of our implementation can be downloaded from
INTRODUCTIONExpression Quantitative Trait Locus (eQTL) analysis is the process of associating genetic variation in a population with variable gene expression to identify polymorphic genetic regions affecting gene expression (). Frequently, genetic markers are used to sample the genetic diversity between individuals of an organism. Owing to linkage disequilibrium and the spacing of the genetic markers on the genome, these genetic markers represent a region on a chromosome that covers multiple genes rather than a single gene. The variability in expression of the genes found to be associated with the eQTL (here referred to as target genes) is most likely caused by a mutation in a single gene located on the eQTL (the true causal gene). Yet, eQTL analysis as such is not able to distinguish this causal gene from the remainder of the genes located on the eQTL (the candidate causal genes). Instead, gene prioritization or refinement methods are needed. A number of prioritization methods that rank candidate genes according to some criterion have been developed in the pastfor an extensive overview]. Typically, these methods target novel (human) disease-gene identification. Information about the disease under study, i.e. in the form of a list of existing disease genes is often needed. Other methods target specific experiments for which additional data, divided in disease/ control groups, are required and cannot be readily applied to the results of an eQTL analysis where such groups are not necessarily present. Also, some of these techniques do not allow for the incorporation of a custom gene interaction network, as only predefined networks for a limited number of organisms are available. A smaller number of techniques were developed to tackle the more specific eQTL prioritization task. All eQTL prioritization methods have in common that they use a physical interaction network to define a similarity measure between a target gene and a set of candidate causal genes. The higher the networkbased similarity between the target and the candidate causal gene, the more likely the candidate corresponds to the true causal gene.developed a method based on random walks (RWs) in a physical interaction network, an approach later refined by, who extended the RW idea with an electric circuit analogy.applied the PageRank algorithm to develop a gene affinity measure, and Stojmirovicndused the mathematical modeling of information flow in a network to rank candidate genes. *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the last two authors should be regarded as joint Last Authors. According to Stojmirovicnd Yu (2012), it is most important to use directed relations (e.g. proteinDNA interactions) in the interaction network whenever possible. They also suggest localizing the network, i.e. excluding distant genes from the network that connects an origin (the target gene) with a set of destinations (the candidate causal genes), before analysis to better reflect the biological context. Otherwise, results of, for example, gene prioritization will be highly dependent on the node degree of the genes in the network. A high node degree can point to functionally useless genes (so-called promiscuous genes). However, genes with a high node degree can also correspond to important hubs (). As a result, simply removing genes from the network with a node degree exceeding an arbitrary threshold or heuristically downweighting the importance of relations based on the number of connections risks removing useful genes or important relations (). To overcome this problem, we propose EPSILON, an eQTL prioritization framework using similarity measures derived from local networks. The main assumption underlying EPSILON is that the disturbing influence of highly connected genes and unreliable or irrelevant interactions can be controlled by reducing the global interaction network to a local neighborhood (i.e. a sub-network) connecting the target gene and all candidate causal genes, before calculating a network-based similarity measure. Once the local network is constructed, a similarity measure between the target gene and all candidate causal genes can be calculated, and the candidate with the highest similarity can be selected as the true causal gene. We demonstrate the added value of a local approach for eQTL prioritization by plugging in established prioritization methods such as path finding and RWs in the EPSILON framework. Alternatively, we also investigate a graph node kernel-based similarity measure. We evaluate the performance of all methods using a gold standard dataset derived from a knockout compendium.
DISCUSSIONIn this manuscript, we presented EPSILON, a framework for eQTL prioritization that ranks a number of candidate causal genes, overlapping an eQTL based on their functional similarity with the target gene associated with the eQTL. The method consists of two steps: (i) local network construction and (ii) the application of a network-based similarity measure. EPSILON is a modular framework that allows for the incorporation of existing network construction procedures and network similarities. We evaluated a k-trials shortest path network construction method together with RW and kernel-based similarity measures using a gold standard dataset derived from a yeast knockout compendium. We were able to show that our approach, the combination of local networks with network-based similarity measures, outperformed random assignment and a shortest path reference method. More interestingly, the global network analogues of the network similarity measures too were outperformed significantly (P510 5 ), clearly showing the added value of using local over global networks. We assume that constraining the global network to a local neighborhood around the target gene and all candidate causal genes is effectively reducing the disturbing impact of hubs and promiscuous genes. Highly connected genes (in the global network) may still be present in the local networks, but the number of interactions those genes participate in will be significantly reduced. An additional explanation of the difference between a local and global approach is the inclusion of directional information in the sub-network construction, even though direction information is not used for the calculation of the similarity measures. There are indications that the LED kernel outperforms the RW similarity measure, but more research is needed to confirm this. We observed large differences in prioritization performance when different eQTL datasets were used (MM, NPR and EN). Especially the EN eQTL seemed to be more difficult to prioritize. Possibly, the quality of the EN associations was lower than that of the other association techniques. All experiments were run with and without TF-filtering. TF-filtering is a technique used by several other authors where it is demanded that a target gene be reached through transcription factor interactions. We were not able to detect any significant effect of TF-filtering on the results obtained.