Motivation: The amount of IBD in an individual depends on the relatedness of the individuals parents. However, it can also provide information regarding mating system, past history and effective size of the population from which the individual has been sampled. Results: Here, we present a new method for estimating inbreeding IBD tracts from low coverage NGS data. Contrary to other methods that use genotype data, the one presented here uses genotype likelihoods to take the uncertainty of the data into account. We benchmark it under a wide range of biologically relevant conditions and show that the new method provides a marked increase in accuracy even at low coverage. Availability and implementation: The methods presented in this work were implemented in C/C þþ and are freely available for non-commercial use from https://github.com/fgvieira/ngsF-HMM.
IntroductionThe inference of inbreeding levels is of central importance in many studies of ecology, evolution and conservation biology. Inbred individuals often have lower fitness than offspring of unrelated parents () and a cumulative effect can reduce the population growth rate and probability of persistence (O'). Furthermore, the study of inbreeding levels on natural populations can shed light into the species' mating system and past history () and is important for understanding the distribution of genetic variation within and among populations and, consequently, the effect of natural selection (). In addition to the genome-wide inbreeding coefficient of an individual, further information can be gained by examining the distribution of inbred (or Identity By Descent; IBD) regions throughout the genome. These regions are usually organized into tracts of homozygous genotypes that recombination breaks down over time. Their number and lengths are tightly coupled to population genetics processes, from fine-scale population structure, effective population size, selfing and recombination rate, to age and type of inbreeding and even relatedness of the parents (). Briefly, short tracts reflect old inbreeding in the population (possibly due to large effective population sizes), while long tracts may reflect recent inbreeding either due to small effective population sizes or familial matings. Under certain conditions and carefully designed experiments, the identification of IBD tracts can even be used for other types of analyses, like mapping of recombination breakpoints from back-crossed individuals. As common descent is always guaranteed for any pair of homologous loci, IBD is often defined relative to an expectation under a certain model. An example is IBD due to recent familial relationships relative to the expectation of genetic identity for two individuals sampled at random from the population. A common operational definition of inbreeding is the excess of homozygosity compared to the HardyWeinberg Equilibrium expectation. This corresponds to classical population genetic definitions dating back toand is in effect the definition used here and in many previous papers (),) based on individual genotype data. Current Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies can sometimes produce data with high error rates due to random sampling of homologous base pairs, sequencing, or alignment errors (). Furthermore, due to budget constraints, many NGS studies rely on low or medium depth of coverage sequence data (  5 per individual), causing genotype calling to be made with a considerable amount of uncertainty. The uncertainty, especially from low depth data, can greatly bias inferences of IBD tracts, as sites with sequencing errors can be mistaken for heterozygote sites thereby breaking up the tracts into smaller segments. Many recent methods rely on probabilistic frameworks to account for these errors and accurately call SNPs and genotypes, even at low coverage (). These methods integrate the base quality score together with other error sources (e.g. mapping or sequencing errors) to calculate an overall genotype likelihood (,b). These likelihoods can be used directly or combined with priors to take into account the uncertainty associated with the data (for reviews see). There are several methods available to infer inbreeding coefficients, but only ngsF () is suitable for low coverage NGS data; however, this program only estimates genome-wide inbreeding levels and is thus incapable of inferring IBD tracts. In this paper, we present a new method to estimate IBD tracts from lowcoverage NGS data. We evaluate its accuracy using extensive biologically relevant simulations and apply it to two real datasets, one consisting of populations from the HAPMAP and 1000 Genomes projects, and another consisting of varieties of wild and domesticated rice. When comparing against genotype-based methods, the method presented here performs considerably better when estimating IBD tracts and per-individual inbreeding coefficients for coverages  3.
DiscussionThe levels of inbreeding in an individual is an important parameter in population genomic studies, since it can reflect mating system, selfing rates, population size and past population history. Theoretically, the best way to infer it is through the pedigree, but pedigrees are not available in much studies. However, even in these cases, inferences based on pedigrees can be biased due to incomplete knowledge of the pedigree. In addition, pedigrees provide expected levels of inbreeding, but these may differ from true genetic levels of inbreeding due to the stochasticity of allelic segregation and recombination. This has been demonstrated by recent analyses identifying higher than expected ROH prevalence in unrelated individuals from outbred populations (), supporting a recent claim that estimates based on markers are more accurate than expected values inferred from pedigrees (). Here, we have developed a method that can reliably estimate individual Identical By Descent (IBD) tracts and inbreeding coefficient, directly from genomic data, without requiring any knowledge of the underlying genealogy. Other methods exist for this () but all were developed for SNP chip data, which has much lower error rates than low coverage NGS data. NGS technologies have revolutionized genetics by providing fast, cheap and reliable large-scale DNA sequencing data. However, the per base pair error rate in NGS data is still considerably higher than in Sanger sequencing or chip-based genotyping technologies (). As a consequence, researchers usually sequence at high sequencing depths but this comes at an increased financial, computational and storage cost. Furthermore, due to the ever-growing demand for larger sample sizes, many NGS studies rely on low coverage NGS sequence data (  5). As such, the availability of methods that can properly handle this data will help researchers make more cost-effective choices in the trade-off between sample size and sequencing depth. The method presented here facilitates the estimation of IBD tracts from low coverage NGS data. We evaluate its performance through both simulated and real data analyses. When compared to genotype-calling-based methods, the improvement in accuracy when estimating IBD tracts and individual inbreeding coefficients is considerable for sequencing depths  3. Apart from the previously mentioned use of this methods in population genomic studies, we note that there is another possible application of the method: mapping of recombination breakpoints in backcrosses between inbred lines. In backcross data, each individual in the backcross generation effectively has an inbreeding coefficient of F  0.5. The method presented here allows the estimation of recombination rates for such data by estimation of the parameter a. More importantly, the posterior decoding algorithm provides estimates of the genomic location of recombination breakpoints. This provides, in combination with low-coverage NGS sequencing of a backcross generation, an efficient design for mapping recombination breakpoints from model species such as yeast.