Numerous software applications exist to deal with synthetic gene design, granting the field of heterologous expression a significant support. However, their dispersion requires the access to different tools and online services in order to complete one single project. Analyzing codon usage, calculating codon adaptation index (CAI), aligning orthologs and optimizing genes are just a few examples. A software application, EuGene, was developed for the optimization of multiple gene synthetic design algorithms. In a seamless automatic form, EuGene calculates or retrieves genome data on codon usage (relative synonymous codon usage and CAI), codon context (CPS and codon pair bias), GC content, hidden stop codons, repetitions, dele-terious sites, protein primary, secondary and tertiary structures, gene orthologs, species housekeeping genes, performs alignments and identifies genes and genomes. The main function of EuGene is analyzing and redesigning gene sequences using multi-objective optimization techniques that maximize the coding features of the resulting sequence. Availability: EuGene is freely available for non-commercial use, at
INTRODUCTIONMolecular biology has witnessed an increased use of computer science tools, especially after the first genome sequencing projects. Assessing the effect and meaning of the genetic information for cells, discovering the information underlying genes and describing protein functionality are some of the most important tasks in this field. Often these require specialized computing tools. Moreover, the developments in the field of gene decoding and protein synthesis already show a good knowledge of the factors that are involved in it. Those factors are mostly related to codon usage (), codon context (), GC content, hidden stop-codons (), repetitions (), deleterious sequences (), messenger RNA (mRNA) secondary structure () and charged transfer RNA availability (). Controlling such factors has become imperative in the field of synthetic gene design. Therefore, numerous tools have been developed to optimize gene sequences and modulate specific characteristics that are believed to influence protein expression efficiency, such as Optimizer), Synthetic Gene Designer () and Gene Composer (). Most of them offer several forms of codon usage optimization, restriction sites management and removal of codon and nucleotide repetitions. However, selection or input of additional information is usually required, such as codon usage and context tables or orthologs to perform alignments. Nonetheless, most of the required information is available online in diverse biological databases such as NCBI, EBI, PDB and KEGG, but few systems take advantage of those. Several other tasks are involved in synthetic gene design efficiency, such as calculating protein secondary structure and visualizing the tertiary structure to aid in mapping protein motifs to gene zones or gathering and aligning orthologs to find similarities and conservation regions. Nevertheless, despite the amount and variety of available gene information and synthetic redesign approaches, integration of those factors into a single optimization tool is still very limited. Thus, in order to advance and facilitate synthetic gene design and analysis, we developed a tool that integrates several online services, offline tools and synthetic gene redesign techniques into a single application.