Motivation: In molecular biology, molecular events describe observable alterations of biomolecules, such as binding of proteins or RNA production. These events might be responsible for drug reactions or development of certain diseases. As such, biomedical event extraction , the process of automatically detecting description of molecular interactions in research articles, attracted substantial research interest recently. Event trigger identification, detecting the words describing the event types, is a crucial and prerequisite step in the pipeline process of biomedical event extraction. Taking the event types as classes, event trigger identification can be viewed as a classification task. For each word in a sentence, a trained classifier predicts whether the word corresponds to an event type and which event type based on the context features. Therefore, a well-designed feature set with a good level of discrimination and generalization is crucial for the performance of event trigger identification. Results: In this article, we propose a novel framework for event trigger identification. In particular, we learn biomedical domain knowledge from a large text corpus built from Medline and embed it into word features using neural language modeling. The embedded features are then combined with the syntactic and semantic context features using the multiple kernel learning method. The combined feature set is used for training the event trigger classifier. Experimental results on the golden standard corpus show that 42.5% improvement on F-score is achieved by the proposed framework when compared with the state-of-the-art approach, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed framework. Availability and implementation: The source code for the proposed framework is freely available and can be downloaded at https://github.com/dphansti/mango.
INTRODUCTIONIn molecular biology, molecular events describe observable alterations of biomolecules, such as binding of proteins or RNA production. These molecular events influence the formation of a phenotype, which may be responsible for drug reactions or development of certain diseases. However, knowledge about these events is scattered in the scientific literature with continuing fast growth. Tremendous systematic and automated efforts are required to use the underlying information. As such, biomedical event extraction attracted much research interest recently. Several evaluation tasks, such as BioNLP'09 (), BioNLP'11 () and BioNLP'13 () shared tasks, have been held in recent years to allow researchers to develop and compare their methods for biomedical events extraction. In general, each biomedical event consists of a trigger and one or more arguments. For example, '.. . inhibiting tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT6. . .' describes two events, one is the phosphorylation event and the other is the negative regulation event, which is signaled by the word 'inhibiting' and takes the first phosphorylation event as its argument. In a typical biomedical event annotation, these two events are represented as follows: E1 (Event Type:Phosphorylation, Theme:STAT6, ToLoc: tyrosine) E2 (Event Type: Negative_regulation:inhibiting Theme:E1)Biomedical event extraction aims to extract such event information from biomedical literature and reformats this extracted information in structures as represented by the two annotations presented above. By extracting detailed behaviors of biomolecules, biomedical event extraction can be used to support the development of biomedical-related databases. To extract events from texts, most systems rely on a pipeline procedure, which usually consists of three cascaded modules including biomedical term identification, event trigger identification and event argument detection (). In such pipeline-based approaches, it is crucial to identify event triggers reliably, as errors in an early stage will be propagated and hurt the performance of the subsequent module. Analysis on the event extraction results show that460% of extraction errors are attributed to the errors of event trigger identification (). To achieve a better performance, existing approaches to event trigger identification are mostly based on learning classifiers from annotated data instead of using manually constructed dictionaries containing a list of trigger words or manually defined linguistic rules. In such approaches, event types are treated as classes, and the aim is to classify words in sentences as indicating a particular event type or not by taking the context features including the syntactic and semantic features into account. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.However, such approaches rely on abundant annotated training data and may not work well when certain event instances are rare in the training data. For example, the word 'proteolysis' does not occur as an event trigger for catabolism type in the training data of the multi-level event extraction (MLEE) corpus (). Therefore, it is difficult to recognize it as an event trigger in the sentence 'The effects of IGF-1 are mediated principally through the IGF-1R but are modulated by complex interactions with multiple IGF binding proteins that themselves are regulated by phosphorylation, proteolysis, polymerization, and cell or matrix association', which appears in the test set. Nevertheless, we notice that another word 'hydrolysis' was annotated as an event trigger in the training data as shown in. If we search through Medline (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov/entrez/query/static/overview.html), we can find that the two words 'proteolysis' and 'hydrolysis' occur in similar context thus tend to have similar meanings following the distributional hypothesis (). Examples of the similar context where 'proteolysis' and 'hydrolysis' occur in Medline are presented in. If we can learn such domain knowledge and incorporate it into trigger word identification, then 'proteolysis' might be correctly identified as an event trigger even if it did not appear in the training data at all. In this article, we argue that biomedical domain knowledge, such as words, tends to occur in similar context, is highly related and this can be incorporated into the learning process of the event trigger classifier to improve the performance of trigger word identification. In specific, we propose a novel framework to learn biomedical knowledge from a large text corpus built from Medline and embed it into word features using neural language modeling. The embedded features are further combined with the well-designed syntactic and semantic context features using the multiple kernel learning (MKL) method for classifier training. We conducted extensive experiments on the MLEE corpus (), and the results show that 42.5% improvement on F-score is achieved using the proposed framework when compared with the state-of-the-art approach, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed framework. The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the proposed framework, which consists of three steps, domain knowledge embedding, local context features extraction and MKL. Experimental setup and results are discussed in Section 3. Finally, Section 4 concludes the article.