Motivation: RNAs play fundamental roles in cellular processes. The function of an RNA is highly dependent on its 3D conformation, which is referred to as the RNA tertiary structure. Because the prediction or experimental determination of these structures is difficult, so many works focus on the problems associated with the RNA secondary structure. Here, we consider the RNA inverse folding problem, in which an RNA secondary structure is given as a target structure and the goal is to design an RNA sequence that folds into the target structure. In this article, we introduce a new evolutionary algorithm for the RNA inverse folding problem. Our algorithm, entitled Evolutionary RNA Design, generates a sequence whose minimum free energy structure is the same as the target structure. Results: We compare our algorithm with INFO-RNA, MODENA, RNAiFold and NUPACK approaches for some biological test sets. The results presented in this article indicate that for longer structures, our algorithm performs better than the other mentioned algorithms in terms of the energy range, accuracy, speedup and nucleotide distribution. Particularly, the generated RNA sequences in our method are much more reliable and similar to the natural RNA sequences. Availability and implementation: The web server and source code are available at https://cbcl.ics.uci.edu/public_data/DAN
INTRODUCTIONRNAs perform a wide range of functions in biological systems. The functional form of RNA frequently requires a specific tertiary structure. The scaffold for this structure is provided by secondary structural elements that are hydrogen bonds within the molecule. Therefore, the study and the analysis of RNA secondary structures are crucial to understanding their functional roles (). In this sense, it is of great interest to propose computational techniques for predicting the RNA secondary structure. Most of the existing computational approaches are based on thermodynamic models that predict the RNA secondary structure with the minimum free energy value (). Several other approaches are introduced based on maximizing the ensemble probability of the predicted RNA secondary structure (). An important problem in the RNA research area is the RNA inverse folding problem, in which the secondary structure of an RNA is given and the goal is to find a proper sequence that folds into the given structure. The RNA inverse folding problem can be used to design non-coding RNAs, which are involved in gene regulation, chromosome replication and RNA modification (). The designed sequences are also applicable to construct ribozymes and riboswitches, which may be used as drugs and therapeutic agents in research (), or for building self-assembling structures from small RNA molecules in nanobiotechnology (). In the RNA inverse folding problem, there are exponential number of sequences to be considered as candidates for the solution (). It is also suggested that the RNA inverse folding problem may be NP-Hard, i.e. finding an exact global solution would require exponential time (). Therefore, the heuristic search methods are widely used to address this problem (). RNAinverse, available as a part of the Vienna RNA package, is an original approach to solve this problem (). This algorithm uses a distance score to measure the distance between the structure of the designed sequence and the target structure. The goal of this algorithm is to minimize the distance score, as well as to maximize the probability of folding the designed sequence into the target structure. When the distance score is 0, the algorithm ends and the generated sequence is returned. The second algorithm, entitled RNA Secondary Structure Designer (RNA-SSD), tries to minimize the structural distance via recursive stochastic local search ().proposed another algorithm based on dynamic programming and local search, called INFORNA. This algorithm consists of two steps. In the first step, it generates an initial sequence using dynamic programming. In the second step, it uses a stochastic local search method to improve the quality of the initial sequence. Genetic algorithm is also used to solve the RNA inverse folding problem, both for RNA secondary structures () and pseudoknotted structures (introduced a new method *To whom correspondence should be addressed. based on a genetic algorithm entitled Frnakenstein, which is implemented in Python. This method allows multiple structures to be specified as target and has a variety of schemes for choosing mutation and recombination operations, or defining fitness and objective functions. The newest version of this method allows pseudoknotted structures to be specified as target or sequence motifs as input, contains parallelization and includes improved searching heuristics as well as multiple folding paradigms.used a dynamic programming approach (NUPACK) for designing the RNA sequence that is intended to adopt a target secondary structure at equilibrium. In this method, the sequence design problem is considered as an optimization problem with the goal of reducing the ensemble defect. The ensemble defect (for a sequence and a target secondary structure) is the average number of incorrectly paired nucleotides at equilibrium evaluated over the ensemble of secondary structures. Recently, a constraint programming) approach, entitled RNAiFold, was presented to solve the RNA inverse folding problem. This approach allows a wide range of design constraints to be specified (). It also introduces a large neighborhood search approach that allows larger instances at the cost of losing completeness, while retaining the advantages of meeting design constraints (motif, GC-content, etc.). It should be mentioned that the existing methods use a folding algorithm for evaluating and improving the accuracy and the quality of the generated sequences. It is well-known that the fold method of the Vienna RNA package requires On 3  operations; thus, using this algorithm over the whole sequence increases the overall running time. To resolve this problem, some structural decomposition schemes have been used in the previous studies to reduce the impact of the fold method. In this article, a different decomposition scheme is also used to produce the smaller sub-structures, and a new method based on evolutionary algorithms is presented to recursively solve and combine the obtained sub-structures. Our evolutionary algorithm designs an RNA sequence that folds into a given target structure. Any RNA secondary structure contains different structural components, each having a different length. Therefore, we first reconstruct RNA sub-sequences (pools) corresponding to different components with different lengths. Using the pools, we reconstruct an initial RNA sequence that is compatible (in which the base pairs are canonical) with the given target structure. Then we use an evolutionary algorithm to improve the quality of the sub-sequences corresponding to the components. The major contributions of our algorithm are using the natural RNA sequences, a different method for evaluating the sequences in each population and a different hierarchical decomposition of the target structure into smaller sub-structures. The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, the details of our approach are presented. Section 3 represents the results of our approach and the others, as well as the comparisons. Finally, the conclusion is presented in Section 4.
CONCLUSIONIn this article, a new evolutionary algorithm is proposed for solving the RNA inverse folding problem. Our algorithm is composed of several steps to design a reliable RNA sequence. The results presented in this article indicate that for longer structures, our algorithm performs better than the other mentioned algorithms in terms of accuracy, speedup and nucleotide distribution. Also, the produced energy ranges of our algorithm are comparable with those produced by MODENA. Therefore, our method could generate much more reliable sequences that have diverse stability in terms of energy range and are more similar to the natural RNA sequences. Although GC base pairs are energetically most favorable, the sequences generated by ERD do not have a high GC content. In the future, it is desirable to introduce sequence constraints in ERD to control the GC content and consequently the stability and the energy range of the designed sequence.