Motivation: Amino acid mutations in proteins can be found by searching tandem mass spectra acquired in shotgun proteomics experiments against protein sequences predicted from genomes. Traditionally, unconstrained searches for amino acid mutations have been accomplished by using a sequence tagging approach that combines de novo sequencing with database searching. However, this approach is limited by the performance of de novo sequencing. Results: The Sipros algorithm v2.0 was developed to perform unconstrained database searching using high-resolution tandem mass spectra by exhaustively enumerating all single non-isobaric mutations for every residue in a protein database. The performance of Sipros for amino acid mutation identification exceeded that of an established sequence tagging algorithm, Inspect, based on benchmarking results from a Rhodopseudomonas palustris proteomics dataset. To demonstrate the viability of the algorithm for meta-proteomics, Sipros was used to identify amino acid mutations in a natural microbial community in acid mine drainage. Availability: The Sipros algorithm is freely available at http://www.perkinslab.ca/Software.html.
INTRODUCTIONMicrobial communities drive biological processes in many natural environments, such as the rhizosphere (, the human gut () and acid mine drainage (AMD,). In recent years, meta-proteomics has emerged as a culture-independent approach for studying the activities of microbial communities in their natural environments (). Generally, the proteomes of a community are extracted from field samples of interest and measured using shotgun proteomics. Proteins are identified by matching tandem mass spectra to a protein database using standard database searching algorithms (). The protein database is typically compiled from the meta-genomic sequences of the community. Although this approach can effectively identify peptides whose sequences are represented in the protein database, it is unable to identify peptides with amino acid mutations which differ slightly * To whom correspondence should be addressed. from the original sequences in the database. Characterization of amino acid mutations in meta-proteome samples will not only increase the number of identified peptides and proteins but also capture sequence polymorphisms of proteins across environmental samples. Because a microbial species in a community is generally comprised of multiple strains, and because different strains often have significant sequence polymorphisms between homologous proteins, identification of amino acid mutations informs the selection of certain strains or certain variants of a protein under different conditions of an ecosystem. Identification of amino acid mutations is of interest for many proteomics studies. The existing methods can be classified into the following two broad categories. (i) Database-searching-based methods. This approach was first demonstrated by identification of amino acid mutations in six variants of isolated human hemoglobin using the SEQUEST-SNP algorithm (). A total of 629 mutations were identified in a breast tumor proteome () by searching mass spectral data against a customized protein database that contained a list of potential mutations inferred from the NCBI single-nucleotide polymorphisms database, dbSNP (). The X!Tandem algorithm can identify a subset of mutations with positive scores in the PAM (Point Accepted Mutation) substitution matrix from a targeted set of proteins that are identified in an unmodified form by a preceding search (). Because amino acid mutations can be considered as post-translation modifications, all standard database searching algorithms can be used to search for a small number of mutations. However, because there are 18 non-isobaric mutations (i.e. considering mutations to I or L as one mutation) for every residue in the protein database, all the existing methods based on database searching need to constrain their search space by limiting the number of proteins and/or the number of mutations. These constraints are necessary to reduce the running time of the search and to maintain a low false discovery rate (FDR), but, as a result of these constraints, they likely exclude many true amino acid mutations from consideration. (ii) Sequence-tagging-based methods. Sequence tags predicted by de novo sequencing algorithms can be used to dramatically narrow down the search space without using the pre-imposed constraints needed for database-searching-based methods. Example algorithms include GutenTag (), Inspect (), Paragon (), DirecTag () and Vonode (). The TagRecon algorithm was developed to leverage sequence tags to identify amino acid mutations in proteomic datasets (). Although much improved in recent years, de novo sequencing algorithms still trail behind database searching algorithms in terms of the number of identified spectra and the accuracy of identification (). The sequence-tagging-based algorithms are dependent on obtaining correct sequence tags from de novo sequencing. In this study, we developed a new strategy for amino acid mutation identification. Experimentally, we acquired high-resolution Orbitrap tandem mass spectra from collision-induced dissociation (CID) for the purpose of amino acid mutation identification. Computationally, we developed an algorithm, Sipros v2.0, to perform an unconstrained database search that exhaustively enumerates and scores all single non-isobaric mutations for every residue in a protein database. The performance of Sipros was compared with an established sequence tagging algorithm, Inspect, using an Rhodopseudomonas palustris dataset. The new approach was used to identify amino acid mutations from a natural community in AMD. Previously, Sipros v1.0 was used to determine the stable isotope enrichment level of partially labeled peptides for proteomic stable isotope probing ().