Motivation: Template-based modelling can approximate the unknown structure of a target protein using an homologous template structure. The core of the resulting prediction then comprises the structural regions conserved between template and target. Target prediction could be improved by rigidly repositioning such single template, structurally conserved fragment regions. The purpose of this article is to quantify the extent to which such improvements are possible and to relate this extent to properties of the target, the template and their alignment. Results: The improvement in accuracy achievable when rigid fragments from a single template are optimally positioned was calculated using structure pairs from the HOMSTRAD database, as well as CASP7 and CASP8 target/best template pairs. Over the union of the structurally conserved regions, improvements of 0.7 Å in root mean squared deviation (RMSD) and 6% in GDT_HA were commonly observed. A generalized linear model revealed that the extent to which a template can be improved can be predicted using four variables. Templates with the greatest scope for improvement tend to have relatively more fragments, shorter fragments, higher percentage of helical secondary structure and lower sequence identity. Optimal positioning of the template fragments offers the potential for improving loop modelling. These results demonstrate that substantial improvement could be made on many templates if the conserved fragments were to be optimally positioned. They also provide a basis for identifying templates for which modification of fragment positions may yield such improvements.
INTRODUCTIONKnowledge of the structure of a protein is crucial to an understanding of its function. Experimental determination of protein structure is far from keeping pace with the discovery of the amino acid sequences of proteins (). Thus to further our understanding of the molecular function of organisms using the growing volume of genomic information, it is necessary to be able to accurately predict protein structure from the amino acid sequence. Template-based modelling (TBM), the most accurate method of predicting protein structure, exploits the structural similarities * To whom correspondence should be addressed.shared between two related proteins (). As the amino acid sequences of related proteins diverge through evolution, each accumulates insertions, deletions and mutations. These modifications are manifested in shifts and rotations of structural elements, local deformations and changes in side chains (), while the fold of the protein tends to be maintained. It is this structural similarity of related proteins that is exploited by TBM. Beginning with its amino acid sequence, the unknown, or target structure is predicted by approximating it with the structural features putatively conserved between itself and a known, homologous template structure. In general, TBM proceeds by first identifying the template structures that best approximate the target, and subsequently attempting to remove any differences that have accumulated between the target and templates. Of the two approaches currently adopted (), one predicts the target by optimizing restraints on inter-atomic distances and torsion angles, restraints derived in part from the templates (, e.g. Modeller). In the alternative approach, TBM involves the direct transfer of backbone and/or side chain coordinates from the templates to the target structure wherever the targettemplate sequences are aligned ()it is this last approach with which we are concerned here. The component steps of this approach have been modified little since the work of. These are:(i) aligning a template and target sequence; (ii) using the structure from sequence regions conserved between the template and target to predict the target structure; (iii) prediction of non-conserved regions; (iv) side chain addition; and (v) refinement/modification of the resulting predictions. Current modelling methods are largely successful in finding the initial approximation, that is, in selecting the best template and aligning this with the target. In the two most recent biennial protein structure prediction experiments [CASP7 () and CASP8 (, for example, optimal or nearoptimal template selection and alignment was achieved for most proteins with readily identifiable templates (). In spite of this success, the majority of final predictions from TBM methods remain inferior to the direct transfer of coordinates from the best template to the target based on an optimal templatetarget alignment (). The accuracy with which a template approximates a target is directly related to their sequence identity (SI). Templates with residues 30% identical to the target generally approximate the core to around 1.52  root mean squared deviation (RMSD), and this may improve to 1  RMSD when sequence identities rise 50% (). Even for templates with high SI to the target, differences in packing and contacts may result in the mainchain conformation of the template and target differing by 'up to several angstroms' (). It is therefore important that TBM be able to predict structures that improve upon the template, and for this it is necessary to modify and refine the backbone (;). Unfortunately, reliable methods of template refinement have so far been elusive. To completely predict the structure of the target often requires the modelling of regions with no corresponding residues in the templatea consequence of the insertions and deletions that have occurred as proteins evolve. The resulting gaps within the predicted structure must be filled using loop prediction methods (). The accuracy of loop prediction is reduced by the distortions present in the unmodified template relative to the target, particularly in the residues adjacent to the gaps in the targettemplate alignment, known as anchor regions (). A further benefit of improving upon the template structure may thus be improved accuracy of anchor regions, which could then yield more accurate prediction of loops. Modifying a template to better approximate the target is equivalent to adjusting for the structural differences that have accumulated between two homologues.previously examined the sources of structural differences within the backbone of conserved regions, and identified all differences as a combination of rigid shifts and rotations of the conserved region, and local deformation of the backbone. Using proteins from the eight families known at that time, the way structural differences were manifest between homologues was related to both SI and type of secondary structure. Although a small number of studies such ashave observed shifts and rotations of structural elements within homologues, and some structure alignment algorithms implement 'flexible' structures (), no other study quantifies the sources of structural variation in the conserved regions of homologues since the analysis of 32 homologues by. Given that more than 50 000 proteins have been experimentally determined in the intervening period, it now seems prudent to revisit this topic. How much of the structural difference observed between two homologues results from the shifts and rotations of the structural elements, and how much from changes in local conformation? This question is critical for determining the nature of the differences that exist between two homologues. At one extreme, if a large proportion of the differences observed derives from shifts and rotations, then such modifications should be considered prior to exploring local changes. At the other extreme, if all of the differences observed are from changes in local conformation, then a TBM algorithm should focus solely on modifying the local conformation. Here, we analyse the extent to which differences between the homologous proteins are a consequence of shifts and rotations of the conserved regions. We demonstrate the potential value of optimizing the positioning of template regions conserved within the target, showing that the accuracy with which the conserved fragments within a template structure can approximate the target is predicted by the number and length of structurally conserved regions within the alignment, the -helical proportion of the target, and the SI. We also show that half of the anchor regions have RMSD to the native conformation decreased by at least 0.45  when fragments are shifted optimally, thus providing scope for more accurate loop modelling. The contributions of the current article are 2-fold. First, the article quantifies the ultimate extent of improvement possible through rotation and translation of structurally conserved regions of a template, so defining the distance to the finish line for such model refinement. Second, the article finds a relationship between the extent of improvement possible and the properties of both the template and the target, so providing initial guidelines for establishing the distance to the finish line for a given template. It remains as future work to provide explicit rules for repositioning fragments, relating the translation and rotation required to local and global properties of the template and target.