Motivation: Although many tools are available to study variation and its impact in single genomes, there is a lack of algorithms for finding such variation in metagenomes. This hampers the interpretation of metagenomics sequencing datasets, which are increasingly acquired in research on the (human) microbiome, in environmental studies and in the study of processes in the production of foods and beverages. Existing algorithms often depend on the use of reference genomes, which pose a problem when a metagenome of a priori unknown strain composition is studied. In this article, we develop a method to perform reference-free detection and visual exploration of genomic variation, both within a single metagenome and between metagenomes. Results: We present the MARYGOLD algorithm and its implementation, which efficiently detects bubble structures in contig graphs using graph decomposition. These bubbles represent variable genomic regions in closely related strains in metagenomic samples. The variation found is presented in a condensed Circos-based visualization, which allows for easy exploration and interpretation of the found variation. We validated the algorithm on two simulated datasets containing three respectively seven Escherichia coli genomes and showed that finding allelic variation in these genomes improves assemblies. Additionally, we applied MARYGOLD to publicly available real metagenomic datasets, enabling us to find within-sample genomic variation in the metagen-omes of a kimchi fermentation process, the microbiome of a premature infant and in microbial communities living on acid mine drainage. Moreover, we used MARYGOLD for between-sample variation detection and exploration by comparing sequencing data sampled at different time points for both of these datasets. Availability: MARYGOLD has been written in Cþþ and Python and can be downloaded from http://bioinformatics.tudelft.nl/software Contact: d.deridder@tudelft.nl
INTRODUCTIONRecently, large-scale microbiome analyses, such as metaHIT () and the National Institutes of Health Human Microbiome Project (), have demonstrated the importance and the richness of our second genome: the microbes inhabiting many different sites of our bodies. To get the complete picture of all DNA present, its biological functions and the genetic variation, increasingly whole-metagenome sequencing is performed (). Large-scale analysis of variation within and between the resulting metagenomessingle nucleotide variants, short insertions and deletions (indels) and structural variatonis essential to fully understand their genetic makeup. However, relatively few studies have thus far ventured into such analyses.combined data obtained from stool samples in the metaHIT and HMP projects and a study comparing leanness and obesity (), taking a read mapping approach to detect millions of single nucleotide polymorphisms and other genetic variation in bacterial metagenomes.studied the metagenome of stool samples of a premature infant using an assembly approach. Manual analysis of the assembly output resulted in a genetic variation found in Citrobacter strains. A major reason for this lack of metagenomic variation analysis is a shortage of available tools. Variation detectors have mainly been developed for the isolated genomes of single individuals and can be roughly divided in two categories: reference-based and reference-free. Several reference-based methods that map reads to a preconstructed reference genome are available to detect single nucleotide variants and structural variants, as reviewed in, respectively. However, in metagenomics, reference genomes are usually not available for all species. Moreover, many bacterial species are not cultivable in the laboratory, complicating construction of reference genomes. Reference-free methods, in contrast, detect variation between sequencing samples directly, without resorting to reference genomes.showed that genomic regions with polymorphisms give rise to bubbles in the fragment assembly graph and presented an algorithm to find and smooth the bubbles, which was implemented in the Celera assembler. The Cortex assembler () was designed to coassemble multiple genomes and search for such bubbles in the de Bruijn graph that represent variation between the assembled genomes. Decomposition of a de Bruijn graph into biconnected components followed by bubble detection has been shown to be useful in detecting splicing variants in RNA sequencing data (). *To whom correspondence should be addressed. Similar to co-assembly of individual genomes, metagenome assembly involves simultaneous assembly of multiple genomes. The presence of two closely related genomes in a sample leads to similar bubbles. The metagenome scaffolder Bambus 2 was designed to detect these bubbles and collapse them, thereby elongating scaffolds while preserving divergence in the data (). Bambus 2 finds bubbles by looking for subgraphs where multiple paths begin at a source node and collapse to one sink node. To keep computation tractable, the number of hops considered is limited to two. Meta-IDBA similarly searches bubbles in a de Bruijn graph, but the search is limited to a maximum of 300 bp (). Here we set out to detect complex bubbles such as presented in, i.e. longer than can currently be detected by Bambus 2 and Cortex, typically found when 42 homologous sequences (closely related genomes) are present in a sample. We overcome the computational limitations in the aforementioned methods by developing an efficient way to find genome variation in assembly graphs, by introducing a graph decomposition into bi-and triconnected components that allows us to select a subset of the nodes as source nodes for bubble finding. Identifying bubbles representing multi-alleles has three applications. First, it can be used to detect sequence variation, i.e. multiple alleles, between strains within a single-sample metagenome. Second, co-assembling multiple metagenomes allows the detection of variation between samples. This latter application is particularly novel and is set to become more prominent as more metagenomics datasets will become available over the coming years. Third, although not the main focus in this article, it allows to simplify assemblies, generating longer scaffolds and contigs by collapsing bubbles into a single linear sequence instead of breaking into multiple contigs. Co-assembly has previously been used byto calculate global distances between metagenomes, but here we aim to find sequence-level differences. We demonstrate MARYGOLD, our algorithm to find bubbles and compare them across samples using co-assembly, by comparing metagenome samples obtained using 454 technology of different time points obtained from the stool sample of a premature infant () and a fermentation process of the traditional Korean food kimchi (). We also apply the algorithm on sequencing data of microbial populations found on acid mine drainage (), obtained using both 454 and Illumina technologies, and compare MARYGOLD with Bambus 2. MARYGOLD exports the variation detected in a format that can be visualized by Circos, allowing for a rich visual exploration and interpretation of the genomic variation in metagenomes.
CONCLUSIONWe presented MARYGOLD, a tool to detect and explore genomic variation within and between metagenomic sequencing samples, not reliant on reference genomes. MARYGOLD finds multi-allelic regions that reflect sequence variation and improves the contiguity of assemblies by collapsing these. As input, it expects a contig graph, which makes it generic and applicable to any type of sequencing data; we demonstrated the algorithm both on 454 and Illumina data. Here we generated contig graphs using links from fragment assembly string graphs, but the graphs can be extended using edges derived from other sources such as paired-end sequencing data, de Bruijn graphs or even reference genomes. Multi-allelic regions are efficiently detected by searching for bubble structures in the contig graph, enabled by its decomposition into bi-and triconnected components. Although MARYGOLD can detect local sequence variation, i.e. multiple alleles of a genomic locus, it ignores variation that not does not result in a detectable bubble, such as duplications and translocations, i.e. due to horizontal gene transfer. Sequence variation in metagenomes and in particular between metagenomes, i.e. comparative metagenomics, is still a largely unexplored field. Our algorithm not only finds sequence variation within a single metagenomic sample but also between samples, and it allows for convenient visualization and interpretation of variation of even multiple metagenomic sequencing samples. The importance of sequence variation detection in metagenomes was demonstrated by finding variability in ABC transporters that are involved in resistance to multiple drugs in the kimchi sample and variability in bacterial cell surface proteins that bind to human Ig in the infant's microbiome. Comparing data sampled at different time points in the infant's microbiome showed varying relative abundance during the early colonization of its gut, suggesting competition between closely related strains until a stable composition is reached. As sequencing gets cheaper, more assembly-grade metagenomics sequencing datasets become available. It will soon be possible to compare cohorts of samples and detect sequencelevel difference in microbiomes or other environmental samples explaining specific phenotypes, and link the meta-genotypes to disease. The development of tools, such as MARYGOLD, that find this sequence variation and allow further analysis and interpretation is essential for effectively mining the metagenomics sequencing data.Note: The number of Bambus 2 and MARYGOLD calls is the number of bubbles that mapped to the K12 genome.