Motivation: Human miRNAs have recently been found to have important roles in viral replication. Understanding the patterns and details of human miRNA interactions during virus–host interactions may help uncover novel antiviral therapies. Based on the abundance of knowledge available regarding protein–protein interactions (PPI), virus–host protein interactions, experimentally validated human miRNA-target pairs and transcriptional regulation of human miRNAs, it is possible to explore the complex regulatory network that exists between viral proteins and human miRNAs at the system level. Results: By integrating current data regarding the virus–human inter-actome and human miRNA-target pairs, the overlap between targets of viral proteins and human miRNAs was identified and found to represent topologically important proteins (e.g. hubs or bottlenecks) at the global center of the human PPI network. Viral proteins and human miRNAs were also found to significantly target human PPI pairs. Furthermore, an overlap analysis of virus targets and transcription factors (TFs) of human miRNAs revealed that viral proteins preferentially target human miRNA TFs, representing a new pattern of virus–host interactions. Potential feedback loops formed by viruses, human miRNAs and miRNA TFs were also identified, and these may be exploited by viruses resulting in greater virulence and more effective replication strategies. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONmiRNAs are key regulators of various biological processes (). In addition, recent studies have demonstrated that human miRNAs also have diverse roles in mediating virushuman interactions, see survey by. For example, viruses are able to regulate infection-associated host factors by manipulating human miRNAs to facilitate the infection process (). miRNAs can also interfere with the virus infection process (). By exploring the role of human miRNAs in viral pathogenesis, our understanding of the complex virushuman interactions will be further increased. Viruses may selectively take advantage of human miRNAs to increase their ability to infect or replicate within hosts. For example, Wang et al. found that cytomegalovirus induced changes in miRNA expression (). Ho et al. also found that enterovirus-induced miR-141 targeted cap-dependent translation initiation factor (eIF4E) resulting in termination of host protein synthesis (). Conversely, human miRNAs can also interfere with viral infections. For example, Santhakumar et al. found that a subset of human miRNAs regulated signal transduction pathways, including PI3K/AKT and ERK/MAPK signaling pathways, as well as oxidative stress signaling and prostaglandin synthesis. Moreover, these miRNAs were able to confer broad inhibitory potential against multiple viruses (). In addition, Lagos et al. further confirmed that human miRNAs can regulate innate immune response to viral infections (). Human miRNAs can also directly target viral genomes. For example, Lecellier et al. confirmed that the open reading frame of human foamy virus was targeted by human miR-32, resulting in effective inhibition of human foamy virus replication (). Similarly, overexpression of human miR-199a inhibited replication of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) genome in cells infected with HCV-1b or HCV-2a replicons (). However, it remains unclear whether human miRNAs that directly target viruses confer resistance to viral infections, or if they are used by viruses to establish infection. The growing availability of experimental data regarding the human protein interactome, virushost protein interactions and human miRNA-target pairs has provided a valuable opportunity to study the role of human miRNAs at the systems level. Therefore, in this study, a potential regulatory network was generated using host targets of viral proteins, human miRNAs and putative miRNA TFs. Specifically, four typical patterns of human miRNA-mediated virushuman interactions (), the topological characteristics of host target proteins and human miRNA targets described in the human proteinprotein interaction network (PPIN) are included.
DISCUSSIONThe discovery that human miRNAs play crucial roles in viral pathogenesis provides valuable insight into new patterns of virushost interactions. Based on the systematic overlap analysis performed using data from virushost protein interactions, previously identified human miRNA-target pairs and known human miRNA TFs, it appears that human miRNAs have important and wide ranging effects on virushost interactions. The existence of a large proportion of shared target proteins and protein pairs between viral proteins and human miRNAs indicates that human miRNA regulation subnetworks and viral infections are significantly interwoven in host cell networks. Correspondingly, analysis of topological characteristics associated with the PPIN reveals that overlapping proteins were preferentially topologically important (e.g. hubs and bottlenecks) and tended to occupy the global center of the PPIN. It is possible that the special position of the overlapping targets in the PPIN facilitates the ability of viruses and human miRNAs to efficiently take control of the PPIN. The functional analysis of overlapping targets also demonstrates that these genes take part in basic cellular processes, such as cell communication and apoptosis, which also suggests that human miRNAs play key roles in the process of virus infection and replication. The significant overlap between host targets for viruses and possible human miRNA TFs also reveals a new pattern of virus host interactions. Therefore, targeting human miRNA TFs may be an effective way for a virus to gain control of a host cell, especially because miRNAs can regulate a large number of host proteins. Interestingly, we also find that the host targets of viral proteins may form feedback loops with human miRNAs. These negative feedback loops may be exploited by viruses to finetune their pathogenesis and to complete their replication cycle. Therefore, interfering with these regulatory circuits may provide new approaches for developing antiviral therapies. Certainly, stronger experimental and computational evidence will be needed to further define the existence and universality of the described virushost interaction patterns. In this article, rules governing virushost interactions were systematically analyzed using a high-quality dataset. Because of the complexity of virushost interactions, all the possible virus host interaction patterns could not be explored and only several typical virushost interaction patterns involving the role of human miRNAs were described, and there are reports of the roles of host epigenetic regulators (). There are many other patterns involving virushost interactions that need to be further investigated. For example, human miRNAs can directly target viral genomes for defense (), and viral proteins were also found to regulate expression of human miRNAs that targeted host chromatin remodeling proteins ().