Motivation: Genome-wide mRNA profiling provides a snapshot of the global state of cells under different conditions. However, mRNA levels do not provide direct understanding of upstream regulatory mechanisms. Here, we present a new approach called Expression2Kinases (X2K) to identify upstream regulators likely responsible for observed patterns in genome-wide gene expression. By integrating chromatin immuno-precipitation (ChIP)-seq/chip and position weight matrices (PWMs) data, protein–protein interactions and kinase–substrate phosphorylation reactions, we can better identify regulatory mechanisms upstream of genome-wide differences in gene expression. We validated X2K by applying it to recover drug targets of food and drug administration (FDA)-approved drugs from drug perturbations followed by mRNA expression profiling; to map the regulatory landscape of 44 stem cells and their differentiating progeny; to profile upstream regulatory mechanisms of 327 breast cancer tumors; and to detect pathways from profiled hepatic stellate cells and hippocampal neurons. The X2K approach can advance our understanding of cell signaling and unravel drugs mechanisms of action. Availability: The software and source code are freely available at:
INTRODUCTIONAlthough genome-wide proteomic approaches are rapidly improving, the most widely available and cost-effective genomewide expression data is still collected at the mRNA level. These experiments are carried out using either microarrays or more recently RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) (). Commonly, studies examine cells under different experimental conditions such as control versus drug treated, disease versus normal states or as a time-series, for example, during cell differentiation. Since quantitative changes in mRNA levels do not directly explain how cell signaling mechanisms are altered to * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First authors. induce changes in gene expression, and in turn lead to changes in cellular phenotype, identification of such upstream regulatory mechanisms has been the focus of many computational systems biology studies. Such understanding will enable us, among other things, to better control cell behavior with small molecules, and in turn translate such ability to therapeutics. Most popular approaches for data interpretation of changes in genome-wide gene expression include promoter analysis (), gene ontology (The Gene Ontology Consortium) or pathway enrichment analyses (), as well as reverse engineering of networks from mRNA expression data (). The ultimate goal of many of these approaches is to identify and rank potential target genes/proteins that if knocked down or overexpressed would explain the observed changes by, for example, reversing them. Such proteins may ultimately become drug targets. Here, we present a rational approach called Expression2Kinases (X2K) to identify and rank putative transcription factors, protein complexes and protein kinase that are likely responsible for the observed changes in genome-wide mRNA expression. By combining data from chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-seq/chip experiments and/or position weight matrices (PWMs), proteinprotein interactions and kinasesubstrate protein phosphorylation reactions, we demonstrate how we can better identify regulatory mechanisms responsible for genome-wide differences in gene expression. The idea is to first infer the most likely transcription factors that regulate the differences in gene expression, then use proteinprotein interactions to connect the identified transcription factors using additional proteins to build transcriptional regulatory subnetworks centered on these factors and finally use kinasesubstrate protein phosphorylation reactions to identify and rank candidate protein kinases that most likely regulate the formation of the identified transcriptional complexes (). We show how transcription factors, protein complexes and protein kinase candidate identification and ranking are inferred robustly by cross-validating the method with additional data such as those from drug perturbations followed by genome-wide mRNA expression profiling. Furthermore, we demonstrate the application of the method to in several case studies, where we developed several visualization methods that present a global view of cellfate trajectories at different layers of regulation. All together, X2K can rapidly advance our understanding of cell signaling networks' regulation of gene expression by utilizing different modalities of prior knowledge. The X2K approach can assist in drug target discovery and help in unraveling drug mechanisms of action.
Application
DISCUSSIONThe X2K pipeline presents a new rational approach to identify and rank upstream regulators that are responsible for observed changes in gene expression collected at the genome-wide scale from mammalian cells. The approach, applied to datasets such as CMAP, has the potential to rapidly advance drug target discovery and help in unraveling drug mechanisms of action. The application to mapping transcription factor profiles and kinome profiles of many individual cell types, i.e. different cells during lineage commitment or tumors from patients, can be useful to obtain a global view of the axis of cell signaling networks across many cell types or to compare individual patients for suggesting appropriate pharmacological interventions. In addition, specific applications to common studies that examine genome-wide gene expression under two conditions, such as the two case studies we presented for HSCs and hippocampal neurons, can benefit from X2K analysis for generating hypotheses for further functional experiments following the global expression profiling. While currently the X2K method uses only protein/DNA interactions, proteinprotein interactions and kinasesubstrate reactions, other types of data could be added. For example, histone modifications, microRNAs and other types of post-translational modifications could be incorporated into the pipeline. While more sophisticated enrichment analyses tests could be implemented, i.e. gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) (), and better parameter tuning can be achieved by cross-validation, the initial application of the approach shows great promise. The X2K approach is useful for data integration across layers and the reuse of prior knowledge within newly acquired expression datasets linking expression changes to upstream regulation. Another limitation of the method is the assumption of independence between regulators and targets when applying the ChEA or KEA steps. It is known that the kinome and transcriptional regulome networks are made of tightly coupled protein kinases regulating other kinases and transcription factors regulating other transcription factors. Several recent studies considered such interactions for transcription factors (). Such interdependencies could be added to the X2K analysis where these two regulatory networks could be dynamically modeled. Regardless of these limitations and future directions, the current application of X2K presents an advancement toward our ultimate goal of understanding mammalian cell signaling networks from a global perspective at a molecular level of resolution.