Motivation: The intensification of DNA sequencing will increasingly unveil uncharacterized species with potential alternative genetic codes. A total of 0.65% of the DNA sequences currently in Genbank encode their proteins with a variant genetic code, and these exceptions occur in many unrelated taxa. Results: We introduce FACIL (Fast and Accurate genetic Code Inference and Logo), a fast and reliable tool to evaluate nucleic acid sequences for their genetic code that detects alternative codes even in species distantly related to known organisms. To illustrate this, we apply FACIL to a set of mitochondrial genomic contigs of Globobulimina pseudospinescens. This foraminifer does not have any sequenced close relative in the databases, yet we infer its alternative genetic code with high confidence values. Results are intuitively visualized in a Genetic Code Logo. Availability and implementation: FACIL is available as a web-based service at http://www.cmbi.ru.nl/FACIL/ and as a stand-alone program.
INTRODUCTIONThe recent increases in read lengths have established next-generation DNA sequencing as a mature technique, with the first machines capable of single molecule sequencing currently being shipped to researchers. In most studies, the researchers' interests lie beyond translation: the focus is on proteins that are encoded in the DNA, and their function. Most analyses consider the translation between DNA and protein a trivial exercise. After all the genetic code or codon table, i.e. the 'dictionary' that translates codons (nucleic acid triplets) * To whom correspondence should be addressed. into amino acids (AAs), is largely universal and unambiguous (). However, exceptions in the code of bacteria (), eukaryotic nuclei (), organelles () and their associated viruses () have been reported and, given the increasing phylogenetic breadth of sequenced taxa (), many more such findings may be anticipated. A quick survey of the DNA sequences currently in Genbank shows that a total of 0.65% is annotated as being alternatively translated. If a novel sequence uses a non-canonical code, open-reading frames may be different than anticipated due to the reassignment of stop codons and alternative translations of coding codons. This affects both protein sequence and function prediction, so these considerations demand an easy way to assess the genetic code used on a sequenced fragment or assembled contig. Non-canonical codes are generally identified by inspecting an alignment of the codons on the DNA against homologous protein sequences identified by, e.g. BlastX. The program Gendecoder () automates this process, but it focuses on metazoan mitochondria and requires an annotated Genbank file as input. DNA sequencing increasingly yields fragments and assembled contigs that contain sufficient information for reliable genetic code prediction, but performing BlastX searches before knowing the correct translation table is untenable with the rate of DNA sequencing accelerating faster than CPU power. Moreover, the alignment may introduce errors that need to be addressed, preferably by an automated and validated approach.
DISCUSSIONCurrently, there is no standard available for inference of the genetic code of an unannotated DNA sequence, and a range of ad hoc methods that lack quality control and reported reliability scores obscure this research area [the notable exception being Gendecoder (. With FACIL, we present an easy, fast and reliable tool to predict the genetic code for nucleic acid sequences that does not depend on any a priori gene annotation. FACIL detects alternative genetic codes even in species distantly related to known organisms. Previously, genetic code prediction has explicitly [Gendecoder ()] or implicitly (BlastX searches) benefited from phylogenetic relatedness for reliable predictions. With FACIL, we chose to rely on general protein domains for two reasons. First, this eliminates the requirement to know the taxonomic placement of the organism from which the DNA was derived, which may in particular be difficult for early-branching organisms. Second, this greatly improves its speed (see Section 3.5). Nevertheless, future genetic code predictors may benefit from a more phylogenetically balanced selection of reference sequences, a proper model of evolution and a probabilistic phylogenetic method that considers the AAs at neighboring nodes of the tree and uses branch lengths to calculate the probability of AAs at an unknown state node.