Motivation: It is well recognized that the effects of drugs are far beyond targeting individual proteins, but rather influencing the complex interactions among many relevant biological pathways. Genome-wide expression profiling before and after drug treatment has become a powerful approach for capturing a global snapshot of cellular response to drugs, as well as to understand drugs mechanism of action. Therefore, it is of great interest to analyze this type of tran-scriptomic profiling data for the identification of pathways responsive to different drugs. However, few computational tools exist for this task. Results: We have developed FacPad, a Bayesian sparse factor model, for the inference of pathways responsive to drug treatments. This model represents biological pathways as latent factors and aims to describe the variation among drug-induced gene expression alternations in terms of a much smaller number of latent factors. We applied this model to the Connectivity Map data set (build 02) and demonstrated that FacPad is able to identify many drug–pathway associations , some of which have been validated in the literature. Although this method was originally designed for the analysis of drug-induced transcriptional alternation data, it can be naturally applied to many other settings beyond polypharmacology. Availability and implementation: The R package FacPad is publi-cally available at: http://cran.open-source-solution.org/web/packages/
INTRODUCTIONOne of the common features of complex diseases (such as cancer, cardiovascular diseases and neurological disorders) is the involvement of many genes and biological pathways during the pathogenic process. On the other hand, human physiological systems show different degrees of robustness against singlepoint perturbation due to functional redundancy, various feedback mechanisms and other immune response. Therefore, successful treatment of complex diseases requires 'polypharmacology', which aims to design multi-targeting therapeutics and may represent a new paradigm shift in drug discovery (). Comprehensive and accurate understanding of the targeting spectrum of various drugs is the prerequisite for practical application of polypharmacology. Although the molecular mechanisms of some drugs are well studied, unexpected side effects or toxicity of a large number of preclinical and clinical drugs are often observed (). Therefore, the construction of genome-wide drugtarget network is a problem of great interest in the bioinformatics community and beyond. Current approaches for computational drug target identification can be roughly categorized into three groups: ligand, phenotype or target based (). Ligand-based approaches assume that similarity in chemical structures between drugs indicates similar targeting activities. A well-known example in this category is the QSAR method (Quantitative Structure Activity Relationship), which uses 2D topological feature vectors (which usually encode atom types and their bonding structure) of drugs to train machine learning models in order to predict their binding activity toward specific target proteins (). However, decent performance of ligand-based approach requires a large enough number of known ligands for target proteins of interest, which may be difficult to meet in practice. A second class of methods associates different drugs by comparing the biological phenotype responses, such as cell lines' gene expression profiles or proteomic data (). Seminal work in this direction includes the national NCI-60 project (), which screened 60 human tumor cell lines against more than 100 000 compounds and constructed a public repository for the basal gene expression and drug sensitivity information. The Connectivity Map project initiated by the Broad Institute went a step further (). Although it only focused on five human cancer cell lines, the project generated genome-wide expression profiles both before and after drug treatment for 1309 compounds. In this way, compounds can be connected into a network by comparing their ranked lists of up-and down-regulated genes (). Other phenotype information such as cell imaging and side effects have also been utilized to associate different drugs and to make inference about their potential targets (). The third category of methods looks at the similarity between target proteins to predict drugtarget interactions, based on structure, sequence, evolutionary as well as functional information (). Several recent studies integrate sequence features of targets with ligand fingerprints to train statistical *To whom correspondence should be addressed. learning models for drugtarget interaction prediction (). Another well-known method in this category is docking analysis, which predicts the preferred orientation of drug candidates to potential target proteins when they are bound to each other to form a stable complex (). However, docking cannot be applied to proteins whose 3D structures are unknown. Therefore, it is difficult to use the docking on a genome-wide scale (). The method proposed in this article falls into the second category, phenotype-based approaches. It is designed for the analysis of genome-wide transcriptional response profiles upon screening of a large number of compounds, which shares similar data structure with the Connectivity Map project. Previous studies on treatment response data usually focus on differential expression analysis: to identify the most up-and down-regulated genes for each drug and then check for pathway enrichment of these response signatures () or to define certain drug similarity metrics based on the ranked gene list as the Connectivity Map project (). Drawbacks with the former approach include that it only utilizes the information of the most differentially expressed (DE) genes while disregarding all the other data points. Moreover, the choice of the DE cutoff is subjective, leading to potentially inconsistent pathway enrichment results. The Connectivity Map approach mainly aims at assessing the similarity between different drugs or the construction of a 'drug-network', rather than direct identification of target biological pathways of various compounds. Target pathway identification is a critical step for therapeutics design in the age of systems pharmacology (). Compared with traditional methods focusing on the inference of separate target genes, taking the pathway perspective allows a more integrative understanding of the mechanism of action and physiological effects of compounds. In order to address the aforementioned limitations of existing analysis procedures, we propose 'FacPad', which applies a Bayesian sparse factor model to explain the gene-wise treatment response in terms of latent biological pathway activity changes upon individual treatment. By encoding pathways as latent factors, FacPad naturally incorporates prior knowledge on pathwaygene association structure to aid the inference on drug targets. The idea of FacPad is conceptually related to one of our previous studies 'iFad', which stands for an integrative factor analysis model for drugpathway association inference (). However, distinct from FacPad, iFad aims to jointly analyze two phenotype profiles measured across the same set of samples, that is, two matrices with the same number of columns (sample size) but different number of rows (dimension of the feature space). The two data matrices are decomposed using a common set of latent factors, which represent biological pathways. Therefore, iFad can be applied to the analysis of paired transcription profiles (basal level gene expression, before drug treatment) and drug sensitivity data ('GI 50 ' values, drug concentrations required to inhibit growth by 50%) across the same cell lines, in order to infer the genepathway and drugpathway associations simultaneously. Due to its general factor model framework, FacPad can be easily applied to many other settings apart from drug-induced pathway response data. From the perspective of data mining, this method is basically performing dimension reduction analysis: it aims to explain the variation in the original observed variables in terms of a much smaller number of latent factors. Different from traditional factor analysis or PCA, FacPad is more convenient to use when there exist certain prior knowledge on the association pattern between the latent factors and the observed independent features. The remaining of this article is structured as follows: we will first describe the statistical model of FacPad in Section 2; in Section 3, application of the model on the Connectivity Map data set is presented; the article concludes with a brief discussion on issues worth of note and potential future work.
DISCUSSIONIn this article, we have presented a Bayesian sparse factor analysis model, FacPad, for the inference of drugpathway associations using treatment response data generated from microarray platforms. This method treats biological pathways as latent factors and explains the gene-wise treatment response variation in items of the latent pathway variables. This approach is different from previous methods for such data, since it does not merely calculate the similarity among different drugs, but tries to detect the association strength between drugs and pathways through large-scale data mining. Although this method was designed for the analysis of gene expression data, it can also be directly applied to proteomic and other high-dimensional data sets. The latter half of this article focuses on information mining on the