Motivation: Hybridization events in evolution may lead to incongruent gene trees. One approach to determining possible interspecific hybridization events is to compute a hybridization network that attempts to reconcile incongruent gene trees using a minimum number of hybridization events. Results: We describe how to compute a representative set of minimum hybridization networks for two given bifurcating input trees, using a parallel algorithm and provide a user-friendly implementation. A simulation study suggests that our program performs significantly better than existing software on biologically relevant data. Finally, we demonstrate the application of such methods in the context of the evolution of the Aegilops/Triticum genera. Availability and implementation: The algorithm is implemented in the program Dendroscope 3, which is freely available from www.dendroscope.org and runs on all three major operating systems. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONSpeciation by hybridization () is a widespread phenomenon not only in plants (), but also occurs in some other types of organisms (). When two individuals from distinct species hybridize and merge their sets of chromosomes, the hybrid organism is often sterile and does not produce any progeny. Differences among homologous chromosomes prevent correct meiotic pairing and viable gamete production. However, the eventual doubling of the chromosome number could restore a correct pairing (each chromosome pair with its double), and the fertile genotype could give rise to a new allopolyploid species. In this case, homologous chromosomes do not mix and the number of the genes is doubled. In other words, the genes from both parental species coexist in the polyploid genome and evolve independently.In the case that the parental species are genetically similar enough, the pairing between homologous chromosomes is not completely prevented and balanced meiosis could take place. In this case, the hybrid genotype could produce viable hybrid gametes (containing portions of both parental chromosomes) and progeny. If the progeny remains reproductively isolated from the parental genotypes, it could give rise to a new species (homoploid hybrid speciation). This implies that, in a hybrid species, different genes may have different evolutionary histories, in which case they will give rise to incongruent gene trees. Thus, using a single rooted phylogenetic tree to represent the evolutionary history of a set of taxa may be inaccurate in the presence of interspecific hybridization. A more precise description may be possible using a rooted phylogenetic network, in which internal tree nodes (nodes of indegree 1) represent putative speciation events, whereas reticulate nodes (nodes of indegree  2) represent possible hybridization events. Suppose we are given a collection of species for which we suspect that hybridization events have played an important role in their evolution. One way to determine a set of possible hybridization events is to compute a hybridization network for a given set of gene trees that aims at explaining the incongruences between the different trees using a minimum number of putative hybridization events. A hybridization network for a set of trees T is simply a rooted phylogenetic network containing the trees in T. In computational terms, the problem can be formulated as follows: given a set T of two or more rooted phylogenetic trees, determine all hybridization networks for T that are minimum in the sense that they have a minimum reticulate number (see below). This problem is known to be a computationally hard problem even for the case of determining only one hybridization network for two bifurcating trees on the same set of taxa (). In this article, we present an algorithm that takes as input two bifurcating, rooted phylogenetic trees T 1 and T 2 on the same taxon set X and produces as output a representative set of minimum hybridization networks N on X that contain both trees. Such a representative set is defined to contain exactly one network derived from each of the possible maximum acyclic agreement forests (MAAF), as defined below. The number of reticulation nodes in any such minimum network is called the hybridization number, denoted by h(T 1 ,T 2 ), for T 1 and T 2. Our algorithm is based on previous work described in;), which aims at computing the hybridization number, and on the work on the rooted SPR distance computation reported in;. We extend the published approach and provide a parallel implementation to compute a representative set of minimum hybridization networks containing one network perPage