We developed a fast and accurate side-chain modeling program [Optimized Side Chain Atomic eneRgy (OSCAR)-star] based on orientation-dependent energy functions and a rigid rotamer model. The average computing time was 18 s per protein for 218 test proteins with higher prediction accuracy (1.1% increase for χ 1 and 0.8% increase for χ 1+2) than the best performing program developed by other groups. We show that the energy functions, which were calibrated to tolerate the discrete errors of rigid rotamers, are appropriate for protein loop selection, especially for decoys without extensive structural refinement. Availability: OSCAR-star and the 218 test proteins are available for download at http://ntfd.mit.edu/.
INTRODUCTIONOver the past two decades, much effort has been spent improving the accuracy or speed of side-chain modeling methods. Most methods exploit a limited number of representative conformations, called rotamers, at each residue position and use efficient search algorithms to find a low-energy rotamer combination for the whole protein. In spite of their efficiency, rigid rotamers are inherently accompanied by a discrete error and not suited for physics-based force fields, which are sensitive to small atomic clashes: the calculated energies can be quite different for the native conformation and near-native rotamers. Force fields thus have to be modified, by either scaling the atomic radii (), or using softer Lennard Jones repulsive terms () to reduce the influence of the steric clashes. Alternatively, knowledge-based, coarse-grained energy functions have been developed that can tolerate rigid rotamers while achieving high accuracy (). A third approach is to use extremely detailed rotamer libraries, or flexible rotamer models, in combination with accurate energy functions at the cost of speed (). Recently, we developed a side-chain modeling program combining accurate, orientation-dependent, Optimized Side Chain Atomic eneRgy (OSCAR-o) with a flexible rotamer model (). The prediction accuracy was significantly higher * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(2.2% for  1 and 4.0% for  1+2 ) than that of the next-best method, but the run time was as long as 28 min for a single protein. In this study, we adopted OSCAR to a rigid rotamer model by modifying the distance-dependent component for fast side-chain modeling. The parameters of the orientation-dependent functions were optimized so that decoy proteins with low RMSD (root mean square deviation) from native structures could be distinguished from a pool of decoys (obtained by perturbing the energy functions and then modeling the entire protein). The proposed methodology (OSCAR-star) is very fast while maintaining high accuracy.