Motivation: Owing to the size and complexity of large multi-component biological assemblies, the most tractable approach to determining their atomic structure is often to fit high-resolution radio-graphic or nuclear magnetic resonance structures of isolated components into lower resolution electron density maps of the larger assembly obtained using cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM). This hybrid approach to structure determination requires that an atomic resolution structure of each component, or a suitable homolog, is available. If neither is available, then the amount of structural information regarding that component is limited by the resolution of the cryo-EM map. However, even if a suitable homolog cannot be identified using sequence analysis, a search for structural homologs should still be performed because structural homology often persists throughout evolution even when sequence homology is undetectable, As macromolecules can often be described as a collection of independently folded domains, one way of searching for structural homo-logs would be to systematically fit representative domain structures from a protein domain database into the medium/low resolution cryo-EM map and return the best fits. Taken together, the best fitting non-overlapping structures would constitute a mosaic backbone model of the assembly that could aid map interpretation and illuminate biological function. Result: Using the computational principles of the Scale-Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT), we have developed FOLD-EM—a computational tool that can identify folded macromolecular domains in medium to low resolution (4–15 A ˚) electron density maps and return a model of the constituent polypeptides in a fully automated fashion. As a by-product, FOLD-EM can also do flexible multi-domain fitting that may provide insight into conformational changes that occur in macromolecular assemblies.
INTRODUCTIONRecent technological advances have resulted in exponential growth of the amount of data available at each level of the sequencestructurefunction relationship. Along with this expansion of available data comes the need for systematic and objective methods for its analysis and interpretation. For example, the amount of information that can be extracted from the structure of an isolated macromolecule is limited; to fully understand how a macromolecule functions in a cell requires knowledge of not only its interaction partners, but also how mutually induced conformational changes that occur upon complex formation give rise to integrated biological function. Toward this end, structural biology continues to tackle larger and larger targets, ranging from radiographic structures of binary protein complexes to cryo-EM image reconstructions of large macromolecular complexes and cryo-electron tomograms of entire cells. Unfortunately, cryo-elecron microscopy/tomography (cryo-EM/ET) maps typically have low signal-to-noise ratios, making their analysis and interpretation challenging and somewhat subjective, depending on the skill of specialized investigators. Hence, there is a need for computational methods to systematically and quantitatively analyze maps of macromolecular assemblies, organelles and whole cells. In particular, tools capable of (i) identifying individual proteins within larger complexes and (ii) characterizing conformational rearrangements relevant to macromolecular function, would provide nonstructural specialists access to structural data, thus allowing for enhanced biological perspectives. We recently reported the development of a new computational tool, MOTIF-EM, that solves a critical structural comparison problem, P, in a fully automated fashion (). P is defined as follows: compare a non-atomic resolution structure (e.g. a cryo-EM map) with another structure (either another map or an atomic resolution structure) and identify conserved structural domains/motifs or structurally equivalent sub-volumes between the input pair. MOTIF-EM solves P (Supplementary), and thus detects conserved sub-structures in a pair of structures, by using a novel algorithm inspired by a recent breakthrough in 2D object recognition, the 'scale-invariant feature transform' or SIFT (). Because of its unmatched effectiveness in carrying out feature detection, adaptations of SIFT are being used in a wide range of scientific applications including tracking of robots, 3D scene/ object modeling/recognition/tracking, human action recognition *To whom correspondence should be addressed. and human brain analysis in 3D Magnetic Resonance images and so forth (). Based on the feature-recognition principles used in MOTIFEM, we have now created a new software tool, FOLD-EM, to automatically identify macromolecular folds in electron density maps and to characterize conformational changes that accompany different biological states of macromolecules. FOLD-EM systematically searches an input electron density map of a macromolecular assembly for sub-volumes that are structurally homologous to one or more protein domains present in the SCOP protein database. By recursively repeating this procedure, a modular structure incorporating all the fitted domains is returned, thus providing a preliminary C-backbone model of the macromolecular assembly under investigation. Similarly, using our approach, it is possible to automatically determine if different transformations are necessary for fitting different regions when comparing a multi-domain structure to an input electron density map of a macromolecule that can adopt different conformations. As a result, SIFT-based feature detection is inherently capable of performing flexible multi-domain fitting and characterizing conformational differences between the structures being compared. Our program assumes no a priori knowledge of the type or relative orientation of macromolecular folds present in the input electron density map, and thus provides a fully automated means of analyzing electron density maps of macromolecules and their assemblies. Although the program was developed for the analysis of medium to low resolution electron density maps obtained via cryo-EM, it should work equally well, if not better, with higher resolution electron density maps such as those obtained by X-ray crystallography. Here, we (i) discuss the computational challenges that needed to be overcome to develop FOLD-EM; (ii) demonstrate the effectiveness of FOLD-EM in carrying out flexible multi-domain and large-scale fittings using synthetic and real data; and (iii) consider some advantages of FOLD-EM compared with existing softwares that fit atomic resolution structures into medium to low resolution electron density maps.
CONCLUSIONInspired by SIFT's broad applicability and driven by the current need in structural biology to effectively and efficiently interpret structures from electron microscopy, we have developed a new software tool, FOLD-EM, to automatically and systematically identify protein folds and fit atomic resolution macromolecular structures into cryo-EM electron density maps without any prior knowledge. FOLD-EM is based on MOTIF-EMour previous adaptation of the SIFT algorithm for interpretation of cryo-EM maps. We have adapted and extended the MOTIF-EM algorithm to automatically identify folds and characterize conformational changes in cryo-electron density maps of large macromolecular assemblies. The underlying algorithm in MOTIF-EM and FOLD-EM works by constructing rotationally invariant low-dimensional representations of local regions in the input atomic resolution structures and cryo-EM maps. Correspondences are established between the reduced representations by comparing them using a simple metric. These correspondences are then clustered using hash tables and graph theory to identify structurally equivalent domains or motifs. The motivation to develop FOLD-EM from MOTIF-EM came from the recognition that the SIFT-based comparison module buildsRigid body docker/fitter (Section 3.1) Partial matching () Yes SITUS, FOLDHUNTER, Chimera, MODELLER, MOLREP, COAN, etc.: No Flexible fitter (Section 3.3) Level of automation Independent of starting conformation, as it is based on global search. (details: Section 3.3, last paragraph) NORMA, DIREX, MDFF, FLEX-EM, etc.: Require users to provide appropriate starting conformations, as they are based on local search. Backbone modeller (Section 3.4) Level of automation FOLD-EM is fully automated. EMATCH, FREDS: Not fully automated. For instance, FREDS required approximate domain region segmentation. (details: Section 3.4, last paragraph) Backbone modeller (Section 3.4) Dependency None EMATCH, FREDS: Depend on availability of third-party modules, such as helix detectors, fitters, etc. (details: Section 3.4, last paragraph) A given row (#X) refers to a method in FOLD-EM. (Row #X, Column #1) lists the name of the method, (Row #X, Column #2) lists one of it's critical distinguishing property, (Row #X, Column #3) elaborates that property for that FOLD-EM method, and (Row #X, Column 4) elaborates that property for existing competing methods. For instance, Row #2 refers to the method 'Rigid Body Docker' (Row #2, Column #1) in FOLD-EM. (Row #2, Column #2) lists the particular property (partial matching of) in question. (Row #2, Column #3) states the existence of that property in the FOLD-EM docker. (Row #2, Column #3) states the non-existence of that property in any other existing docker that we are aware of. correspondences by matching smaller structural units, and hence the algorithm should work even if only portions of the structures being compared are homologous. Thus, the method is well suited for building backbone models of large complex macromolecular assemblies by systematically fitting smaller independent domain structures into a cryo-EM map of the larger assembly. FOLD-EM accomplishes this task by recursively fitting representative domain structures from the SCOP structural database into the input cryo-EM map and returning the best-fitting non-overlapping structures. FOLD-EM succeeds at least partially because it is inherently capable of carrying out partial matching; unlike other fitting software, the FOLD-EM fitting module is not affected by extraneous structure in either the target map or the search structure. Similarly, FOLD-EM will also automatically determine if different transformations are necessary for fitting different regions of the input search model; as a result, FOLD-EM is inherently able to characterize conformational differences (due to inter-domain motions, partial resemblances) between the structures being compared. Using FOLD-EM, we have demonstrated its effectiveness in (i) partial matching, i.e. successful docking/fitting in the presence of extraneous protein residues; (ii) fitting multi-domain structures into cryo-EM maps in a single step while taking into account flexibility due to inter-domain motions; and (iii) performing fully automated large-scale fold recognition and fitting using a protein domain database. The ability to automatically and objectively carry out these challenging tasks allows non-specialists to perform sophisticated structural analysis and sets FOLD-EM apart from other existing docking packages.