Motivations: Recent progress in ancient DNA sequencing technologies and protocols has lead to the sequencing of whole ancient bacterial genomes, as illustrated by the recent sequence of the Yersinia pestis strain that caused the Black Death pandemic. However, sequencing ancient genomes raises specific problems, because of the decay and fragmentation of ancient DNA among others, making the scaffolding of ancient contigs challenging. Results: We show that computational paleogenomics methods aimed at reconstructing the organization of ancestral genomes from the comparison of extant genomes can be adapted to correct, order and orient ancient bacterial contigs. We describe the method FPSAC (fast phylo-genetic scaffolding of ancient contigs) and apply it on a set of 2134 ancient contigs assembled from the recently sequenced Black Death agent genome. We obtain a unique scaffold for the whole chromosome of this ancient genome that allows to gain precise insights into the structural evolution of the Yersinia clade. Availability and Implementation: Code, data and results are available at
INTRODUCTIONPalaeomicrobiology aims at analyzing ancient microorganisms, especially pathogens obtained from the remains of infected hosts (). Aside of an historical interest in characterizing precisely past infectious diseases (), understanding the evolution of pathogens and their relation with their hosts is of primary interest for modern microbiology (). Initially based on polymerase chain reaction techniques, ancient DNA (aDNA) sequencing benefited from advances in sequencing technologies and the development of new protocols, that lead to breakthroughs, such as the sequencing of whole molecules from the Yersinia pestis strain that caused the Black Death pandemic, including a plasmid () and the main chromosome (extracted 410 million short single reads (average length of 53 nt) from the dental pulp of an individual infected by the Black Death pathogen, using the genome of an extant Y.pestis strain (CO92) as a bait. They were assembled, using Velvet (), into 4130 000 contigs, including 2134 contigs of length !500 nt from the main chromosome of the Black Death agent. This first sequencing of the chromosome of an extinct prokaryote helped to clarify the causes of the Black Death pandemic (). However, the 2134 larger contigs cover only 85% of the expected length of the ancestral chromosome and their organization along this ancestral chromosome is still unknown, keeping out of reach a detailed genome-scale study of the evolution of the structural organization of Yersinia genomes, whose impact on pathogenicity is still an open question (). Current scaffolding methodologies can hardly be applied to fully assemble and finish an ancient bacterial genome from a dataset such as the one described by, aside of short molecules like plasmids (). These methods, aimed at ordering and orienting the contigs, and estimating the lengths of inter-contig gaps, rely on data such as mate-pair libraries with mixed insert sizes (), genome maps () or comparison with one or several closely related genomes (). Owing to the decay and fragmentation of aDNA molecules [whose length depends on many factors, but that can be as short as 300 nt (, reads from ancient genomes are expected to be short, and genome maps or mate-pair libraries with long inserts are not available. This leaves the comparative approach as the only possibility. The usual setting of the comparative approach involves the comparison of the contigs with one, or a few, closely related genomes sequences or maps (). For an ancestral genome, comparison with a single reference genome, either a descendant or an outgroup, is likely to predict derived syntenic features as ancestral (), which is a problem for genomes such as the Y.pestis genomes that contains many repeats and are highly rearranged (). There exists only one scaffolding method that allows to compare with several related genomes while using a phylogenetic tree (), but it is not designed to scaffold an ancient genome. We address this specific *To whom correspondence should be addressed problem here and describe a phylogenetic approach to scaffold ancient bacterial contigs that adapts existing methods initially designed to predict ancestral genome features from the comparison of extant genomes. The design of predictive methods to reconstruct ancestral genomic features is a relatively ancient field of computational genomics, dating back to methods such as Fitch's algorithm for reconstructing ancestral genomic sequences (). Advances in computational paleogenomics include improved methods for reconstructing ancestral genome sequence (), gene content () and gene order. The latter ones have been used for reconstructing ancestral genomes organization of bacteria (), animals (), plants (), yeasts () or protists (). Recent developments provide exact and fast algorithms that handle repeats as well as diverse types of genome rearrangements and chromosome structures (). We describe here how to adapt and integrate some of these methods to process ancient bacterial contigs. We apply our method to the Black Death agent genome, using the genomes of eleven closely related descendants and outgroups from the Y.pestis and Yersinia pseudotuberculosis clades, whose phylogeny is given in: we correct, order and orient the ancient contigs of the of the medieval Black Death agent chromosome into a single scaffold and estimate the inter-contigs DNA sequences, and we describe a preliminary analysis of this reconstructed ancestral genome.
DISCUSSION
CONCLUSIONTechnological sequencing advances can now provide sequences from whole ancient bacterial genomes, which promises to be an invaluable source of knowledge for understanding pathogen evolution. However, assembling ancient bacterial genomes poses specific issues, in particular because of high fragmentation in numerous contigs. In parallel, computational paleogenomics by comparative methods has grown tremendously, and computational methods can now provide ancestral genome sequences accounting for substitutions or small indels, ancestral gene content or ancestral genome organizations, at the level of full chromosomes, but, until now, were never combined to scaffold and estimate the sequence of an ancient bacterial chromosome. In the present work, we described a general method to combine both sequencing and computational reconstruction, and illustrated its potential on a real dataset.