Motivation: Speed, accuracy and robustness of building protein fragment library have important implications in de novo protein structure prediction since fragment-based methods are one of the most successful approaches in template-free modeling (FM). Majority of the existing fragment detection methods rely on database-driven search strategies to identify candidate fragments, which are inherently time-consuming and often hinder the possibility to locate longer fragments due to the limited sizes of databases. Also, it is difficult to alleviate the effect of noisy sequence-based predicted features such as secondary structures on the quality of fragment. Results: Here, we present FRAGSION, a database-free method to efficiently generate protein fragment library by sampling from an Input–Output Hidden Markov Model. FRAGSION offers some unique features compared to existing approaches in that it (i) is lightning-fast, consuming only few seconds of CPU time to generate fragment library for a protein of typical length (300 residues); (ii) can generate dynamic-size fragments of any length (even for the whole protein sequence) and (iii) offers ways to handle noise in predicted secondary structure during fragment sampling. On a FM dataset from the most recent Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction, we demonstrate that FGRAGSION provides advantages over the state-of-the-art fragment picking protocol of ROSETTA suite by speeding up computation by several orders of magnitude while achieving comparable performance in fragment quality. Availability and implementation: Source code and executable versions of FRAGSION for Linux and MacOS is freely available to non-commercial users at http://sysbio.rnet.missouri.edu/ FRAGSION/. It is bundled with a manual and example data.
IntroductionFragment library is one of the key components of widely used fragment-based protein structure prediction methods (), where complete models of the target structures are generated by combining fragments from the library. Therefore, improving speed, accuracy and robustness of fragment library generation have direct impact on the performance of these methods. Several approaches have been introduced over the last decade for fragment detection ranging from exhaustive search to more sophisticated profile hidden Markov models (HMM) based comparison (). These methods require a template database against which segment of the target sequence is matched in order to identify suitable fragments. Due to large size of the template database that includes all representative structures from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (), the search is oftenslow. Moreover, the incomplete coverage of PDB makes it difficult to map a reasonably large fragment for the target protein. Recent developments in fragment selection using probabilistic models () have shown promising directions to overcome the size and diversity restriction of database-driven approaches by sampling local structure from a generative model. Here, we extend their scope by (i) sampling fragments of protein backbone in full-atomic detail rather than using a coarse-grained representation or assuming ideality in backbone planarity and (ii) allowing robustness against noise in sequence-based predicted information like secondary structure. The resulting application, FRAGSION, has been compared to the popular database-driven fragment assignment protocol of ROSETTA () on template-free modeling (FM) targets from 11th edition of Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction (CASP11) experiment. The results show that FRAGSION (i) provides slightly better coverage than ROSETTA at the expense of minor loss in precision and (ii) computationally much more efficient than ROSETTA.