Motivation: Discovering patterns in networks of protein–protein interactions (PPIs) is a central problem in systems biology. Alignments between these networks aid functional understanding as they uncover important information, such as evolutionary conserved pathways, protein complexes and functional orthologs. However, the complexity of the multiple network alignment problem grows exponentially with the number of networks being aligned and designing a multiple network aligner that is both scalable and that produces biologically relevant alignments is a challenging task that has not been fully addressed. The objective of multiple network alignment is to create clusters of nodes that are evolutionarily and functionally conserved across all networks. Unfortunately, the alignment methods proposed thus far do not meet this objective as they are guided by pairwise scores that do not utilize the entire functional and evolutionary information across all networks. Results: To overcome this weakness, we propose Fuse, a new multiple network alignment algorithm that works in two steps. First, it computes our novel protein functional similarity scores by fusing information from wiring patterns of all aligned PPI networks and sequence similarities between their proteins. This is in contrast with the previous tools that are all based on protein similarities in pairs of networks being aligned. Our comprehensive new protein similarity scores are computed by Non-negative Matrix Tri-Factorization (NMTF) method that predicts associations between proteins whose homology (from sequences) and functioning similarity (from wiring patterns) are supported by all networks. Using the five largest and most complete PPI networks from BioGRID, we show that NMTF predicts a large number protein pairs that are biologically consistent. Second, to identify clusters of aligned proteins over all networks, Fuse uses our novel maximum weight k-partite matching approximation algorithm. We compare Fuse with the state of the art multiple network aligners and show that (i) by using only sequence alignment scores, Fuse already outperforms other aligners and produces a larger number of biologically consistent clusters that cover all aligned PPI networks and (ii) using both sequence alignments and topological NMTF-predicted scores leads to the best multiple network alignments thus far.
IntroductionUnderstanding the patterns in molecular interaction networks is of foremost importance in systems biology, as it is instrumental to understanding the functioning of the cell (). A large number of studies focused on understanding the topology of these networks (). Network alignment started as a pairwise problem: given two networks, aligning them means finding a node-to-node mapping (called an alignment) between the networks that groups together evolutionarily or functionally related proteins between the networks. These methods uncovered valuable information, such as evolutionarily conserved pathways and protein complexes (), and functional orthologs (). Finding these allows transfer of information across species, such as performing Herpes viral experiments in yeast or fly and then applying the insights towards understanding the mechanisms of human diseases (). The pairwise network alignment problem is computationally intractable due to NP-completeness of the underlying sub-graph isomorphism problem (). Hence, several pairwise network alignment heuristics have been proposed. Early methods, called local network aligners, search for small, but highly conserved subnetworks (). As such sub-networks can be duplicated, local network aligners often produce one-to-many or many-to-many mappings, in which a node from a given network can be mapped to several nodes of the other network. While these multiple mappings can indicate gene duplications, they are often biologically implausible (). Hence, global network aligners, which perform an overall comparison of the input networks and produce one-to-one mappings between the nodes of the two networks have been introduced [seefor the most recent comparison of pairwise network aligners]. The number of known proteinprotein interactions (increased dramatically over the last 2 decades thanks to the technological advances in high-throughput interaction detection techniques, such as yeast two-hybrid () and affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (). With the availability of PPI networks of multiple species came the multiple network alignment problem, where given k networks, aligning them means to group together the proteins that are evolutionarily or functionally conserved between the networks. Similar to pairwise network alignment, multiple network alignment can be local or global, with node mappings one-to-one or many-tomany. As the complexity of the problem grows exponentially with the number of networks to be aligned, the proposed multiple network alignment algorithms use simple and scalable alignment schemes. The pioneering multiple network alignment algorithm is NetworkBLAST (), which greedily searches for highly conserved local regions in the alignment graph constructed from the pairwise protein sequence similarities. Graemlin () produces local multiple network alignments using a progressive alignment scheme, by successively performing pairwise alignments of the closest network pairs. IsoRank () and its successor IsoRankN () are the first multiple network aligners that do not only use pairwise sequence similarity to guide their alignment processes but they also take into account the topology (i.e. wiring patterns) around the two nodes in their corresponding networks to build up global many-to-many multiple network alignments, using a derivative of Google's PageRank algorithm. Smetana () also produces global many-to-many multiple network alignments using both pairwise sequence scores and pairwise topological scores, which are derived from a semi-Markov random walk model. While NetCoffee () does not use topological information to build its global one-to-one alignment, it is the first multiple network aligner in which the score for mapping two nodes does not only depend on the scores in pairs of networks but also on their conservation across all PPI networks being aligned, by using a triplet approach similar to the multiple sequence aligner, T-Coffee (). Beams () is a fast heuristics that constructs global many-to-many multiple network alignments from the pairwise sequence similarities of the nodes by using a backbone (seed) extraction and merge strategy. CSRW () follows the Smetana methodology but uses a context-sensitive random walk model. Finally, NodeHandprinting (NH) () produces global many-to-many multiple network alignments from topological information only, by using a progressive alignment heuristic. In the aforementioned aligners, most of the node mapping scores are local, in the sense that they only consider the sequence similarity or the topological similarity of the nodes. The only exception is NetCoffee, but its global scores are only based on sequence similarity and do not take into account the topology of the networks. To overcome these limitations, we propose Fuse, a novel multiple network alignment method that consists of two parts. In the first part, we compute novel similarity (association) scores between proteins by fusing sequence similarities and network wiring patterns over all proteins in all PPI networks being aligned. Our objective is to link together proteins whose homology (from their sequence similarity) and functioning similarity (from their wiring patterns in PPI networks) are supported by all networks. We do this by using nonnegative matrix tri-factorization (NMTF) technique (), initially used for co-clustering heterogeneous data but recently proposed as a data fusion technique as well. NMTF has demonstrated a great potential in addressing various biological problems, such as drug-induced liver injuries prediction (), disease association prediction (), PPI prediction () and gene function prediction (). We apply NMTF on the PPI networks of the five species that have the largest and the most complete sets of PPIs in BioGRID database (). On this dataset, the fusion process changes the values of sequence similarities between proteins based on network topologies, so that some of the sequence similarities that existed before the fusion disappear (about 40% in our experiments), while a large set of new ones is created by the matrix completion property of NMTF (). This new set of similar protein pairs is 13 times larger than the set of sequence-similar protein pairs due to fusion of sequence information with network topology. Moreover, the new set of protein pairs has a higher functional consistency (i.e. shared GO terms across the pairs) than the set of protein pairs found to be similar by sequence alignment. To control the contribution of topology versus sequence, our final functional similarity score for a pair of proteins is a weighted sum of their sequence similarity and their similarity predicted by NMTF based on their wiring and sequence similarity with proteins in all networks being aligned. In the second part of Fuse, to construct a global one-to-one multiple network alignment, first we construct an edge-weighted k-partite graph, with the proteins of each of the k PPI networks being partitions of its node set and the above described functional similarity scores being edge weights. To construct a multiple network alignment, we find a maximum weight k-partite matching in this graph. As finding a maximum weight k-partite matching is NP-hard (), and because NMTF predicts a large number of similarities in the Fuse's k-partite graph, we propose a novel k-partite matching heuristic algorithm. We evaluate the performance of Fuse against other state of the art multiple network aligners and show that Fuse produces the largest number of functionally consistent clusters that map proteins over all aligned networks. Unlike other aligners, Fuse is able to predict functional associations between proteins that are not sequence related (i.e. whose sequence similarity is not significant). These associations can contribute to the identification of functionally consistent clusters that cannot be identified by the previous aligners, as the previous aligners cannot predict new protein associations that are not sequence based. Furthermore, these predicted clusters could be used for transfer of annotations across proteins of different species that are not sequence related. Moreover, we show that Fuse is scalable and computationally more efficient than all of the previous aligners except Smetana (but Smetana's aligned proteins are not as functionally consistent as Fuse's; detailed below). Specifically, the data-fusion step is the most time consuming in Fuse with the time complexity of On 3 , where n is the total number of proteins in all PPI networks being aligned, while the alignment step has a smaller time complexity of Okn 2 log n  kne, where k is the number of networks and e is the number of functional associations (similarity scores) between the proteins in them.