Motivation: Mathematical modeling and optimization have been used for detecting enzyme targets in human metabolic disorders. Such optimal drug design methods are generally differentiated as two stages, identification and decision-making, to find optimal targets. We developed a unified method named fuzzy equal metabolic adjustment to formulate an optimal enzyme target design problem for drug discovery. The optimization framework combines the identification of enzyme targets and a decision-making strategy simultaneously. The objectives of this algorithm include evaluations of the therapeutic effect of target enzymes, the adverse effects of drugs and the minimum effective dose (MED). Results: An existing generalized mass action system model of human uric acid (UA) metabolism was used to formulate the fuzzy optimization method for detecting two types of enzymopathies: hyperuricemia caused by phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase (PRPPS) over-activity and Lesch–Nyhan syndrome. The fuzzy objectives were set so that the concentrations of the metabolites were as close as possible to the healthy levels. The target design included a diet control of ribose-5-phospahate (R5P). The diet control of R5P served as an extra remedy to reduce phosphate uptake entering the purine metabolic pathway, so that we could obtain a more satisfactory treatment than obtained for those without a diet control. Moreover, enhancing UA excretion resulted in an effective treatment of hyperuricemia caused by PRPPS overactivity. This result correlates with using pro-benecid and benbromazone, which are uricosuric agents present in current clinical medications. By contrast, the Lesch–Nyhan syndrome required at least three enzyme targets to cure hyperuricemia.
INTRODUCTIONOne of the most potentially valuable approaches used to accelerate the development of new drugs is through the simulation of human metabolic disorders. Simulations involve the construction of mathematical models that integrate genomic, proteomic and metabolic information (). In mathematical models, parameters are manipulated to identify biomedical systems that have defective enzymes, and mathematical optimization methods are then applied to correct those systems (). One of the genetic causes of hyperuricemia is a functional defect in phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase (PRPPS), which provokes an increase in the activity of this enzyme and promotes the metabolic flux yielding uric acid (UA;). Another instance of hyperuricemia is caused by a deficiency of the activity of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosy1transferase (HGPRT), leading to LeschNyhan disease (). Patients with hyperuricemia are at risk of nephropathy, urinary tract stone disease, gouty arthritis and tophaceous deposits. In addition, those with the LeschNyhan disease also exhibit neurological symptoms and self-mutilating behavior. The oxypurines hypoxanthine and xanthine (XA) accumulate in HGPRT deficiency. These oxypurines are thought to contribute to the pathogenesis of the neurological symptoms of LeschNyhan disease because of their cytopathic effects (). The current treatment of hyperuricemia usually includes a symptomatic treatment for joint pain, a restricted diet in which foods with high purine concentrations are limited, and the prescription of medications, such as uricosuric agents and XA oxidase inhibitors, that increase the excretion of UA in the urine and block UA production, respectively (). The development of a new drug is a high-risk and costly activity involving multi-criteria decision making and trade-offs. In a model-based approach, systems biological data and optimization technologies are integrated to surmount these drawbacks (Guillen). The optimization program for drug design (OPDD) is a two-stage procedure used to identify enzyme targets for remedying hyperuricemia (), which is caused by PRPPS overactivity in the purine metabolic pathway. The first stage of the OPDD is to enumerate each enzyme to identify a set of candidate enzyme targets that minimize the difference between a high concentration of UA and its healthy levels. The purine metabolic pathway was originally expressed using a generalized mass action (GMA) model (). The GMA model was first transformed into an S-system model, so that the OPDD can be applied to a linear programming method in solving the drug target design problem to obtain a set of candidate enzyme targets. The second stage of the OPDD is a posterior decisionmaking determining a satisfactory target from the candidate enzyme targets. Three objectives, therapeutic effect, adverse effect and low dose, are considered to make the decision. The therapeutic effect objective consists of ensuring that each *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com candidate enzyme target is able to return the concentration of UA to 5105% of the healthy levels. The adverse effect objective consists of ensuring that the least-square error between the remedied metabolite concentration and its corresponding healthy levels is small. Furthermore, the drug dose objective is based on the fact that higher enzyme activities imply using a lower dose of drugs, and low drug doses minimize adverse effects. In this study, we introduce a fuzzy multi-objective optimization approach to formulate the enzyme target design problem for drug discovery. The design problem is a unified optimization framework, in which the identification of enzyme targets is combined with multi-criteria decision-making to identify enzyme targets for curing hyperuricemia caused by PRPPS overactivity and HGPRT deficiency. In this work, we not only consider the therapeutic effect and adverse effect objectives, but also the minimum effective dose (MED) to represent the low dose objective. The MED is defined as the lowest dose level of a pharmaceutical product that provides a clinically significant response with average efficacy, and that is also significantly superior to the response provided by the placebo (). Although fuzzy multi-objective optimization approaches have been applied to the enzyme intervention problem metabolic networks of microbe (), almost no literature has so far discussed the approach for evaluating therapeutic effect, adverse effect and MED, simultaneously, to combine the detection of candidate enzyme targets and decision-making to select satisfactory targets.
CONCLUSIONWe introduce fuzzy programming in which the detection of candidate enzyme targets is combined with decision-making strategies to create a unified optimization framework for determining satisfactory targets. This optimal enzyme target design problem is indeed a multi-criteria decision-making problem. A multi-objective optimization method can be generally applied to find the Pareto front for this decision problem, and such Pareto solutions are provided for the designer using his/her biological knowledge to decide candidate enzyme targets. Almost no literature has so far discussed the fuzzy equal operation in the FEMA problem to simultaneously evaluate therapeutic effect, adverse effect and MED. Furthermore, the membership function defined in fuzzy programming can be referred to as an index for determining how to achieve satisfactory levels in the design. The FEMA approach can also be applied for drug development for other metabolic diseases. Using multiple objectives enables managing various effects, such as therapeutic effects, adverse effects and MED, and the weighting factor for each objective in a unified optimization framework. The objectives in the FEMA framework can be compromised to obtain a satisfactory result. Furthermore, the concentrations of metabolites in the human body are not fixed, but fluctuate within normal ranges. As a result, boundaries for each objective and constraint are not sharply defined. Fuzzy programming has the advantage of enabling the management of these flexible conditions.