Motivation: The in silico prediction of potential interactions between drugs and target proteins is of core importance for the identification of new drugs or novel targets for existing drugs. However, only a tiny portion of all drug–target pairs in current datasets are experimentally validated interactions. This motivates the need for developing computational methods that predict true interaction pairs with high accuracy. Results: We show that a simple machine learning method that uses the drug–target network as the only source of information is capable of predicting true interaction pairs with high accuracy. Specifically, we introduce interaction profiles of drugs (and of targets) in a network, which are binary vectors specifying the presence or absence of interaction with every target (drug) in that network. We define a kernel on these profiles, called the Gaussian Interaction Profile (GIP) kernel, and use a simple classifier, (kernel) Regularized Least Squares (RLS), for prediction drug–target interactions. We test comparatively the effectiveness of RLS with the GIP kernel on four drug–target interaction networks used in previous studies. The proposed algorithm achieves area under the precision–recall curve (AUPR) up to 92.7, significantly improving over results of state-of-the-art methods. Moreover, we show that using also kernels based on chemical and genomic information further increases accuracy, with a neat improvement on small datasets. These results substantiate the relevance of the network topology (in the form of interaction profiles) as source of information for predicting drug–target interactions. Availability: Software and Supplementary Material are available at
INTRODUCTIONThe in silico prediction of interaction between drugs and target proteins is a core step in the drug discovery process for identifying new drugs or novel targets for existing drugs, in order to guide and speed up the laborious and costly experimental determination of drugtarget interaction (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Drugtarget interaction data are available for many classes of pharmaceutically useful target proteins including Enzymes, Ion Channels, G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and Nuclear Receptors (). Several publicly available databases have been built and maintained, such as KEGG BRITE (), DrugBank (), GLIDA (), SuperTarget and Matador (), BRENDA () and ChEMBL () containing drugtarget interaction and other related sources of information, like chemical and genomic data. A property of the current drugtarget interaction databases is that they contain a rather small number of drugtarget pairs which are experimentally validated interactions. This motivates the need for developing methods that predict true interacting pairs with high accuracy. Recently, machine learning methods have been introduced to tackle this problem. They can be viewed as instances of the more general link prediction problem, seefor a recent survey of this topic. These methods are motivated by the observation that similar drugs tend to target similar proteins (). This property was shown, for instance, for chemical () and side effect similarity (), and motivated the development of an integrated approach for drugtarget interaction prediction (). A desirable property of this approach is that it does not require the 3D structure information of the target proteins, which is needed in traditional methods based on docking simulations (). The current state-of-the-art for the in silico prediction of drug target interaction is formed by methods that employ similarity measures for drugs and for targets in the form by kernel functions, like;;;). By using kernels, multiple sources of information can be easily incorporated for performing prediction (). In, different settings of the interaction prediction problem are explored. The authors make the distinction between 'known' drugs or targets, for which at least one interaction is in the training set, and 'new' drugs or targets, for which there is not. There are then four possible settings, depending on whether the drugs and/or targets are known or new. In this article, we focus on the setting where both the drugs and targets are known. That is, we use known interactions for predicting novel ones.
DISCUSSIONWe have presented a new kernel that leads to good predictive performance as measured by AUPR on the task of predicting interactions between drugs and target proteins. An interesting aspect of our GPI kernel is that it uses no properties beyond the interactions themselves. This means that knowing the sequence of proteins and chemical structure of drugs is perhaps not as important for this task as previously thought. For example, on the Ion Channel dataset our method with only the GIP kernel has an AUC score of 98.6 and an AUPR score of 92.7, which improves upon the state-of-the-art, while using less prior information. Besides the GIP kernel, we have also introduced the RLS-Kron algorithm that combines a kernel on drugs and a kernel on targets using the Kronecker product. Compared with previous methods that do prediction with the two kernels independently and then combine the results, this new method represents a small but consistent improvement. By combining the GIP kernel with chemical and genomic information, we get a method with excellent performance. This method has AUPR scores of 91.5, 94.3, 79.0 and 68.4 on four datasets of drugtarget interaction networks in humans, representing an average improvement of 10 points over previous results. The AUPR is a particularly relevant metric for this problem, because it is very sensitive to the correctness of the highest ranked predictions. The large improvement in AUPR suggests that the top ranked putative drugtarget interactions found by our method are more likely to be correct than those found in previous methods. A limitation of all machine learning methods for finding new drugtarget interactions is that they are sensitive to inherent biases contained in the training data. It would be interesting to try and analyze the bias of existing datasets of drugtarget interaction, but this is out of the scope of this article. Note also that the datasets byused in this article do not include any singletons: each drug interacts with at least one target, and each target interacts with at least one drug. This property could affect the cross-validation results, by allowing a limited form of cheating. However, the experiments in Section 4.3 show that our method also works when tested in other ways. A further limitation of the approach used in this article is that it can only be applied to detect new interactions for a target or a drug for which at least one interaction has already been established. Therefore, biologists can use the method as guidance for extending their knowledge about the interaction of a drug or of a target, not for discovering interactions of a new drug or target (that is, one for which no interaction is known). In particular, our method is useful for experimentalist to aid in experimental design and interpretation, especially in solving problems related to drugtarget selectivity and polypharmacology (). There are several ways in which the result might further be improved. So far we have used uninformative choices of the parameters:   = 1,  = 1 and  = 0.5. Of these choices, we have only investigated the last one. Perhaps with tuning of the other parameters better predictions are possible, although one has to be careful not to over-fit them to the data. Another avenue for improvement is in using more information about drugs and targets. Since combining the GIP kernel with chemical and genomic kernels leads to a better predictive performance, perhaps adding different information in the form of additional kernels would yield further improvements. These kernels could be interaction profile kernels based on other types data, such as proteinprotein interaction networks. Similarly, for each pair of interacting drug and target more information is known beyond the fact they interact. For example, the type of interaction, the binding strength, the mechanism of discovery and its uncertainty might all be known. In this article, we have made no use of this additional information, nor did we attempt to predict the type or strength of interactions.