Connections between disease phenotypes and drug effects can be made by identifying commonalities in the associated patterns of differential gene expression. Searchable databases that record the impacts of chemical or genetic perturbations on the transcriptome—here referred to as connectivity maps—permit discovery of such com-monalities. We describe two R packages, gCMAP and gCMAPWeb, which provide a complete framework to construct and query connect-ivity maps assembled from user-defined collections of differential gene expression data. Microarray or RNAseq data are processed in a standardized way, and results can be interrogated using various well-established gene set enrichment methods. The packages also feature an easy-to-deploy web application that facilitates reproducible research through automatic generation of graphical and tabular reports. Availability and implementation: The gCMAP and gCMAPWeb R packages are freely available for UNIX, Windows and Mac OS X operating systems at Bioconductor
INTRODUCTIONMicroarray and RNAseq technologies enable the study of transcriptional changes triggered by experimental perturbations. Gene expression changes observed after one perturbation often resemble those produced by others, suggesting a shared biological mechanism (). This strategy for establishing links between perturbations can then be used, for example, to identify bioactive compounds (), elucidate their mode of action () or reposition approved pharmaceuticals for use in new indications (). Standalone tools (), modular software libraries () or hosted web applications are available to query the original Connectivity Map (), but tools that allow users to easily compile and search their own reference datasets are lacking. The gCMAP package provides utilities and memory-efficient structures to create, store and query large experimental datasets. gCMAP also provides a unified R command-line interface to multiple gene set enrichment (GSE) approaches, permitting their use for querying user-created connectivity maps as well as more traditional gene set collectionse.g. Gene Ontology, Reactome or WikiPathways (). In addition, the companion gCMAPWeb package provides a customizable browser-based graphical user interface, and can leverage R's built-in web server or be integrated into a production-scale server.
CONCLUSIONThe gCMAP Bioconductor packages combine powerful command-line functionality with a convenient portable web application. The efficient handling of large datasets empowers users to assemble large connectivity maps from private or public data, query them programmatically or through an interactive user interface and store queries and results in a reproducible report.