Scientists now use high-throughput sequencing technologies and short-read assembly methods to create draft genome assemblies in just days. Tools and pipelines like the assembler, and the workflow management environments make it easy for a non-specialist to implement complicated pipelines to produce genome assemblies and annotations very quickly. Such accessibility results in a proliferation of assemblies and associated files, often for many organisms. These assemblies get used as a working reference by lots of different workers, from a bioinformatician doing gene prediction or a bench scientist designing primers for PCR. Here we describe Gee Fu, a database tool for genomic assembly and feature data, including next-generation sequence alignments. Gee Fu is an instance of a Ruby-On-Rails web application on a feature database that provides web and console interfaces for input, visualization of feature data via AnnoJ, access to data through a web-service interface, an API for direct data access by Ruby scripts and access to feature data stored in BAM files. Gee Fu provides a platform for storing and sharing different versions of an assembly and associated features that can be accessed and updated by bench biologists and bioinformaticians in ways that are easy and useful for each.
INTRODUCTIONNGS technologies, easy to use bioinformatics pipelining and workflow management tools like Galaxy () that lower barriers to access to powerful tools for genome assembly such as Velvet () have made it possible for individual laboratories to create draft quality genome assemblies in very short timescales. Projects describing fragmented but valuable assemblies () have provided many new insights. Laboratories whose main expertise is molecular biology can have difficulty managing the large datasets that they have created. Bioinformatic and bench based analyses generate new sequence and feature annotations and laboratories can easily lose track of the many changes to their sequence and annotated features.Thus, the amount of data generated in NGS experiments is driving a need for automation and sustainable * To whom correspondence should be addressed. storage solutions for assembly and feature data. We have created an application called Gee Fu that stores genomic sequence and feature information and provides a platform to allow groups with diverse levels of bioinformatics and computing skills to easily store, track versions, edit and visualize feature data and keep track of versions, share and visualize basic sequence data. There are many genome browsers and annotation editors, including GBrowse and Apollo (). Gee Fu extends and integrates into this eco-system by providing a light-weight database version system that can import from and export to other annotation systems and genome browsers if needed. It provides access and utility to bioinformaticians who want to access data programatically and others who prefer a graphical interface in one central repository that allows changes made by one worker to be reflected to others instantly. Gee Fu has been useful in our next-generation sequence based assembly and annotation efforts ().