Motivation: Linking gene mentions in an article to entries of biological databases can facilitate indexing and querying biological literature greatly. Due to the high ambiguity of gene names, this task is particularly challenging. Manual annotation for this task is cost expensive, time consuming and labor intensive. Therefore, providing assistive tools to facilitate the task is of high value. Results: We developed GeneTUKit, a document-level gene normalization software for full-text articles. This software employs both local context surrounding gene mentions and global context from the whole full-text document. It can normalize genes of different species simultaneously. When participating in BioCreAtIvE III, the system obtained good results among 37 runs: the system was ranked first, fourth and seventh in terms of TAP-20, TAP-10 and TAP-5, respectively on the 507 full-text test articles. Availability and implementation: The software is available at http://epigen.molgen.mpg.de/nuchunter/.
INTRODUCTIONGene normalization is one of the most challenging tasks in bio-literature mining due to the high ambiguity of gene names as they may refer to orthologous or entirely different genes, may be named after phenotypes and other biomedical terms, or may resemble common names with non-gene entities (). It is time consuming and labor intensive to annotate full-text articles manually. Therefore, a good assistive tool for this task may facilitate the process greatly. There has been a large body of work addressing the problem of gene mention normalization. ProMiner (), a strict dictionary-based approach, relies on the quality of its gene dictionaries heavily.proposed a method using gene profiles generated from PubMed abstracts for gene disambiguation. GNAT () is a rule-based and machine learning (ML) based gene normalization system which used extensive background knowledge. Built from open-source libraries and publicly available resources, GENO () employed a carefully crafted suite of symbolic and statistical methods. Moara () is a Java library for extracting and normalizing gene and protein mentions, and currently designed for four model organisms. Our software departs from previous systems in two aspects: first, it combines local and global contexts to normalize genes at * To whom correspondence should be addressed. document-level. The goal of this software is not to normalize every mention correctly, but to suggest a list of normalized genes given a target document, to assist human annotators. Most previous systems are normalizing genes at mention-level and only local context surrounding a mention (e.g. the sentence where the mention was recognized) were employed. However, due to the high ambiguity of gene names, it may be insufficient to use only local context: intersentential or document-level context can be helpful in this task. Second, the software is designed for simultaneously normalizing genes of many different species for full-text articles. It is not limited to any specific organism, but rather deals with all species present in a gene database (Entrez Gene in this article).
CONCLUSIONGeneTUKit is a software designed for document-level gene normalization, which employs features from the local context and the global context within the whole full-text article. It can normalize genes of many different species. Given a target article, the software outputs a list of normalized genes, and each predicted gene is associated with a confidence score.