Motivation: Markov networks are undirected graphical models that are widely used to infer relations between genes from experimental data. Their state-of-the-art inference procedures assume the data arise from a Gaussian distribution. High-throughput omics data, such as that from next generation sequencing, often violates this assumption. Furthermore, when collected data arise from multiple related but otherwise nonidentical distributions, their underlying networks are likely to have common features. New principled statistical approaches are needed that can deal with different data distributions and jointly consider collections of datasets. Results: We present FUSENET, a Markov network formulation that infers networks from a collection of nonidentically distributed datasets. Our approach is computationally efficient and general: given any number of distributions from an exponential family, FUSENET represents model parameters through shared latent factors that define neighborhoods of network nodes. In a simulation study, we demonstrate good predictive performance of FUSENET in comparison to several popular graph-ical models. We show its effectiveness in an application to breast cancer RNA-sequencing and somatic mutation data, a novel application of graphical models. Fusion of datasets offers substantial gains relative to inference of separate networks for each dataset. Our results demonstrate that network inference methods for non-Gaussian data can help in accurate modeling of the data generated by emergent high-throughput technologies. Availability and implementation: Source code is at https://github.com/
IntroductionUndirected graphical models or Markov networks are a popular class of statistical tools for probabilistic description of complex associations in high-dimensional data (cf.). Biological processes in a cell involve complex interactions between genes and it is important to understand, which genes conditionally depend on each other. These dependencies can be inferred from the experimental data and represented in a gene network. As a popular approach to network modeling, Markov networks are particularly appealing because they focus on finding such conditional dependence relationships. Intuitively, the existence of a link between genes A and B in a Markov network indicates that the behavior of gene A is still predictive of gene B given all available measurements about gene A and its immediate neighbors in a network. Hence, Markov networks can help us to find a rich set of direct dependencies between genes that are stronger than gene correlations ().Markov networks have been well studied in bioinformatics and numerous applications are concerned with inferring the network structure primarily from microarray and next generation sequencing gene expression data (). They are complementary but not superior to other gene network inference approaches (). However, the increasing variety of data generating technologies and heterogeneity of resulting data draw attention to two challenges in the context of Markov network inference: inference from nonGaussian distributed data, and simultaneous inference from many datasets. In bioinformatics, many datasets are high dimensional, contain a limited number of samples with a large number of zeros, and come from skewed distributions. Most existing methods assume that data follow a Gaussian distribution. While this assumption holds for typical log ratio expression values from microarray data, it is violated for measurements obtained from sequencing technologies.
ConclusionFUSENET is an approach for automatic inference of gene networks from data arising from potentially many nonidentical distributions. It is based on the theory of Markov networks, where the inferred network edges denote a type of direct dependence that is stronger than merely correlated measurements. An appealing property of FUSENET is its ability to estimate network edges by fusing potentially many datasets. In the case studies, FUSENET's models outperform several state-of-the-art undirected graphical models. We show that FUSENET's high performance is attributed to the ability to model nonGaussian distributions and fusion of data through sharing of latent representations. Our work here has broadened the class of off-theshelf network inference algorithms for simultaneously considering a wide range of parametric distributions and has combined Markov network inference with data fusion.