Motivation: Functional genomics data provides a rich source of information that can be used in the annotation of the thousands of genes of unknown function found in most sequenced genomes. However, previous gene function prediction programs are mostly produced for relatively well-annotated organisms that often have a large amount of functional genomics data. Here, we present a novel method for predicting gene function that uses clustering of genes by semantic similarity, a naïve Bayes classifier and enrichment analysis to predict gene function for a genome that is less well annotated but does has a severe effect on human health, that of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Results: Predictions for the molecular function, biological process and cellular component of P.falciparum genes were created from eight different datasets with a combined prediction also being produced. The high-confidence predictions produced by the combined prediction were compared to those produced by a simple K-nearest neighbour classifier approach and were shown to improve accuracy and coverage. Finally, two case studies are described, which investigate two biological processes in more detail, that of translation initiation and invasion of the host cell. Availability: Predictions produced are available at http://www .bioinformatics.leeds.ac.uk/∼bio5pmrt/PAGODA
INTRODUCTIONThe massive improvements in DNA sequencing technology have led in the past decade to ever more genomes being sequenced. Most newly sequenced genomes contain a large number of genes whose function cannot be inferred through conventional homology methods such as BLAST and annotating the function of these genes has been aided in recent years by the production of large high-throughput datasets. These datasets can be based on genomic sequence data * To whom correspondence should be addressed. using methods such as gene fusion () and phylogenetic profiles () or they can be derived from experimental methods such as yeast two-hybrid screens and microarray expression (). However, these datasets are often noisy and incomplete, which can often lead to problems of low reliability and limited coverage when the data are used to predict gene function. To address these problems, several gene function prediction programs have been produced that combine multiple datasets using machine learning techniques to create synergistic predictions, see the review of MouseFunc for examples (). Most of these programs rely on a 'guilt by association' approach where a query protein's function is inferred from annotated proteins with 'similar' biological attributes. Many different approaches have been taken but they can effectively be split into either supervised or unsupervised learning methods. With a supervised approach, a training dataset is created from which an algorithm learns a set of rules that can then be used to predict the most likely annotation of a gene absent from the training set. Alternatively, an unsupervised approach can be taken where the data are separated into multiple clusters. Then, for each cluster, a statistical test is applied to see whether a cluster is overrepresented with a particular annotation. Functions can be defined using several different databases but the most popular is the Gene Ontology (GO;). The GO database is structured as a directed acyclic graph, in which the terms form a hierarchy where more specific GO terms also inherit the more general terms above them. Early attempts at gene function prediction often overlooked these high levels of similarity between terms, but more recently programs have attempted to address this problem particularly by the inclusion of semantic similarity measures. Unfortunately, these programs all have drawbacks.could only produce predictions for genes that already have an annotation, whileboth use a semantic similarity measure but only with a relatively simple K-nearest neighbour (KNN) classifier approach and only using microarray and proteinprotein interaction data. Also, these two papers limit themselves to human and Saccharomyces cerevisaie, both organisms which have relatively well-annotated genomes. Gene function prediction programs for organisms that are less well annotated but have significant effects on humans, such as thecausative agent of the most deadly form of malaria Plasmodium falciparum, are few. The sparse annotation of such genomes and, thus, lack of training data makes predicting gene function more challenging. Therefore, in this article, we collate a large, disparate collection of datasets for P.falciparum and present a novel method for gene function prediction that attempts to address this problem. Our program contains three steps: (i) clustering genes using a semantic similarity measure into functional clusters; (ii) calculating the probability that a pair of genes belong to the same functional cluster using a Bayes classifier; (iii) using these probabilities, we employ an enrichment analysis algorithm to predict the function of the gene. We call this program PAGODA (Protein Assignment by Gene Ontology Data Associations).