We present a novel public health database (GENI-DB) in which news events on the topic of over 176 infectious diseases and chemicals affecting human and animal health are compiled from surveillance of the global online news media in 10 languages. News event frequency data were gathered systematically through the BioCaster public health surveillance system from July 2009 to the present and is available to download by the research community for purposes of analyzing trends in the global burden of infectious diseases. Database search can be conducted by year, country, disease and language.
INTRODUCTIONSystems which gather information about disease outbreak events from informal digital sources such as news media are now seen as having high value to national and transnational public health agencies (). Although agencies in wealthy countries have a sophisticated array of indicator sources such as over-the-counter sales or sentinel networks, not all countries possess the resources to implement or maintain such systems. With concerns about newly emerging diseases such as A(H5N1), there has been increasing attention on epidemic intelligence (EI) systems that can complement indicator networks by detecting events on a global scale so that they can be acted on close to source. While there are several surveillance systems offering alerts and news browsing (), to the best of our knowledge there are only a few databases where researchers, government health officials, physicians and public health practitioners can look for historical event data which are updated in real time. ProMED (), a human network organized through the International Society for Disease Surveillance, is an excellent source with its wide-coverage open access database of human disease reports from 1995 onwards. Reports are gathered manually and reviewed by experts in a staged process before being sent out via email and stored in an online database. ProMED reports on both human and animal health events although its coverage of animal health is more limited in scope. The World Health Organization * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(WHO) offers a more specialized service through its weekly EuroFlu bulletins which are archived online as well as a news bulletin service through its Global Alert and Response site. Additionally, the World Animal Health Information Database (WAHID) provides access to reports of exceptional events submitted by member states of the OIE (World Organisation of Animal Health). GENI-DB is a complementary service that provides additional support to those interested in understanding the context of ongoing disease outbreaks as well as analyzing the global burden of infectious diseases. We developed the GENI-DB database as a free, structured and searchable source on news event statistics reported in the global media. Information gathering has been done fully automatically without human intervention by the BioCaster EI system () from thousands of sources in 10 languages. Our experiments have shown that aggregated event counts from news can provide valuable early warning alerts that in some cases are more timely than ProMED (). An additional advantage is that since BioCaster is a single system with a common reporting standard, this allows users to obtain comparative estimates of disease outbreaks across disease conditions and geographic areas.