Motivation: Modelling the regulation of gene expression can provide insight into the regulatory roles of individual transcription factors (TFs) and histone modifications. Recently, Ouyang et al. in 2009 modelled gene expression levels in mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells using in vivo ChIP-seq measurements of TF binding. ChIP-seq TF binding data, however, are tissue-specific and relatively difficult to obtain. This limits the applicability of gene expression models that rely on ChIP-seq TF binding data. Results: In this study, we build regression-based models that relate gene expression to the binding of 12 different TFs, 7 histone modifications and chromatin accessibility (DNase I hypersensitivity) in two different tissues. We find that expression models based on computa-tionally predicted TF binding can achieve similar accuracy to those using in vivo TF binding data and that including binding at weak sites is critical for accurate prediction of gene expression. We also find that incorporating histone modification and chromatin accessibility data results in additional accuracy. Surprisingly, we find that models that use no TF binding data at all, but only histone modification and chro-matin accessibility data, can be as (or more) accurate than those based on in vivo TF binding data. Availability and implementation: All scripts, motifs and data presented in this article are available online at http://research.
INTRODUCTIONA key challenge in modern genomics is understanding the regulatory interactions that occur to control gene expression. We can use predictive modelling techniques such as linear regression to both determine the accuracy of our understanding of the mechanisms of the regulation of gene expression, and to interpret and offer insight into the roles played by the various regulatory proteins, RNAs and other factors. Perhaps the most studied and best understood mechanism of gene regulation is transcription factor (TF) binding. TFs characteristically have sequence-specific DNA-binding preferences. They typically bind sites that are short (515 bp), and often degenerate. Not surprisingly, navenave computational approaches that simply scan genomic sequence for matching sites are highly prone to making false-positive predictions (). In an attempt to overcome this, methods incorporating evolutionary information regarding the conservation of each putative site such as BBLS () have been proposed. In reality, however, most researchers aim to make tissue-, cell-or condition-specific (hereafter 'tissue-specific') inferences regarding gene regulation, which evolutionary information alone cannot provide. Histones are subject to many different covalent posttranslational modifications such as methylation and acetylation. These modifications can alter chromatin structure and function and are known to comprise a tissue-specific histone 'code', read by proteins to effect changes in gene regulation and expression (van). Recently, global chromatin-immunoprecipitation with massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) 'maps' of many histone modifications have become available through the ENCODE () and NIH Roadmap Epigenomics () projects. ChIP-seq is not just limited to interrogating histone state, but also has become the gold-standard method for the genome-wide prediction of tissue-specific TF-bound regulatory regions. Unfortunately, however, TF ChIP-seq suffers from a major drawback: only one TF (in a single tissue) may be analysed at a time. It would be an extremely significant endeavour to predict the binding of the 41391 known human sequence-specific TFs () in one tissue or condition. As a result, even large-scale projects to date have focused either on a small number of TFs across several tissues (e.g. 10 TFs in modENCODE;), or on a larger number of TFs in relatively few tissues (e.g. three primary tissues in ENCODE;). Additionally, determining an appropriate cutoff for declaring putative binding sites is difficult and has been the focus of substantial research (). ChIP-seq TF binding data have previously been used to construct a model of gene expression () in mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells. They used ChIP-seq binding data for 12 TFs that are known to contribute heavily to maintaining pluripotency () and thus are considered key factors regulating gene expression in ES cells.performed linear regression, correlating binding by these TFs with the expression of all genes and found that it could explain 65% of the variation in gene expression in ES cells (r  0.81). This study did not consider the role of histone modifications on expression, but Karlict al. (2010) built a similar regression model for human CD4 T cells, using histone *To whom correspondence should be addressed. modification data rather than TF binding data and also managed to explain a high degree of expression variance (r  0.74). In this study, we use TF binding, histone modification and chromatin accessibility data to address three major questions:(i) can we accurately predict gene expression using in silico predictions of TF binding rather than in vivo binding data? (ii) Does adding histone modification and chromatin accessibility data improve the accuracy of predicted gene expression? (iii) Are weak binding sites important to accurately predict gene expression? To answer these questions, we derive log-linear regressionbased models that relate gene expression to the binding of 12 different TFs, to 7 histone modifications and to chromatin accessibility. We find that expression models based on computationally predicted TF binding can achieve similar accuracy to those using in vivo TF binding data and that including binding at weak sites is critical for accurate prediction of gene expression. We also find that incorporating histone modification and chromatin accessibility data results in additional accuracy. Surprisingly, we find that models that use no TF binding data at all, but only histone modification and chromatin accessibility data, are essentially as accurate as those based on in vivo TF binding data.
DISCUSSIONWe have successfully explained the majority of variance in gene expression in mES cells by building an integrated model of 12 TFs, seven histone modifications and DNase hypersensitivity data. In fact, we find that gene expression levels predicted by both the tissue-specific in silico models and the histone modification and DNase-only model are more highly correlated with mESC RNA-seq gene expression data than microarray data from the same tissue type. The wide availability of TF binding site motifs () gives our in silico method the advantage of allowing the evaluation of many different TFs without the cost and time required to perform TF ChIP-seq experiments, instead requiring only a PWM and H3K4me3 data in the tissue of interest. Surprisingly, we find that using the seven histone modifications and chromatin accessibility (DNase) data alone produces a model as descriptive of expression as one using 12 TF ChIP-seq datasets. By using histone modifications and DNase data alone, we explain more variation (up to %70%) in gene expression than other studies that use more complex in silico models of TF binding, which vary from %11% () to %33% (). Several of these models incorporate TFTF interactions and other higher order effects compared with our simpler log-linear regression models. We also find that models combining histone data with TF ChIP-seq data outperform models using TF ChIP-seq data alone. This suggests that the histone modifications perhaps capture an 'expression state', containing information not captured by our 12 TFs. Although using tissue-specific in silico (PWM  H3K4me3) predictions of our 12 TFs alone does achieve a less-accurate fit to RNA-seq expression data than using 12 ChIP-seq TFAS, we find that replacing a single TFAS (E2f1) with ChIP-seq data improves the accuracy of our tissue-specific in silico method to be indistinguishable from using all 12 ChIP-seq TFASs. We hypothesize that this is due to both E2f1 being the most informative of these 12 TFs (see Supplementary Material) for predicting expression, and the majority of its binding being indirect () and thus not directly measurable by sequence-based methods. Replacing Sox2 in silico TFAS data with Sox2 ChIP-seq TFAS data, however, actually decreases the fit of the regression (c). We are unsure of why this is the case, although it may be due to noise in the ChIP-seq dataset for Sox2. Re-analyzing the Sox2 ChIP-seq data with more accurate ChIP-seq peak calling algorithms may shed light on why the in silico Sox2 TFAS appears to give an improvement in fit over the ChIP-seq Sox2 TFAS. A recent article shows that models using this TF ChIP-seq data fit expression more accurately when the ChIP-seq data are re-analyzed with more accurate peak calling algorithms (). Using PCA, we extended the study of the roles of TFs () to also include the roles of histone modifications. The results we obtain, accurately assigning (known) roles to histone modifications, suggests that this method is of value for exploring regulation. Applying this method to the full set of histone modification data from the NIH Roadmap Epigenomics Project () would be of particular interest, especially for the examination of less well-studied histone modifications, due to the availability of data across a broad spectrum of tissues. Some histone modifications, for example, H4K20me3 are known to act combinatorially with other marks such as H3K4me1 (). Similarly, some marks are mutually exclusive with other marks (e.g. H3K27me3 and H3K27ac) (). These marks have also been suggested to potentially play different regulatory roles at different genomic loci (). It has been suggested that the combination of marks around a TSS or enhancer form a 'histone state' (). Using the histone states defined byrather than raw tag counts may prove to be more effective in our linear model at capturing the combinatorial effects of histone modifications.