Understanding the effect of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the expression level of genes is an important goal. We recently published a study in which we devised a multi-SNP predictive model for gene expression in Lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL), and showed that it can robustly predict the expression of a small number of genes in test individuals. Here, we validate the generality of our models by predicting expression profiles for genes in LCL in an independent study, and extend the pool of predictable genes for which we are able to explain more than 25% of their expression variability to 232 genes across 14 different cell types. As the number of people who obtained their SNP profiles through companies such as 23andMe is rising rapidly, we developed GenoExp, a web-based tool in which users can upload their individual SNP data and obtain predicted expression levels for the set of predictable genes across the 14 different cell types. Our tool thus allows users with biological knowledge to study the possible effects that their set of SNPs might have on these genes and predict their cell-specific expression levels relative to the population average.
IntroductionIn recent years, individual genotype [i.e. single nucleotide polymorphisms (] data have become readily accessible via directto-consumer genetic testing (DTCGT) companies such as 23andMe, deCODEme and Navigenics. These companies allow users to acquire their allele calls at 0.5 M SNPs across the genome, as well as a report of higher and lower risk for certain diseases, based on their genotyped SNPs. Since we have recently developed methods to robustly predict gene expression solely from genotype (), we decided to enable users to predict their own gene expression across multiple cell types. To this end, we developed GenoExp, a web-based tool where users can upload their raw genotype files obtained from any DTCGT company, and view their predicted gene expression (for a set of predictable genes) across 14 different cell types. To demonstrate the application of GenoExp, we used 23andMe genotype data provided willingly by one individual. We show the resulting predictions of gene expression and highlight examples such as a gene known to play a role in learning and memory that is predicted to be expressed above population-mean in brain cells of that individual.