Motivation: Genome-wide association study (GWAS) has been a great success in the past decade. However, significant challenges still remain in both identifying new risk loci and interpreting results. Bonferroni-corrected significance level is known to be conservative, leading to insufficient statistical power when the effect size is moderate at risk locus. Complex structure of linkage dis-equilibrium also makes it challenging to separate causal variants from nonfunctional ones in large haplotype blocks. Under such circumstances, a computational approach that may increase signal replication rate and identify potential functional sites among correlated markers is urgently needed. Results: We describe GenoWAP, a GWAS signal prioritization method that integrates genomic functional annotation and GWAS test statistics. The effectiveness of GenoWAP is demonstrated through its applications to Crohns disease and schizophrenia using the largest studies available, where highly ranked loci show substantially stronger signals in the whole dataset after prioritiza-tion based on a subset of samples. At the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) level, top ranked SNPs after prioritization have both higher replication rates and consistently stronger enrichment of eQTLs. Within each risk locus, GenoWAP may be able to distinguish functional sites from groups of correlated SNPs.
IntroductionIn the past ten years, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been designed and applied to identify disease genes for almost all complex diseases. As of216 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) from over 2000 publications have been documented in the GWAS Catalog (). Despite its great success in identifying disease-associated loci, scientists have noted several limitations of current GWAS approaches. First, although linkage disequilibrium (LD) is the basis of GWAS, it also hinders the interpretation of association results. Due to the complex LD structure among SNPs, it is the disease-associated haplotype blocks varying in size from a few kb to more than 100 kb () that are identified in GWASs. Therefore, the resolution of GWAS is not sufficient for distinguishing causal variants from a large group of correlated SNPs, especially in non-coding regions where the mechanism of genomic function is still largely V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com unknown (). Second, although Bonferroni-corrected significance threshold (i.e. 5  10 8 ) is widely accepted as the standard cutoff in GWAS analysis, it is well known that Bonferroni correction, as an approach that controls family-wise error rate, is conservative when the number of hypotheses is large and there are many weak to moderate signals (). In fact, for most complex diseases, numerous genomic loci are involved in disease etiology while each locus only has a moderate effect size. Therefore, studies based on high-throughput genomic scan may be underpowered if the sample size is not large enough. This has led to so-called missing heritability which refers to the gap between the narrow-sense heritability estimated from twin/pedigree analysis and the proportion of the variance explained by significant SNPs identified from GWAS, that has been reported for many diseases (). One explanation of missing heritability is the insufficient statistical power to identify all the disease-associated SNPs (). Variant prioritization techniques are crucial for post-GWAS analysis on different scales. Locally, it may be able to reveal truly functional sites within each significant locus. Globally, signals at some loci can be enhanced if proper prior information is used. Many variant prioritization methods have been proposed (). Supervised-learning-based statistical tools for predicting deleterious variants are probably the richest among available approaches. So far, most of the existing deleteriousness prediction tools only focus on protein-coding genes in the human genome. However, coding-region-based tools are not sufficient for GWAS signal prioritization because nearly 90% of the significant SNPs identified in GWAS are intronic or intergenic (). A few tools targeting non-coding variants have been proposed (). Detailed comparisons of these methods were reviewed elsewhere (). Unlike the extensively studied protein-altering variants, very few non-coding pathogenic variants have been revealed so far (). Moreover, non-coding variants span a much wider functional spectrum. Varied and complex mechanisms from cell-specific Transcription Factor Binding Sites (TFBS), to enhancers, insulators, short and long range epigenetic and structural effects on DNA, make it challenging to understand non-coding variants in the human genome. Therefore, existing noncoding variant prioritization tools based on supervised-learning may suffer from the potentially biased training data. Their performance in GWAS signal prioritization remains to be further investigated. Finally, although deleteriousness of a single SNP is crucial for identifying causal variants, it does not provide all the information needed in GWAS signal prioritization, where each SNP in GWAS also carries information of nearby variants that are not genotyped. A better-informed method should be able to measure the functional potential for the surrounding region of each genotyped marker. Recently, Lu et al. developed GenoCanyon, a statistical framework to predict functional non-coding regions in the human genome through integrated analysis of multiple biochemical signals and genomic conservation measures (). Its unsupervisedlearning framework makes GenoCanyon suffer less from our limited knowledge of non-coding genome. Moreover, since the resolution of its functional prediction is at the nucleotide level, it is possible to use GenoCanyon scores to evaluate the surrounding region of each genotyped SNP. In this paper, we propose Genome Wide Association Prioritizer (GenoWAP), a GWAS signal prioritization approach that integrates GenoCanyon functional prediction and GWAS P-values.We apply the method on two smaller GWASs of Crohn's disease and schizophrenia, respectively, to prioritize SNPs. The performance is evaluated using the results from large GWAS meta-analyses of these two diseases. Compared to the top loci ranked on P-values only, top ranked loci after prioritization tend to show substantially stronger signals in large GWAS studies. Within each locus, GenoWAP may be able to distinguish true signals among highly correlated SNPs. The method has the potential to reduce noises caused by LD and rescue marginal signals in GWASs with insufficient sample sizes.
DiscussionIn this study, we developed and applied GenoWAP to two sets of GWAS data to illustrate its performance in GWAS signal prioritization. Compared to P-values, GenoWAP posterior scores can better prioritize SNPs in many different ways. At the locus level, posterior score is more efficient in the sense that fewer SNPs are needed to identify the same number of top loci. Moreover, noises due to chance are effectively reduced, and the highly ranked loci using posterior scores may be more likely to contain functional elements than the top loci selected purely based on P-values. At the SNP level, markers with high posterior scores have both better replication rates. Local performance in studies of schizophrenia. From top to bottom, the three panels show the P-values from the PGC2011 study, the posterior scores, and the P-values from the PGC2014 study, respectively. (A) Local performance at the risk locus on chromosome 3q26. The top signals at this locus in the PGC2011 study reside upstream of gene FXR1, while the posterior scores pull down those signals and suggest the importance of SNPs in FXR1. This agrees with the signal pattern in the PGC2014 study. (B) Local performance at the risk locus on chromosome 8q21. Posterior scores diminish most of the correlated SNPs at this locus, leaving three separate signal peaks. The peak near 89.6M is suggested to be the strongest signal source, which cannot be seen using P-values from the PGC2011 study. The signal peaks suggested by posterior scores perfectly match the strongest signals in the PGC2014 study. Figures are generated using LocusZoom (GenoWAPand consistently stronger enrichment of eQTLs than the top SNPs based on P-values. More importantly, within each risk locus identified in GWAS, posterior scores can effectively suggest potential functional sites among a large number of correlated SNPs. The performance of GenoWAP depends on the accuracy of functional annotation. Due to our limited understanding of non-coding genome, it is challenging to provide accurate genomic functional annotation. GenoCanyon is a convenient tool that provides functional prediction at the nucleotide level, yet its predictive ability can still be improved. Large consortia such as ENCODE () and Roadmap project () are continuously generating diverse types of epigenetic annotation data from a variety of cell types. The performance of GenoWAP may be further enhanced when these data become available in the future. In our implemented software, we allow users to use their own annotation file. GenoWAP also depends on the quality of GWAS data. If no information is contained in the GWAS dataset, then GenoWAP can only provide limited insight. Finally, we emphasize that GenoWAP's ability to identify precise functional factors is limited. GenoWAP is a region-based tool, and is powerful in identifying regions that are more likely to have a functional impact within LD blocks. However, definitive proof for functionality of any given SNP still requires thorough allele-specific experimentation. More than 2000 GWASs have been published in the past decade, and the number continues to grow. It is well known that our ability to identify new risk loci for complex diseases has surpassed our ability to interpret the results. However, although we are overwhelmed by the large amount of information detected in GWASs, evidence such as missing heritability still suggests that many risk loci remain to be discovered. Therefore, there is pressing need for GWAS signal prioritization tools, and our method has great potential for future application. Since GenoWAP uses only P-values as the input, it is convenient to apply our method on published results, which may help reveal potential functional sites within large haplotype blocks, and ultimately help understand disease etiology. Moreover, for multi-stage GWASs, GenoWAP can be used to better prioritize SNPs from the discovery stage to the validation planning and increase the replication rates. Finally, next-generation sequencing is widely recognized as the future of genomic epidemiology. However, the high cost of sequencing usually leads to insufficient sample sizes and many other challenging issues (). The combination of GenoWAP and the rich collection of publicly available GWAS data has the potential to provide functional candidates and guide sequencing analysis in the future.