Motivation: Rapidly decreasing sequencing cost due to the emergence and improvement of massively parallel sequencing technologies has resulted in a dramatic increase in the quantity of data that needs to be analyzed. Therefore, software tools to process, visualize, analyze and integrate data produced on multiple platforms and using multiple methods are needed. Results: GenPlay is a fast, easy to use and stable tool for rapid analysis and data processing. It is written in Java and runs on all major operating systems. GenPlay recognizes a wide variety of common genomic data formats from microarray-or sequencing-based platforms and offers a library of operations (normalization, binning, smoothing) to process raw data into visualizable tracks. GenPlay displays tracks adapted to summarize gene structure, gene expression, repeat families, CPG islands, etc. as well as custom tracks to show the results of RNA-Seq, ChIP-Seq, TimEX-Seq and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis. GenPlay can generate statistics (minimum, maximum, SD, correlation, etc.). The tools provided include Gaussian filter, peak finders, signal saturation, island finders. The software also offers graphical features such as scatter plots and bar charts to depict signal repartition. The library of operations is continuously growing based on the emerging needs. Availability: GenPlay is an open-source project available from
INTRODUCTIONWith the advent of high-throughput sequencing technologies, bioinformatics analysis has become a bottleneck despite the creation of biocomputational units at major research centers. Many useful tools are available to analyze and visualize genomic and epigenomic data, but most are geared toward informaticians and can be difficult to use for biologists. The problem is not that most applications are run through a command line since commands, flags and parameters can rapidly be learned. Rather, the main bottleneck is the absence of tools that biologists can use to analyze and evaluate their data by the usual trial and error process that is so important to gain a real understanding of any phenomenon. Biologists need tools that allow them to scrutinize genomic and epigenomic data as easily as * To whom correspondence should be addressed. they can scrutinize a microscope slide by moving the stage, varying the light, etc. to focus on interesting details. With most existing tools, this is not possible because data analysis involves many hours of computing time and many decision points without any visual feedback before the data are sufficiently processed to be loaded in a genome browser. In practice, most bioinformatics analyses are performed by informaticians that understand the tools but not necessarily the experiments, rather than by the biologists who designed the experiments. GenPlay was developed with the aim of producing a graphically oriented, user-friendly multipurpose tool that would help biologists visualize, analyze and transform their raw data into biologically relevant tracks. It was also developed to facilitate comparison of datasets generated on multiple platforms. Among the currently available genome browsers, we can distinguish two categories. The first category is web-based client/server application such as the UCSC () or Ensembl (Fernandez) genome browsers. They include rich databases and users do not need to have the data on their personal computer. These browsers are mostly used for data visualization and they generally do not offer tools to process data. The second category of browsers are desktop oriented and rely on local databases and can be graphically much faster. This category is particularly adapted to processing as well as visualizing user-generated data. Examples of desktop-oriented browsers include the software Apollo (), Artemis (), BamView (), Gambit-viewer (http://code.google.com/p/gambit-viewer/), GBrowse (), IGV (), IGB (), LookSeq (), Magic Viewer (), MochiView (), Savant (), Tablet (). GenPlay is a desktop genome analyzer and visualizer that was written in Java because of the cross-platform capability of this language and the ease-of-development features from the JDK (Java Development Toolkit). One of the challenges we faced during development was to obtain fast performance on common desktop computers. The challenge was met by extensive use of multithreading, by paying close attention to data structures and by preloading data to be visualized in the computer's main memory. One effective solution for some data types was to divide the genome into bins of fixed size. One of GenPlay advantages over most of the other browsers is that it places emphasis on letting biologists take control of their own data by providing constant visual feedback combined with extremely rapid browsing at every decision point during an analysis. The speed of the analyses performed in GenPlay is critical to let users experiment