Motivation: Gaining insight into chemogenomic drug–target interactions, such as those involving the substructures of synthetic drugs and protein domains, is important in fragment-based drug discovery and drug repositioning. Previous studies evaluated the interactions locally, thereby ignoring the competitive effects of different substructures or domains, but this could lead to high false-positive estimation, calling for a computational method that presents more predictive power. Results: A statistical model, termed Global optimization-based InFerence of chemogenomic features from drug–Target interactions, or GIFT, is proposed herein to evaluate substructure-domain interactions globally such that all substructure-domain contributions to drug–target interaction are analyzed simultaneously. Combinations of different chemical substructures were included since they may function as one unit. When compared to previous methods, GIFT showed better interpret-ive performance, and performance for the recovery of drug–target interactions was good. Among 53 known drug–domain interactions, 81% were accurately predicted by GIFT. Eighteen of the top 100 predicted combined substructure-domain interactions had corresponding drug–target structures in the Protein Data Bank database, and 15 out of the 18 had been proved. GIFT was then implemented to predict substructure-domain interactions based on drug repositioning. For example, the anticancer activities of tazarotene, adapalene, acitretin and raloxifene were identified. In summary , GIFT is a global chemogenomic inference approach and offers fresh insight into drug–target interactions. Availability and implementation: The source codes can be found at http://bioinfo.au.tsinghua.edu. cn/software/GIFT. Contact:
IntroductionProtein domains are independent folding structures and form different proteins as the functional units (). Compared with sequence similarity, domain structures are much more conserved among proteins (). Compound chemical substructures, or functional scaffolds, are the basic structural and functional building blocks of small molecules (). According to, chemogenomics, or chemical genomics, involves the systematic screening of targeted chemical libraries of small molecules against individual drug target familieswith the goal of identifying new drugs and drug targets. Thus, gathering chemogenomic data about protein domains and the chemical substructures of drugs underlying drugtarget interactions could foster the development of fragment-based drug discovery, drug repositioning and the understanding of drug-induced side effects (), thereby supplementing the network pharmacology methods of target prediction (). Among 1584 FDA-approved drugs and 89 nutraceuticals from the DrugBank database (), only 30% of them are contained in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) database (). The large gap between the number of known binding positions and the total number of drugtarget pairs calls for computational models to bridge them. Such computational models can be classified as structure-based methods and nonstructure-based methods. Structure-based methods, such as docking, have been developed over the course of many years, but they are constrained by the dependence on three dimensional structures of proteins (). In recent years, several non-structure-based methods, which are not limited by the structure information have been developed, along the accumulation of large-scale database in both chemistry and biology.developed a sparse canonical correspondence analysis method to extract the associated sets of chemical substructures and protein domains from drugtarget interactions, but the amount of detectable protein domains was relatively small.applied graph mining and sequence mining to automate the search for significant substructure patterns, leading to the interpretation of polypharmacology in drugtarget network. The substructures in drugs or proteins did not need to be defined from the literatures. However, protein substructures, which are generally composed of two or three residues, were difficult to correlate with biological interpretations.treated this question as a classification problem in machine learning. They used the logistic regression and support vector machine (SVM) algorithm to seek the drug chemical substructures and protein domains pairs that could be used to determine whether drugs and proteins interact or not. This method showed good results in predicting drugtarget interactions. However, none the methods noted above was able to evaluate uncertainty or variance of results, and they also ignored the possible combinations of drug chemical substructures that bind to protein domains as a whole. More importantly, the competitive effects of different substructuredomain interactions have never been considered since prediction has, thus far, been performed locally. Therefore, in this article, a Global optimization-based InFerence of chemogenomic features from drugtarget interactions, termed GIFT, was proposed (). Since different drug chemical substructures and protein domains may competitively contribute to drugtarget interactions, GIFT takes into consideration all the substructuredomain interactions and treats them as latent variables leading to drugtarget interactions. A substructuredomain interaction is defined as a direct physical interaction between a chemical substructure and a protein domain, for example, a hydrogen bond between an atom in a chemical substructure and an atom in an amino acids (). It should be noted that because some drugtarget interactions have not been recorded in DrugBank, we incorporated two parameters, namely fp (false-positive rate) and fn (false-negative rate), to describe data inaccuracy and incompleteness. Then the substructuredomain contributions to different drugtarget pairs were globally analyzed by the expectationmaximum (EM) algorithm framework, a statistical method to find the maximum likelihood estimates when the latent variables exist (). Variances in results were calculated by the observed Fisher Information (). GIFT was further extended to include the combinations of different drug chemical substructures based on the likelihood that some may function together. More than 700 substructure-domain interactions were found by GIFT. Some were validated by the PDB database. Our approach is a promising method for investigating drugtarget binding positions and contributes to our understanding in this field.
DiscussionIn this article, a statistical model, termed GIFT, was constructed to infer the interactions between drug chemical substructures and protein domains based on drugprotein interactions data. For the first time, a global optimization perspective has been introduced into this computation, meaning that all the substructure-domain contributions on drugtarget interactions are simultaneously analyzed. GIFT has several advantages compared with previous methods. First, it offers a more detailed description on the drugprotein interactions. Instead of adhering to the constraint which holds that 'similar drugs target similar proteins', we attempt to reveal the possible mechanisms underlying drugprotein interactions. Second, more than 350 000 interactions were predicted by SCCA (), and around 5000 interactions were predicted by L1SVM (). However, these figures represent local estimates, in addition to the lack statistical significance evaluations, thus potentially overestimating substructuredomain interactions. GIFT, on the other hand, can reduce such overestimation by incorporating a global perspective that accommodates variance estimation. It should be noted that GIFT is limited in that it only focuses on two-dimensional chemical space, as presented by the 881 PubChem substructures. Therefore, in the future, three-dimensional structure information should be incorporated into the calculations (See Section 4). As reflected by data already accumulated in the PDB database, more than 20,000 compound-protein interactions can be found, including more than 9000 distinct compounds (). Extraction of these binding information might result in more precise estimations of the substructure-domain interactions in the future. In summary, we propose a novel chemogenomic approach to infer substructure-domain interactions. It provides a chemogenomic view of the mechanisms of drugprotein interactions, and can be used as a new method that contributes to target prediction, drug repositioning and drug combination studies.