Sequencing oligosaccharides by exoglycosidases, either sequentially or in an array format, is a powerful tool to unambiguously determine the structure of complex N-and O-link glycans. Here, we introduce GlycoDigest, a tool that simulates exoglycosidase digestion, based on controlled rules acquired from expert knowledge and experimental evidence available in GlycoBase. The tool allows the targeted design of glycosidase enzyme mixtures by allowing researchers to model the action of exoglycosidases, thereby validating and improving the efficiency and accuracy of glycan analysis. Availability and implementation: http://www.glycodigest.org.
INTRODUCTIONProtein glycosylation plays a key role in a wide range of biological processes. Advances in glycansequencing technology show that glycoproteins and glycolipids exist in many glycosylated variants, or glycoforms, which can differ substantially in their biochemical properties and functions. Glycans are structurally diverse, incorporating a wide range of monosaccharide residues and glycosidic linkages. Given that protein glycosylation is involved in numerous cellular processes and is implicated in disease progression, the ability to accurately characterize glycan structures and substructures and the determination of the function of these modifications, is increasingly important. However, the difficulty associated with oligosaccharide sequencing has resulted in researchers using only their knowledge of the biosynthetic pathways for protein glycosylation to report proposed glycan structures. Various analytical platforms are available for the sensitive and efficient analysis of N-and O-glycans. Such strategies include chromatographic and electrophoretic separations (with fluorescence detection), mass spectrometry (MS) and a combination of both. However, each particular methodology has its strengths and weaknesses, especially in terms of the information content (structural features) that can be readily measured. For example, limitations in material, the lack of fragments and resolution/ separation of peaks may yield only partial structures whereby the linkage, the identity or sequence of residue(s) cannot be fully identified. The use of orthogonal methodologies for structural and functional glycomics overcomes these constraints but often necessitates the integration of results from multiple complementary tools.