Motivation: Protein subcellular localization is pivotal in understanding a proteins function. Computational prediction of subcellular localization has become a viable alternative to experimental approaches. While current machine learning-based methods yield good prediction accuracy, most of them suffer from two key problems: lack of interpretability and dealing with multiple locations. Results: We present YLoc, a novel method for predicting protein subcellular localization that addresses these issues. Due to its simple architecture, YLoc can identify the relevant features of a protein sequence contributing to its subcellular localization, e.g. localization signals or motifs relevant to protein sorting. We present several example applications where YLoc identifies the sequence features responsible for protein localization, and thus reveals not only to which location a protein is transported to, but also why it is transported there. YLoc also provides a confidence estimate for the prediction. Thus, the user can decide what level of error is acceptable for a prediction. Due to a probabilistic approach and the use of several thousands of dual-targeted proteins, YLoc is able to predict multiple locations per protein. YLoc was benchmarked using several independent datasets for protein subcellular localization and performs on par with other state-of-the-art predictors. Disregarding low-confidence predictions, YLoc can achieve prediction accuracies of over 90%. Moreover, we show that YLoc is able to reliably predict multiple locations and outperforms the best predictors in this area. Availability: www.multiloc.org/YLoc Contact:
INTRODUCTIONSubcellular protein localization is a key process in many eukaryotic cells, and hence a major research topic in biology. After being synthesized, proteins are transported into different compartments depending on their molecular role within the cell. Some proteins are even transported to multiple sites. Protein localization is often mediated by sorting signals or sorting patches. However, the process of protein sorting is not fully understood yet. The subcellular localization of a protein is highly correlated with its function and is * To whom correspondence should be addressed. thus used to draw conclusions about its cellular role, interaction partners and function in biological processes. During the past decade, huge number of novel proteins were discovered in the context of large-scale sequencing projects. Unfortunately, for a majority of these proteins their subcellular localization is unknown and experimentally determining the localization of a protein is expensive and time-consuming. Computational prediction methods that predict subcellular localization from the amino acid sequence represent an attractive alternative to experimental methods. Over the past few years, numerous prediction methods have been developed. We distinguish between sequence-and annotation-based methods. Sequence-based predictors make use of sequence-coded sorting signals (), amino acid composition information () or even both information sources (). Annotation-based predictors use information about functional domains and motifs (), proteinprotein interaction (), homologous proteins (), annotated Gene Ontology (GO) terms () and textual information from Swiss-Prot keywords () or PubMed abstracts (). Since proteins with sufficiently similar protein sequences are usually located in the same compartment (), missing annotation information might also be transferred from close homologues. Annotation-based predictors often show higher accuracies than pure sequence-based predictors although they are less robust for novel proteins without known close homologues. Hybrid prediction approaches () take advantage of both information sources. Although there is an evidence that more than one-third of all eukaryotic proteins are transported to multiple compartments (), multiple targeting of proteins has only rarely been considered by prediction methods. As one of the first groups,introduced a method for multiple localization prediction based on about 500 multiple localized proteins. More recent predictors such as WoLF PSORT (),
DISCUSSION
CONCLUSIONUnderstanding protein subcellular localization is crucial for functional annotation of proteins. In contrast to many prediction methods, predictions made by YLoc are highly interpretable. YLoc explains why a prediction was made and shows which particular attributes contributed most and in which direction. Explaining why a subcellular localization prediction was made clearly influences the trust in the results. A user might find a prediction reasonable but might also find attributes indicating a different localization that are more convincing to him. In addition, a users can identify properties of their proteins that are typical or atypical for a certain cell organelle. Thus, YLoc can be helpful to understand the localization of novel proteins that have not been annotated before. Our benchmark results suggest that using complex computational models is less important than using highly discriminating features with different biological background. When considering only proteins that can be predicted with a certain confidence score, the prediction performance increases considerably. We believe that a confidence estimate is of great interest since it increases the trust in prediction results. When predicting proteins from multiple locations, YLoc yields often better prediction quality than current state-of-theart predictors. Moreover, YLoc's flexible probability transformation allows predicting novel location combinations that are not part of the training data. We showed several examples where YLoc predicted experimentally validated changes of localization sites and known sorting signals caused by mutations. This is a key step toward understanding subcellular localization processes without conducting expensive experiments. However, single amino acid substitutions that will not change important physiochemical properties are not likely to cause a change of the predicted location. In the future, we hope to increase both performance and interpretability of YLoc by integrating further biologically relevant features. Improvement will rely on traditional biology and computational biology proceeding hand in hand. Discovering novel protein sorting signals can improve the performance of YLoc, whereas an improved predictor can help biologists to elucidate the localization of novel proteins. Since we applied YLoc successfully on proteins with alternative isoforms that differ in localization, it seems promising to include alternative transcription and translation sites as features for YLoc +. In addition, qualitative distribution data of multiply targeted proteins will help to improve the prediction quality of YLoc +. The YLoc web service is available at www.multiloc.org/YLoc.