Motivations: Spreadsheet-like tabular formats are ever more popular in the biomedical field as a mean for experimental reporting. The problem of converting the graph of an experimental workflow into a table-based representation occurs in many such formats and is not easy to solve. Results: We describe graph2tab, a library that implements methods to realise such a conversion in a size-optimised way. Our solution is generic and can be adapted to specific cases of data exporters or data converters that need to be implemented. Availability and Implementation: The library source code and documentation are available at http://github.com/ISA-tools/ graph2tab.
INTRODUCTIONSpreadsheet-like tabular formats are popular data exchange means in the biomedical field (). The idea of representing complex structures, such as experimental designs, by means of matrices makes these formats easy to understand by end users, who can use familiar spreadsheet software products or specific applications () to manage experiment reporting and other biomedical data (). While working with such formats is relatively easy for software developers too, it is highly desirable to build and share reusable software components for processing them. In this article we describe graph2tab, a (Java-based) programming library that allows a developer to deal with the specific (yet recurrent) problem of converting the workflow graph of a biomedical experiment into a tabular representation, defined according to a given tabular format, such as ISA-Tab () or MAGE-TAB (). While the basics of such a conversion procedure are well known (http://www.mged.org/mage-tab/spec1.0.html;) our experience shows that implementing all the details is not trivial. Considering this, we have developed the graph2tab library in a generic way, so that it can be adapted to a variety of concrete cases. A software developer can leverage on it to build tools like data exporters or data format converters. This can be done * To whom correspondence should be addressed. by adapting the library to a particular combination of an input object model and an output tabular format. In the following we describe the specific problems related to such conversion and the solutions that graph2tab offers to them.