Motivation: Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD), automatically identifying the meaning of ambiguous words in context, is an important stage of text processing. This article presents a graph-based approach to WSD in the biomedical domain. The method is unsupervised and does not require any labeled training data. It makes use of knowledge from the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus which is represented as a graph. A state-of-the-art algorithm, Personalized PageRank, is used to perform WSD. Results: When evaluated on the NLM-WSD dataset, the algorithm outperforms other methods that rely on the UMLS Metathesaurus alone. Availability: The WSD system is open source licensed and available from http://ixa2.si.ehu.es/ukb/. The UMLS, MetaMap program and NLM-WSD corpus are available from the National Library of Medicine http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/, http://mmtx.nlm.nih.gov and http://wsd.nlm.nih.gov. Software to convert the NLM-WSD corpus into a format that can be used by our WSD system is available from http://www.dcs.shef.ac.uk/∼marks/biomedical_wsd/ under open source license. Contact
INTRODUCTIONThe biomedical scientific literature is now so large that automated tools are necessary to access it effectively (). However, this process is made difficult by the fact that terms in natural language can be ambiguous, i.e. may refer to more than one possible concept. For example, in the biomedical domain the word 'cold' is ambiguous and can mean (at least) 'common cold', 'cold temperature' or 'cold sensation'. Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) systems aim to solve this problem by identifying the meanings of ambiguous words in context (). For example, WSD would aim to identify that the meaning of cold in the sentence The role of zinc in treating cold symptoms is 'common cold'. This information could be used to improve literature searches, by ensuring that the documents returned only contain ambiguous terms when they are used in a meaning that is relevant to the search, and is also beneficial for other applications that are useful for biomedical researchers, such as automated indexing, information extraction and knowledge * To whom correspondence should be addressed. discovery (). This article describes an approach to WSD in the biomedical domain that is based on graph-based algorithms. Since the approach is unsupervised, it does not require any labeled training data and relies on information from the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus () instead. The UMLS Metathesaurus is converted into a graph to which the Personalized Page Rank algorithm () is applied to carry out WSD. Section 2 describes previous work on WSD in the biomedical domain and the use of graph-based algorithm for WSD. Section 3 describes our approach to WSD in the biomedical domain using the UMLS Metathesaurus and Personalized Page Rank algorithm. The approach is evaluated against a standard dataset and the results were analysed in Section 4. These results are discussed in Section 5. The conclusions are found in Section 6.
DISCUSSIONThere is some debate on how accurate WSD performance has to be to assisted in applications.carried out experiments suggesting that a WSD system would need to correctly disambiguate 90% of words in order to be useful for Information Retrieval. However, more recent experiments () have shown that WSD with lower performance can improve Information Retrieval results, showing that the way in which the output of the WSD system is used is as important as the WSD performance. It has also been shown that WSD can improve several applications including Cross-lingual Information Retrieval (), Machine Translation () and Information Extraction (). Performance of the WSD components of these systems is generally not reported but it is likely that it will be lower than the result obtained by the best system in a community evaluation exercise of all-words WSD systems, 65% (). This suggests that the WSD accuracy obtained by our system could be used to improve performance of applications.The results reported here are based on the only available dataset, NLM-WSD, which contains terms that are frequent and ambiguous (). The inter-annotator agreement for this data set is relatively low [kappa score 0.47 (which indicates that disambiguating these examples is not easy for humans. The performance of our approach for all ambiguous terms in a document cannot be reliably extrapolated but may be higher than the results reported here given the challenging nature of the NLM-WSD dataset. It is possible that the performance of our algorithm could be further improved by adding other parts of the UMLS, such as the Semantic Types, to the graph, or by making use of domain information from the MeSH codes, which has been shown to be useful for supervised WSD in the biomedical domain ().