Motivation: The molecular dynamics simulation package GROMACS is a widely used tool used in a broad range of different applications within physics, chemistry and biology. It is freely available, user friendly and extremely efficient. The GROMACS software is force field agnostic, and compatible with many molecular dynamics force fields; coarse-grained, unified atom, all atom as well as polarizable models based on the charge on a spring concept. To validate simulations, it is necessary to compare results from the simulations to experimental data. To ease the process of setting up topologies and structures for simulations, as well as providing pre-calculated physical properties along with experimental values for the same we provide a web-based database, containing 145 organic molecules at present. Results: Liquid properties of 145 organic molecules have been simulated using two different force fields, OPLS all atom and Generalized Amber Force Field. So far, eight properties have been calculated (the density, enthalpy of vaporization, surface tension, heat capacity at constant volume and pressure, isothermal compressibility, volumetric expansion coefficient and the static dielectric constant). The results, together with experimental values are available through the database, along with liquid structures and topologies for the 145 molecules, in the two force fields. Availability: The database is freely available under http://cyclo
INTRODUCTIONMolecular dynamics simulations can be a very useful tool in understanding fundamental interactions in simple molecular liquids and crystals as well as complex biomolecular systems. The accuracy of predictions based on molecular dynamics simulations are limited by the applied force field. Force fields are normally developed to reproduce certain specific experimental properties, such as density or energies, or to reproduces known molecular structures. A model that captures the basic physics underlying the atomic interactions can in principle be used to predict outside the realm of parameterization, and this is in fact often done. In order to validate the predictions based on force fields, we have recently performed force field benchmarks of proteins () and liquids (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.The latest incarnation of the GROMACS software was described bywhile a recent overview paper (van der) describes future prospects for the software suite. Here we present a database holding simulation resources, namely liquid structures and topology files. The construction of molecular topologiesdescribing connectivity, atom types and partial chargesis unfortunately still cumbersome. There is a large user base for the GROMACS softwareover 2000 people that subscribe to a mailing listand therefore we envision that there will be a significant demand for the kind of service the molecule  liquid database provides, since questions about topology building are among the most common ones on the mailing list.
DISCUSSIONThe molecular modeling community has a lot to gain from easy access to pre-equilibrated simulation structures and topologies thatare validated against experimental data. The GROMACS molecule  liquid database freely provides this for a set of over a hundred molecules, an example molecule entry being shown in. Presently, two of the most widely used force fields for organic molecules, GAFF () and OPLS/AA () are supported, and there are plans to include models based on the CHARMM generalized force field () as well. The expectation is that this test set will help users to establish how good these force fields are not only for the molecules included, but also for similar molecules. For this reason, the test set was picked such that it would include a large variety of chemical moieties. All topologies and structures available have been checked manually and calculated physical properties along with experimental data are provided for each of the the molecules, including corresponding experimental data which is fully referenced. A similar effort providing input files for molecules based on the GROMOS96 force field (van) was announced recently (). Further molecules, simulation results and corresponding experimental data will be added to the database in the future. The ultimate goal with this work is to build up a large database, that can be used both for getting reliable topologies and liquid structures, and to provide a list of relevant physical properties for comparison to experiments. The reference values provided () can also serve as a benchmark for force field improvements, for instance using polarizable models (; van Maaren and van der).