Motivation: The association between two blocks of omics data brings challenging issues in computational biology due to their size and complexity. Here, we focus on a class of multivariate statistical methods called partial least square (PLS). Sparse version of PLS (sPLS) operates integration of two datasets while simultaneously selecting the contributing variables. However, these methods do not take into account the important structural or group effects due to the relationship between markers among biological pathways. Hence, considering the predefined groups of markers (e.g. genesets), this could improve the relevance and the efficacy of the PLS approach. Results: We propose two PLS extensions called group PLS (gPLS) and sparse gPLS (sgPLS). Our algorithm enables to study the relationship between two different types of omics data (e.g. SNP and gene expression) or between an omics dataset and multivariate phenotypes (e.g. cytokine secretion). We demonstrate the good performance of gPLS and sgPLS compared with the sPLS in the context of grouped data. Then, these methods are compared through an HIV therapeutic vaccine trial. Our approaches provide parsimonious models to reveal the relationship between gene abundance and the immunological response to the vaccine. Availability and implementation: The approach is implemented in a comprehensive R package called sgPLS available on the CRAN.
IntroductionRecent advances in high-throughput 'omics' technologies enable quantitative measurements of expression or abundance of biological molecules of a whole biological system. Various popular 'omics' platforms in systems biology include transcriptomics, proteomics, cytomics and metabolomics. The integration of multi-layer information is required to fully unravel the complexities of a biological system, as each functional level is hypothesized to be related to each other (). Furthermore, multi-layer information is increasingly available such as in standard clinical trials. As an example, the evaluation of vaccines in phase I/II trials incorporates various measurements of the cell counts (tens of population of interest), of the cell functionality by many ways including the production of cytokines (intra and extracellular) and of the gene expression (). The integration of omics data is a challenging task. First, the high dimensionality of the data, i.e. the large number of measured biological entities (tens of thousands) makes it very difficult toobtain a good overview or understanding of the system under study. The noisy characteristics of such high-throughput data require a filtering process to be able to identify a clear signal. Second, because of experimental or financial constraints, the small number of samples or patients (typically  50) makes the statistical inference difficult and argue for using the maximum amount of available information. Third, the integration of heterogeneous data also represents an analytical and numerical challenge to try to find common patterns in data from different origins. In recent years, several statistical integrative approaches have been proposed in the literature to combine two blocks of omics data, often in an unsupervised framework. These approaches aim at selecting correlated biological entities from two datasets () or more (). This abundant literature clearly illustrates that the integrative analysis of two datasets poses significant statistical challenges to deal with the high dimensionality of the data. In particular, sparse partial least squares (sPLSs), using a L 1 penalty, has been developed for that purpose. With sPLS, it has been demonstrated that the integrative analysis of large scale omics datasets could generate new knowledge not accessible by the analysis of a single data type alone (). Moreover, the biological relevance of the approach has been demonstrated in recent studies (). However, group structures often existing within such data have not yet been accounted for in these analyses. For example, genes within the same pathway have similar functions and act together in regulating a biological system. These genes can add up to have a larger effect and therefore can be detected as a group [i.e. at a pathway or gene set level (. This has been increasingly used thank to geneset enrichment analysis approaches (). Considering a group of features instead of individual features has been found to be effective for biomarker identification ().proposed group lasso for group variables selection.extended it to logistic regression.modified group lasso to solve the non-orthonormal matrices problem. Although group lasso penalty can increase the power for variable selection, it requires a strong group-sparsity () and cannot yield sparsity within a group.proposed a supervised group lasso which selects both significant gene clusters and significant genes within clusters for logistic binary classification and Cox survival analysis.proposed a sparse group lasso penalty by combining an L 1 penalty with group lasso to yield sparsity at both the group and individual feature level.applied it to genomic feature identification.developed a sparse group-subgroup Lasso to accommodate selecting important groups, subgroups and individual predictors. In a regression context with a multivariate response variable,have recently proposed a multivariate sparse group lasso. Also some work has been reported to incorporate 'group effect' into a conventional canonical correlation analysis (CCA) model.studied structure-based CCA and proposed treebased and network-based CCA (). Chen and Liu (2012) incorporated group effect into an association study of nutrient intake with human gut microbiome (). Both papers show an improvement when incorporating group effect; however, a priori knowledge of group structure is needed and only the group effect of one type of data is discussed. More recently,developed a more general group sparse CCA method, which have been illustrated on genomics datasets (human gliomas data and NCI60 data).proposed a general penalized matrix decomposition (PMD) approach, which include sparse principal components and CCA. Sparsity have been realized by introducing different penalties forms such as L 1 penalty or fused lasso penalty to get smooth results in the context of ordered features. Based on generalized least square matrix decomposition, Allen et al.(2014) develop fast computational algorithms for generalized principal component analysis (PCA) and sparse PCA. In the same idea, a regularized PLS (RPLS) approach is proposed byto take into account the correlations between adjacent variables. However, none of the PMD and RPLS approaches have introduced group and sparse group lasso penalty. Here, we develop in a more general framework a group PLS (gPLS) method and a sparse gPLS (sgPLS) method (see also L fstedt et al. 2014). Both methods focus on sub-matrices decomposition taking into account the group structures. They could be used in 'regression' mode or in 'canonical mode'. The gPLS model aims at performing selection at group level while sgPLS enables selection at both group and single feature levels. Both irrelevant groups of features and individual features in the remaining groups will be simultaneously discarded with sgPLS. Our article is organized as follows. The model and algorithm for group and sgPLS are described in Section 2 after introducing the main steps of sPLS. We also present our extension in a context of PLS discriminant analysis. The performances of our approaches are compared with sPLS via a simulation study in Section 3. This section also contains an illustration of our method with an HIV vaccine study. The results are compared with the one obtained by applying the multivariate sparse group lasso recently proposed by).