Visualizing genes structure and annotated features helps biologists to investigate their function and evolution intuitively. The Gene Structure Display Server (GSDS) has been widely used by more than 60 000 users since its first publication in 2007. Here, we reported the upgraded GSDS 2.0 with a newly designed interface, supports for more types of annotation features and formats, as well as an integrated visual editor for editing the generated figure. Moreover, a user-specified phylogenetic tree can be added to facilitate further evolutionary analysis. The full source code is also available for downloading. Availability and implementation: Web server and source code are freely available at http://gsds.
IntroductionThe visualization of gene features such as composition and position of exons and introns for genes offers visual presentation for biologists to integrate annotation, and also helps them to produce highquality figures for publication. Thus, several web servers/software including FancyGene (), GECA (), FeatureStack (), GSDraw (), GPViz () and GenePainter () have been developed recently. Designing to generate high-quality figures suitable for publication, we developed an online Gene Structure Display Server (GSDS) (), which supported three input formats including sequences, accession number of GenBank () and exon positions. With more than 1 million hits annually, GSDS has been widely used by world-wide scientists in the functional () and evolutionary study () of gene families. According to the feedbacks from GSDS users, we developed the upgraded GSDS 2.0. Compared with the previous version, GSDS 2.0 supports two more widely used annotation formats, providing more comprehensive support for annotation files. To aid biologists generating suitable figures for publication, GSDS 2.0 offers a powerful interactive interface. Users can customize the size, shape and color of annotation features after their initial render and even fine-tune each element through an integrated visual editor. To facilitate evolutionary analysis, a user-specified phylogenetic tree can be added to theFinally, the generated figure can be exported as either vector graphic (in SVG and PDF format), or raster graphic (in PNG format).