Determining genetic factors underlying various phenotypes is hindered by the involvement of multiple genes acting cooperatively. Over the past years, disease–gene prioritization has been central to identify genes implicated in human disorders. Special attention has been paid on using physical interactions between the proteins encoded by the genes to link them with diseases. Such methods exploit the guilt-by-association principle in the protein interaction network to uncover novel disease–gene associations. These methods rely on the proximity of a gene in the network to the genes associated with a phenotype and require a set of initial associations. Here, we present GUILDify, an easy-to-use web server for the phenotypic characterization of genes. GUILDify offers a prioritization approach based on the protein–protein interaction network where the initial phenotype–gene associations are retrieved via free text search on biological databases. GUILDify web server does not restrict the prioritization to any predefined phenotype, supports multiple species and accepts user-specified genes. It also prioritizes drugs based on the ranking of their targets, unleashing opportunities for repurposing drugs for novel therapies. Availability and implementation: Available online at
INTRODUCTIONDuring the past decade, diseasegene prioritization has been central to research efforts in the field of human genetics. The promise of suggesting novel associations for genetic disorders with implications to therapeutical improvements has yielded a broad spectrum of computational tools (). Special attention has been paid on using physical interactions between the products of these genes to associate them with diseases (). Methods using proteinprotein interactions (PPIs) exploit the 'guilt-by-association' principle over the network topology to uncover new diseasegene associations. The guilt-by-association principle suggests that the genes whose products (proteins) interact with the products of known disease genes are more likely to be disease genes (). Recently, we proposed three novel algorithms for genome-wide prioritization of disease genes using PPI networks and showed that a consensus method combining these algorithms improved the prioritization () when using the diseasegene associations in Online Mendalian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database (). Combined with genomics and proteomics data, the method has been successfully used to identify a gene driving metastasis to bone in breast cancer (). Available network-based prioritization tools use either disease gene annotations from OMIM database () or a set of genes provided by the user () as initial associations (seed genes). These tools typically output the prioritization for a set of candidate genes; genes lying under a given genomic interval, a set of user-provided genes or top ranking genes (several hundred at most). Furthermore, some of these tools are accessible only through Cytoscape () as a plugin (). Publicly available biological data repositories can also be used for mining initial phenotypegene associations required by network-based prioritization methods without restricting to any predefined phenotype or candidates. Considering the limited availability of convenient interfaces that bridge network-based prioritization algorithms, we present GUILDify, an interactomebased prioritization server for phenotype-based characterization. GUILDify retrieves initial phenotypegene associations (seeds) via free text search on biological databases and ranks the proteins in the interaction network for their relevance to the phenotype. When the queried species is Homo sapiens, GUILDify provides a ranking of the drugs related to the phenotype based on the ranking of their targets.
CONCLUSIONPhenotypic characterization of genes plays a crucial role in explaining the mechanisms behind biological processes. We have developed GUILDify, a free and easy-to-use web server for prioritization of genes using PPI networks. For a given phenotype, GUILDify uses descriptive fields in several proteomics and genomics databases in combination with network-based prioritization methods and provides an interactome-wide ranking. The ranking represents the relevance to the phenotype of interest and can be used to short-list the set of candidate genes that need to be further validated or to repurpose drugs (e.g. through common high-ranking targets).