Copy number variants (CNVs) are a major source of genetic variation. Comparing CNVs between samples is important in elucidating their potential effects in a wide variety of biological contexts. HD-CNV (hotspot detector for copy number variants) is a tool for downstream analysis of previously identified CNV regions from multiple samples, and it detects recurrent regions by finding cliques in an interval graph generated from the input. It creates a unique graphical representation of the data, as well as summary spreadsheets and UCSC (University of California, Santa Cruz) Genome Browser track files. The interval graph, when viewed with other software or by automated graph analysis, is useful in identifying genomic regions of interest for further study. Availability and implementation: HD-CNV is an open source Java code and is freely available, with tutorials and sample data from http://daleylab.org.
INTRODUCTIONA copy number variant (CNV) refers to a large (1 kb) segment of the genome that is either duplicated or deleted. CNVs are found between individuals and between tissues of the same organism because of germline mutation and/or somatic mosaicism, and can significantly impact genetic variability, gene expression, phenotypic variability, disease, cancer, evolution and adaptation (). They may also be referred to as copy number abberations, changes, differences or polymorphisms depending on the discipline, context and the level of specificity. At the genome scale, CNVs can be detected using a variety of methods, including microarray and next-generation sequencing analysis. After detection, finding CNVs present in many samples (recurrent CNV regions) can indicate commonly inherited CNVs or mutation hotspots generating CNVs. Finding unique CNV events can indicate potential candidate mutations relevant to disease or other phenotypic variants. We introduce HD-CNV, which takes any collection of CNV calls as input, detects recurrent regions based on percentage overlap and creates a unique graphical visualization of clusters of overlapping CNV regions across samples. Other software exists to analyse overlapping CNV calls and find recurrent copy number variable regions among samples (). HD-CNV is unique, in that it analyses CNV events using interval graphs () and gives a visual karyotype for quick identification of recurrent and unique CNVs across the genome.
APPLICATIONHD-CNV identifies recurrent CNV regions and allows for high-level visualization of the relative number of CNV events on each chromosome, clusters of overlapping CNV events and isolated CNV events. It can be used for qualitative exploratory analysis on data from any organism, and it does not require additional reference data or annotation. Statistical analysis can be done up-or downstream as appropriate for the dataset. It can be used to compare CNV calls from multiple programs for concordance or discordance as in, for example, tumour/normal sample comparisons. It has been tested on data from different species (human and mouse) and data from different CNV calling platforms. HD-CNV generates various output files, including: 'Graph files' can be used for large scale visualization, allowing quick identification of areas for further study. CNV events, or merged regions from the graph, can be found in the track files. 'UCSC Genome Browser track files' contain the merged regions and the original CNV events, including base pair locations, which allows cross referencing with other genomic data and features.