Motivation: The HHsearch algorithm, implementing a hidden Markov model (HMM)-HMM alignment method, has shown excellent alignment performance in the so-called twilight zone (target-template sequence identity with 20%). However, an optimal alignment by HHsearch may contain small to large errors, leading to poor structure prediction if these errors are located in important structural elements. Results: HHalign-Kbest server runs a full pipeline, from the generation of suboptimal HMM-HMM alignments to the evaluation of the best structural models. In the HHsearch framework, it implements a novel algorithm capable of generating k-best HMM-HMM suboptimal alignments rather than only the optimal one. For large proteins, a directed acyclic graph-based implementation reduces drastically the memory usage. Improved alignments were systematically generated among the top k suboptimal alignments. To recognize them, corresponding structural models were systematically generated and evaluated with Qmean score. The method was benchmarked over 420 targets from the SCOP30 database. In the range of HHsearch probability of 20–99%, average quality of the models (TM-score) raised by 4.1–16.3% and 8.0–21.0% considering the top 1 and top 10 best models, respectively. Availability and implementation: http://bioserv.rpbs.univ-paris-diderot.fr/services/HHalign-Kbest/ (source code and server).
IntroductionAutomated protein structure prediction has been widely used for biological research in recent years. HHsearch is among the fastest and most accurate tool for remote homology detection and targettemplate alignment by using a hidden Markov model (HMM) pairwise alignment method (). Despite its high performance, an optimal alignment often contains small to large errors, especially in the position and length of gaps. Usually, structural biologists correct these errors manually using back and forth examination of the alignments and of the resulting structural models. This task becomes particularly tedious when target-template sequence identities are low and hampers the development of fully automated pipelines able to generate accurate structural models.In this work, we present a tool integrating suboptimal technique within the Viterbi algorithm of HHsearch program to generate suboptimal alignments. This interest of suboptimal exploration has previously been shown for the prediction of membrane protein topology () and in sequence-HMM pairwise alignments (). We first studied 26 targets from the CASP10 TBM dataset (template-based modeling) () to test the algorithms. The SCOP30 database (sequence identity in the range of 530%,) was then used as a benchmark to define the conditions in which the strongest increase in model accuracy could be expected from the use of the HHalignKbest server.