Recently developed methods that couple next-generation sequencing with chromosome conformation capture-based techniques , such as Hi-C and ChIA-PET, allow for characterization of genome-wide chromatin 3D structure. Understanding the organization of chromatin in three dimensions is a crucial next step in the unraveling of global gene regulation, and methods for analyzing such data are needed. We have developed HiBrowse, a user-friendly web-tool consisting of a range of hypothesis-based and descriptive statistics, using realistic assumptions in null-models. Availability and implementation: HiBrowse is supported by all major browsers, and is freely available at http://hyperbrowser.uio.no/3d. Software is implemented in Python, and source code is available for download by following instructions on the main site.
INTRODUCTIONMethods for detection of genome-wide chromatin 3D conformation, such as Hi-C () and ChIAPET (), are drastically expanding our understanding of genome biology. However, statistical and computational methods to analyze chromatin conformation capturebased data are needed. Many of the available methods focus on data visualization, or are not suited for genome-wide statistical investigations). The structure of chromatin makes statistical analysis complicated, due to correlations between the interaction frequencies caused by both sequence-dependent and topological constraints (). A few statistical tests have been proposed, with varying possibilities to account for structural dependencies (). Two useful command-line tools are the hiclib-package (), and the HOMER software suit (), which both allow for noise-removal, outlier detection and compartment identification. The HOMER software additionally allows for identification of significant interactions in a given dataset, assuming a binomial distribution and a background model taking into account sequence-based and compartmental biases. The global nature of these data allow for other types of statistical investigations beyond detecting significance of individual interactions. A common type of analysis is to analyze a set of genomic elements (genes, regulatory elements, transcription factors, etc.), and ask how this subset, or 'query track', is spatially arranged in 3D space as represented by a Hi-C dataset, for example. Here we present HiBrowse, a web-based analysis server for performing statistical analysis of 3D genomes in a range of different settings. The available statistics provide a flexible and expandable catalog of tools based on state-of-the-art statistical methods utilizing Monte Carlo (MC) and analytic methods as suited, in addition to a range of tools for visualization and hypothesis-generating investigations. for such biases using the method of. Furthermore, a specialized tool has been developed to allow users to upload their own Hi-C data (or similar) into the history, even if the dataset itself does not conform to well-known formats. See Supplementaryfor a list of already installed and pre-processed Hi-C datasets.