Motivation: Residue–residue contacts across the transmembrane heli-ces dictate the three-dimensional topology of alpha-helical membrane proteins. However, contact determination through experiments is difficult because most transmembrane proteins are hard to crystallize. Results: We present a novel method (MemBrain) to derive transmem-brane inter-helix contacts from amino acid sequences by combining correlated mutations and multiple machine learning classifiers. Tested on 60 non-redundant polytopic proteins using a strict leave-one-out cross-validation protocol, MemBrain achieves an average accuracy of 62%, which is 12.5% higher than the current best method from the literature. When applied to 13 recently solved G protein-coupled receptors , the MemBrain contact predictions helped increase the TM-score of the I-TASSER models by 37% in the transmembrane region. The number of foldable cases (TM-score 40.5) increased by 100%, where all G protein-coupled receptor templates and homologous templates with sequence identity 430% were excluded. These results demonstrate significant progress in contact prediction and a potential for contact driven structure modeling of transmembrane proteins.
INTRODUCTIONMembrane proteins constitute $30% of the proteins in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes (), and they participate in various crucial cellular processes, from basic small-molecule transport to complicated signaling pathways (). It has been shown that450% of current drug targets are membrane proteins (), where the top four gene families of Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs are all membrane proteins; i.e. G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), nuclear receptors, ligand-gated ion channels and voltage-gated ion channels (). Membrane-embedded alpha-helical polytopic proteins constitute the majority of ion channels, transporters and receptors in living organisms. This class of proteins, which accounts for $40% of all membrane proteins, is infamously difficult for high-resolution structural studies. Due to the intrinsic structural plasticity associated with many of these proteins, the chance of obtaining crystals suitable for X-ray or electron diffraction studies is small (). Although helical membrane proteins have many experimental difficulties, their structural conformation has been demonstrated to be predictable in a number of ways, e.g. transmembrane helix (TMH) domain topology (). Structure prediction of the TMH bundle for alpha-helical membrane proteins can be fulfilled by first predicting TMHs and then applying helix-packing constraints (). The first step of the TMH prediction has a long history, and the current methods can achieve an accuracy of $90% (;). In the second step, it has been widely acknowledged that residueresidue contact maps contain crucial constraints for ab initio assembly of protein structures. In the past 5 years, several methods have been proposed to predict inter-TMH residue contacts and TMHTMH interactions from the primary sequence. These approaches generally can be classified into two categories: (i) correlated mutation analysis (CMA)-based approaches [e.g. HelixCorr (, and (ii) machine learning (ML)-based methods [e.g. TMHcon (), TMhit (), MEMPACK () and TMhhcp (. CMA-based approaches identify co-evolving residue pairs that tend to be in contact from multiple sequence alignments (MSAs). ML-based methods predict inter-TMH residue contacts by training statistical models using various sequence-derived features. The predicted contacts are used to predict TMHTMH interactions. Despite the progress, there is much space for improvement. First, in the case of CMA-based approaches, the performance depends highly on the number of aligned sequences in MSAs. For example, the recent CMA-based residue contact prediction algorithm PSICOV () performs poorly on the CASP hard targets, which tend to have few homologous sequences (). This indicates that contact prediction based on CMA alone is insufficient. Second, from ML point of view, inter-TMH residue contact prediction is an imbalanced learning problem, where the number of samples in different classes (contact versus non-contact) differs significantly. Existing ML-based methods use random under-sampling *To whom correspondence should be addressed.() to select the negative samples. Except for random forest in TMhhcp (), which used 100 decision trees, all the existing predictors were trained with a single model using a 1:1 or 1:4 ratio of contact and non-contact samples. There is no single best ML algorithm because each has a different mathematical hypothesis. Therefore, an ensemble classifier constructed by applying multiple algorithms on multiple training sets can combine the diversities among different predictors and yield better results (). Third, in all the existing ML-based models, feature vectors of two residues are serially concatenated together. Although this serial combination is widely used, the doubled feature vector dimensions may decrease performance due to over-fitting effects of high-dimensional data. The parallel strategy is another feature fusion approach (), which represents the two vectors as real and imaginary parts in a complex space. The benefit is that the dimension of the obtained complex vector is the same as the vector of each residue, which we show improves performance. In this study, we present a novel method called MemBrain to predict inter-TMH residue contacts by merging an ML-based engine with the CMA-based approach. Here, we use the PSICOV () algorithm to calculate correlated mutation scores (CMs). The ML-based engine in the proposed protocol is implemented with an ensemble classifier. It is the fusion of five OET-KNN () classifiers and five SVM classifiers, where each independent classifier is trained with a different training set obtained from five independent under-samplings. By doing so, we can get the diversities from different algorithms and, at the same time, reduce the information loss via multiple samplings.
DISCUSSIONOur results demonstrate that the weakness of CMA (sufficient homology) can be compensated for by combining it with ML methods, and the weakness of statistical ML (local condensed predictions) can also be complemented by combining with CMA-based approaches. It would be interesting to investigate whether the idea of combining ML-based methods with CMAbased approaches in MemBrain can also be used to enhance the contact prediction accuracy in globular proteins. To demonstrate this, we used PSI-BLAST to search against UniRef90 database for the 22 targets containing free modeling or free modeling/template-based modeling domains in CASP9. Supplementaryshows the distributions of the number of homologous sequences on the CASP9 targets. The results in Supplementarydemonstrate: (i) Although some targets have very few or no homologous structures in the PDB, which causes difficulties for homology structure modeling, they have a large number of homologous sequences available. For example, four of these targets have more than 1000 homologous sequences in the UniRef90 database. This means we can get reliable predicted contacts for these four proteins ($61% average accuracy for top L/5 predictions on the training data set). (ii) In the other 18 targets, 9 of them contain less than 250 homologous sequences. According to our results, the accuracy of PSICOV in this group was very low (12.8% in this work), and the combination of ML-based method with PSICOV is expected to improve the accuracy (23.6% in this work). Furthermore, there are six proteins in the homology size region of (250 500). When directly applying PSICOV on this group, the results are also not satisfactory (28.0% in this work). However, the MemBrain prediction significantly improves the results in this group (73.5% in this work). To further illustrate the potential merit of the combination of ML-based methods with CMA-based approaches on globular proteins, we replaced the ML-part of the MemBrain predictor with SVMSEQ. The predictions of SVMSEQ for the 22 targetsTemplates whose sequence has4X% sequence identity to the protein were removed. fAverage results of the top 10 models, where templates whose sequence has 415% sequence identity to the protein were removed. gTemplates whose structure has TM-score40.5 to the native structure were removed.were extracted from http://www.predictioncenter.org/download_ area/CASP9/predictions/, which were merged with PSICOV outputs using a linear combination strategy. Supplementarylists the detailed performance of top L/5 predictions for each range contact on the 22 targets. As can be seen, the performance improved as expected. From the results, it is very interesting to see the following: SVMSEQ performs better than PSICOV on the short-range contacts (33.6% versus 12.8%), and worse than PSICOV on the long-rang contacts (17.1% versus 20.3%). This is consistent with our previous observation that the ML-based approach gives more local condensed predictions. The results also show that SVMSEQ and PSICOV predictions are largely complementary on long-range contacts, which makes the combination of them more accurate. These results suggest that a proper consensus of CMA-based approaches with ML-based methods is also promising for enhancing the ab initio contact predictions in globular proteins. Besides inter-TMH residue contacts in TMHs (denoted asType 1), there exist two other contact types in TMH proteins: contacts where one residue is in the membrane region and the other residue in the water-soluble loop region (denoted as Type 2), and contacts where both residues are in the water soluble region (denoted as Type 3). These two types of contacts are also important for 3D structure prediction, especially for the loop region. By observing the native contacts from known structures in the training and the independent data set at the whole-chain level, we found that 48.0 and 45.9% are Type 3 contacts, and 14.1 and 14.8% are Type 2 contacts. Hence, predicting these two types of contacts will be important future work. In this case, the predictors developed for predicting residue contacts in globular proteins are expected to contribute. Funding: The National Natural Science Foundation of China (61222306, 91130033, 61175024), Shanghai Science and Technology Commission (11JC1404800), a Foundation for the Author of National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation of PR, the National Science Foundation Career Award (DBI 0746198) and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (GM083107, GM084222). Conflict of Interest: none declared.