Motivation: Detection of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) has been a major application in processing second generation sequencing (SGS) data. In principle, SNPs are called on single base differences between a reference genome and a sequence generated from SGS short reads of a sample genome. However, this exercise is far from trivial; several parameters related to sequencing quality, and/or reference genome properties, play essential effect on the accuracy of called SNPs especially at shallow coverage data. In this work, we present Slider II, an alignment and SNP calling approach that demonstrates improved algorithmic approaches enabling larger number of called SNPs with lower false positive rate. In addition to the regular alignment and SNP calling, as an optional feature, Slider II is capable of utilizing information about known SNPs of a target genome, as priors, in the alignment and SNPs calling to enhance its capability of detecting these known SNPs and novel SNPs and mutations in their vicinity.
INTRODUCTIONThe ability to perform an unambiguous alignment of sequence reads () and the detection of sequence variants () is an essential task in processing the output of second generation sequencing. As this technology evolves, algorithms used in alignment and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) calling need to be modified to adapt to rapidly changing parameters such as read length, overall read quality, the number of reads and the sequence coverage being generated. Furthermore, information about reference genomes, in particular known polymorphisms, have the potential to improve the alignment and SNP calling accuracy. For example, the current human reference sequence typically used for alignment reflects, within any region, a single haplotype that will contain private SNPs as well as ones of low frequency within the human population. Such polymorphic regions, through their generation of an alignment mismatch, will impede the ability to determine nearby mutations of interest. A commonly used application for alignment and SNP calling from Illumina reads is the MAQ aligner (). MAQ uses * To whom correspondence should be addressed. hash tables to align the most probable sequence of each read to a reference genome, and then uses the Bayesian theorem to construct consensus sequence from these aligned and calibrated most probable reads, a list of SNPs are called on differences between the reference sequence and the consensus, and filtered by a set of threshold cutoff parameters such as SNP quality score, minimum and maximum coverage, the maximum allowed number of SNPs in a small window (dense SNPs) and the size of this small window. Previously, we reported on the ability of the Slider algorithm () to use a merge-sort approach for aligning the probability (prb) values at each position of Illumina short reads. By utilizing the probability values to reconstruct likely sequences from each read, Slider was able to achieve considerably higher alignment accuracy, reducing the number of mis-mapped reads arising due to sequence error. The algorithmic approach of Slider II continues to utilize the probability of all four possible nucleotides generated by Illumina to improve the overall alignment. This information has also been incorporated to improve SNPs calling quality. In brief, Slider II high SNP calling accuracy is a result of higher alignment accuracy of Slider (), higher SNP calling capability achieved in utilizing information provided in prb data and higher SNPs filtering accuracy: @BULLET High alignment accuracy: while most aligners are designed to align the most probable sequence, higher alignment accuracy is achieved by Slider by aligning the prb sequences for all four bases (). Slider II uses the merge-sort approach of Slider to align seeds of the first 31 bases (higher quality bases) of each read and then extend these seeds to full reads. @BULLET After the alignment step, Slider II utilizes more information provided in prb data for SNP calling: @BULLET Using all four prb values in a consensus construction yield a more discriminatory probability accumulation compared to only using the probability of the most probable base (mpb). @BULLET With heterozygous SNPs, the expectation is to have approximately equal coverage representation for the reference nucleotide and the allele nucleotide, however, this coverage, due to the low numbers, is likely to be skewed in favor of one nucleotide or another. Since probability accumulates exponentially to the level of coverage, such coverage unbalance is likely to mask the probability of the under represented nucleotide, therefore, in order to overcome this, Slider II builds a coverage probability consensus that only include data when the reference nucleotide has a lower probability than some threshold value. Again, having the probability values of all four nucleotides enables more accurate filtering of these bases.Page: 1030 10291035
DISCUSSIONIn this article, we presented a comprehensive SNPs calling tool from prb values of Illumina short reads, which aligns Illumina short prb reads to a reference genome, utilizes alignment information in calibrating all four prb values and accumulates bases probability using Bayes approach, and finally SNPs are called on nucleotide differences between the accumulated bases probabilities and the reference genome, when our confidence in a consensus accumulated from the reads is higher than our confidence of the used reference. Each called SNP is associated with a single score that ranks its accuracy among the set of called SNPs. SNPs that are likely to be a result of genomic rearrangements are either down scored or removed. As an optional feature, known SNPs of a target genome can be utilized as priors in alignment and SNPs calling, which increases the capability of detecting known SNPs. Results show that Slider II calls more SNPs with higher accuracy than the leading competitive tools; fromwe see that the concordance with Ensembl known SNPs for Slider II is higher than that of MAQ at every output size, for example, at concordance of 90%, Slider II was able to call more than 2 million SNPs whereas MAQ called about 1.58 million SNPs. We contribute this higher SNPs calling accuracy of Slider II to two factors:(1) The use of prb values: prb values result in higher alignment quality and more discriminatory probability accumulation outcome, compared to qCal value of the mpb, which enabled