Motivation: Discovery of novel protective antigens is fundamental to the development of vaccines for existing and emerging pathogens. Most computational methods for predicting protein antigenicity rely directly on homology with previously characterized protective antigens; however, homology-based methods will fail to discover truly novel protective antigens. Thus, there is a significant need for homology-free methods capable of screening entire proteomes for the antigens most likely to generate a protective humoral immune response.
INTRODUCTIONIdentification of antigen proteins capable of triggering a significant humoral immune system response is important for addressing fundamental questions in immunology, virology and bacteriology. It is also important for practical purposes ranging from diagnostic applications to vaccine design. The goal of this article is to develop and test a predictor of protein antigenicity that can be used on a high-throughput scale on existing or new proteomes to identify key antigenic proteins that may have protective qualities and may be used in vaccine design applications. The predictor is developed * To whom correspondence should be addressed. by applying machine-learning methods to training data resulting from a unique high-throughput proteomic chip technology originally developed in the Felgner Laboratory (), as well as data extracted from the literature and public databases. From the outset, it must be recognized that the notion of protein antigen is similar to many other notions in biology (e.g. gene, consciousness) that are very useful but not tightly defined. Given the complexity, variability and flexibility of the immune system, at one extreme, one could take the position that every protein has the potential of being antigenic and of triggering a humoral immune response. On the other hand, it is well known that immune systems respond differentially to the various proteins of a pathogen and that there are commonalities among the humoral immune responses of different individuals exposed to the same pathogen. Within the proteins of a pathogen considered to be antigenic, one can further distinguish several overlapping subclasses with fuzzy boundaries such as protective antigens, serodiagnostic antigens and crossreactive antigens. To a first degree of approximation: protective antigens are important for conferring protection, serodiagnostic antigens are associated with a differential humoral antibody response between naive and exposed individuals and are important for diagnostics purposes and cross-reactive antigens are associated with a strong humoral antibody response in both naive and exposed individuals. The primary focus of this work is on protective antigen prediction. Protecting populations against infectious pathogens is an important priority and vaccination is widely recognized as one of the most reliable preventive approaches. By simulating the presence of a given pathogen, a vaccine elicits a specific protective immune response. Although most proteins produced by a given pathogen can be considered to be antigens, only some, denoted protective antigens, induce an effective immune response against the whole pathogen (). These protective antigens are usually surfaceexposed or exported proteins accessible to the immune system (). For safety purposes, the historical trend has been toward creating subunit vaccines or epitope vaccines () containing only full or partial protective antigens, as opposed to early vaccines based on attenuated whole pathogens. Identification of protective antigenic proteins or determinants is therefore a top priority in current vaccine development projects (). Thanks to advances in genomic technologies, pathogen genomes can now be rapidly obtained (), opening the door for in silico screening of a pathogen's entire proteome
CONCLUSIONPrediction of the most antigenic proteins produced by a pathogen is an important and difficult problem. Such predictors could be used to identify the best vaccine candidates for a pathogen or for diagnostic tests. One key issue associated with the prediction task is the difficulty of classifying antigenic and non-antigenic proteins on a large scale and the lack of public databases dedicated to this purpose. In this work, we have used reactivity data obtained by protein microarray data analysis to prepare relatively large sets of examples. From these protein sets and 213 known protective antigens, we have designed a two-stage architecture to predict protein antigenicity from the primary sequence. The resulting predictor, ANTIGENpro, is the first sequence-based predictor trained using a large non-redundant dataset mainly obtained by protein microarray data analysis. In addition, ANTIGENpro is the only alignment-free predictor not designed for a specific pathogen category. The results obtained during the evaluation experiments provide several interesting conclusions. First, despite the inherent noise in protein microarray data, it can be used to effectively categorize both antigen and non-antigenic proteins for training purposes. The results demonstrate that this source of data can be used effectively for this problem: 81.6% of the known protective antigens are correctly classified when the model is trained only on balanced protein microarray datasets and an unbiased decision threshold of 0.5 is used. In addition, the cross-validation results indicate that ANTIGENpro can predict protein antigenicity from sequence alone with accuracy that is significantly better than random (75.51%). These cross-validation results also show that it significantly outperforms Vaxijen, the only previously reported method that does not directly rely on homology to known protective antigens. The results on the external validation dataset demonstrate that ANTIGENpro performs well when ranking entire proteomes according to likely antigenicity, when compared with Vaxijen and SignalP. In addition, the method presented here can rapidly take advantage of the massive amount of data that will be available thanks to the high-throughput protein microarray technology developed for studying the humoral immune response to pathogen infections. ANTIGENpro is available online at http://scratch.proteomics.ics.uci.edu.