Hilbert curves enable high-resolution visualization of genomic data on a chromosome-or genome-wide scale. Here we present the HilbertCurve package that provides an easy-to-use interface for mapping genomic data to Hilbert curves. The package transforms the curve as a virtual axis, thereby hiding the details of the curve construction from the user. HilbertCurve supports multiple-layer overlay that makes it a powerful tool to correlate the spatial distribution of multiple feature types. Availability and implementation: The HilbertCurve package and documentation are freely available from the Bioconductor project
IntroductionHilbert curves can be used to effectively visualize genomic data, because they can provide a global overview of genome-scale datasets while still revealing the spatial distribution of features at high resolution (). Hilbert curve visualization has been utilized to compare the sequence difference between human and other primates (), to show the spatial organization of different chromatin states (), and to investigate the genome-wide distribution of histone modifications (). The Hilbert curve () is a spacefilling curve, i.e. a continuous mapping of one-dimensional axis to a two-dimensional area. It is constructed recursively by dividing the two-dimensional square (and in subsequent iterations the subsquares) into four quadrants and folding the one-dimensional line into a U-shape to traverse all quadrants. After k iterations, the twodimensional space is split into 2 k  2 k grids and the one-dimensional line folded into 4 k  1 segments. The iteration level k of the Hilbert curve controls the degree of folding, with a higher k meaning a longer but also more densely packed curve in a given space (). For example, while in a linear visualization of human chromosome 1 of 1024 pixel length each pixel represents 243 kb, in a Hilbert curve visualization of 1024  1024 pixels each pixel represents only 238 bp, which greatly increases the resolution by 1000 times. Importantly, the Hilbert curve preserves the locality of data points, meaning that if two data points are in proximity on the onedimensional axis, they are also close to each other in twodimensional space (see demonstration in Supplementary File S1; it should be noted that the reverse is not always true and some points are close in the two-dimensional space while they are distant on the genome). Here we present HilbertCurve, an R/Bioconductor package for genomic data visualization using Hilbert curves. HilbertCurve hides details of the curve construction and provides methods to add graphics only based on genomic positions. This enables smooth integration of HilbertCurve in genomic analysis and distinguishes the package from currently available tools such as HilbertVis (). Further advantages of HilbertCurve over other tools are the capability to visualize multiple chromosomes simultaneously and V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com support of multiple-layer overlay, a powerful method to investigate correlations between different features. With these functionalities, the HilbertCurve package will greatly facilitate the visualization and interpretation of the ever increasing number of genome-wide datasets generated by next-generation sequencing and other omics techniques.
ApplicationHilbert curve visualization of genomic data can be used to assess the spatial distribution, size distribution and co-localization of genomic features together in a single plot.illustrates sequence conservation for human chromosome 1 compared to zebrafish. The chromosome is mapped to a Hilbert curve with level 6 so that each point represents a window of 61 kb. The plot reveals large highly conserved regions that alternate with regions of low conservation and non-conserved regions. For comparison, Supplementary File S4 also illustrates conservation between mouse and human. Histone modifications (e.g. methylation, acetylation) affect the chromatinDNA interaction and thus play a role in transcription regulation.visualizes the H3K36me3 modification in human chromosome 1. The curve is initialized with level 9 and illustrated under 'pixel' mode. While H3K36me3 is indicated in red, gene bodies are illustrated as additional layer in grey. Overlapping regions are adjusted in purple to visualize the strong enrichment of