HippDB catalogs every protein–protein interaction whose structure is available in the Protein Data Bank and which exhibits one or more helices at the interface. The Web site accepts queries on variables such as helix length and sequence, and it provides computational alanine scanning and change in solvent-accessible surface area values for every interfacial residue. HippDB is intended to serve as a starting point for structure-based small molecule and peptidomi-metic drug development. Availability and implementation: HippDB is freely available on the web at http://www.nyu.edu/projects/arora/hippdb. The Web site is implemented in PHP, MySQL and Apache. Source code freely available for download at http://sydney.edu.au/science/biology/meep/softwarel.
INTRODUCTIONProteinprotein interactions (PPIs) mediate fundamental signaling pathways and cellular processes. Although PPIs are highly promising pharmaceutical targets, they are not preferred targets in conventional drug development because of their extended flat interfaces. In particular, compound libraries for high-throughput screening that offer attractive lead compounds for enzymatic targets lack the topological and functional complexity necessary for PPI inhibition (). One successful method to inhibit PPIs is the mimicry of secondary structure motifs that contribute to complex formation (). Often a subset of the residues at a proteinprotein interface can contribute significantly to the binding interaction (). Because solubility and specificity are eternal problems in drug design, it is advantageous to identify and prioritize most important residues, leaving less important positions free for fine-tuning (). Conventional computational methods to predict important residues include alanine scanning () and solvent-accessible surface area (SASA) analysis (). Alanine scanning provides the change in G resulting from a contact residue being mutated to alanine, while a SASA value describes how much of the residue is buried from solvent on binding. We have previously developed a scoring strategy to rank protein interfaces by their promise for synthetic inhibition () and designed inhibitors of formerly 'undruggable' PPIs (). To follow-up this work, we sought to derive a readily accessible resource for the chemical biology community. Research groups with potent small-molecule scaffolds might be interested in small interfaces with hotspot residues in two consecutive positions or in the i and i4 positions, whereas those developing peptoid or beta-peptide foldamers might be more interested in long interfaces with high total G. HippDBa database of helical interfaces in PPIslists all the helical PPIs in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) and catalogs computational alanine scanning results (G in Rosetta energy units) and SASA for each interfacial residue. We expect this dataset will be a useful resource for PPI inhibition.depicts a typical workflow in HippDB. The user might first search for interface helices found in humans by constraining the organism name. Next, the user might trim the results for complexes with exactly three hotspot residues, then for helices 510 residues long, then for a G average 42. By clicking on the PDB codes that result, the user can view any of the five complexes fitting these criteria in JMol, with their hotspot residues displayed in wireframe.