Motivation: Existing coalescent models and phylogenetic tools based on them are not designed for studying the genealogy of sequences like those of HIV, since in HIV recombinants with multiple cross-over points between the parental strains frequently arise. Hence, ambiguous cases in the classification of HIV sequences into subtypes and circulating recombinant forms (CRFs) have been treated with ad hoc methods in lack of tools based on a comprehensive coalescent model accounting for complex recombination patterns. Results: We developed the program ARGUS that scores classifications of sequences into subtypes and recombinant forms. It reconstructs ancestral recombination graphs (ARGs) that reflect the genealogy of the input sequences given a classification hypothesis. An ARG with maximal probability is approximated using a Markov chain Monte Carlo approach. ARGUS was able to distinguish the correct classification with a low error rate from plausible alternative classifications in simulation studies with realistic parameters. We applied our algorithm to decide between two recently debated alternatives in the classification of CRF02 of HIV-1 and find that CRF02 is indeed a recombinant of Subtypes A and G. Availability: ARGUS is implemented in C++ and the source code is available at http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/GMD/
INTRODUCTIONA coalescent model incorporating recombination was first introduced by. In the presence of recombination, the genealogy of a set of sequences can be represented as a so-called ancestral recombination graph (ARG) rather than a tree (). In human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) recombination is frequent and recombinant forms of the virus that spread are called circulating recombinant forms (CRFs). In current nomenclature, sequences of the epidemiologically most * To whom correspondence should be addressed. relevant clade, HIV-1 Group M, are classified into 9 subtypes and 43 CRFs [see Los Alamos National Lab (LANL)-database; http://www.hiv.lanl.gov]. The CRFs have (usually multiple) recombination breakpoints between unrecombined segments of the 'pure' parental subtypes. Algorithms for subtype classification and breakpoint detection of HIV-1 sequences are based on the classification system of HIV-1 (). Hence, their quality highly depend on this system. But due to the evolution of HIV-1 nomenclature, developed in real time in conjunction with emerging knowledge of the global diversity of the virus, the current nomenclature has anomalies. E.g. the phylogenetic distance between Subtypes B and D is relatively small compared to that of other pairs of subtypes. In fact, it is more like the distance of a pair of subsubtypes (). Furthermore, several questions about the current classification system of sequences are unanswered or debated: There are 8 complete and over 400 partial HIV-1 Group M genomes in the LANL-database, which are 'undefined', i.e. belong neither to a subtype nor to a CRF (this is due to many reasons, e.g. parental sequences have not been identified yet). Additionally, in the nomenclature system CRF02 is considered to be a recombinant of subtype A and G, but recently some evidence has been presented in the literature suggesting that CRF02 would actually be better described as a subtype and subtype G as a recombinant (). A few years ago it was also debated whether CRF01 is in fact a pure subtype (). Moreover, assignments in the database are reflected on diverse classification strategies employed by different investigators in the primary literature. Therefore, it is desirable to have tools for classifying the HIV sequence set systematically based on a comprehensive coalescent model accounting for complex recombination patterns. While the problem of recombination has been well documented in HIV-1, recombination also occurs in the other lentiviruses. Moreover, intra-segmental recombination has been reported from a large variety of other viruses, e.g. coronaviruses, flaviviruses, alphaviruses, rotaviruses, influenzaviruses, hantaviruses, arenaviruses and avian oncoviruses (). Furthermore, recombination plays also a role in other species, such as bacteria (). Thus, it is possible that many virus systems would benefit from a systematic classification that explicitly includes recombination ().Page: 1410 14091415
DISCUSSIONWe presented ARGUS, a classification tool for recombining viruses, particularly HIV. Up to now, researchers intending to classify sequences of strongly recombining viruses had to analyze the sequences separately by segmenting their genome in recombinationfree parts and applying traditional phylogenetic tools to them. The information stemming from different parts of the genome had to be assembled by ad hoc methods (if even possible at all). Here, ARGUS offers an alternative by applying sophisticated coalescent theory and MCMC-based methods and incorporating much larger parts of the available information in an integrated and model-based way. The recently developed version 3.0 of VisRD does not perform well on the datasets analyzed in this article. Nevertheless, one has to keep in mind that the approach used by VisRD is in principle not adequate for a small number of sequence groups. In fact our test setting is the smallest possible for which the taxon ranking of VisRD can be applied. Since applying ARGUS on a very large number of sequence groups is prohibitive with respect to running time (at least in the current implementation), we can conclude that the scopes of VisRD and ARGUS are roughly exclusive. Moreover, the application range of ARGUS is limited in two directions: first, ARGUS is not designed to rank different classifications not containing any recombinants. This is due to the fact that the two classifications assigning the same subtype to all sequences and assigning a different subtype to each sequence, respectively, achieve the highest likelihood among all CRF-free classifications by definition. Second, when applying ARGUS one has to keep in mind that there might be very plausible classifications that do not fit into the framework of ARGUS, i.e. classifications incorporating intra-subtype recombination and recombination events in the early history of the ARG. In this study, we first verified in different test settings that ARGUS possesses the ability to reliably identify the most appropriate classification in most investigated cases. Due to the character of the test method, we can conclude that for input sequences stemming from (sub-)species well separated by founder effectssuch as HIV-1ARGUS classifies correctly with very high probability. Afterwards, we applied ARGUS to real-world HIV-1 Group M data in order to address the intensively debated question whether CRF02 is truly a CRF or rather the alleged Subtype G is one. Our results show that the former classification explains the data better. The fact that we had to run the MCMC algorithm with up to 50 initial ARGs to achieve satisfying results, shows that the MCMC algorithm is not often able to find the global maximum directly, very probably due to getting trapped in a local maximum. We plan to overcome this problem by applying Metropolis-coupled MCMC (MC 3 ) methods (). A standard task after sequencing a new HIV genome is subtyping as performed by jpHMM and other tools: The genome is segmented into regions that are each related to one known pure subtype of HIV. A future application of ARGUS will be to vote between the results of several subtyping tools in case they disagree on the correct classification of the query sequence (easily carried out by replacing the recombination prediction of jpHMM by the ones of the other subtyping tools). This application is a special case for the model in which two or more classifications are compared that differ only in the recombination pattern of one sequence, the other sequences all being pure subtypes. While ARGUS does not search for a recombination pattern itself, its comprehensive model is well suited to compare such patterns. In the near future, we plan to incorporate additional rules (such as intra-subtype recombination and recombination near to the root) into ARGUS and allow for growth of the population and temporally Page: 1415 14091415