Motivation: Some economically important plants including wheat and cotton have more than two copies of each chromosome. With the decreasing cost and increasing read length of next-generation sequencing technologies, reconstructing the multiple haplotypes of a polyploid genome from its sequence reads becomes practical. However, the computational challenge in polyploid haplotyping is much greater than that in diploid haplotyping, and there are few related methods. Results: This paper models the polyploid haplotyping problem as an optimal poly-partition problem of the reads, called the Polyploid Balanced Optimal Partition (PBOP) model. For the reads sequenced from a k-ploid genome, the model tries to divide the reads into k groups such that the difference between the reads of the same group is minimized while the difference between the reads of different groups is maximized. When the genotype information is available, the model is extended to the Polyploid Balanced Optimal Partition with Genotype constraint (PBOPG) problem. These models are all NP-hard. We propose two heuristic algorithms, H-PoP and H-PoPG, based on dynamic programming and a strategy of limiting the number of intermediate solutions at each iteration, to solve the two models, respectively. Extensive experimental results on simulated and real data show that our algorithms can solve the models effectively, and are much faster and more accurate than the recent state-of-the-art polyploid haplotyping algorithms. The experiments also show that our algorithms can deal with long reads and deep read coverage effectively and accurately. Furthermore, H-PoP might be applied to help determine the ploidy of an organism. Availability: https://github.com/MinzhuXie/H-PoPG Contact:
ConclusionWith the rapid development of sequencing technologies, reconstructing the multiple haplotypes of a polyploid from DNA sequencing reads is becoming more and more practical. In this paper, we modeled polyploid haplotyping as a combinatorial optimization problem to partition the input reads, called the Polyploid Balanced Optimal Partition (PBOP) problem. Since the problem is NP-hard, we developed a heuristic algorithm HPoP for it. When the genotype information is available, we also proposed a genotype constrained version, called PBOPG, of the problem and designed a corresponding heuristic algorithm H-PoPG. Note that these methods are very different from our previous methods for dealing with diploids () since they consider the distance between the consensus haplotypes of different groups while the previous methods for diploids calculates the distance between reads belonging to different groups. We compared our algorithms with three recent state-of-the-art polyploid haplotyping algorithms SDhaP, HapTree and HapCompass on both simulated and real data. Our extensive test results showed that HPoPG was generally more accurate in reconstructing haplotypes than SDhaP, HapTree and HapCompass, and H-PoP was able to achieve comparable (though slightly worse) performance without the genotype information. Furthermore, H-PoPG and H-PoP ran much faster than SDhaP, HapTree and HapCompass, and could effectively handle long reads and deep read coverage. Our experiments on real data also showed that H-PoP could be used to infer the number of chromosomes of an organism (i.e. its ploidy), since when the parameter k is set smaller than the ploidy of the organism, the MEC rate of H-PoP would be much larger than the sequencing error rate.