Motivation: Modern molecular technologies allow the collection of large amounts of high-throughput data on the functional attributes of genes. Often multiple technologies and study designs are used to address the same biological question such as which genes are over-expressed in a specific disease state. Consequently, there is considerable interest in methods that can integrate across datasets to present a unified set of predictions. Results: An important aspect of data integration is being able to account for the fact that datasets may differ in how accurately they capture the biological signal of interest. While many methods to address this problem exist, they always rely either on dataset internal statistics, which reflect data structure and not necessarily biological relevance, or external gold standards, which may not always be available. We present a new rank aggregation method for data integration that requires neither external standards nor internal statistics but relies on Bayesian reasoning to assess dataset relevance. We demonstrate that our method outperforms established techniques and significantly improves the predictive power of rank-based aggregations. We show that our method, which does not require an external gold standard, provides reliable estimates of dataset relevance and allows the same set of data to be integrated differently depending on the specific signal of interest. Availability: The method is implemented in R and is freely available at http://evpedia.info.
INTRODUCTIONThe availability of high-throughput experimental technologies has greatly increased the rate of data generation. However, the reliability of individual high-throughput datasets is often uncertain, and the development of techniques to integrate the results across different studies to improve the validity and reproducibility of findings has been an important area of research. In samples studying disease-related expression changes, for example, sample size is a common limitation, and data integration by statistical meta-analysis has been used repeatedly to boost statistical power and find reliable signals. Formal meta-analyses rely on the statistical properties of each independent dataset, and common strategies involve combining effect sizes and P-values [see () for a comprehensive review. However, the fundamental limitation of this approach is that statistical properties may not correlate with how well a particular biological question is addressed. A single study may show large effect sizes and small P-values but can be biologically invalid owing to design flaws. For example, a study purporting to find large expression differences in ethnic groups () was later shown to be confounded by batch effect (). An alternative data integration approach that is robust to discordance between statistical power and biological validity is Bayesian integration with an external gold standard. This approach does not use any internal dataset statistics and has the additional advantage that it can be used to perform integration tasks that cannot even in principle be addressed with statistical meta analysis, such as integrating data from completely unrelated experimental platforms. In the Bayesian integration approach, the accuracy of each dataset is measured in terms of how well it is able to reproduce known information in the gold standard. For example, in integrating genomic datasets for functional network predictions, each dataset is evaluated against a gold standard of functionally interacting proteins (). In this case, datasets only contribute a set of final predictions (which may be categorical or real valued) whose accuracy is judged independently of the underlying data structure. The limitation of the Bayesian approach is that it requires the existence of an acceptable gold standard against which individual predictions are evaluated. For some integration tasks, such as disease gene expression studies, such a standard is typically not available. Moreover, even well-established standards of knowledge, such as the Gene Ontology or KEGG, are only limited to capturing accuracy relative to what is already known. Thus, if a dataset captures correct but completely novel biological information, its value is not recognized by the comparison with a gold standard lacking any sampling of this signal, and its contribution will be discarded. A practical alternative to formal statistical meta-analysis or Bayesian analysis is combining datasets directly without any treatment of the underlying statistics or any reference to the external standard. Such methods can be applied in a variety of contexts where statistics and external standards may be unavailable or prone to producing misleading quality assessments. In this integration approach, each dataset contributes equally to the consensus signature. Without loss of generality, the approach *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com can be viewed as an instance of rank aggregation where each dataset supplies a prediction list (that is not necessarily complete) in order of differential expression, correlation or some other metric of relevance. Unfortunately treating all datasets equally can make these methods unacceptably sensitive to noise and outliers. To address these limitations, we propose a new data integration method that combines the rank aggregation framework with the power of Bayesian reasoning. Our method assumes that there is a ground truth to be discovered and this is represented with varying fidelity in the datasets to be integrated. Starting with an equally weighted consensus generated by rank averaging, we iteratively fit Bayes Factors to each dataset and recompute the integration result. Thus, this approach combines the advantages of being agnostic to dataset-specific statistics and external standards while using the robustness of the Bayesian framework to handle outliers and inconsistencies. We demonstrate that this approach has favorable theoretical properties on an established simulation pipe-line and improves over other rank aggregation methods in real data integration tasks. The method is computationally simple, yet significantly increases the predictive power of rank-based aggregations. Additionally it provides a reliable estimate of dataset relevance and can be used to produce contextsensitive integrations that focus in on specific areas of interest. Because it requires only ranked lists, it is readily applicable to many integration problems.
DISCUSSIONWe present a method that implements rank aggregation via Bayesian reasoning. Our method differs from previous rank aggregation approaches in that it directly estimates the reliability of individual datasets, weighing them accordingly. We have shown that the BIRRA method outperforms established approaches on simulations and performs well in real data integration scenarios. However, the method will likely not be applicable to all data integration tasks without some further developments. For example, as it operates entirely by bootstrapping, it is even more susceptible to deviations from the independence assumption underlying the naive Bayes calculations. In general, the Bayes factors and probabilities calculated by our method are always inflated relative to those that are calculated with an external gold standard, and the gap widens when dataset dependence is present. BIRRA performance on the stem cell expression integration, which has considerable dataset dependence, demonstrates that the method is effective despite the independence assumption. However, dependence will have to be addressed directly for integrations that involve a larger number of datasets. It is likely that in those cases, the deleterious effects of data dependence can be negated using regularization techniques commonly applied to standard-based Bayesian integration (), and finding a suitable regularization method will be an important direction for future research.