Motivation: In the past few years, an increasing number of crystal and cryo electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structures of large macromolecular complexes, such as the ribosome or the RNA polymerase, have become available from various species. These multi-subunit complexes can be difficult to analyze at the level of amino acid sequence in combination with the 3D structural organization of the complex. Therefore, novel tools for simultaneous analysis of structure and sequence information of complex assemblies are required to better understand the basis of molecular mechanisms and their functional implications. Results: Here, we present a web-based tool, Integrative Biology of Sequences and Structures (IBiSS), which is designed for interactively displaying 3D structures and selected sequences of subunits from large macromolecular complexes thus allowing simultaneous structure-sequence analysis such as conserved residues involved in catalysis or protein-protein interfaces. This tool comprises a Graphic User Interface and uses a rapid-access internal database, containing the relevant pre-aligned multiple sequences across all species available and 3D structural information. These annotations are automatically retrieved and updated from UniProt and crystallographic and cryo-EM data available in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) and Electron Microscopy Data Bank (EMDB). Availability and implementation: The database contains all currently available structures of ribo-somes, RNA polymerases, nucleosomes, proteasome, photosystem I and II complexes. IBiSS is available at http://compbio.ddns.comp.nus.edu.sg/%7elipidgo/index.php.
IntroductionTo obtain a better understanding of large macromolecular complexes that contain multiple and variable subunits, such as the ribosome, the RNA polymerase or the proteasome, appropriate tools are required to allow the integrated analysis of several subunit proteins down to the level of individual residues. For example, eukaryotic ribosomes contain 80 proteins of which some are conserved across species, some only share conserved domains, while others are specific to either prokaryotic or eukaryotic species. In this context, protein sequence analysis greatly benefits from the available 3D structures and vice versa.