Motivation: Recently, mapping studies of expression quantitative loci (eQTL) (where gene expression levels are viewed as quantitative traits) have provided insight into the biology of gene regulation. Bayesian methods provide natural modeling frameworks for analyzing eQTL studies, where information shared across markers and/or genes can increase the power to detect eQTLs. Bayesian approaches tend to be computationally demanding and require specialized software. As a result, most eQTL studies use univariate methods treating each gene independently, leading to suboptimal results. Results: We present a powerful, computationally optimized and free open-source R package, iBMQ. Our package implements a joint hierarchical Bayesian model where all genes and SNPs are modeled concurrently. Model parameters are estimated using a Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm. The free and widely used openMP parallel library speeds up computation. Using a mouse cardiac dataset, we show that iBMQ improves the detection of large trans-eQTL hotspots compared with other state-of-the-art packages for eQTL analysis. Availability: The R-package iBMQ is available from the Bioconductor Web site at http://bioconductor.org and runs on Linux, Windows and MAC OS X. It is distributed under the Artistic Licence-2.0 terms.
INTRODUCTIONRecently, eQTL mapping studies (where gene expression levels are viewed as quantitative traits) have provided insight into the biology of gene regulation. Among eQTLs, it is customary to distinguish cis-eQTLs from trans-eQTLs. The former share the same locus as the expressed gene, whereas the latter are located on loci different from the expressed gene. Many eQTLs, particularly trans-eQTLs, form trans-eQTL hotspots where one single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) is linked to the expression of several genes across the genome. Despite this observation, most available eQTL analysis tools treat genes as independent, and as such these methods are underpowered to detect trans-eQTL hotspots (). Likewise, some available packages [such as GGtools (] allow for data analysis and visualization of results, but are currently limited to univariate analyses. We present an integrated hierarchical Bayesian model that jointly models all genes and SNPs to detect eQTLs. The iBMQ R/Bioconductor package incorporates genotypic and gene expression data into a single model while (i) coping with the high dimensionality of eQTL data (large number of genes), (ii) borrowing strength from all gene expression data for the mapping procedures and (iii) controlling the number of false positives to a desirable level.