Biological sequence diagrams are fundamental for visualizing various functional elements in protein or nucleotide sequences that enable a summarization and presentation of existing information as well as means of intuitive new discoveries. Here, we present a software package called illustrator of biological sequences (IBS) that can be used for representing the organization of either protein or nucleotide sequences in a convenient, efficient and precise manner. Multiple options are provided in IBS, and biological sequences can be manipulated, recolored or rescaled in a user-defined mode. Also, the final representational artwork can be directly exported into a publication quality figure. Availability and implementation: The standalone package of IBS was implemented in JAVA, while the online service was implemented in HTML5 and JavaScript. Both the standalone package and online service are freely available at http://ibs.
IntroductionA concise, delicate and precise picture can afford a great advantage over description alone. The graphical representation of biological sequences with various functional elements is fundamental for the efficient introduction and interpretation of scientific findings obtained in the course of the investigation of molecular biological functions. At present, biologists mainly use Microsoft PowerPoint, Adobe Illustrator or Photoshop to diagram biological sequences. However, these software packages were developed for the general propose of image manipulation, so it is difficult to use them to prepare a sequence organization diagram of sufficient accuracy. For example, the scale of functional elements such as DNA motifs and protein domains is typically approximated, even judged by eye. Also, when using these tools, neither the locations nor the positions of functional elements can be precisely designated in the biological sequences. The first attempt at providing a professional illustrator of MyDomains for biological sequences was made by the PROSITE database (). Using the tool, the functional domains and sites of a protein sequence can be drawn to a precise scale. Up to six different shapes and four different color modes are supported in the diagramming of the protein domains. However, a pre-defined script that specifies the precise positions of the function domains or sites must be provided before generating a protein domain graph (DOG). In 2009, our group also developed a software package called DOG () for plotting protein graphs in a step-by-step manner. Although DOG was specifically designed for protein diagramming, a number of researchers still used it for visualizing the functional elements of nucleotide sequences. However, DOG is not an optimal tool for the visualization of nucleotide sequences since it lacks of drawing elements for nucleotide domains. In this regard, the development of a new software package for the purpose of diagramming both protein and nucleotide sequences is awaited. In this work, we present a new tool called illustrator of biological sequences (IBS) for assisting biologists in drawing publicationquality diagrams of both protein and nucleotide sequences. Abundant graphical elements are available for representing functional elements or regulatory molecules for both protein and nucleotide sequences. The standalone packages of IBS were implemented in JAVA, and supported three major Operating Systems, including Windows, Linux and Mac OS. We anticipate this powerful tool to be a great help to biologists for the purpose of visualizing biological sequences.
ConclusionHere, we have developed a novel software called IBS, which is dedicated to the illustration of biological sequence organization. IBS was equipped with many features that are specifically designed for drawing both protein and nucleotide sequences. Notably, IBS was implemented with a configurable database visualization interface, which allows users to directly retrieve and specify annotations from UniProt database for the visualization. In the near future, more different annotations from other databases will be integrated, for example, the nucleotide sequence organizations from NCBI GenBank and the cancer somatic mutation information from TCGA. Thus, we believe that IBS is a useful tool for the biology research community, allowing the representation of findings in a simpler and more intuitive way.