Motivation: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that cause mRNA degradation and translational inhibition. They are important regulators of development and cellular homeostasis through their control of diverse processes. Recently, great efforts have been made to elucidate their regulatory mechanism, but the functions of most miRNAs and their precise regulatory mechanisms remain elusive. With more and more matched expression profiles of miRNAs and mRNAs having been made available, it is of great interest to utilize both expression profiles to discover the functional regulatory networks of miRNAs and their target mRNAs for potential biological processes that they may participate in. Results: We present a probabilistic graphical model to discover functional miRNA regulatory modules at potential biological levels by integrating heterogeneous datasets, including expression profiles of miRNAs and mRNAs, with or without the prior target binding information. We applied this model to a mouse mammary dataset. It effectively captured several biological process specific modules involving miRNAs and their target mRNAs. Furthermore, without using prior target binding information, the identified miRNAs and mRNAs in each module show a large proportion of overlap with predicted miRNA target relationships, suggesting that expression profiles are crucial for both target identification and discovery of regulatory modules. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-protein-coding RNAs that are expressed from longer transcripts encoded in animals, plants, viruses and single-celled eukaryotes (). They cause mRNA degradation, translational inhibition or a combination of the two by completely or partially complementary base binding to their target mRNAs (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed. miRNAs are pivotal regulators of development and cellular homeostasis through their control of diverse processes, including cell differentiation, proliferation, growth, mobility, and apoptosis (). Consequently, dysregulation of miRNA functions may lead to diseases. Recent studies have reported differentially expressed miRNAs in diverse cancer types such as breast cancer (), lung cancer (), prostate cancer (), colon cancer () and ovarian cancer (). Therefore, the understanding of miRNA is critical in understanding basic biological processes, elucidating the development and inhibition of pathogenesis of many diseases, and facilitating biotechnology projects. Many computational approaches have been proposed to elucidate miRNA functions in recent years. We classify these works into three categories: (i) miRNA target prediction (), that is, to identify which mRNAs are targeted by which miRNAs; (ii) discovering miRNA regulatory modules (MRMs), that is, to identify a group of co-expressed miRNAs and mRNAs, either at sequence level () or by integrating sequence and expression profiles of miRNAs and mRNAs (); (iii) prediction of functional miRNA regulatory modules (FMRMs), which are regulatory networks of miRNAs and their target miRNAs for specific biological processes (). The identification of FMRMs is critical in understanding the biological pathways and the development and inhibition of pathogenesis of many diseases. It also has a great potential for the development of gene therapeutic treatments and miRNA-based drugs (). For FMRM discovery,proposed a method based on association rule mining. It associates the reverse expression patterns of miRNAs and mRNAs with biological conditions. A novel method is further proposed () using Bayesian Network structure learning. This method was designed to explore all the possible miRNA regulatory patterns for biological conditions under the comparative experiment designs. These two methods are supervised methods where biological conditions are directly applied to the search for the FMRMs. An unsupervised method was proposed byfor FMRM discovery.