Motivation: Eukaryotic gene expression is controlled through molecular logic circuits that combine regulatory signals of many different factors. In particular, complexation of transcription factors (TFs) and other regulatory proteins is a prevailing and highly conserved mechanism of signal integration within critical regulatory pathways and enables us to infer controlled genes as well as the exerted regulatory mechanism. Common approaches for protein complex prediction that only use protein interaction networks, however, are designed to detect self-contained functional complexes and have difficulties to reveal dynamic combinatorial assemblies of physically interacting proteins. Results: We developed the novel algorithm DACO that combines pro-tein–protein interaction networks and domain–domain interaction networks with the cluster-quality metric cohesiveness. The metric is locally maximized on the holistic level of protein interactions, and con-nectivity constraints on the domain level are used to account for the exclusive and thus inherently combinatorial nature of the interactions within such assemblies. When applied to predicting TF complexes in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the proposed approach outper-formed popular complex prediction methods by far. Furthermore, we were able to assign many of the predictions to target genes, as well as to a potential regulatory effect in agreement with literature evidence. Availability and implementation: A prototype implementation is freely available at https://sourceforge.net/projects/dacoalgorithm/.
INTRODUCTIONThe complexity of higher eukaryotes cannot be explained without considering the combinatorial regulation of transcription (). Recent experimental work showed that the information encoded by many regulatory control elements, namely specific DNA-binding transcription factors (TFs) and their cofactors, epigenetic marks, microRNAs and other input signals, is integrated to orchestrate the expression patterns of genes in a context-dependent manner in time and space (). On a conceptual level, this complex signal processing task is accomplished by an interplay of several control layers. Cis-regulatory modules, functional sequence segments whose accessibility is dependent on the packing state of the chromatin, enable basic logic operations on the input that are essentially implemented by proteinprotein interactions between DNA-binding proteins with suitably positioned binding sites (). When bound to the DNA, these proteins often mediate further physical interactions that provide an additional scaffold besides the regulatory sequence. This important aspect expands the current understanding of cis-regulatory signal integration beyond the linear sequence-based code (). The scaffold is used to recruit additional TFs or cofactors that entail regulatory capabilities such as epigenetic alterations or mediate interactions with other TFs on selected sites where binding motifs obey certain distance constraints (; G  oke et al., 2011). TFs that participate in such multi-protein complexes to produce decisive output signals are referred to as being 'cooperative' (). Cooperative TFs are found in shorter distance and are more clustered within the protein interaction network than expected by chance (). Although they influence similar groups of target genes, what supports their role as important regulatory drivers, they neither seem to share similar regulatory inputs nor regulate each other (). Recent research showed that cooperative binding events are evolutionary much stronger conserved (G ) and show a greater impact on expression compared with individual binding events (). Furthermore, they turned out to be driving regulators in essential eukaryotic control processes such as the cell cycle in yeast (), body part formation in Drosophila () or mammalian cell fate determination (G ). The understanding of this combinatorial interplay requires a paradigm shift from single key players to the coupled activity of many regulatory control elements. At a first glance, the prediction of protein complexes is a wellestablished field. Data for physical interactions between proteins in the form of proteinprotein interaction networks (PPIN) is abundant and so are suitable clustering approaches that find dense areas in networks. A very successful recent method is ClusterONE (), which locally optimizes the cluster quality measure cohesiveness. This is done iteratively by stepwise addition/removal of the locally most valuable incident/ boundary proteins. The cohesiveness f of a set of proteins V in a network is generally defined as fV= w in V w in V+w bound V where w in V denotes the total weight of edges between members of V (internal edges), and w bound V denotes the total weight of edges that connect V with the rest of the network (boundary edges).illustrates these definitions with an example and additionally introduces the notion of incident and boundary proteins. Cohesiveness assesses the structural properties of subnetworks that we aim for in this work: they should be densely connected but at the same time well separated from the outside. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.comAn important feature of ClusterONE and other successful complex prediction approaches is to account for overlaps between complexes. Many protein complexes are organized in a modular and combinatorial fashion so that proteins may take part in several distinct complexes (). PPINs provide a static compilation of assumed pairwise interactions, whereas real biological interactions are highly dynamic and intrinsically controlled by protein expression and spatial constraints. To enable the formation of a physically interacting protein complex, all involved proteins must be expressed at the same time () and must be capable of forming a stable binding topology devoid of any binding site competition (). The integration of additional data should thus allow us to derive a clearer picture of the combinatorial complexity of protein complexes. Although the combinatorial manifold of individual proteins was studied before (), few computational methods so far account for those effects. A first step in this direction was taken bywho annotated mutually exclusive interactions in a yeast protein network using structural data, where available, to determine all possible conflict-free subnetworks. Owing to the exponential complexity, the construction was limited to previously determined dense areas of the network that were then used to predict complexes. The evaluation showed that the effort can lead to a considerable refinement of a given pre-clustering by the consequent exclusion of superfluous proteins from complex candidates. To our knowledge, this is the only available method that accounts for the combinatorial possibilities due to binding interface limitations. Due to the current sparsity of available structural data on the 3D conformations of proteinprotein complexes, a model based on domaindomain interactions (DDIs) as introduced byappeared to us as a worthwhile alternative. Given a dense protein interaction subnetwork from a generic complex prediction approach, one decomposes the member proteins into their domains and bases the connectivity on interactions between the individual domains, the DDIs. This transformation to a domain-level network can then be used to filter out falsepositive predictions. If every domain is restricted to participate in only one interaction, the model implies a certain binding interface constraint and thus reveals which proteins can be connected at the same time. This is important because true protein complexes must admit a topology of pairwise binding at the level of interfaces, and these interfaces are often exclusive (). The model assumes that the correct topology has the maximal number of simultaneous interactions.enhanced the initial model by introducing a sequence-based domain prediction step and artificial domains that help to maintain connectivity due to incomplete annotation. Furthermore, they suggested a polynomial time solution. Deploying the DDI model as a filtering step to existing clustering approaches was shown to increase the precision of predictions. However, the methods by Ozawa and Ma only provide a fixed solution for each complex candidate. If one is interested in the combinatorial manifold of potential solutions, one would have to enumerate all possible exclusive choices in advance. This is the gap we want to fill with our algorithm.
CONCLUSIONTF complexes are highly modular combinatorial assemblies and thus clearly different from large self-contained functional protein complexes. Our novel DACO approach was found to give superior results to established complex prediction programs for theNote: Owing to the number of permutations of the test, the lowest possible value is P dECS =10 4. The calculations were conducted for different conceivable modes of targeting (all shared target proteins, direct adjacency, mediated adjacency and colocalization) to have a detailed picture of the possible targetgene sets. Only the most enriched GO process term is shown for each target set. The inferred regulatory influence on the rate of transcription is abbreviated as follows: + (increase),  (decrease), o (no statement possible), / (conflicting annotations).. Cell cycle expression profiles of all genes targeted by MET4 or MET32 (gray) are compared with the refined set of target genes where MET4 and MET32 bind as a colocalized complex with the two binding sites at pairwise distance between 50 and 50 bp (black). The increase in expression coherence between the targets of the individual TFs and the targets of a colocalized complex is highly significant () i420