Motivation: Current computational approaches to function prediction are mostly based on protein sequence classification and transfer of annotation from known proteins to their closest homologous sequences relying on the orthology concept of function conservation. This approach suffers a major weakness: annotation reliability depends on global sequence similarity to known proteins and is poorly efficient for enzyme superfamilies that catalyze different reactions. Structural biology offers a different strategy to overcome the problem of annotation by adding information about protein 3D structures. This information can be used to identify amino acids located in active sites, focusing on detection of functional polymorphisms residues in an enzyme superfamily. Structural genomics programs are providing more and more novel protein structures at a high-throughput rate. However, there is still a huge gap between the number of sequences and available structures. Computational methods, such as homology modeling provides reliable approaches to bridge this gap and could be a new precise tool to annotate protein functions. Results: Here, we present Active Sites Modeling and Clustering (ASMC) method, a novel unsupervised method to classify sequences using structural information of protein pockets. ASMC combines homology modeling of family members, structural alignment of modeled active sites and a subsequent hierarchical conceptual classification. Comparison of profiles obtained from computed clusters allows the identification of residues correlated to subfamily function divergence, called specificity determining positions. ASMC method has been validated on a benchmark of 42 Pfam families for which previous resolved holo-structures were available. ASMC was also applied to several families containing known protein structures and comprehensive functional annotations. We will discuss how ASMC improves annotation and understanding of protein families functions by giving some specific illustrative examples on nucleotidyl cyclases, protein kinases and serine proteases.
INTRODUCTIONWith the increasing number of genomes and meta-genomes sequenced, a critical challenge concerns the functional prediction of proteins encoded by novel predicted genes. Genes and proteins are commonly classified in terms of families, subfamilies or superfamilies according to different molecular taxonomy (). Clustering methods are aimed at identifying functionally related proteins and defining thresholds to distinguish truly related proteins from homologous proteins with different functions. All these methods rely on the Darwinian evolution concept; protein sequences are subjected to random mutations and selective pressure adds (or causes) functional modifications. The sequence is hence composed of well conserved positions and others that tolerate mutations, insertions and deletions. Methods to detect these positions are based on multiple sequence alignment (MSeqA) analysis using different parameters metrics: chemical properties of residues, evolution (), quantitative information analysis (), evolutionarybased analysis (), phylogeny-independent methods () or combination of properties (). For a few years, new methods have been proposed to include structural information for enhancing the quality of amino acids function prediction (). Capra and;;;;proposed an evolutionary trace (ET) procedure to predict active sites and functional interfaces in proteins with known structure. In this work, we propose ASMC, a novel methodology for unsupervised classification of protein subfamilies allowing functional and specificity determining positions (SDPs) detection. According to, SDPs are related to fundamental regions that correspond to ligand binding and protein interaction sites. Methods developed to detect SDPs are based on multiple sequence alignments and we propose with ASMC to improve the detection by using structural alignments of active site
CONCLUSIONWhile quantities of sequence and structural data continue to grow, only a few methods are using these two kinds of information to annotate proteins at a high-throughput rate. Our method, ASMC, proposes a new approach to the annotation of enzymes with a high level of precision. Indeed, prediction of SDPs in active site provides information for understanding protein functions and evolution. The main advantage of ASMC over existing methods is the structural alignment of pockets that provides a high-quality comparison of residues located in the active site. Comparison of the method with a multiple sequence alignment-based methods demonstrated the limitation of using only the sequence information, due to the low quality of sequence alignments. The conceptual clustering step separates the subfamilies and determines the residues responsible for the specificity. The methodology has been validated with families of known functions and predicted SDPs are well confirmed by experimental data. We identified several applications of patterns proposed by ASMC. CPs and SDPs positions outline residues of active site pockets that are under selective constraint, conserved or correlated to subfamily differentiation. These residues, used as a geometric pattern, can be used for screening structure databases to identify new candidates for specific functions. ASMC can also be used to classify new sequences, belonging to families with at least one structure available, in order to annotate them into functional subfamilies. Although we presented results for known protein families, the method can provide valuable insights in the study of families with unknown functions and can serve as an input to elucidate new enzymatic activities. This is a real challenge as 3000 above 11 912 families of the database of sequences families (Pfam-A) are referred to domains of unknown functions (DUFs). Among them, about 250 families have at least one structure deposited in PDB. ASMC can be used by screening and searching for homologous patterns in an active site profile database associated to an enzymatic activity. Another interesting perspective of ASMC patterns is the improvement of de novo function prediction through virtual screening approaches. SDPs and CPs can be used to improve selection of plausible configurations of substrates in the active sites by pinpointing important substrate/enzyme interactions.