Motivation: DNA binding proteins play crucial roles in the regulation of gene expression. Transcription factors (TFs) activate or repress genes directly while other proteins influence chromatin structure for transcription. Binding sites of a TF exhibit a similar sequence pattern called a motif. However, a one-to-one map does not exist between each TF and motif. Many TFs in a protein family may recognize the same motif with subtle nucleotide differences leading to different binding affinities. Additionally, a particular TF may bind different motifs under certain conditions, for example in the presence of different co-regulators. The availability of genome-wide binding data of multiple collaborative TFs makes it possible to detect such context-dependent motifs. Results: We developed a contrast motif finder (CMF) for the de novo identification of motifs that are differentially enriched in two sets of sequences. Applying this method to a number of TF binding datasets from mouse embryonic stem cells, we demonstrate that CMF achieves substantially higher accuracy than several well-known motif finding methods. By contrasting sequences bound by distinct sets of TFs, CMF identified two different motifs that may be recognized by Oct4 dependent on the presence of another co-regulator and detected subtle motif signals that may be associated with potential competitive binding between Sox2 and Tcf3.
INTRODUCTIONA TF binds the promoter or enhancer region of a gene, and in turn regulates the expression of the gene. TF binding sites (TFBSs) have a similar pattern or a motif usually described by a positionspecific weight matrix (PWM) (). A PWM is a w4 matrix, = ( ij ) w4 , where each element  ij represents the probability of nucleotide j {A,C,G,T } being at position i {1,...,w} and w is the length of the motif. Each position is modeled independently and each row of a PWM sums to 1. Motif discovery can be regarded as a missing data problem in the sense * To whom correspondence should be addressed. that neither the locations of TFBSs nor the motif parameters (PWM) are known. Many computational methods have been developed for motif discovery (), with most fitting into two broad categories, those based on mixture models () and those based on discrimination (). Mixture models assume that a set of sequences consists of a mix of TFBSs and background nucleotides. While there are multiple approaches, most methods employ the EM algorithm or Gibbs sampling to identify TFBSs and estimate PWMs via iterative updating schemes. These iterative approaches tend to rely on two steps: first, sequences are scanned given an estimated PWM and background model to produce a set of predicted sites; secondly, the PWM is updated using the predicted sites. Under the mixture model, the counts of nucleotides from predicted sites can be used to estimate the PWM in a closed form. Discriminative motif finders (discriminators for short), on the other hand, use two sets of sequences, usually a bound set and an unbound control set, and attempt to find motifs that best distinguish between the two groups (). Most discriminators aim to maximize a measure of separation between the two sequence sets. For example, discriminating matrix enumerator (DME) () uses a measure based on likelihood ratio (LR) and FIRE () uses mutual information. Again, these methods utilize iterative approaches to update a PWM such that their measure of separation improves. However, even with TFBSs predicted there is generally no closed-form estimation of the PWM under a discriminative model. As such discriminators often discretize the parameter space of the PWM to render discovery computationally feasible and thus sacrifice accuracy in estimation. Recent improvements in genomic coverage by chromatin immunoprecipitation microarrays (ChIP-chip) and the coupling of ChIP with high-throughput sequencing technologies (ChIP-seq) have increased the number of bound regions identified while decreasing the width of such regions. This increase in accuracy and data size now enables many motif finders to easily identify the consensus motif of a TF. We hypothesize, however, that a TF may have context-dependent binding patterns and believe that the accuracy of newer ChIP datasets, along with the greater availability of such datasets, can be leveraged to discover these patterns. We are motivated by two possible context-dependent TF binding scenarios. The first is a co-regulation scenario where a TF binds DNA with a cofactor in some sequences and binds alone or with a different cofactor in other sequences. While the cofactor may haveits own motif, the motif recognized by the original TF might be different when binding occurs with and without its cofactor. The second is a competition scenario where two TFs share similar DNA binding domains that may compete for the same binding sites. Here, sequences can be split into two groups based on context (i.e. the two TFs compete for the sequence versus only one TF binding the sequence). Differences in the motifs between the two groups might provide insight into how each TF is targeted to its binding sites. Here, we propose a contrast motif finder (CMF) that aims to take advantage of multiple high-quality binding datasets to identify subtle regulatory signals, such as context-dependent motifs, within bound sequences. CMF is specifically designed to discriminate between two sets of bound sequences and provide a non-discretized estimation of PWMs. This method takes into account false positive sites when updating PWMs and other model parameters. In this article, we apply CMF to three recently published genome-wide binding studies of TFs in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) (). Each study used ChIP-chip or ChIP-seq to investigate TFs thought to play a role in ESC pluripotency and self-renewal (, for details see Supplementary Materials).