Motivation: Alzheimers disease (AD) is a dementia that gets worse with time resulting in loss of memory and cognitive functions. The life expectancy of AD patients following diagnosis is $7 years. In 2006, researchers estimated that 0.40% of the world population (range 0.17–0.89%) was afflicted by AD, and that the prevalence rate would be tripled by 2050. Usually, examination of brain tissues is required for definite diagnosis of AD. So, it is crucial to diagnose AD at an early stage via some alternative methods. As the brain controls many functions via releasing signalling proteins through blood, we analyse blood plasma proteins for diagnosis of AD. Results: Here, we use a radial basis function (RBF) network for feature selection called feature selection RBF network for selection of plasma proteins that can help diagnosis of AD. We have identified a set of plasma proteins, smaller in size than previous study, with comparable prediction accuracy. We have also analysed mild cognitive impairment (MCI) samples with our selected proteins. We have used neural networks and support vector machines as classifiers. The principle component analysis, Sammmon projection and heat-map of the selected proteins have been used to demonstrate the proteins discriminating power for diagnosis of AD. We have also found a set of plasma signalling proteins that can distinguish incipient AD from MCI at an early stage. Literature survey strongly supports the AD diagnosis capability of the selected plasma proteins.
IntroductionAlzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia. According to a cohort longitudinal study, $1015 persons per 1000 persons per year get dementia of which 510 get AD (). In AD, an unknown process divides Amyloid Precursor Protein into smaller fragments. One of these fragments gives rise to fibrils of beta-amyloid, which gets deposited outside neurons in dense formation known as senile plaques (). Tau protein becomes hyper-phosphorylated and creates neurofibrillary tangles (). In recent years researchers have devoted great efforts for the development of AD diagnosis tools (). Most of the articles have investigated on a small set (two to four) of Cerebro Spinal Fluid (CSF) proteins (). Few attempts have been made using serum proteins () and using both CSF and serum proteins (). Some have tried tofind biomarker proteins that can discriminate AD and non-AD patients () and some have tried to predict AD from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) patients (). In the study by, a semi-supervised distance metric learning using random forests with label propagation is proposed for prediction of AD. In, concentration of T  tau, P  tau 181 and Ab42 in CSF are reported to be associated with future development of AD in patients with MCI.have proposed a microarray-based method that has selected 18 blood plasma signalling proteins to classify and predict clinical AD diagnosis. We have used the same dataset and found nine plasma signalling proteins for the same problem with comparable prediction accuracy. We have also found a set of useful plasma signalling proteins that can predict AD from MCI with a better prediction accuracy. The selection of biomarker plasma proteins from a large set of proteins is a feature selection problem. Feature selection methods can be broadly classified as filter methods and wrapper methods. In filter methods, the features are given importance solely depending on the properties of the features themselves. These methods ignore the tool finally used to recognize the patterns. But the utility of a feature depends on the pattern recognition tool being used and the problem being solved. A set of features good for a particular pattern recognition problem and a tool may not be as good for a different pattern recognition tool. The wrapper-based feature selection methods utilize the classifier itself to find the relevance of the feature. Thus, wrapper methods are generally considered better as compared with filter methods (). One of the early filter methods is Relief (). In Relief, given a feature vector, two more instances of feature vectors are considered; one from the same class and the other from the other class. The weight of a feature is decreased if the value of that feature differs more from the value in the instance of the same class than the value in the instance of the different class and vice versa. Relief was modified into ReliefF by. KernelPLS () is a kernel-based multivariate feature selection method that selects features taking into account possible non-linear relation between features as well as that between features and target. In the study by, a partial least square (PLS) algorithm finds a low-dimensional approximation of the input matrix that can explain as close as possible the target vectors. The support vector machine recursive feature elimination (SVMRFE) method () eliminates poor features using an iterative process. It starts with all features and removes one feature at a time based on a feature ranking score that is computed using the coefficients of the weight vector of a linear SVM. At each iteration, the feature with the smallest ranking score is eliminated. In this study, neural networks (NNs) are used for feature selection as well as for classification. We have used both multilayer perceptron (MLP) and radial basis function (RBF) NNs for classification. RBF NNs are used for feature selection in the studies by Basak and Mitra (1999) and Chakraborty and Pal (2008). The Group Feature Selection RBF (GFSRBF) is proposed byfor selecting useful groups of features where each feature group corresponds to a sensor. In, this network has been adapted for feature selection with controlled redundancy. Here, we have adapted GFSRBF for feature selection without any explicit control on redundancy for selection of plasma proteins that can predict clinical AD. Our approach is described in the following section.
Discussion