A key to understanding RNA function is to uncover its complex 3D structure. Experimental methods used for determining RNA 3D structures are technologically challenging and laborious, which makes the development of computational prediction methods of substantial interest. Previously, we developed the iFoldRNA server that allows accurate prediction of short (50 nt) tertiary RNA structures starting from primary sequences. Here, we present a new version of the iFoldRNA server that permits the prediction of tertiary structure of RNAs as long as a few hundred nucleotides. This substantial increase in the server capacity is achieved by utilization of experimental information such as base-pairing and hydroxyl-radical probing. We demonstrate a significant benefit provided by integration of experimental data and computational methods. Availability and implementation: http://ifoldrna.dokhlab.org Contact: dokh@unc.eu
IntroductionThe iFoldRNA is a physical simulation-based automated RNA structure prediction webserver designed to predict 3D RNA structure based on available sequence data. The previous version of iFoldRNA allowed prediction of the structure of short RNA molecules (50 nt) within 4 A  Root-Mean-Square deviation (RMSD) from corresponding experimental structures (). The limitation on RNA size is due to inaccuracies in the force-field and insufficient sampling. Increasing sequence size quickly becomes computationally prohibitive, since the RNA conformational space grows exponentially. We have previously shown that sampling conformational space can be drastically reduced by use of experimental constraints allowing us to correctly predict the tertiary structure of RNA up to a few hundred nucleotides long (). Here, we present a second version of iFoldRNA, which allows automated inclusion of two categories of constraints: base-pairing and nucleotide solvent accessibility. The source of base-pairing information can be generated either by sequence covariation analysis () or by using a number of chemical probing techniques. The SHAPE technique, in particular, has proven to be a quick and effective method for determining RNA secondary structure (). To infer solvent accessibility iFoldRNA v2 uses data from hydroxyl radical probing (HRP) experiments. In HRP, RNA in solution is treated with reagents that generate hydroxyl radicals, which cleave RNA strands. By identifying cleavage frequency for specific nucleotide bonds, solvent exposure can be determined. Incorporating these data as a burial force in simulations imposes long-range constraints on folded structures ().