The analysis of concentrations of circulating antibodies in serum (antibody repertoire) is a fundamental, yet poorly studied, problem in immunoinformatics. The two current approaches to the analysis of antibody repertoires [next generation sequencing (NGS) and mass spectrometry (MS)] present difficult computational challenges since antibodies are not directly encoded in the germline but are extensively diversified by somatic recombination and hypermutations. Therefore, the protein database required for the interpretation of spectra from circulating antibodies is custom for each individual. Although such a database can be constructed via NGS, the reads generated by NGS are error-prone and even a single nucleotide error precludes identification of a peptide by the standard proteomics tools. Here, we present the IGREPERTOIRECONSTRUCTOR algorithm that performs error-correction of immunosequencing reads and uses mass spectra to validate the constructed antibody repertoires. Availability and implementation: IGREPERTOIRECONSTRUCTOR is open source and freely available as a Cþþ and Python program running on all Unix-compatible platforms. The source code is available from http://bioinf.spbau.ru/igtools.
IntroductionUntil 2009, the computational analysis of antibodies had been performed via proteomics techniques () and had not utilized DNA sequencing technologies.were the first to demonstrate the power of DNA sequencing for analyzing antibody repertoires and to open a 'next generation sequencing (NGS) era' in antibody analysis (). Although this study was quickly followed by many other immunosequencing (Ig-seq) studies (); until 2012, there were no attempts to integrate NGS and mass spectrometry (MS) approaches for antibody analysis. Such integration (immunoproteogenomics) is important since it represents a bottleneck for an emerging approach that promises to transform the antibody industry from focusing on single (monoclonal) antibodies, toward analyzing polyclonal antibodies.pioneered a new immunoproteogenomics approach for identification of circulating monoclonal antibodies from serum that enables high-throughput antibody development. Although sequencing purified monoclonal antibodies has now become routine (), sequencing multiple antibodies from a complex sample represents a breakthrough with great biomedical potential. The important conclusion in
Discussion
ConclusionOur study is the first to validate the constructed antibody repertoires (by using complementary proteomics data) that confirmed that IGREPERTOIRECONSTRUCTOR generates accurate repertoires. With an accurate tool for constructing antibody repertoires, we can move to studies of evolution of antibody repertoires, the analysis that has not been possible in the past. Because analysis of antibody repertoires is not unlike analysis of repeat subfamilies, the existing algorithms for analyzing repeat evolution () can be applied to study evolution of antibodies. We also addressed the problem of peptide identification in large and highly repetitive databases by designing multi-layer immunoproteogenomics search algorithm. Finally, we revealed an alarming lack of correlation between NGS-based and MS-based quantitation of antibodies