Motivation: Due to the high mutation rate of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), drug-resistant-variants emerge frequently. Therefore, researchers are constantly searching for new ways to attack the virus. One new class of anti-HIV drugs is the class of coreceptor antagonists that block cell entry by occupying a coreceptor on CD4 cells. This type of drug just has an effect on the subset of HIVs that use the inhibited coreceptor. A good prediction of whether the viral population inside a patient is susceptible to the treatment is hence very important for therapy decisions and prerequisite to administering the respective drug. The first prediction models were based on data from Sanger sequencing of the V3 loop of HIV. Recently, a method based on next-generation sequencing (NGS) data was introduced that predicts labels for each read separately and decides on the patient label through a percentage threshold for the resistant viral minority. Results: We model the prediction problem on the patient level taking the information of all reads from NGS data jointly into account. This enables us to improve prediction performance for NGS data, but we can also use the trained model to improve predictions based on Sanger sequencing data. Therefore, also laboratories without NGS capabilities can benefit from the improvements. Furthermore, we show which amino acids at which position are important for prediction success, giving clues on how the interaction mechanism between the V3 loop and the particular coreceptors might be influenced. Availability: A webserver is available at
INTRODUCTIONSince the discovery of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in 1983 () there has been an enormous attention of researchers to HIV and the associated disease, the acquired immune deficiency syndrome. The first drug against HIV was already introduced in 1985 (), but it soon became obvious that additional anti-HIV drugs would be needed due to the high mutation rate of the virus. Even with the introduction of combination drug therapy in the mid 1990s, the viral populations of HIV-infected patients under therapy could become resistant after a certain period of time-creating the need for further anti-HIV drugs that attack the virus in a different manner. Therefore, researchers are constantly searching for new ways to * To whom correspondence should be addressed. limit viral load in HIV-infected patients. HIV needs a coreceptor on CD4 cells to enter the cell (). Different HIV strains use different coreceptors. The two most prominent coreceptors are CCR5 and CXCR4. The first approved drug that blocks cell entry of CCR5-using viruses (R5 viruses) by serving as a CCR5 antagonist is called maraviroc (), but there is no approved drug that blocks cell entry of CXCR4-using HIVs (X4 viruses). Administering CCR5 blockers requires use of a companion diagnostic determining viral coreceptor usage, also called viral tropism. For this purpose,introduced a laboratory test called Trofile, which was replaced by the Enhanced Sensitivity Trofile Assay (ESTA) (), but these methods have a long turnaround time, are costly, are not widely accessible and require large sample volume (). Recently, approaches that predict viral tropism based on the genetic sequence of the V3 loop, which is part of the envelope (Env) protein of HIV, have been introduced (). All of these models were trained with either clonal-sequenced data or bulk sequenced data. In the former case, the sequences of individual clones of R5 or X4 viruses are used and in the latter case each sequence represents a consensus of the dominating strains in the whole viral population inside a patient. Such bulk sequences also comprise ambiguous sequence positions, called wobbles. Prediction models based on bulk sequenced data perform in general worse than methods on clonal sequences (). Presumably, this is due partly to the fact that bulk consensus sequences describe the dominating strains in a viral population only incompletely and partly because small viral minorities do not show up in bulk data at all. Further improvements were achieved by utilizing other parts of the env sequence and information on the three-dimensional structure of the V3 loop of the viral surface gene (). Very recently, prediction models for deep sequencing data of the V3 loop were introduced by. They used next-generation sequencing (NGS) data from the Maraviroc versus Optimized Therapy in Viremic Antiretroviral Treatment-Experienced Patients (MOTIVATE) studies () to predict virologic response to maraviroc. This dataset comprises 3000 reads per patient sample, where each read corresponds to a particular V3 loop of an HIV variant inside the patient.classified each read with standard tools and then classified the whole sample depending on how large the fraction of reads with predicted X4-capable label was. This means that they had to use one cutoff for the method that predicted the label for each read and another cutoff to specify the minimal fraction of X4-capable reads such that the sample was classified as X4-capable. Unfortunately, the authors trained these thresholds directly on 75% of the data that they then used for validation, which is why it is unclear how well the method performs on unseen data. Instead of classifying each read separately, we consider the reads of a sample jointly and train a classifier on this joint representation. This is motivated by the fact that a mere percentage threshold might not have the adequate information for deciding whether a viral population withstands treatment with maraviroc. Here, we present a method that analyzes the NGS data in a more elaborate fashion. We show that the new method performs better than existing methods without training any parameters on the test data. Furthermore, we introduce new models for predictions based on bulk Sanger sequences and show how to improve predictions with a model trained on NGS data. This is particularly important since many clinics will not have access to NGS techniques for some time to come. Additionally, we show how one can obtain interpretable prediction results and evaluate information on which of the residues of the V3 loop contribute to the improvement of prediction accuracy. Specifically, we find amino acids at certain positions that are highly predictive and might lead to new insights about the interaction between the V3 loop and the different coreceptors.
CONCLUSIONDue to the high mutation rate of HIV, the viral populations inside a patient are constantly changing. This is one of the main reasons why until today there is no approved vaccine against HIV. It is also the main reason why researchers constantly have to find new ways to attack the virus. One of the new classes of anti-HIV drugs are CCR5 coreceptor antagonists. Since they are only effective against R5 viruses, it is very important to apply a reliable and fast companion diagnostic before administering this type of drug to a patient. Phenotypic tests such as Trofile or ESTA have a long turnaround time, are costly and not easily accessible, and require a large sample volume, which is why an accurate genotypic test has many advantages. We were able to build a superior predictor by prioritizing the most informative strains in a viral population and crafting a more complex information merging procedure based on a set kernel, rather than uniformly processing all strains occurring in the population and merging information by using simple cutoffs. Furthermore, we could show how to construct better predictors for bulk sequenced Sanger sequences. This is very important since few clinics have the means to routinely sequence patient samples with NGS techniques. Additionally, we provided a method to visualize how informative particular positions in the sequences are in terms of the final prediction. We were also able to show which amino acids at which positions were probably responsible for the performance gain. We used this information to speculate about the structural differences between the V3 loops of R5 and X4 viruses and might help to identify important interactions between the V3 loop and the particular coreceptors. Our framework is very general. One can easily incorporate additional features of interest (e.g. structural descriptors) by using different feature encodings or other kernel functions in the inner kernel. Furthermore, this approach is not limited to predicting coreceptor usage and should be applicable to a wide variety of prediction problems with NGS data, especially in cases where the whole region of interest can be covered by one read.