Motivation: Computational prediction of compound–protein interactions (CPIs) is of great importance for drug design and development, as genome-scale experimental validation of CPIs is not only time-consuming but also prohibitively expensive. With the availability of an increasing number of validated interactions, the performance of computational prediction approaches is severely impended by the lack of reliable negative CPI samples. A systematic method of screening reliable negative sample becomes critical to improving the performance of in silico prediction methods. Results: This article aims at building up a set of highly credible negative samples of CPIs via an in silico screening method. As most existing computational models assume that similar compounds are likely to interact with similar target proteins and achieve remarkable performance, it is rational to identify potential negative samples based on the converse negative proposition that the proteins dissimilar to every known/predicted target of a compound are not much likely to be targeted by the compound and vice versa. We integrated various resources, including chemical structures, chemical expression profiles and side effects of compounds, amino acid sequences, protein–protein interaction network and functional annotations of proteins, into a systematic screening framework. We first tested the screened negative samples on six classical classifiers, and all these classifiers achieved remarkably higher performance on our negative samples than on randomly generated negative samples for both human and Caenorhabditis elegans. We then verified the negative samples on three existing prediction models, including bipartite local model, Gaussian kernel profile and Bayesian matrix factorization, and found that the performances of these models are also significantly improved on the screened negative samples. Moreover, we validated the screened negative samples on a drug bioactivity dataset. Finally, we derived two sets of new interactions by training an support vector machine classifier on the positive interactions annotated in DrugBank and our screened negative interactions. The screened negative samples and the predicted interactions provide the research community with a useful resource for identifying new drug targets and a helpful supplement to the current curated compound–protein databases.
IntroductionCompoundprotein interactions (CPIs) are crucial to the discovery of new drugs by screening candidate compounds and are also helpful for understanding the causes of side effects of existing drugs. Although various biological assays are available, experimental validation of CPIs remains time-consuming and expensive. Therefore, there is a strong incentive to develop computational methods to detect CPIs accurately. Meanwhile, with the rapid growth of public chemical and biological databases, such as the PubChem (), DrugBank (), SIDER (), STITCH (), STRING () and Gene Ontology (GO) (), various kinds of resources, including drug features such as chemical structures, side effects and gene expression profiles under drug treatments and protein features such as amino acid sequences, proteinprotein interaction (PPI) networks and functional annotations, become available to the research community and consolidate the basis of computational CPI prediction. Traditional computational approaches fall roughly into two categories: structure based and ligand based. The structure-based methods depend on the structural information of target proteins that are often unavailable for most protein families. Ligand-based methods get poor performance for those proteins having few or none of the known ligands. Recently, a variety of machine learningbased methods have been proposed and achieved a considerable success by taking the viewpoint of chemogenomics (), which integrates the chemical attributes of drug compounds, the genomic attributes of proteins and the known CPIs into a unified mathematical framework. The main rationale underlying the chemogenomics approaches is that similar compounds tend to bind similar proteins, so that the lack of known ligands for a given protein can be compensated by the availability of known ligands of similar proteins and vice versa. Following the philosophy of chemogenomics, many methods have been proposed by exploiting various types of features and classification algorithms (). With the chemical structure similarity and protein sequence similarity measures, Bleakley andproposed the bipartite local model (BLM) to infer CPIs by training local support vector machine (SVM) classifiers based on known interactions. vanproposed Gaussian interaction profile (GIP) kernels that exploit the topology of CPI networks. However, these methods still suffer from the lack of known interactions between the drugs and proteins of interest, which often leads to the failure of prediction. Therefore,improved BLM by exploiting the known interactions of neighbors to compensate the lack of interaction information. vanalso used the interaction profiles of weighted nearest neighbors to improve the GIP method. Instead of utilizing the attributes of drugs and proteins separately, more and more researchers combined these attributes into a single feature vector by the concatenation or tensor product operators and then built classifiers based on the integrated features and known CPIs. For example,proposed SVM classifiers with pairwise kernels that were derived, respectively, from similarity measures of drugs and proteins.proposed the bipartite graph inference that maps drugs and proteins into a unified Euclidean feature space in which the distances between drugs and proteins linked by known interactions are minimized and otherwise maximized. The network-based inference originally proposed for personal recommendation () was also used to identify CPIs (). Other methods including kernel-based data fusion (), Kernelized Bayesian matrix factorization with twin kernels (KBMF2K) (), restricted Boltzmann machine () and semi-supervised methods () were successively proposed. In addition to chemical structures and protein sequences, researchers also resorted to other attributes of drugs and proteins to reveal their interacting associations, including the drug expression profiles (), functional groups () and side effects () of drugs, signaling pathways and GO annotations () of proteins or even the combination of these attributes (). Most previous approaches used experimentally validated CPIs as positive samples and randomly generated negative samples to learn the prediction models. However, the randomly generated negative samples may include real positive samples not yet known. A classifier trained by using such randomly generated negative samples may yield high cross-validation accuracy but very possibly has poor performance on independent, real test datasets. Screening highly reliable negative samples is therefore critical to improving the accuracy of computational prediction methods. The importance of truenegative interactions was recently highlighted as one of the future developments in predicting drugtarget interactions (). Motivated by this, we set about to screen in silico highly credible negative samples of CPIs. An assumption underlying most computational methods for predicting CPIs is that similar drug compounds are likely to interact with similar target proteins. Our method is based on the converse negative proposition, i.e. the proteins that are dissimilar to every known/predicted target of a given compound are not much likely to be targeted by the compound and vice versa. We integrated various resources of compounds and proteins, including chemical structures, chemical expression profiles and side effects of compounds, amino acid sequences, PPI networks and GO functional annotations of proteins, to a systematic screening framework. We evaluated our method on both human and Caenorhabditis elegans data. We first tested our screened negative samples on six classical classifiers, including random forest, L1-and L2-regularized logistic regression, naive Bayes, SVM and k-nearest neighbor (kNN). All these classifiers achieved remarkably higher performance on our negative samples than on randomly generated negative samples. We also verified our negative samples on three existing prediction models, including BLM (), Gaussian kernel profile (van) and Bayesian matrix factorization (), and found that the performances of these models are also significantly improved on the screened negative samples. Furthermore, we validated our screened negative samples with a drug bioactivity dataset. Finally, we derived two sets of new CPIs by training an SVM classifier on the positive interactions annotated in DrugBank and our screened negative interactions. These screened negative samples and the predicted interactions can serve the research community as a useful resource for identifying new drug targets and as a helpful supplement to the current curated compoundprotein databases.