Motivation: Multidimensional scaling (MDS) is a well-known multivariate statistical analysis method used for dimensionality reduction and visualization of similarities and dissimilarities in multidimensional data. The advantage of MDS with respect to singular value decomposition (SVD) based methods such as principal component analysis is its superior fidelity in representing the distance between different instances specially for high-dimensional geometric objects. Here, we investigate the importance of the choice of initial conditions for MDS, and show that SVD is the best choice to initiate MDS. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the use of the first principal components of SVD to initiate the MDS algorithm is more efficient than an iteration through all the principal components. Adding stochasticity to the molecular dynamics simulations typically used for MDS of large datasets, contrary to previous suggestions, likewise does not increase accuracy. Finally, we introduce a k nearest neighbor method to analyze the local structure of the geometric objects and use it to control the quality of the dimensionality reduction. Results: We demonstrate here the, to our knowledge, most efficient and accurate initialization strategy for MDS algorithms, reducing considerably computational load. SVD-based initialization renders MDS methodology much more useful in the analysis of high-dimensional data such as functional genomics datasets.
INTRODUCTIONThe appropriate and faithful visualization of high-dimensional data is often a prerequisite for their analysis as the human visual cortex is still one of the most powerful tools to detect and conceptualize structure in data (). Furthermore, communication of numerical and statistical results is greatly aided by the intuition arising from appropriate representations of data. Different methods * To whom correspondence should be addressed.for the required dimensionality reduction have been developed (). An entire family of approaches, such as principal component analysis (PCA) finds the minimal orthonormal basis using a mathematical tool called singular value decomposition (SVD). These methods, using different similarity or dissimilarity measures such as covariance or correlation, order the ensemble of components by their statistical deviation, and for visualization only the first two or three components are retained. Thereby, the statistical information in the first components are entirely retained, whereas one of the subsequent components is entirely lost. Today's highdimensional biological datasets can easily contain thousands of instances (number of measures) with 10 5 10 9 variables (number of parameters measured). The repartition of information is usually homogeneous over the entire number of variables. In consequence, considering only the first components given by SVD-based techniques is not necessarily the best choice. Multidimensional scaling (MDS) is a methodology that reduces dimensionality using only the information of similarities or dissimilarities between instances, hereafter regrouped in the general term of 'distance'. The search for an optimal configuration, is reduced to finding the global minimum of a function evaluating the loss of distance information. To be sure to find an acceptable minima (i) an initial state for the optimization algorithm, and (ii) an optimization algorithm and the appropriate parameters have to be appropriately chosen. Recently,has shown that the best choice for the second is a molecular dynamics multidimensional scaling approach. We demonstrate here that the choice of the initial position is paramount to the quality of the representation and its computational efficiency. By using SVD for providing an initial configuration for MDS, we obtain a significantly increased computational efficacy. Interestingly, we also demonstrate that performing an iterative MDS or adding stochastic energy during the molecular dynamics, MDS execution do not increase performance or reproducibility of the algorithm. We also investigate the local structure of the geometric objects after dimensionality reduction with our different methodologies, and then evaluate the accuracy of the different approaches developed here on biological data. These investigations and the use of SVD to the initial state allow to better define and
CONCLUSIONDimensionality reduction of complex, high-dimensional data is an important problem which becomes ever more complicated due to the increase of data concomitant with an increase in their dimensionality. This is particularly true for data from modern genomics analyses where more and more data with thousands of instances each over millions of variables are generated. We demonstrate here how a combined molecular dynamics simulation multidimensional scaling approach for dimensionality reduction of high-dimensional data can be improved by better defining the initial conditions. We have shown that singular value decomposition is most effective to create an initial condition for MDS. Using links between SVD and different standard data analysis methods, we demonstrate how our combined SVD MDS method can be used to improve geometric representation in low-dimensional space that are generally obtained with standard analysis methods (PCA, classical scaling, PCCA, correspondence analysis). We also show that the use of iterative reduction or Page: 1420 14131421stochastic energy does not increase performance of the algorithms in terms of finding a optimal solution. Finally, we have investigated the local structure deformation induced by dimensionality reduction, and confirmed the superior accuracy of the SVDMDS. Overall, the methodology developed here should further advance our capacity to analyze high-dimensional data such as the ones produced by functional genomics approaches.