Motivation: Theoretical models of biological networks are valuable tools in evolutionary inference. Theoretical models based on gene duplication and divergence provide biologically plausible evolutionary mechanics. Similarities found between empirical networks and their theoretically generated counterpart are considered evidence of the role modeled mechanics play in biological evolution. However, the method by which these models are parameterized can lead to questions about the validity of the inferences. Selecting parameter values in order to produce a particular topological value obfuscates the possibility that the model may produce a similar topology for a large range of parameter values. Alternately, a model may produce a large range of topologies, allowing (incorrect) parameter values to produce a valid topology from an otherwise flawed model. In order to lend biological credence to the modeled evolutionary mechanics, parameter values should be derived from the empirical data. Furthermore, recent work indicates that the timing and fate of gene duplications are critical to proper derivation of these parameters. Results: We present a methodology for deriving evolutionary rates from empirical data that is used to parameterize duplication and divergence models of protein interaction network evolution. Our method avoids shortcomings of previous methods, which failed to consider the effect of subsequent duplications. From our parameter values, we find that concurrent and existing existing duplication and divergence models are insufficient for modeling protein interaction network evolution. We introduce a model enhancement based on heritable interaction sites on the surface of a protein and find that it more closely reflects the high clustering found in the empirical network.
INTRODUCTIONThe study of biological networks is a promising area for arriving at evolutionary inference. Gene duplication is regarded as the primary evolutionary phenomenon driving protein network growth. In theoretical models, gene duplication is represented through the random copying of one of the proteins (nodes) in the network. Each duplication is accompanied by 'link dynamics', the gain and loss of interactions in the network based on theories of gene duplicate * To whom correspondence should be addressed. fates. Model parameters control the probability at which interactions are gained and lost with each duplication. Two models in particular,are exemplars of this type of theoretical model. The strategy used to affirm the evolutionary mechanics captured by these models is to compare the topology generated by these networks with empirical biological networks. The models are seen to be validated when the theoretical and empirical networks share similar topological characteristics. It therefore follows that proper parameterization of the models is paramount to generating a network, which is plausible given the model mechanics.used the average number of empirical protein interactions from empirical data (average degree) as a constraint to 'tune' model parameter values, which produced a similar theoretical network.derived parameter estimates directly from empirical measurements based on the fact that the model parameters represent the gain and loss of interactions after gene duplication. Their interaction gain and loss rate parameter values were based on examination of interactions of known duplicates (i.e. paralogs;), the average degree and mathematical constraints. The mechanics featured in the Vzquez and Sol models are essential to this study. Gene duplication, loss of redundant interactions between duplicates, the formation of new interactions and interactions which form between paralogs when a selfinteracting protein's gene is duplicated are all evolutionary phenomena which have direct analogs in the Vzquez and Sol models. It is these evolutionarily plausible mechanics to which we give special attention. Can these mechanics be enhanced to improve model performance while preserving the biological plausibility of the enhancements? Aside from Vzquez and Sol, there are numerous models that have furthered our understanding of protein interaction network evolution. One notable example is, who construct a stochastic model based on empirical observations. The model features protein interaction gain and loss, but the interaction loss rate is predicated on preserving a constant network connectivity rather than on a biologically identifiable phenomena. In another example,find that a geometric random graph has a good topological fit to empirical protein interaction networks. Their geometric random graph is constructed by connecting nodes based on their proximity from each other when arranged randomly on a two-dimensional metric space. The mechanics of the model are not evolutionarily plausible; they do not help us elucidate the evolutionary processes that have contributed to the formation of the network topology. A strength of the Vzquez model over other models with biologically faithful mechanics is that it does not require
DISCUSSIONWe have presented an alternative method of calculating model parameters which take into consideration the effect concurrent and subsequent duplications have on the model calculation. Now we discuss the advantages of our parameter estimation methodology over previous approaches. We also take a further look at the model improvements integrated into the iSite model, and how it compares to the empirical network.
CONCLUSIONWe have developed an improved methodology for estimating link dynamics rates based on empirical network data. Estimating rates through simple examination of the empirical network fails to account for the entire evolutionary history of interaction addition and loss which underlie the extant network. Our methodology attempts to 'peel back' more recent duplication events in order to more accurately assess link dynamics associated with older duplication events. Using our empirically derived rates, the Vzquez et al. model fails to achieve empirical clustering. A modified model integrating heritable interaction sites generates networks with clustering more closely approximating the yeast network.