Motivation: Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry-based metabolomics has gained importance in the life sciences, yet it is not supported by software tools for high throughput identification of metabolites based on their fragmentation spectra. An algorithm (ISIS: in silico identification software) and its implementation are presented and show great promise in generating in silico spectra of lipids for the purpose of structural identification. Instead of using chemical reaction rate equations or rules-based fragmentation libraries, the algorithm uses machine learning to find accurate bond cleavage rates in a mass spectrometer employing collision-induced dissociation tandem mass spectrometry. Results: A preliminary test of the algorithm with 45 lipids from a subset of lipid classes shows both high sensitivity and specificity.
INTRODUCTIONThe field of proteomics has enjoyed considerable success in part due to software tools like SEQUEST () and Mascot (), which enable highthroughput identifications of detected peptides (and their corresponding proteins) based on their fragmentation spectra generated by collision-induced dissociation (CID) mass spectrometry. These tools have benefited from the close link between DNA and protein sequences and the fact that the polymeric structure of amino acid residues in proteolytic peptides provides a convenient basis for interpreting peptide tandem mass spectra. However, small molecules other than peptides have to be considered as 2D or 3D structures of atoms or functional groups of atoms. These differences require novel algorithms. To date, the main approaches to predict in silico tandem mass spectra are based on either chemical reaction equations, libraries of fragmentation spectra/pathways, or bond cleavage probabilities based upon bond strengths. None of these approaches (briefly discussed below) have shown sufficient accuracy in generating in silico spectra to enable automated and correct identifications of non-peptide small molecules. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.Chemical reactions involving unimolecular dissociation are commonly studied using the RiceRamspergerKasselMarcus (RRKM) () and quasiequilibrium theories (QET) (). Chemical reaction time evolutions are described in systems of differential equations as in a master equation approach. These theories are invaluable to understanding chemical reaction mechanisms and energies required for state transitions. Yet, while quantum calculations like RRKM and QET explain the dissociation of activated ions, they are insufficient in explaining the activations of ions in inelastic collisions for molecules larger than a few atoms (). Predicting or identifying fragment ions in tandem mass spectra is difficult for large molecules; indeed, little is known regarding the rates at which ions gain internal energy in activation methods and at which bonds dissociate. A few small peptides such as leucine enkephalin and bradykinin have been empirically studied as to their fragmentation behaviors; however, these results cannot be translated to the fragmentation of non-peptide small molecules (). Hence, it remains difficult to explain many ions and their intensities in fragmentation spectra or to generate accurate in silico spectra knowing only the molecular compositions. Tools such as Mass Frontier from Thermo Scientific (Highchem, http://www.highchem.com/) and ACD/MS Fragmenter, (ACDLabs, http://www.acdlabs.com/products/adh/ms/ms_frag/) generate fragments using a large library of rules describing fragmentation pathways. This can become unmanageable in that rules are not necessarily exclusiveone rule can affect another rule. Sometimes the correct rules are not available entirely or are not available with sufficient specificity. Mass Frontier generates 'bar code' spectra where all ions have the same intensity because bond cleavage rates are not considered. Bar code spectra are not sufficient when many molecules generate the same fragment ions. In these instances, only the relative ion intensities will aid the correct identification.(). It may be surmised that many BDEs are either not available or sufficiently accurate. Thus, defining an accurate algorithm that identifies non-peptide small molecules from CID tandem mass spectra is still an open problem. In a proof-of-principle demonstration, the algorithm presented here shows promise in generating accurate in silico CID tandem mass spectra for identification of lipids, knowing only the molecular structures. That is, the algorithm uses no chemical reaction equations (in which parameters have to be estimated), no fragmentation rules from observed pathways, and no bond cleavage rates provided by bond strengths. Instead, the algorithm simulates the fragmentation process in an ion trap mass spectrometer model using a machine learning approach to overcome the difficulties that result from unknown quantities and simplifying assumptions in the CID process. Importantly, the algorithm uses a model of the CID process in a linear ion trap mass spectrometer. We believe the model is qualitatively accurate and do not claim that the algorithm describes the actual physical quantities in the variables discussed. The results from a first test using 45 lipids are presented. As a class of non-peptide small molecule, lipids have been extensively studied, providing relatively well-understood fragmentation pathways. As such, they provide a good set for both initial development and testing of the algorithm.