Motivation: A major goal in genomic research is to identify genes that may jointly influence a biological response. From many years of intensive biomedical research, a large body of biological knowledge, or pathway information, has accumulated in available databases. There is a strong interest in leveraging these pathways to improve the statistical power and interpretability in studying gene networks associated with complex phenotypes. This prior information is a valuable complement to large-scale genomic data such as gene expression data generated from microarrays. However, it is a non-trivial task to effectively integrate available biological knowledge into gene expression data when reconstructing gene networks. Results: In this article, we developed and applied a Lasso method from a Bayesian perspective, a method we call prior Lasso (pLasso), for the reconstruction of gene networks. In this method, we partition edges between genes into two subsets: one subset of edges is present in known pathways, whereas the other has no prior information associated. Our method assigns different prior distributions to each subset according to a modified Bayesian information criterion that incorporates prior knowledge on both the network structure and the pathway information. Simulation studies have indicated that the method is more effective in recovering the underlying network than a traditional Lasso method that does not use the prior information. We applied pLasso to microarray gene expression datasets, where we used information from the Pathway Commons (PC) and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) as prior information for the network reconstruction, and successfully identified network hub genes associated with clinical outcome in cancer patients. Availability: The source code is available at http://nba.uth.tmc.edu/ homepage/liu/pLasso.
INTRODUCTIONA central research focus in genomics is to identify genes and gene networks involved in variety of biological processes. Gaussian graphical models are popular tools for the estimation of gene association networks from microarray data (). These models assume that the available data are generated from a multivariate Gaussian distribution (). As a consequence, the main task for inferring networks is to derive conditional independencies in the joint probability distribution of expression data for multiple genes. In the framework of undirected Gaussian graphical models, conditional independence relationships can be inferred from partial correlations, which are the correlations between pairs of variables given the remaining observed ones. Contrary to the marginal correlation, the partial correlation measures the direct association between two genes in the gene association network. Once a direct gene association network is complete, the knowledge on indirect gene associations can be easily obtained. The standard estimation of partial correlations involves either the inversion of the sample covariance matrix or the estimation of least square regression problems. Unfortunately, microarray data are typically characterized by a large number of variables with a small number of samples, which makes these traditional approaches inappropriate. To ensure proper estimation capability, suitable alternatives based on regularized estimation of these parameters by sparsity restriction have been proposed. The underlying assumption is the sparsity of biological networks: only a few edges are supposed to be present in the gene regulatory network. A well-known example of these regularization-based techniques is the L1 penalized least square estimator, known as the Lasso technique. The method has been widely adapted to high-dimensional model selection in linear and Gaussian graphical models (). One limitation of these approaches is that they focus on computational or algorithmic aspects but neglect prior biological knowledge or information. Many years of intensive biomedical research has deposited a wealth of biological knowledge into databases, including genegene regulatory pathway information. One well-known example of these data resources is the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (). It is a collection of comprehensive pathway information derived from experimental results, literature and other databases. Another rich resource is the Pathway Commons (PC) that integrates biological pathway and molecular interaction data from publicly available databases including BioGRID, HPRD, Reactome and others (). These pathways are often interconnected and can be viewed as a graph of inter-gene regulatory relationships. However, pathway databases represent only the static regulatory relationships between genes or gene products. It is not clear yet to what extent a network in a particular phenotype or cell type aligns with interactions defined in these databases. A recent *To whom correspondence should be addressed. microarray data analysis of 20 genes involved with the human cell cycle showed that as much as 6070% of the identified gene regulatory relationships were in agreement with known regulations (). It is expected that integrating a priori pathway information in a gene expression analysis would increase the power of the method to recover biological networks. Recently, several methods have been developed to use pathways or network information, including network-constrained parameter estimation, in the framework of variable selection (; Tai and Pan, 2007a, b;). For example, the prior information was incorporated into a spatially correlated mixture model for selecting targets of one transcription factor (). In addition, an Ising model using network knowledge was used to identify differentially expressed genes (). In this study, we developed a prior information-dependent Lasso (pLasso) procedure for regularized estimation of largescale gene association networks. Specifically, we embedded prior network information into the regularized regression, such that it could specify preferences for particular sets of variables in the model. The rationale is derived from a Bayesian perspective of Lasso. A mixture of two Laplacian distributions was conceptually proposed to represent different prior knowledge of two sets of gene interactions: one set is present in known pathways, whereas the other has no known prior information. We first explored the effectiveness of the pLasso using simulation studies, and then applied the pLasso to a breast cancer dataset and an ovarian cancer dataset to evaluate the proposed method. We have demonstrated the effectiveness and power of our pLasso procedure through both simulation studies and real data analysis.