Recent technological developments in measuring genetic variation have ushered in an era of genome-wide association studies which have discovered many genes involved in human disease. Current methods to perform association studies collect genetic information and compare the frequency of variants in individuals with and without the disease. Standard approaches do not take into account any information on whether or not a given variant is likely to have an effect on the disease. We propose a novel method for computing an association statistic which takes into account prior information. Our method improves both power and resolution by 8% and 27%, respectively, over traditional methods for performing association studies when applied to simulations using the HapMap data. Advantages of our method are that it is as simple to apply to association studies as standard methods, the results of the method are interpretable as the method reports p-values, and the method is optimal in its use of prior information in regards to statistical power. Availability: The method presented herein is available at
INTRODUCTIONThe cost of collecting genetic information has been decreasing with advances in high-throughput genomic technology (). Over the last few years, hundreds of genes have been identified as being associated with common human disease (). Traditionally, association studies are performed without making any assumptions about which variants are more or less likely to be involved in the disease. These methods evaluate an association statistic at each single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), and only take into account one SNP at a time. The Bonferroni correction is often used to control the overall false-positive rate by uniformly limiting the significance threshold at each SNP (). Current standard approaches report a p-value for each variant and there is a good understanding in the community of what significance levels are required for genome-wide association (). Virtually all association studies report p-values as their results which allows investigators to interpret their findings in the context of other groups' findings. Although the lack of assumptions has the advantage of being unbiased in the search for variants involved in the disease, we know that not all SNPs contribute equally to the disease (). Recent studies () have shown that incorporating  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.prior information such as the results of functional studies (ENCODE Project) can increase statistical power. Unfortunately, the methods for incorporating prior information are complicated and difficult to apply in practice. Methods that use prior information are typically Bayesian association study methods () and instead report Bayes factors which are not usually reported in other studies. Although standard methods do not take into account prior information, they do have the advantage of being simple. We present a novel method for performing association studies using prior information, which is as simple to apply as standard association statistics and reports p-values, yet, optimally incorporates prior information. We extend our method to take advantage of the correlation structure to consider multiple markers in a region (). When considering multiple markers, we compute an association statistic at each SNP in the region, not only the collected SNPs. Incorporating prior SNP information increases power over traditional association studies while maintaining the same overall false-positive rate. Our method can be used in association studies to improve both the power and resolution of a study. When our method is applied to simulations using data from individuals in the HapMap, we demonstrate a significant increase in power and resolution compared with the methods used in a traditional association study. Our method also has the advantage of maintaining the inherent simplicity of a traditional association study. As a result, the computational complexity of our method matches that of a traditional association study. We measure resolution by calculating the distance between the location of the assumed causal SNP and the location of the SNP corresponding to the maximum-likelihood ratio. Our method increases the average resolution of the four HapMap populations by 27% and the average power by 8% over the traditional method. Our method has a connection to multithreshold associations presented in (. In this work, we show that the multithreshold association method which uses the prior information optimally to maximize statistical power can be interpreted as a likelihood ratio test (LRT). This is the key observation underlying our approach and allows us to propose a very simple method which is also optimal with respect to statistical power, but has the advantage of being simple and easy to interpret.
DISCUSSIONWe have presented a novel statistical method for incorporating prior information into association studies. The advantage of our method is that we can optimally incorporate prior information with respect to statistical power but still report p-values for each variant. By incorporating the correlation structure underlying the HapMap, we manipulate the significance threshold at each SNP to improve the overall power of a study. Experiments show that our method has a similar computational overhead yet greatly increased power and resolution to traditional association study methods. Our method has similarities with, the method presented in () and (). The difference is that whilepresent the general framework for optimally setting multithresholds for tests, our method is specifically focusing on the context of genetic association studies using available information of both MAF and LD. For example, if only the non-centrality parameter of the statistic at the tested markers is considered as presented in the general framework of Roeder et al., the method will be exactly equivalent to the multithreshold method with MAF prior that we examined in our simulations. We show that this method does not achieve a better performance than the traditional method in terms of both power and resolution. Moreover, we present the novel MVN method that assumes correlation between markers and that outperforms both the traditional method and the multithreshold method of (), which is distinctive from the framework assuming independency between the tests. The new MVN method has some similarities with the weighted haplotype test () or imputation method (). In both the new method and their methods, the unobserved causal variant is tested using the observed markers. However, the intrinsic difference is that our method takes into account prior information to optimally set significance thresholds differently to each causal variant in the context of multiple-testing correction. Moreover, the application of the method is much simpler than those methods, requiring only the MAF and LD information from the reference dataset but not the actual haplotype data. As we use prior information to improve power and resolution, the drawback is that the performance will not be optimal if the prior information is incorrect. For example, the MAF or LD information from the HapMap data can have sampling variation and the extrinsic information about the deleterious effect of the variant can be inaccurate. A possible approach dealing with inaccurate prior information can be explicitly accounting for the uncertainty. For example, we reduce the correlation coefficient estimated from the HapMap by a small amount because the likelihood of the MVN distribution becomes zero if the perfectly correlated markers in the reference is not perfectly correlated in the sample. A systematic approach dealing with prior uncertainty will be an interesting subject of the future research. However, we assume that the uncertainty in the prior information will be decreased in the future as the sample size of the reference dataset increases (1000 Genomes Project Consortium, 2010).