Motivation: The differential expression analysis focusing on inter-group comparison can capture only differentially expressed genes (DE genes) at the population level, which may mask the heterogeneity of differential expression in individuals. Thus, to provide patient-specific information for personalized medicine, it is necessary to conduct differential expression analysis at the individual level. Results: We proposed a method to detect DE genes in individual disease samples by using the disrupted ordering in individual disease samples. In both simulated data and real paired cancer-normal sample data, this method showed excellent performance. It was found to be insensitive to experimental batch effects and data normal-ization. The landscape of stable gene pairs in a particular type of normal tissue could be predetermined using previously accumulated data, based on which dysregulated genes and pathways for any disease sample can be readily detected. The usefulness of the RankComp method in clinical settings was exemplified by the identification and application of prognostic markers for lung cancer.
INTRODUCTIONThe differential expression analysis methods on intergroup comparison for identifying disease-related genes can be classified into two broad categories: the intensity-based methods such as T-Test (), SAM () and Limma (), and the rank-based methods such as Wilcoxon signed rank test (), Wilcoxon rank sum test () and RP (). Of the rankbased methods, there is a special type of method using the foldchange ordering information, such as RP (), RcoS () and FCROS (). In general, these methods first entail ranking fold-change values within each pairwise comparison between two types of samples, then calculate a fold-change rank ordering statistic for each gene. The significance of the observed statistic could be determined by using a permutation test (e.g. RP) or probability distribution function (e.g. FCROS). The rank-based methods usually have some advantages in comparison with the intensity-based methods, such as robustness against outlier values and favorable power efficiency in some cases (). However, both the above-mentioned intensity-based and rankbased methods are designed to detect the population-level DE genes and cannot provide patient-specific differential expression information. Taking the heterogeneous nature of disease into account, several outlier detection methods, including COPA (), OS (), ORT (), MOST () and others (), are developed to detect genes that are dysregulated in subsets of disease samples. However, they are more sensitive to various technical artifacts, especially experimental batch effects caused by differences in laboratory conditions, reagent lots and personnel (). In general, batch effects can introduce serious problems in translating experimental findings to clinical settings. For example, because of this problem, an optimized threshold value of the risk score summarizing the expression levels of signature genes determined from a set of training samples cannot be directly applied to other samples. Usually, in validation studies, data normalization is required for independently extracted samples to make all data having nearly the same scale as the training samples. However, current normalization methods that are used to adjust for systematic technical artifacts are usually not able to remove batch effects (). They may even distort biological signals (). More fundamentally, large interindividual variation in gene expression will exacerbate the problem of threshold setting for risk stratification. To tackle this difficult problem, researchers have proposed to make use of the relative ordering information of gene expression within each sample, considering that the relative ordering of gene expression within each sample would be rather robust against batch effects and insensitive to data normalization (). The relative ordering of gene expression is overall stable in a particular type of normal human tissue but widely disturbed in diseased tissue. Taking this into account, a method of detecting *To whom correspondence should be addressed. DE genes in individual disease samples is here proposed. Using both simulated data and real paired cancernormal data, this method was shown to have excellent performance for individual-level analyses of dysregulated genes and pathways. The use of this method in clinical contexts was exemplified by the identification and application of prognostic markers to risk stratification of lung cancer patients according to the dysregulation status of signature in each patient rather than a predefined risk threshold value.
DISCUSSIONThe overall stable ordering of gene expression in a normal human tissue may reflect the biological reality that the normal state should be robust against various perturbations (). During the transition from the normal state to a disease state, the ordering of gene expression residing in a diseased tissue may be subject to extensive changes, which could be sufficient to reveal patient-specific differential expression information, as demonstrated by the results based on both simulated data and real paired cancernormal sample data. One unique advantage of the present relative ordering-based method is that it is insensitive to batch effects and data normalization and thus can directly use microarray data from different data sources. In particular, the landscape of stable gene pairs in a particular type of normal tissue can be pre-determined using previously accumulated data of normal samples collected for the study of different disorders on the tissue and could become increasingly stable and reliable along with data accumulation of normal samples. Based on the landscape, dysregulated genes and pathways for an individual disease sample of this tissue can be readily detected. Analysis of individualized DE genes could have important applications. First, it can be of value in the practice of personalized medicine. For prognostic risk stratification, the present method can directly stratify patients at the individual level based on the dysregulation status of signature in each patient. Optimal risk threshold value that is determined from a set of training samples using a risk-scoring method usually needs to be redetermined in independent samples because of technical and biological variations. Another possible application of the RankComp method is in addressing the scarcity of normal tissue samples, which are often rare because of the invasive nature of sample collection. Fortunately, normal samples for a particular type of tissue, generated in different laboratories for the study of different disorders, are often collected in public repositories. Using these normal samples, this method can be used to predetermine the landscape of stable expression ordering of gene pairs for that particular type of tissue. Then, based on this landscape, dysregulated genes and pathways for any disease sample of this tissue can be readily detected. In this way, the present method makes it possible to maximize the reuse of accumulated data for normal tissue samples and facilitate the research of human disease. Nevertheless, the present method also has several limitations. First, the RankComp method may have insufficient power to detect genes whose differential expression causes minor changes in the gene ranking profile. Fortunately, even if a certain number of DE genes go undetected in a given disease sample, shifting the focus of the analysis from individual genes to pathways tends to produce relatively robust results despite insufficient power (). Second, the analysis presented here was performed only on microarray data from the same platform because the ordering of gene expression is sensitive to microarray platforms to some degree. One possible way of addressing this limitation is to filter out gene pairs with unstable ordering in datasets produced by different platforms.