Motivation: In practice, identifying and interpreting the functional impacts of the regulatory relationships between micro-RNA and messenger-RNA is non-trivial. The sheer scale of possible micro-RNA and messenger-RNA interactions can make the interpretation of results difficult. Results: We propose a supervised framework, pMim, built upon concepts of significance combination , for jointly ranking regulatory micro-RNA and their potential functional impacts with respect to a condition of interest. Here, pMim directly tests if a micro-RNA is differentially expressed and if its predicted targets, which lie in a common biological pathway, have changed in the opposite direction. We leverage the information within existing micro-RNA target and pathway databases to stabilize the estimation and annotation of micro-RNA regulation making our approach suitable for datasets with small sample sizes. In addition to outputting meaningful and interpretable results, we demonstrate in a variety of datasets that the micro-RNA identified by pMim, in comparison to simpler existing approaches, are also more concordant with what is described in the literature. Availability and implementation: This framework is implemented as an R function, pMim, in the package sydSeq available from http://www.ellispatrick.com/r-packages.
IntroductionMicro-RNA (miRNA) are a class of small non-coding RNA molecules which down-regulate gene expression. Through basepairing, miRNA down-regulate the expression of genes by inhibiting their translation or promoting the degradation of their target messenger-RNA (mRNA). Dysregulation of miRNA can lead to a variety of human diseases with miRNA being shown to play a critical regulatory role in many cellular pathways and functions such as developmental timing, cell death, cell proliferation, immunity and patterning of the nervous system (). As such, investigating the functional impacts of miRNA may further the understanding of many diseases. One of the first steps to understand how a miRNA could regulate a biological process is predicting which mRNA can directly interact with a miRNA. Irrespective of a particular dataset or condition, there exist many computational algorithms for predicting the target genes of miRNA, such as TargetScan (), miRBase () and PicTar ().These algorithms essentially attempt to identify whether a mRNA contains the binding motif of a miRNA. This remains an active area of research as there is generally not a large consensus between algorithms (). Attempting to identify a miRNA that is regulating a set of genes in response to a particular condition or treatment is also an established problem. A simple approach for identifying candidate miRNA-mRNA regulatory relationships is to identify a differentially expressed (DE) miRNA and look for large negative pair-wise correlations between that miRNA and the genes that it is predicted to bind to () Another common approach is to identify a DE miRNA and then use predicted binding target information to perform an enrichment analysis on the DE genes or miRNA-mRNA correlations (). An important but often overlooked factor to both of these approaches is the combination of the significance from the test on the miRNA with the test on its targets. Not combining these tests may produce results that are overly conservative as two p-value cutoffs are performed instead of one (). This could result in biologically significant signal being missed. As miRNA can potentially target hundreds or even thousands of genes, if a miRNA and its targets are identified as DE then further pathway enrichment analysis is often performed to make any results biologically interpretable. This adds another level of statistical complication and yet another P-value cutoff. Practically this style of analysis often produces a list of DE miRNA, a list of DE miRNA targets and a list of pathway analyses for each miRNA. These nested lists can quickly become unmanageable, in some sense broadening an exploratory analysis instead of focusing it. Instead of performing functional pathway analysis as an after thought, directly considering how miRNA interact with annotated pathways may help the interpretation of their function. It is well documented that the predicted gene targets of miRNA are often overrepresented for annotated functional pathways (). Likewise, annotated pathways are overrepresented for predicted gene targets of miRNA (see Supplementary Section S3 for further explanation). This observation suggests that pathway databases contain stable information about miRNA-mRNA regulatory networks. If leveraged effectively, this information could improve both the power and interpretability of results. To this end, we propose an integrative analysis for pathways, Micro-RNA and mRNA (pMim) incorporating publicly available biological network information and miRNA target predictions together with experimental RNA-seq and miRNA-seq data. This novel framework is the first to allow for the joint ranking of interesting miRNA and pathways by directly testing for miRNA that target a group of genes from a specific biological pathway in response to a treatment or condition. This approach produces one list of biologically interpretable results instead of the multiple lists generated by the previously described methods. Also, due to its simplicity it is free of the statistically demanding task of estimating complex miRNA-mRNA interactions making it suitable for datasets with small sample sizes.
DiscussionThe key strength of pMimDE and pMimCor is to rank both miRNA and pathways concurrently, i.e. rank the top mir-pathways. As such, these may be considered favourable approaches for integration as they facilitate interpretation and directly address the biological question. However, quantitatively assessing the performance of these rankings is not trivial in the absence of the known truth. As such, we have assessed the performance of the proposed methods via three evaluation techniques. While individually these techniques are suggestive at best, concurrently they provide a more complete picture of each methods performance. Our proposed method has recently been applied to an experiment using microarrays to investigate the associations between miRNA and gene expression with BRAF mutations and patient prognosis in stage III metastatic melanoma (). In comparison to other state of the art methods used in the analysis, our approach provided insights that could not be easily made using the other approaches. It has been our experience that the joint ranking of miRNA and pathways provided by pMim makes the information from studying miRNA-mRNA interactions more easily accessible and interpretable. The Notch dataset is previously unpublished and has a small sample size yet still identifies signal concordant with the predicted phenotype. This is promising in two ways. Firstly, it demonstrates the benefits of using a predefined network structure as opposed to one derived empirically. Deriving a large complex network using six samples would generally be ill advised. However, using the predefined mir-pathways, pMimCor is able to identify signal, demonstrating that small samples experiments can still be informative even when calculating correlations on only six samples. Secondly, as this dataset is unpublished and still identifies signal concordant with the literature, it protects against publication bias in the evaluation approach. In both the literature search strategy and prognostic strategy the integration approaches; cMimDE, pMimDE and pMimCor; generally perform better than using only the gene or miRNA data. This potentially demonstrates the value of integrating data to ask complex questions. Alternatively, there are arguments why both of the evaluation strategies should be biased towards the integration approaches and it is reassuring to observe the results concordant with these expected biases. In the literature search strategy a miRNA may be more likely to have been associated with a condition in the literature if that miRNA and its targets have been observed as changed. Whilst in the prognostic strategy, as the miRNA for each method are chosen outside of cross-validation performance could be biased towards those methods that use gene information.The general framework described in this paper has some natural extensions. It is possible to extend pMim to cover experiments with multiple conditions by combining the p-value from testing the equality of group means (using a one-way ANOVA) of the miRNA expression with the correlations between the miRNA and the genes in a mir-pathway. Also, many significance combination approaches can be modified to include weights including Stouffer's method (). Weights could be included to increase the impact of genes that are thought to be highly influential on the biology in question. Our integration approach has raised some statistically interesting questions that should warrant further investigation. To transcend the typical modularized analysis framework, our approaches make use of P-value combination methods to combine significance. By combining significance from a DE test of one miRNA with tests on multiple gene sets, pMim suffers from an issue associated with correcting for multiple comparisons. While there has been some research into correction for multiple comparisons in the presence of correlated pathways (), this methodology could be extended further to account for having correlated summary statistics from multiple miRNA. It would also be interesting to establish whether it is more appropriate to correct for multiple testing before or after utilising a P-value combination method like Fisher or OSP. In addition to considering how individual miRNA regulate a set of gene, miRNA are also known to act in groups to regulate genes. One broad group of statistical methods aims to identify groups of genes that are potentially being regulated by a miRNA or group of miRNA. Such methods include canonical correlation analysis (), nonnegative matrix factorization (), multivariate random forests () and integrative Bayesian analysis (). Statistically these methods can be thought of as ways of identifying relationships between a high dimensional multivariate response and high dimensional multivariate covariates. Unfortunately, as these methods are attempting to identify large complex networks their results are very dependent on sample size. As with the simpler univariate tests, the interpretation of the outputs from these methods can quickly become intimidating due to the many pathway analyses being performed on multiple lists of results. For datasets with sufficient sample size, our framework may be used as a first pass of analysis before implementing more sophisticated or intricate approaches. We can easily incorporate other functional databases into the pMim framework. The framework is not restricted to any specific databases such as the TargetScan and KEGG databases that were used as the predicted binding target and pathway databases respectively in this paper. Depending on the question of interest and the desired interpretation, scientists could easily substitute the pathway database with other functional relevant databases such as those on GSEA () or DAVID (). The resampling scheme outlined in the evaluation, as well as a further strategy outlined in Section 3 of the supplementary file, could both be used to assess the viability of any alternate predicted binding target or functional database. We have included an evaluation of theA table of the top 10 mir-pathways identified by pMimCor in the Notch dataset. The table consists of four columns; the miRNA that was identified as changed, the direction the miRNA expression changed, a significance score of the mir-pathway and the pathway contained the target genes. information in the protein-protein interaction database iRef () in Section 5 of the supplementary file.
ConclusionWe described a general framework, pMim, for integrating miRNA expression, gene expression and annotation information. From this framework three methods were proposed, cMimDE, pMimDE and pMimCor. The method cMimDE is a formalization and mild improvement of previously described approaches for identifying regulatory miRNA. The methods pMimDE and pMimCor are both novel methods for identifying if a miRNA is regulating a set of genes that also share some common biological function. Each of these methods relies on a predefined network structure derived from miRNA binding target predictions and/or biological pathway annotations making them suitable for use on experiments with limited replication. The proposed pMimDE and pMimCor are the first methods to jointly rank miRNA and pathways in relation to a condition of interest which greatly facilitates biological interpretation.