Motivation: Statins are the most widely used cholesterol-lowering drugs. The primary target of statins is HMG-CoA reductase, a key enzyme in cholesterol synthesis. However, statins elicit pleitropic responses including beneficial as well as adverse effects in the liver or other organs. Today, the regulatory mechanisms that cause these pleiotropic effects are not sufficiently understood. Results: In this work, genome-wide RNA expression changes in primary human hepatocytes of six individuals were measured at up to six time points upon atorvastatin treatment. A computational analysis workflow was applied to reconstruct regulatory mechanisms based on these drug–response data and available knowledge about transcription factor (TF) binding specificities and protein–drug interactions. Several previously unknown TFs were predicted to be involved in atorvastatin-responsive gene expression. The novel relationships of nuclear receptors NR2C2 and PPARA on CYP3A4 were successfully validated in wet-lab experiments.
INTRODUCTIONStatins are widely used cholesterol-lowering drugs that inhibit HMG-CoA reductase, a key enzyme in cholesterol synthesis. Clinical trials, however, indicate that statins additionally cause cholesterol-independent or pleiotropic effects (). These pleitropic effects may either be beneficial (e.g. decrease of oxidative stress and inflammation) or toxic (e.g. statininduced liver injury;). Currently, the specific regulatory mechanisms that cause these adverse effects are not sufficiently understood. Transcriptional regulators, including statinresponsive transcription factors (TFs) and regulatory co-factors, are suspected to be involved in these mechanisms (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Genome-wide mRNA expression profiling techniques are widely used tools to monitor large-scale regulatory effects in response to drug treatments. For this purpose, gene expression profiles are first clustered into sets of co-expressed genes, which are assumed to be co-regulated. Putative TFs are then inferred by mapping position frequency matrices (PFMs), which are widely used models for TF binding motifs, to the promoter sequences of putative target genes (). According to the futility theorem (), however, the grand majority of predicted transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) is nonfunctional, which is partly due to the degeneracy of TFBSs and the low specificity of PFMs. One common approach to overcome this problem and increase the specificity of TFBS detection is to search for common combinations of TFBSs in sets of co-expressed genes, referred to as cis-regulatory module (CRM) detection. CRM detection methods rely on the assumption that co-regulated genes are controlled by specific combinations of TFs, which bind in physical proximity to each other (). The specificity of CRM detection can be further increased by taking additional sources of evidence into account, such as correlations between regulators and putative target genes on the gene expression level (). In this work, a multiobjective CRM detection approach was used to infer new statin-induced gene regulatory relationships based on microarray measurements, transcription factor binding sites and proteindrug interaction data.