Motivation: The rapid accumulation of microRNAs (miRNAs) and experimental evidence for miRNA interactions has ushered in a new area of miRNA research that focuses on network more than individual miRNA interaction, which provides a systematic view of the whole microRNome. So it is a challenge to infer miRNA functional interactions on a system-wide level and further draw a miRNA functional network (miRFN). A few studies have focused on the well-studied human species; however, these methods can neither be extended to other non-model organisms nor take fully into account the information embedded in miRNA–target and target–target interactions. Thus, it is important to develop appropriate methods for inferring the miRNA network of non-model species, such as soybean (Glycine max), without such extensive miRNA-phenotype associated data as miRNA-disease associations in human. Results: Here we propose a new method to measure the functional similarity of miRNAs considering both the site accessibility and the interactive context of target genes in functional gene networks. We further construct the miRFNs of soybean, which is the first study on soybean miRNAs on the network level and the core methods can be easily extended to other species. We found that miRFNs of soybean exhibit a scale-free, small world and modular architecture, with their degrees fit best to power-law and exponential distribution. We also showed that miRNA with high degree tends to interact with those of low degree, which reveals the disassortativity and modularity of miRFNs. Our efforts in this study will be useful to further reveal the soybean miRNA–miRNA and miRNA–gene interactive mechanism on a systematic level. Availability and implementation: A web tool for information retrieval and analysis of soybean miRFNs and the relevant target functional gene networks can be accessed at SoymiRNet: http://nclab.hit.edu. cn/SoymiRNet.
INTRODUCTIONMicroRNAs (miRNAs), $22 nt in length, are endogenous small non-coding RNAs that repress gene expression by binding 3 0untranslated regions (3 0-UTRs) of their target messengerRNAs (mRNAs), leading to direct destructive cleavage or translational repression. In plant, mature miRNAs are generated from stem-loop regions of longer RNA precursors mainly by an endoribonuclease III-like enzyme, dicer like-1 (DCL1). The processed and methylated miRNA/miRNA* duplex is then exported to the cytosol. MiRNAs that are incorporated into an argonaute protein containing RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) can affect the target gene expression (). Different from of animals, most plant miRNAs have highly complementary recognition sites on their targets; it is considered to be a prominent feature of cleavage-guided repression. MiRNAs, one of the most important components of the cell, play critical roles in many important biological processes, such as development, nutrient homeostasis, abiotic stress responses and pathogen responses in plant. So far, miRBase () () contains 21 264 entries representing hairpin precursor miRNAs, expressing 25 141 mature miRNA products, in 193 species. It is predicted that in eukaryotes, miRNA genes accounted for $1% of the total genes and their target genes may reach 1030%. The limited miRNAs are claimed to be able to control the larger set of genes or processes through interaction, in which multiple miRNAs work interactively to control individual genes. To date, several elegant experiments have been carried out, unraveling intriguing miRNA interactions. For example, lin-4 and let-7, the first two experimentally verified miRNAs, are cooperative in).pointed out that there are interactive relations between miRNAs when they proposed the algorithm of PicTar and further experimentally validated that miR-375, miR-124 and let7b coordinately regulate Mtpn. Additionally, numerous miRNAs were identified to be involved in the aging signaling pathway, such as miR-1, miR-21, miR-24, miR-34, miR-100, miR-106, miR-132, miR-145, miR-146, miR-199, miR-206, miR-217, miR-320 and miR-449 [reviewed by. The same interactions also exist in plant; for example, miR160 and miR167 are involved in Arabidopsis adventitious rooting program. All these experimental results bring to a new area of miRNA research that focuses on network rather than individual miRNA interaction. With the availability of large data derived from fine-scale experiments and computer algorithms, several results have been achieved.first built an miRNA network by analyzing the target genes predicted by PicTar and TargetScan. Integrated analysis of miRNA expression profiling data showed that the higher correlation coefficient of miRNA co-expressions, the higher intensity in *To whom correspondence should be addressed. their synergy; miRNAs with negative correlation between their expressions tend to avoid the synergies. Recently,constructed a human miRNAmiRNA functional synergistic network via co-regulating functional modules. They found that, contrasting to non-disease miRNAs, disease miRNAs have more synergism and are the global central cores of the network, indicating their higher complexity of function. The prerequisite of constructing an miRNA functional network (miRFN) is to define the functions of the miRNAs. However, the functions of the most recently identified miRNAs are unknown due to the lack of experimental strategy for systematic identification of their regulating targets. To better understand miRNAs, it is increasingly necessary to measure their functional similarity (FS) and further construct a functional network, thus in turn to infer novel potential functions for miRNAs. For the FS of protein-coding genes, many successful methods have been proposed either based on sequence or expression similarities () or based on Gene Ontology (GO) annotations (). Nevertheless, we cannot indiscriminately imitate these successful methods for inferring the FS of miRNAs. First, all miRNAs are short in length and miRNAmRNA duplex allows mismatch. So miRNAs with similar sequence and pre-miRNAs with similar structure may have distinctive functions. Second, although expression similarity can interpret part of the FS of miRNA, like protein-coding genes, the similar expression pattern does not always signify FS. Third, it is impractical to measure miRNAs FS directly based on their functions due to the absence of functional databases such as GO annotations for coding genes to annotate miRNAs. Therefore, new methods were developed to measure miRNAs' FS.used human miRNA-disease association data to infer miRNAs' FS by measuring the similarity of their associated diseases structured as directed acyclic graphs, which is similar to infer the similarity of protein-coding genes by measuring the semantic similarity of their annotating GO directed acyclic graphs (). However, few species has datasets about the relationships between miRNAs and specific phenotypes, such as miRNA-diseases associations in human. More generally and directly, miRNAs' function as repressive regulator on their target transcripts. The final functionality of miRNAs that is embedded in the miRNAtarget interactions mainly depends on the functions of the downstream target genes. Thus, the target genes should play the major roles in full elucidation of the biological meanings as well as the FSs of the miRNAs. Based on target genes, all existing approaches for miRNA's FS calculation can be summarized as shown in. The simplest method reported bydefined the FS as the proportion of the common target genes, which is represented as a Jaccard similarity between two target gene sets regulated by two miRNAs ((a)).presented a second method for systematic study of FSs among human miRNAs by using their target genes' FSs presented as GO semantic similarities [(b)].used the third method shown as in(c). For each pairwise miRNAs, they test the significance of their co-regulated genes sharing the same GO category (called as co-regulating functional modules) using hypergeometric test. However, all aforementioned methods ignored two critical aspects of information embedded in the miRNA-target regulatory process, which would greatly improve their performances. One is the site accessibility between miRNA and its target mRNA. The other is the interactive context between target genes. Target accessibility, first proposed by, has been identified as one of important factors that are involved in target recognition because the secondary structure (stem etc.) around target site will prevent miRNA and target mRNA from contacting. As shown in, the target accessibility is represented by G, the energy computed as the free energy gained by transitioning from the state in which miRNA and its target are unbound (left) to the state in which the miRNA binds its target (right). The less energy means the more possibility that miRNA is able to contact (and cleave) target mRNA (i.e. high accessibility). From this point of view, an miRNA pair that has less G with their common target mRNAs should be more similar in functionality (more detailed illustrations are provided in Supplementary Materials S1 and Supplementary). Thus, we should take into account target accessibility when measuring the FS between miRNAs to improve the sensitivity of functional comparison. Interactive contexts between miRNAs' target genes have also attracted the attentions of several researchers.suggested that a set of miRNA targets regulated by a single miRNA generally constitute the biological network of(A) Three approaches for measuring FS of miRNAs. (a) FS was directly calculated as the proportion of the common target genes between two miRNAs, which is represented as a Jaccard similarity between two target gene sets. (b) FS was calculated by computing the semantic similarity between their target gene sets based on GO. (c) FS was represented as the significance of their co-regulated genes sharing the same GO category, which is identified by hypergeometric test. (B) Illustration of accessibility, represented as for mRNAtarget interaction. The left part shows the unbound RISC and its partial-paired target UTR; the right shows the RISC-target interactions. G is computed as the free energy gained by transitioning from the state in which miRNA and target are unbound (left) to the state in which the miRNA binds its target (right). The region of the target site that needs to be unpaired for a miRNA target interaction includes the miRNA bound region and likely additional flanks. This figure was completely cited fromfunctionally associated molecules in human cells.have performed topological analysis to elucidate the global correlation between miRNA regulation and protein protein interaction network in humans. They showed that target genes of individual miRNA tend to be hubs and bottlenecks in the network. Although proteins directly regulated by miRNA might not form a network module themselves, the miRNA targets and their interacting neighbors jointly showed significantly higher modularity. These studies indicate that target genes constitute not just a simple gene set, but also a subnetwork of a larger scale functional gene network they involved in. The interactive contexts in such target gene network should also be used for inferring the FS of miRNAs. We propose a novel approach to measuring the FS of miRNAs, considering both their target site accessibility and the topology of target functional gene networks (FGN), and further construct four soybean (Glycine max) miRFNs. We by topology analysis indicated that miRFNs of soybean exhibit a scale-free, small world and modular architecture; with their degrees fit best to power-law and exponential distribution. Degree correlation showed that miRNAs of high degrees in miRFNs tend to interact with miRNAs of low degrees, revealing the disassortativity and modularity of miRFNs. More researches on soybean genome and microRNome based on miRFNs and FGNs are underway.
DISCUSSIONIn this study, we first proposed a novel approach to measuring the FS of miRNAs, both considering their site accessibility and the topology of target gene functional network. Based on pairwise FS, we further constructed four soybean (G.max) miRFNs via a clusteringcoefficient-based threshold selection. Our method in this article made up for the defects of existing methods either that some of them failed to infer the miRNA network of non-model species without such extensive miRNAphenotype associated data as miRNA-disease association in human, or that some of them did not consider the target site accessibility and the interactive context between target genes. The successful application in soybean indicates that our methods can be easily extended to other species. In next five subsections, we will discuss the highlights of this article and the research prospects.