Motivation: Reconstruction of gene regulatory networks (GRNs), which explicitly represent the causality of developmental or regulatory process, is of utmost interest and has become a challenging computational problem for understanding the complex regulatory mechanisms in cellular systems. However, all existing methods of inferring GRNs from gene expression profiles have their strengths and weaknesses. In particular, many properties of GRNs, such as topology sparseness and non-linear dependence, are generally in regulation mechanism but seldom are taken into account simultaneously in one computational method. Results: In this work, we present a novel method for inferring GRNs from gene expression data considering the non-linear dependence and topological structure of GRNs by employing path consistency algorithm (PCA) based on conditional mutual information (CMI). In this algorithm, the conditional dependence between a pair of genes is represented by the CMI between them. With the general hypothesis of Gaussian distribution underlying gene expression data, CMI between a pair of genes is computed by a concise formula involving the covariance matrices of the related gene expression profiles. The method is validated on the benchmark GRNs from the DREAM challenge and the widely used SOS DNA repair network in Escherichia coli. The cross-validation results confirmed the effectiveness of our method (PCA-CMI), which outperforms significantly other previous methods. Besides its high accuracy, our method is able to distinguish direct (or causal) interactions from indirect associations. Availability: All the source data and code are available at:
INTRODUCTIONAn important problem in molecular biology is to identify and understand the gene regulatory networks (GRNs), which explicitly represent the causality of developmental or regulatory process. Microarray technologies have produced tremendous amounts of gene expression data (), which provide opportunity for understanding the underlying regulatory mechanism. The reconstruction or 'reverse engineering' of GRNs, which aims to find the underlying network of genegene interactions from the measurement of gene expression, is considered one of most important goals in systems biology (). For this, the Dialogue for Reverse Engineering Assessments and Methods (DREAM) program was established to encourage researchers to develop new efficient computation methods to infer robust GRNs (). A variety of approaches have been proposed to infer GRNs from gene expression data (), such as discrete models of Boolean networks and Bayesian networks (), differential equations (), regression method () and linear programming (). Although many popular network inference algorithms have been investigated (), there are still a large space for current models to be improved (). Recently, information-theoretic approaches are increasingly being used for reconstructing GRNs. Several mutual information (MI)based methods () have been successfully applied to infer GRNs (), such as ARACNE (), CLR () and minet (). In general, these approaches start by computing the pair-wise MIs between all possible pairs of genes, resulting in an MI matrix. The MI matrix is then manipulated to identify the regulatory relationships (). MI provides a natural generalization of the correlation since it measures non-linear dependency (which is common in biology) and therefore attracts much attention (). Another Page: 99 98104
DISCUSSIONIn this work, we proposed a novel method PCA-CMI to infer GRNs. From the benchmark validations, PCA-CMI is an effective method and the comparison results show its advantages. Comparing to linear methods like LP, LASSO and PCA-PCC, our method can cover non-linear relations between gene pairs based on MI and CMI from information theory. They can detect the non-linear statistical dependence, which is in accordance with the complexity of biology instead of linear assumption. In addition, PCA-CMI can distinguish the direct interactions or correlations from indirect ones, which are important for causality analysis. For example, consider three genes forming a causal chain: the first gene couples to the second, and the latter to the third gene. In this case, a pair wise MI analysis would yield dependencies also between the first and third genes, and we could not decide whether this coupling is made directly or mediated by the second one. An alternative to overcome the problem is to consider partial (conditional) dependence or correlation. To this end, partial MI as proposed is a general approach because it relates to non-linear dependencies, needs no explicit modeling and further represents the information between two observations that is not contained in a third one. Thus, in this way, we can discover the real underlying coupling or dependence structure. To illustrate the significance of the inferred networks, the average correlation underling the inferred regulations was compared with that of random gene pairs. We chose the result of the method performed on a rice (O.sativa L.) gene expression dataset (GEO access number: GSE4471) with 1387 significantly differential expression genes (t-test P  0.05). The average MI and Pearson's correlation coefficient (PCC) between gene pairs from 4459 inferred edges by PCA-CMI were also computed. The average PCC was randomly repeated five times. Supplementary Figures S3 and S4 describe the histograms of MIs and PCCs (Supplementary Materials). The result shows that CMI can significantly quantify the correlations of gene pairs. For the general PCA, genes i, j and k are randomly selected in order to reduce the computational complexity. To reduce computational complexity but not sacrifice the accuracy to detect the true regulatory interactions, we adopted an optimal strategy to select L genes from T adjacent genes for randomly selected gene pair i and j, which also ensures the local optimality of the algorithm. For example, suppose that there are T (T  1) genes which are adjacent with both genes i and j. When constructing the L-order (L  T ) network, all the L-order CMIs for the possible combinations of L conditional genes from T genes are computed and the maximum one or the geometric mean of them is selected to decide the existence of regulation. It is well known that the PCA is not robust for some inputs. In order to improve the robustness and accuracy of the inference in large-scale datasets, modular analysis is adopted in our algorithm. Specifically, the first level network is inferred by PCACMI. Then subnetworks are identified from the first level network by module finder methods such as CFinder (). Each modular network can be re-inferred again by PCA-CMI, and the resulting networks are called second level subnetworks. The bi-level integrative method of PCA-CMI can improve accuracy for avoiding the effects of wrong edges in a largescale network. The performance of such bi-level method was tested on DREAM3 challenge InSilico50 datasets, and the ACC value actually improved from 0.9102 to 0.9332 (Supplementary). In addition, the PCA based on partial coefficient correlation is not robust for the correlation estimator of PCC, in which a small quantity of outliers suffices to completely distort the resulting network (). A comparison study on correlation measure for MI-and PCC-based methods from gene expression datasets showed that MI is more robust than PCC with respect to missing expression values (). However, there is some limitation for PCA-CMI. As same as that of ARACNE, PCA-CMI cannot directly infer edge directionality, which is also a general limitation of many other methods, especially for these methods that do not use time series data (). Another limitation of PCA-CMI (the same as other methods based on general MI) is that it cannot detect all regulatory relations, in particular those with time delay between transcriptional factors and their target genes. Although MI is a symmetric measure, which cannot derive the direction of an edge (), this limitation can be relieved by a two-tier approach in which an undirected GRN is inferred first, and then edge directionality is accessed via other method like multiple linear regression method () or specific biochemical perturbation method ().
CONCLUSIONIn this work, we proposed a novel method PCA-CMI for inferring GRNs from gene expression data by taking into account the nonlinear dependence and sparse structure of GRNs. In this algorithm, the conditional independence between a pair of genes is represented by CMI between this gene pair given certain other gene(s). With the hypothesis of Gaussian distribution for gene expression data, CMIs between gene pairs are calculated by a concise formula involving the covariance matrices of the related gene expression profiles. The proposed method performed superior to other methods on the benchmark GRNs from the DREAM3 challenge, real SOS DNA repair network in E.coli and real rice networks. Both the cross-validation results and comparison studies demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our method. In addition, PCA-CMI is able to distinguish the direct regulatory relationships from indirect ones.