Motivation: To improve the understanding of molecular regulation events, various approaches have been developed for deducing gene regulatory networks from mRNA expression data. Results: We present a new score for network inference, η 2 , that is derived from an analysis of variance. Candidate transcription factor:target gene (TF:TG) relationships are assumed more likely if the expression of TF and TG are mutually dependent in at least a subset of the examined experiments. We evaluate this dependency by η 2 , a non-parametric, non-linear correlation coefficient. It is fast, easy to apply and does not require the discretization of the input data. In the recent DREAM5 blind assessment, the arguably most comprehensive evaluation of inference methods, our approach based on η 2 was rated the best performer on real expression compendia. It also performs better than methods tested in other recently published comparative assessments. About half of our predicted novel predictions are true interactions as estimated from qPCR experiments performed for DREAM5. Conclusions: The score η 2 has a number of interesting features that enable the efficient detection of gene regulatory interactions. For most experimental setups, it is an interesting alternative to other measures of dependency such as Pearsons correlation or mutual information. Availability: See http://www2.bio.ifi.lmu.de/˜kueffner/anova.tar.gz for code and example data.
INTRODUCTIONThe reconstruction of gene regulatory networks (GRNs) from expression data can help to improve our understanding of molecular regulation events. A variety of algorithms have been devised to predict gene regulatory interactions, frequently based on mutual dependencies between the expression of regulators and their targets (see related work). We propose to evaluate transcription factor:target gene (TF:TG) interactions by the measure  2], a non-linear correlation coefficient derived from an analysis of variance (ANOVA). Although  2 has a number of interesting features it has, to our knowledge, not been applied to network inference or to bioinformatics in general. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. A high proportion of our predicted novel interactions were confirmed by small-scale qPCR experiments performed by the DREAM5 organizers. In addition, our approach was evaluated as the best performer for the inference of real datasets in the recent DREAM5 blind assessment [http://wiki.c2b2.columbia.edu/ dream/index.php;;. Here, 29 participating teams applied a diverse set of inference methods to a variety of large real (Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and artificial expression compendia with thousands of genes from several hundreds of microarray measurements. The microarray experiments consisted of various gene, drug or environmental perturbations that were in some cases carried out as time courses. After a brief summary of related work we describe the GRN inference setting, introduce our inference approach based on the score  2 and evaluate its properties and performance.
DISCUSSIONTo infer gene regulatory networks (GRNs), we rank the relevance of candidate relationships consisting of a TF and a TG by measuring the dependency between their respective expression profiles. For the detection of dependencies we proposed the measure  2 that is derived from an analysis of variance (ANOVA). To our knowledge,  2 has not been applied to network inference or to other problems in bioinformatics although it has a number of interesting features (). Like Pearson's  2 , but in contrast to Bayes conditional probability tables or mutual information,  2 does not require the discretization of the input data. This increases the robustness of our method as inappropriate discretization might lead to loss of signal. In contrast to Pearson's linear correlation coefficient,  2 is a non-parametric, non-linear correlation coefficient. It also detects local correlations that are only apparent in a subset of the measured conditions. This increased sensitivity is due to the effective utilization of replicated measurements to model the measurement error. The recent DREAM5 blind assessment solicited the prediction of GRNs with thousands of genes from two real datasets (E. coli and S. cerevisiae) and one artificial dataset. The 29 participating teams employed a variety of methods based on regression (Lasso, random forests), Bayesian networks, mutual information and correlation. In DREAM5, our approach was rated the best performer on the inference of real networks and the second best performer on real and artificial networks combined. Especially for the inference of E. coli interactions, our approach performed significantly better than the methods evaluated in DREAM5 () as well as in the large assessment of().In contrast to E. coli, predictions for S. cerevisiae received significantly lower scores because the yeast gold standard network is less reliable. Compared with E. coli and artifical networks, inference is substantially more difficult in S. cerevisiae as here the expression of TF and their regulated genes is hardly correlated (). Indeed, with an AUC between 0.49 and 0.54, predictions were hardly better than guessing. The difficulty of network inference in S.cerevisiae has also been recognized by. Many publications on network inference approaches solely focus on E. coli; Mordelet and. Some of the known E. coli interactions identified by our approach were quite interesting biologically. For instance, an interaction between multiple antibiotic resistance genes was active after antibiotic treatment (local correlation) but not in growth phase experiments. According to qPCR experiments that were performed as part of the DREAM5 conference 50% of our novel predictions represent true interactions. At a precision of 50% we thus expect that our predictions contain 1000 previously unobserved true interactions.