Motivation: Cancer cell genomes acquire several genetic alterations during somatic evolution from a normal cell type. The relative order in which these mutations accumulate and contribute to cell fitness is affected by epistatic interactions. Inferring their evolutionary history is challenging because of the large number of mutations acquired by cancer cells as well as the presence of unknown epistatic interactions. Results: We developed Bayesian Mutation Landscape (BML), a prob-abilistic approach for reconstructing ancestral genotypes from tumor samples for much larger sets of genes than previously feasible. BML infers the likely sequence of mutation accumulation for any set of genes that is recurrently mutated in tumor samples. When applied to tumor samples from colorectal, glioblastoma, lung and ovarian cancer patients, BML identifies the diverse evolutionary scenarios involved in tumor initiation and progression in greater detail, but broadly in agreement with prior results. Availability and implementation: Source code and all datasets are freely available at http://www.ifr.ac.uk/dass/gui/.DASS-GUI
INTRODUCTIONTumor samples from cancer patients show a large variety of genetic abnormalities that have accumulated during somatic evolution from a normal cell state (). Somatic mutations are continuously acquired in individual cells, but depending on, among other things, the fitness of the resultant genotype, only a small fraction may reach fixation within a cell population (). Fitness change induced by a mutation can in turn depend on the genetic background, a phenomenon known as epistasis (). Epistasis has been known to play an important role in molecular evolution () and can constrain the sequence of mutation accumulation (). The fitness function or landscape over the space of all genotypes depends both on the magnitude and sign of the epistatic interactions. Therefore, genotypes observed in tumor samples are likely the result of a diverse set of mutational paths evolving across a complex fitness landscape. Patterns of somatic mutations observed in tumor samples contain information, both about the evolutionary paths of cancer progression and the epistatic gene interactions that influence them. However, extracting this evolutionary information is challenging because the fitness landscapes are unknown, and analyzing large datasets with hundreds of recurrently mutated genes is computationally demanding. Owing to these difficulties, existing computational methods for cancer progression either constrain the set of possible evolutionary scenarios () or are feasible for relatively small sets of genes ().
DISCUSSIONModeling the evolutionary events leading to cancer and characterizing the fitness landscape of cancer cells promises innovative applications in clinical cancer research (). BML allows the reconstruction of likely ancestral genotypes and the paths of mutation accumulation in greater detail than existing methods. BML accomplishes these tasks owing to several algorithmic improvements that take into account the unobserved precancer genotypes that provide a systematic bias to EPP reconstruction, as well as the effects of unknown epistatic interactions. We should emphasize that the goal of BML is not to classify somatic mutations as drivers or passengers; rather BML recapitulates the likely sequence of somatic mutation accumulation in recurrently mutated genes. It should also be noted that the bifurcating tree used by BML is simply an efficient data structure to represent paths and does not necessarily imply a hierarchical ordering of mutations. This distinction is important because somatic evolution occurred independently in each cancer patient and different tumor samples do not have a shared evolutionary history. Even though the genotypes at the internal nodes of the bifurcating tree allow us to correct for the systematic bias due to unobserved precancer genotypes, the estimated evolutionary probabilities are still only an approximation of the true distribution. However, since the estimated P are computed after taking into account the inferred precancer genotypes, they also incorporate the evolutionary aspect of the true evolutionary probabilities. There are some obvious limitations of BML analysis because it does not include copy number and genomic rearrangements that likely provide alternative paths for tumor initiation and progression. Another source of complexity is the existence of genetic heterogeneity within individual tumor samples (Nik-Zainalshows the sum of the two single mutated states. Mutations in these genes show a tendency to co-occur, suggesting that the departures from additivity are due to positive epistasis. Furthermore, a clear sequence of genetic events can be inferred (along the red box plots), suggesting the presence of a fitness valley along one (blue single mutant) of two possible paths to reach the double mutant genotype. The case of TP53-TTN genotype in ovarian cancer shows how TTN mutations, despite their recurrence, rarely initiate tumor progression. (bd). Simulation-based parametric bootstrap for each of the datasets. Blue (box plots in b and curves in c and d) show the results for the BML model that uses inferred ancestral information, whereas the results for standard Bayesian network learning algorithm are in red. The box plots in b show P(g) for single mutated states for 10 frequently mutated genes. These genes were selected based on an ordering that the algorithm automatically assigns to the genes (Section 3). Vertical axes in c and d represent the percentages of bootstrap confidence, whereas the horizontal axes represent the number of edges in the inferred networks that were false and true positives, respectively), as well as the role of tumor microenvironment during cancer progression (). BML ignores the possible cooperative interactions between subclonal cell populations within a tumor and between tumor and surrounding stromal cells. These are all important avenues that are left for further exploration. Aside from these limitations, an extensive bootstrap analysis demonstrates that BML estimates of P are accurate and robust (). Simulations (and d) also show that BML identifies epistatic interactions with greater accuracy than a naive network reconstruction algorithm. At the same time, BML is scalable for application to some of the largest available cancer datasets (). Therefore, BML is an efficient and powerful tool that brings us a step closer to understanding the evolution of the cancer genome.