Motivation: It has been recently suggested that atomic burials, as expressed by molecular central distances, contain sufficient information to determine the tertiary structure of small globular proteins. A possible approach to structural determination from sequence could therefore involve a sequence-to-burial intermediate prediction step whose accuracy, however, is theoretically limited by the mutual information between these two variables. We use a non-redundant set of globular protein structures to estimate the mutual information between local amino acid sequence and atomic burials. Discretizing central distances of C or C atoms in equiprobable burial levels, we estimate relevant mutual information measures that are compared with actual predictions obtained from a Naive Bayesian Classifier (NBC) and a Hidden Markov Model (HMM). Results: Mutual information density for 20 amino acids and two or three burial levels were estimated to be roughly 15% of the unconditional burial entropy density. Lower estimates for the mutual information between local amino acid sequence and burial of a single residue indicated an increase in mutual information with the number of burial levels up to at least five or six levels. Prediction schemes were found to efficiently extract the available burial information from local sequence. Lower estimates for the mutual information involving single burials are consistently approached by predictions from the NBC and actually surpassed by predictions from the HMM. Near-optimal prediction for the HMM is indicated by the agreement between its density of prediction information and the corresponding density of mutual information between input and output representations. Availability: The dataset of protein structures and the prediction implementations are available at http://www.btc.unb.br/ (in Software).
INTRODUCTIONIt has been a common statement in biology that amino acid sequences contain sufficient information to determine protein tertiary structures. Fulfilment of the implied possibility of structure prediction from sequence is actually considered one of the most important unsolved problems of molecular biophysics, as reviewed by different groups (). Such an intrinsically informational assertion, however, has only more recently been extensively investigated within the context of Shannon's information theory. Although informational concepts have been used in algorithms for secondary structure prediction from local sequence since the 70s (), for example, the limit imposed on prediction by the mutual information between these two quantities was estimated only a few years ago (). Incidentally, an informational analysis of backbone dihedral angles has also exposed the unfeasibility of tertiary structure determination from an even perfect three-state secondary structure prediction (). The recurrent utilization of statistical potentials in computational biology has also been interpreted explicitly in informational terms (). A particularly relevant example is the analysis of pairwise contact potentials, which revealed a surprisingly modest mutual information between contact partners (). General distance constraints have also been investigated, at least in the context of minimalist protein models (). Contrasting with secondary structure, atomic burials appear to encode sufficient information for structural determination. Contrasting with pairwise contacts, they have a much better chance of being adequately estimated from sequence information. Monte Carlo simulations of geometrically realistic protein models using native burial information, as expressed by atomic distances from the molecular center, have successfully recovered the tertiary structure of small globular proteins (Pereira). A simple computational experiment combining Molecular Dynamics of similar models with discretized burial levels has additionally provided an upper bound for the amount of required burial information. It actually turned out to be comparable to, and therefore encodable by, the information (entropy) of local protein sequences (Pereira de Araujo). The observed discriminatory difference between *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
CONCLUSIONKnowledge about atomic burial levels has been previously shown to be both sufficient for structural determination of small globular proteins and entropically compatible with amino acid sequences. Our present results, however, indicate that only a fraction around 15%, at least for C and C atoms, of burial uncertainty is resolvable by local amino acid sequence. On the bright side, most of this sequence-dependent burial information is easily extractable by simple prediction schemes, such as the presently implemented NBC and HMM. Most importantly, these predictions provide parameters for future folding simulations completely independent of knowledge about the native structure. The possibility of structural prediction of globular proteins from amino acid sequence using atomic burials as informational intermediates, including a possible combined improvement of sequence-independent constraints and burial prediction schemes, can now be investigated directly.