Motivation: One of the main goals of high-throughput gene-expression studies in cancer research is to identify prognostic gene signatures, which have the potential to predict the clinical outcome. It is common practice to investigate these questions using classification methods. However, standard methods merely rely on gene-expression data and assume the genes to be independent. Including pathway knowledge a priori into the classification process has recently been indicated as a promising way to increase classification accuracy as well as the interpretability and reproducibility of prognostic gene signatures. Results: We propose a new method called Reweighted Recursive Feature Elimination. It is based on the hypothesis that a gene with a low fold-change should have an increased influence on the classifier if it is connected to differentially expressed genes. We used a modified version of Googles PageRank algorithm to alter the ranking criterion of the SVM-RFE algorithm. Evaluations of our method on an integrated breast cancer dataset comprising 788 samples showed an improvement of the area under the receiver operator characteristic curve as well as in the reproducibility and interpretability of selected genes. Availability: The R code of the proposed algorithm is given in Supplementary Material. Contact
INTRODUCTIONClinical cancer research is driven by two basic tasks. One is to elucidate the functions of genes and pathways to get mechanistic insights in tumor development and progression and to identify novel drug targets. Another task is the identification of prognostic and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. predictive gene signatures that allow the prediction of the clinical outcome and response to treatment. In breast cancer, clinical predictors for relapse events (e.g. lymphnode status and histological grade) often fail to classify tumors according to their clinical behavior. The molecular heterogeneity of the tumors leads to differing outcomes in patients with the same disease stage. Therefore, several studies have been performed to identify prognostic gene signatures based on high-throughput geneexpression profiling. Various gene signatures have been identified, which have the potential to improve the current risk stratification of breast cancer patients (). Classification methods are used in this context to identify genes, which are able to discriminate between clinical relevant endpoints. One example is the support vector machine (SVM), which is a supervised learning algorithm that covers a broad range of applications (). Due to its ability to handle high-dimensional data, the SVM is a good tool for analyzing gene-expression data and its superior performance over other methods has been shown (). However, genes identified by standard methods, which exclusively rely on gene-expression data, often lack stability, i.e. applying the same method to different datasets results in gene lists that have only a small number of genes in common (). Recent studies have shown that standard methods can be improved in terms of classification accuracy as well as stability of gene lists by including a priori knowledge of pathways into the classification process (). These methods benefit from pathway knowledge since genes are not treated as independent. Most of the methods mentioned above are based on the hypothesis that genes in close proximity which are connected to each other should have similar expression profiles. Therefore, these algorithms look for predictive subnetworks instead of single genes. However, this hypothesis might not always be valid since pathways can be completely shut down by only one regulating gene and one would not observe a systematic effect in the whole pathway. Hence, the accuracy of predictions might be furtherPage: 2137 21362144
DISCUSSIONMany high-throughput gene-expression profiling studies have been performed with the aim to identify putative new biomarkers for risk stratification of breast cancer patients (). However, a major drawback of the gene lists identified in these studies is that the overlap is poor (). Classification methods are often used to computationally find survival-related gene signatures. However, genes which are known to be involved in breast cancer are not necessarily identified by current methods because they only detect genes that exhibit a large change in expression (), which might be only downstream effectors of the key players. For example, minute changes in transcription factor expression may lead to considerable expression changes of many genes regulated by the transcription factor. The key players, which are correlated to cancer development and not exhibit high fold changes, are known to be highly connected to those genes that significantly change their expression level (). Hence, the performance of classification algorithms might be improved if they are adapted to use the geneexpression data coming from microarray experiments and exploit the information that is stored in biological networks, that is, the connectivity of the genes. In this article, we introduced RRFE, which includes pathway knowledge into the classification process by modifying the featureranking criterion of RFE (). Motivated by the findings mentioned above, we used GeneRank (), a modified version of the PageRank algorithm (), to alter the ranking criterion of RFE and thus incorporate the prior knowledge. The PageRank algorithm, used by Google, is based on the hypothesis that a web page should be highly ranked in a search result if other highly ranked pages contain links to it. This hypothesis is similar to what is observed in gene networks. The assumption of our approach is that a gene with a low fold change should have an increased influence on the classifier if it is connected to differentially expressed genes.
CONCLUSIONWe presented a new classification method called RRFE that a priori takes pathway knowledge into account. This is achieved by using a modified version of the PageRank algorithm in combination with RFE. In our experiments, we used PPI data as prior knowledge.