Motivation: Animal models are widely used in biomedical research for reasons ranging from practical to ethical. An important issue is whether rodent models are predictive of human biology. This has been addressed recently in the framework of a series of challenges designed by the systems biology verification for Industrial Methodology for Process Verification in Research (sbv IMPROVER) initiative. In particular, one of the sub-challenges was devoted to the prediction of protein phosphorylation responses in human bronchial epithelial cells, exposed to a number of different chemical stimuli, given the responses in rat bronchial epithelial cells. Participating teams were asked to make inter-species predictions on the basis of available training examples, comprising transcriptomics and phospho-proteomics data. Results: Here, the two best performing teams present their data-driven approaches and computational methods. In addition, post hoc analyses of the datasets and challenge results were performed by the participants and challenge organizers. The challenge outcome indicates that successful prediction of protein phosphorylation status in human based on rat phosphorylation levels is feasible. However, within the limitations of the computational tools used, the inclusion of gene expression data does not improve the prediction quality. The post hoc analysis of time-specific measurements sheds light on the signaling pathways in both species. Availability and implementation: A detailed description of the data-set, challenge design and outcome is available at www.sbvimprover. com. The code used by team IGB is provided under http://github.com/ uci-igb/improver2013. Implementations of the algorithms applied by team AMG are available at http://bhanot.biomaps.rutgers.edu/wiki/AMG-sc2-code.zip.
INTRODUCTIONDespite their limitations, animal models play an essential role in biomedical research, ranging from basic science to translational medicine, as human testing is severely limited by practical and ethical constraints. In the context of drug development, the usefulness of animal models obviously hinges on the extent to which results can be translated to human biology. As an example, we consider here the response of bronchial epithelial cells to external chemical stimuli in rat and human. On one hand, organisms of common origin should arguably share many of the basic physiological mechanisms. On the other hand, different species may exhibit significant differences in the details of their cellular mechanisms such as signaling pathways. It is, therefore, essential to study this relationship systematically with the aim to develop reliable tools for the translation of results from animal models to human biology. Recently, the systems biology verification Industrial Methodology for Process Verification in Research (sbvIMPROVER) initiative designed and organized the second sbv IMPROVER challenge, which was devoted to the question of species translation. In particular, sub-challenge 2 discussed in the following, concerned the protein phosphorylation status of normal human bronchial epithelial cells (NHBE) and normal rat bronchial epithelial cells (NRBE) exposed to the same set of chemical stimuli. Herein, we present and discuss our studies of computational approaches for the prediction of stimulus-specific human protein phosphorylation levels based on gene expression and phosphorylation observed in the rat model. In section 2, we first give a brief description of the data and challenge design. Next, the computational approaches to the prediction task are described. After specifying the evaluation criteria applied by the challenge organizers, we describe methods used for the post hoc analysis of datasets and challenge results. Section 3 presents the results in terms of the predictions and their evaluation. In addition, results of the post hoc analysis concerning modifications of the prediction models and findings related to the phosphorylation kinetics are presented. We conclude with a discussion of the main results and an outlook on potential extensions and future studies. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
DISCUSSIONWith respect to the predictions required in the sub-challenge, results summarized inindicate that the naive prediction was already competitive and yielded the best prediction performance of all individual methods. On the other hand, the findings demonstrate that the combination of different methods had the effect of improving the test set performance with respect to some of the criteria. In the comparison across the primary methods shown in, the ranking of the different choices also confirms that assuming humP % ratP yields a decent baseline performance as compared with the NN trained on just phosphorylation data. It is also interesting to note that team AMG's naive prediction outperformed the LVQ method with respect to the test set B, while LVQ appeared superior in the training set validation. Apparently, the relatively small sample sizes do not allow for more reliable performance estimates by means of the L-O-O method. The organizers of the challenge compared all the submissions, and the details of this analysis are described in. Like most participants of the sub-challenge, the two top-ranked teams chose to predict protein activation in human exclusively from the rat phosphorylation data. The immediate reaction of the cell in terms of protein phosphorylation can be expected to be similar. However, species-specific details in the regulation processes may be significant along the complex pathways from phosphorylation to gene expression levels. The use of gene expression data is further complicated by high dimension compared with the relatively small number of samples. Both teams decided to avoid this complexity, which, combined with measurement noise and unknown thresholds for gene activation, may contribute to significant prediction errors. One possible strategy for the inclusion of gene expression data in the analysis would require several steps: from rat phosphorylation levels to rat gene expression data to human gene expression to human phosphorylation levels, with the possibility of significant and unknown systematic and stochastic errors. Alternatively, as explored by team IGB, rat GEx data could be used as additional input to the prediction model directly. Results summarized inshow that, interestingly, a NN trained on P in combination with gene expression (GEx) performs worse than using rat P as a naive prediction for human P. This is not unexpected, primarily because of overfitting on the numerous GEx features using only a handful of training examples. Additionally, no cross-validation methods were used by Team IGB to specifically avoid overfitting, and therefore the trained model performs well on the training data but not on the test data, for which it performs about as poorly as random and ranks among the worst performing submissions. The post hoc evaluation of time-specific rat phosphorylation values as naive predictors for human protein activation at the corresponding time points, cf., reveals that the agreement is slightly better for the measurement at 25 min. This could simply reflect a more pronounced variability in the early stages of protein activation, or that most of the activation happens between 5 and 25 min. It is difficult to come to a general conclusion concerning the comparison of signaling pathways and their kinetics in rat and human. Closer inspection of the phosphorylation kinetics revealed significant differences between rat and human with respect to the activation patterns, but pathways that are activated similarly in the two species could also be identified. The differences in regulation of signaling pathways in these species seem to be stimulus and pathway-dependent, but can be identified from a well-structured training set as shown by the challenge results.