Motivation: The availability of modern sequencing techniques has led to a rapid increase in the amount of reconstructed metabolic networks. Using these models as a platform for the analysis of high throughput transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic data can provide valuable insight into conditional changes in the metabolic activity of an organism. While transcriptomics and proteomics provide important insights into the hierarchical regulation of metabolic flux, metabolomics shed light on the actual enzyme activity through metabolic regulation and mass action effects. Here we introduce a new method, termed integrative omics-metabolic analysis (IOMA) that quantitatively integrates proteomic and metabolomic data with genome-scale metabolic models, to more accurately predict metabolic flux distributions. The method is formulated as a quadratic programming (QP) problem that seeks a steady-state flux distribution in which flux through reactions with measured proteomic and metabolomic data, is as consistent as possible with kinetically derived flux estimations. Results: IOMA is shown to successfully predict the metabolic state of human erythrocytes (compared to kinetic model simulations), showing a significant advantage over the commonly used methods flux balance analysis and minimization of metabolic adjustment. Thereafter, IOMA is shown to correctly predict metabolic fluxes in Escherichia coli under different gene knockouts for which both metabolomic and proteomic data is available, achieving higher prediction accuracy over the extant methods. Considering the lack of high-throughput flux measurements, while high-throughput metabolomic and proteomic data are becoming readily available, we expect IOMA to significantly contribute to future research of cellular metabolism.
INTRODUCTIONModern genome-sequencing capabilities have led to the generation of genome-scale metabolic network reconstructions for many microorganisms, giving rise to more than 50 highly curated metabolic reconstructions that have been published to date (). A metabolic network reconstruction is composed of a set of biochemical reactions, and the associations between these reactions and their enzymecoding genes. The constraint-based modeling (CBM) computational framework serves to analyze the functionality of these genome scale * To whom correspondence should be addressed. models, enabling the prediction of various metabolic phenotypes in microorganism such as growth rates, nutrient uptake rates, byproduct secretions and gene essentiality (). CBM has been used for a variety of applications including the comparative metabolic analyses over multiple organisms (), drug discovery (), metabolic flux analysis (), studies of network evolution () and metabolic engineering tasks (). Using metabolic models as scaffolds for the analysis of high throughput data such as transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics suggests the possibility of inferring conditiondependent changes in the metabolic activity of an organism. Developing computational methods capable of predicting metabolic flux by integrating these data sources with a metabolic network is hence a major challenge of metabolic network modeling. Previous investigations have already utilized CBM to integrate high-throughput molecular datasets with a metabolic network in a qualitative manner: The methods developed byand Becker and Palsson (2008) use gene expression data to identify genes that are absent or likely to be absent in certain contexts. They then search for metabolic states that prevent (or minimize) the flux through the associated metabolic reactions. A recent method byconsiders data on both lowly and highly expressed genes in a given context, as cues for the likelihood that their associated reactions carry metabolic flux and employs CBM to accumulate these cues into a global, consistent prediction of the metabolic state. The lack of dependency on a cellular objective is a marked advantage of this approach as the latter is difficult to define for multi-cellular organisms. While transcriptomics and proteomics data provides important insight into hierarchical regulation of metabolic flux (representing the control over the maximum activity of enzymesi.e. vmax), metabolomics may provide information on an additional level of regulation called, metabolic regulation (). The latter denotes the effect of metabolite concentrations on actual enzyme activity through mass action, kinetic and allosteric effects. A previous CBM method for integrating metabolomic data with a metabolic network model, thermodynamic-based metabolic flux analysis (TMFA) (), derives constraints on reaction directionality from metabolite concentration data based on thermodynamic principles. Another method byintegrates quantitative metabolome data with genome-scale models to identify reporter reactions, defined as the set of reactions that respond to genetic or environmental perturbations through coordinated variations in the levels of surrounding metabolites. Currently, however, there is no CBM method that enables the
DISCUSSIONThis study presents a novel approach for integrating quantitative proteomic and metabolomic data with a genome-scale metabolic network model to predict flux alterations under different perturbations, based on a mechanistic model for determining reaction rate. The method predicts feasible flux distributions while accounting for missing concentration levels of substrate and product metabolites for some enzymes, for potential noise in both the proteomic and metabolomic data, and for the simplifying rate equation formalism used. IOMA is shown to successfully predict changes in fluxes both in E.coli's central metabolism under various genetic perturbations and in a simulated RBC kinetic model, displaying a significant improvement versus the commonly used FBA and MOMA methods. Metabolic fluxes are the most informative and direct indices of the metabolic and physiological state of cells/tissues, and hence, inferring their state in different biological contexts is probably the holy grail of metabolic modeling. However, in a somewhat spiteful way, while we are facing an ever increasing availability of numerous pertaining high-throughput 'omics' data including transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic measurements, the measurement of fluxes is still very challenging and limited to a small fraction of the reactions present in cells. Hence, there is an emerging need to continue and develop new computational methods for robustly inferring the flux state, while capitalizing on these other available 'omics' measurements. In this context, IOMA presents an important step forward in this direction, which hopefully will be followed upon by others. IOMA profits from the absolute quantification of metabolites levels (in contrast to fold changes), that are becoming available, while absolute quantification of proteins is not necessary. Apart from the specific kind of reaction rate laws utilized in this work, IOMA can be used with a variety of rate laws including different types of regulation or enzyme saturation. The only restriction is that the rate laws can be represented in the form of Equation (5), where estimates of the terms a + and a  can be recomputed based on available data. Future work for improving flux predictions, could possibly utilize existing information on the thermodynamic constants of reactions to further constraint the model's solution space, following. Another potential application of IOMA is the prediction of metabolic flux alterations associated with human metabolic disorders (as means for predicting potential clinical biomarkers). Encouragingly, genome-scale human metabolic models have already shown their value in this highly important clinical task [e.g. in the case of inborn errors of metabolism ()], but as the methods used up until now have been simple and straightforward, there is certainly much room for improvement ahead, to which methods like IOMA are bound to serve as solid starting points.