Motivation: Microarrays are being increasingly used in cancer research to better characterize and classify tumors by selecting marker genes. However, as very few of these genes have been validated as predictive biomarkers so far, it is mostly conventional clinical and pathological factors that are being used as prognostic indicators of clinical course. Combining clinical data with gene expression data may add valuable information, but it is a challenging task due to their categorical versus continuous characteristics. We have further developed the mixture of experts (ME) methodology, a promising approach to tackle complex non-linear problems. Several variants are proposed in integrative ME as well as the inclusion of various gene selection methods to select a hybrid signature. Results: We show on three cancer studies that prediction accuracy can be improved when combining both types of variables. Furthermore, the selected genes were found to be of high relevance and can be considered as potential biomarkers for the prognostic selection of cancer therapy. Availability: Integrative ME is implemented in the R package integrativeME (http://cran.r-project.org/).
INTRODUCTIONIn clinical cancer studies, the primary treatment of localized cancer is either complete tumor excision with or without radiotherapy. The addition of systemic adjuvant therapies, such as chemotherapy or hormonal treatment has been shown to increase the chance of long-term survival but also to increase side effects and costs. Strong prognostic factors are, therefore, needed to predict more accurately the disease outcome as this would help physicians make treatment decisions. Various clinical or pathological factors have been evaluated as prognosis factors. For example, the treatment of primary breast cancer is often based on factors such as age, lymph node status, tumors size, among others, and also cell biological estrogen receptor status. Although these factors provide * To whom correspondence should be addressed. valuable information about the risk of recurrence, they are generally considered not to be sufficient to predict individual patient outcomes and determine an individual patient's need for systemic adjuvant therapy. In some cases, for example, patients with the same clinical parameters can have different clinical courses. DNA microarray-based technology is seen as a great potential to gain new insight into cell biology and biological pathways. This technology has been mostly used to further delineate cancer subgroups or to identify candidate genes for cancer prognosis and therapeutic targeting. However, even though the identified gene signature was promising, e.g. the 70-gene signature from van't, the clinical applications resulting from microarray statistical analyzes remain somewhat limited. This might be due to the complex and noisy nature of microarray data. Utilizing both clinical factors and genetic markers may add complementary information and may lead to a more accurate prognostic. Another reason to combine both types of variables is purely economical. Indeed, if the combination of clinical factors and a small number of biomarkers would suffice to either (i) improve the prognostic prediction or (ii) reduce the number of biomarkers while performing as good as when using a bigger set of genes alone, this would imply major cost cutting in biomarkers driven clinical treatments. To this end, a first step would be to select a combined signature of both gene expressions and clinical factors, which would be used in an appropriate statistical methodology. Then, the last step would be to assess if the selected genes can be considered as potential biomarkers for the clinic. The combination of both markers is a challenging task for two reasons. First, both types of variables do not measure the same entity. While microarray data are homogeneous, as the expression levels of genes or transcripts are measured, clinical variables are heterogeneous in their nature, as they can measure the age of the patient, but also the size of the tumor or the gender. Second, most clinical variables are of a categorical type, or are discretized by the physician, whereas microarray data are continuous data. Developing an appropriate methodology that can handle both types of variables, thus raises some statistical challenges. Related work: few methodologies have been proposed so far to combine clinical factors and gene expression to improve cancer prognosis. In a general framework,proposed conditional inference trees to deal with various types of variables. Closer to our focus of application, several authors analyzed the van't
CONCLUSIONWe have presented a method to combine categorical clinical factors and continuous gene expression variables in a hybrid signature. We have shown that the gene selection step did yield important biological insights into the cancer studies. These genes should be investigated further to validate them as potential biomarkers. The ME methodology was improved by proposing different gating networks function to combine clinical factors and gene expression. In addition, three different gene selection procedures were proposed that improved the prognosis prediction accuracy on three cancer studies. We also investigated the gain in accuracy when selecting clinical variables based on the outcome status. The accuracy was improved for the independent gating function in integrative ME, but in general, we showed that the location model sufficed to give good results as the number of clinical variables was small. Furthermore, we showed that sensitivity and specificity criteria were generally improved with integrative ME. Therefore, both types of variables should not be neglected or separately analyzed. Indeed, although microarray data can help uncover new features into cancer cell biology, cancer prognosis cannot solely rely on microarray data without taking into account the clinical characteristics of the patients. Conversely, clinical factors have valuable information about the risk of recurrence but they lack accuracy to determine the need of systemic adjuvant therapy. The availability of larger-scale studies involving the records of a larger number of clinical variables will undoubtedly allow better improvements in the prediction accuracy, as we will be able to select disease-specific clinical variables that are more closely related to the cancer study.