Motivation: The 1000 Genomes Project (1KGP) and thousands of Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) performed during the last years have generated an enormous amount of information that needs to be integrated to better understand the genetic architecture of complex diseases in different populations. This integration is important in areas such as genetics, epidemiology, anthropology, as well as admixture mapping design and GWAS-replications. Network-based approaches that explore the genetic bases of human diseases and traits have not yet incorporated information on genetic diversity among human populations. Results: We propose Disease-ANCEstry networks (DANCE), a graph-based web tool that allows to integrate and visualize information on human complex phenotypes and their GWAS-hits, as well as their risk allele frequencies in different populations. DANCE provides an interactive way to explore the human SNP–Disease Network and its projection, a Disease–Disease Network. With these func-tionalities, DANCE fills a gap in our ability to handle and understand the knowledge generated by GWAS and 1KGP. We provide a number of case studies that show how DANCE can be used to explore the relationships between human complex diseases, their genetic bases and variability in different human populations. Availability and implementation: DANCE is freely available at http://ldgh.com.br/dance/. We recommend using DANCE with Mozilla Firefox, Safari, Chrome or Internet Explorer (v9 or v10).
IntroductionInformation on human diversity and complex human phenotypes are currently organized in independent databases. The 1000 Genomes Project (1KGP) () database contains information on the spectrum of genetic variants in different human populations. The NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog () contains information on the genetic architecture of complex diseases and traits. Despite the importance of this information, there are no tools to summarize, integrate and visualize it, which is critical for a wide spectrum of areas such as genetics, epidemiology, anthropology, to design admixture mapping or GWAS-replications and to test the genetic architecture of diseases in different populations. Relationships between human phenotypes and their causing genetic variants have been modeled using network-based approaches, V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com which provide a comprehensive and integrated view of phenotypes interrelations (). Despite the fact that differences in allele frequencies can account for unequal phenotype prevalences among populations, current network approaches do not integrate this information. Here, we present Disease-ANCEstry networks (DANCE), a graph-based web tool that allows to organize and visualize information on human complex phenotypes and their GWAS-hits, together with their allele frequencies in African, European and Asian populations.