Motivation: Diagnosis and prognosis of cancer and understanding oncogenesis within the context of biological pathways is one of the most important research areas in bioinformatics. Recently, there have been several attempts to integrate interactome and transcriptome data to identify subnetworks that provide limited interpretations of known and candidate cancer genes, as well as increase classification accuracy. However, these studies provide little information about the detailed roles of identified cancer genes. Results: To provide more information to the network, we constructed the network by incorporating genetic interactions and manually curated gene regulations to the protein interaction network. To make our newly constructed network cancer specific, we identified edges where two genes show different expression patterns between cancer and normal phenotypes. We showed that the integration of various datasets increased classification accuracy, which suggests that our network is more complete than a network based solely on protein interactions. We also showed that our network contains significantly more known cancer-related genes than other feature selection algorithms. Through observations of some examples of cancer-specific subnetworks, we were able to predict more detailed and interpretable roles of oncogenes and other cancer candidate genes in the prostate cancer cells.
INTRODUCTIONDiagnosis and prognosis of cancer is one of the most important research areas in bioinformatics. Enormous efforts have been made to identify biomarkers of cancer, and have predominantly focused on the analysis of transcriptome data. Recently, diagnostic and prognostic predictive performances have been improved by incorporating interactome data (). Incorporating interactome data has the additional benefit that it can suggest detailed roles of potential cancer-related genes.showed that with metastasis of breast cancer, integration of interactome and transcriptome data can be useful to * To whom correspondence should be addressed. extract coexpressed functional subnetworks, as well as to obtain higher classification accuracy. These subnetworks contain many known breast cancer genes that could not be detected in previous studies which analyzed only transcriptome data.that the organization of interactome data is changed by altered gene expression in breast cancer, which affects disease outcome. To accommodate for this, they searched for changes in global modularity in protein interaction networks. They calculated the average Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) of a hub protein and its interacting partners, and revealed many interactions that displayed altered PCCs as a function of disease outcome. Their analysis is based on the concept of date and party hub (). A date (intermodular) hub shows low correlation of coexpression with its interacting partner and acts as a global connector in the protein interaction network, while a party (intramodular) hub shows high correlation of coexpression and acts as a local connector. They found that intermodular hub proteins tend to have more partners which form altered interactions than intramodular hub proteins. Analyses of coexpressed subnetworks or hub proteins have been helpful for the understanding of the metastasis of cancer at the molecular level. However, providing interpretability to a gene or protein network would also be valuable. For example, if the network could provide information on what makes networks change and what the effects of the changes are, then candidates to be validated or methods to validate would be more specific, and more effective targeting for therapies or drugs would be possible. To achieve this goal, we integrated genetic interactions and gene regulatory pathways, based on previous studies using proteinprotein interactions and gene expression profiles. Functional dependencies revealed by genetic interactions are known to provide abundant information regarding biological pathways (). Recently, Lin et al. constructed genome-wide maps of human genetic interactions using radiation hybrid genotyping data (). They suggested that their genetic interaction network approached saturation, suggesting the network did not show a scale-free distribution of connectivity, but was Gaussian-like. Thus, we can expect that the addition of genetic interactions would help make the network more global, provide functional dependencies between genes at a genome-wide level and give more accurate and abundant explanation to each individual pathway. The other dataset we used for our network is gene regulation information. Gene regulatory pathways give more detailed explanations of cancer genes and their oncogenesis. CombinatorialPage: 1847 18461853