The increasing availability of experimentally determined binding affinities for drugs on multiple protein targets requires the design of specific mining and visualization tools that graphically integrate chemical and biological data in an efficient environment. With this aim, we developed iPHACE, an integrative web-based tool to navigate in the pharmacological space defined by small molecule drugs contained in the IUPHAR-DB, with additional interactions present in PDSP. Extending beyond traditional querying and filtering tools, iPHACE offers a means to extract knowledge from the target profile of drugs as well as from the drug profile of protein targets. Availability: iPHACE is available at
INTRODUCTIONThe perception that drugs bind selectively to only a few biological targets has been largely biased by the limited time and resources devoted to the systematic screening of compounds against a large panel of proteins. Recent efforts towards generating, compiling and storing pharmacological data for drugs are challenging this traditional perception, as most drugs appear to have a rich polypharmacology (). In this respect, data repositories such as the Psychoactive Drug Screening Program (PDSP;), DrugBank (), IUPHAR-DB () and PubChem () have become essential public resources that provide up-todate information on the binding affinity profile of drugs. The increasing amount of available data on drugtarget interactions brings on the need to develop new interactive tools for data integration and mining that can facilitate knowledge extraction. All the above databases offer, via individual web sites, the possibility to perform some degree of querying and filtering to enable data access. In addition, other resources such as SEA (), SuperTarget (), STITCH () and DrugViz () provide purposely designed tools to analyse and visualize drugtarget relationships. Along these lines, iPHACE represents a new integrative conceptual framework to navigate in the pharmacological space covered by drugs. The current release contains 4089 interactions between 739 drugs and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. 181 targets [147 G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and 34 ion channels] extracted from IUPHAR-DB and PDSP.
CONCLUSIONThe iPHACE navigator was designed to enable a multidisciplinary team of drug discovery scientists to visually process information on chemical structures and biological activities of drugs in an efficient, organized and integrative manner. As more data on the interaction of drugs with multiple targets become available, tools such as iPHACE are likely to deepen our understanding of both the polypharmacology of drugs and the cross-pharmacology of targets.