Given a set of extant haplotypes IRiS first detects high confidence recombination events in their shared genealogy. Next using the local sequence topology defined by each detected event, it integrates these recombinations into an ancestral recombination graph. While the current system has been calibrated for human population data, it is easily extendible to other species as well. Availability: IRiS (Identification of Recombinations in Sequences) binary files are available for non-commercial use in both Linux and Microsoft Windows, 32 and 64 bit environments from
INTRODUCTIONGenetic recombination is a key evolutionary force shaping the sequence variability of the recombining genome. Yet individual recombination events have played a limited role in studies on phylogenetics and population characteristics. Recombinational analysis generally relies on estimated population recombination rates which are statistical averages among individuals from the same population over many generations (). In vitro sperm typing experiments define individual recombination events () and so do familial datasets of related individuals across generations. However these analysis are restricted in time depth, both by the human generation time and the family sizes. The inherent difficulty in identifying past recombinations shared among unrelated individuals lies in the palimpsestic nature of the recombining genome. Over successive generations recombinations conjoin potentially divergent sequences, often overwriting the traces of older events, making the task of reconstructing the true recombining genealogy almost impossible. Even under simplifying assumptions, such as the Wright Fisher population model and the parsimony principle, the problem of reconstructing the ancestral recombination graph (ARG) from the haplotypes has been shown to be NP complete (). Thus attempts to solve the reconstruction problem exactly do not scale beyond a few sequences (). IRiS (Identification of Recombinations in Sequences) is a suite of programs to study the recombinational variations in populations. It constructs the ARG from the haplotype data in two phases. In * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  Work done during internship at IBM Research. the first phase it detects the recombinations and only the ones with high confidence are used in the next phase. In the second phase these recombinations, along with local topology information, are reconciled into an ARG network. To the best of our knowledge this is the first time that an ARG network is being constructed at a genomic scale for hundreds of samples. The ARG is not fully resolved, due to the difficulties discussed above, hence we call it a subARG.Page: 2449 24482450. The fidelity of the reconstructed subARG to the true ARG is shown here. COSI () simulates a demographic scenario with African (blue), Asian (yellow) and European (green) extant samples and denotes the true ARG. The MRCA of all the samples is toward the top right corner. The internal nodes and edges of the reconstructed subARG are shown in red. Note that all the leaf nodes, i.e. the blue, yellow and green colored nodes are (trivially) reconstructed in the subARG. The remaining nodes and edges of the true ARG are shown in gray. The network is rendered using Pajek (http://vlado.fmf.uni-lj .si/pub/networks/pajek/).
CONCLUSIONWe present a software suite to study genetic recombination. While most currently available software systems estimate only the recombination rate, we undertake the orthogonal task of identifying individual events and reconstructing the ARG network. The system is currently calibrated for human population data based on realistic coalescent (COSI) simulations. To the best of our knowledge this is the first time that an ARG network has been constructed at a genomic Page: 2450 24482450scale for hundreds of samples. We believe that IRiS is an invaluable tool to comprehensively understand the dynamics of recombining genomes.