Motivation: Tag density plots are very important to intuitively reveal biological phenomena from capture-based sequencing data by visualizing the normalized read depth in a region. Results: We have developed iTagPlot to compute tag density across functional features in parallel using multicores and a grid engine and to interactively explore it in a graphical user interface. It allows us to stratify features by defining groups based on biological function and measurement, summary statistics and unsupervised clustering. Availability and implementation: http://sourceforge.net/projects/itagplot/.
IntroductionChIP-seq, MBD-seq and MeDIP-seq are powerful and standard sequencing technologies to identify transcription factor binding, histone modification and DNA methylation by counting the number of reads in base resolution, i.e. tag density. One of the fundamental analyses is to visualize tag density of sequencing samples on genome browsers, e.g. the UCSC genome browser ()and IGV (), because tag density reflects the degree of enrichment of biological aspects. Although such visualizations can clearly show the distribution of tag density in a local region, they cannot show the overall distribution of tags around genomic features. To this end, several programs and libraries in Perl, Python, R and Java have been developed. Cistrome provides correlation analyses to downstream genome feature association, gene expression analyses and motif discovery based on Galaxy workflow system (). Spark clusters tag density of regions of interest and visualizes a heatmap of clusters or regions (). Very recently, ngs.plot has been developed for quick mining and visualization of tag density in the command line interface (). However, some of them require programming skills or experience in the command line interface. Some have simple functions to generate plots, and do not support various graphical displays and editing, flexible grouping, fine-tuning of graphical parameters, feature identifier conversion or multiple samples, as shown in(). In this article, we present iTagPlot to accurately compute and interactively visualize tag density in a graphical user interface. Like ngs.plot (), iTagPlot computes and draws the average tag density of all features for each sample. In addition, iTagPlot visualizes the tag density of individual features of interest and groups of features based on quantitative values such as gene expression, DNA methylation, CpG density and even quantiles of quantitative values. It supports parallel computation using multithreading or a grid engine and allows customizing drawing properties easily in a user-friendly interface. Given that tag density plots are the mainstay of manuscripts describing epigenomics data based on next-gensequencing, it is essential for biologists to have access to software that can generate these plots easily.