Motivation: Whole genome sequencing (WGS) of parent-offspring trios is a powerful approach for identifying disease-associated genes via detecting copy number variations (CNVs). Existing approaches, which detect CNVs for each individual in a trio independently, usually yield low-detection accuracy. Joint modeling approaches leveraging Mendelian transmission within the parent-offspring trio can be an efficient strategy to improve CNV detection accuracy. Results: In this study, we developed TrioCNV, a novel approach for jointly detecting CNVs in parent offspring trios from WGS data. Using negative binomial regression, we modeled the read depth signal while considering both GC content bias and mappability bias. Moreover, we incorporated the family relationship and used a hidden Markov model to jointly infer CNVs for three samples of a parent-offspring trio. Through application to both simulated data and a trio from 1000 Genomes Project, we showed that TrioCNV achieved superior performance than existing approaches. Availability and implementation: The software TrioCNV implemented using a combination of Java and R is freely available from the website at https://github.com/yongzhuang/TrioCNV.
IntroductionCopy number variations (CNVs) are defined as changes in the copy number (gain or loss) of large genomic segments, which can be transmitted from parents or arise de novo. CNVs have been shown to play an important role in human morbidities, including neuropsychiatric disorders () and cancers (). CNVs have been traditionally detected using fluorescent in situ hybridization, array comparative genomic hybridization and SNP microarray (). Recently, next generation sequencing (NGS), especially whole genome sequencing (WGS), has become extremely powerful in detecting CNVs comprehensively, being able to identify CNVs that are often missed by array-based assays. On the other hand, NGS-based approaches present substantial challenges for CNV calling. They usually work by mapping sequencing reads to the reference genome and subsequently identifying discordant mapping signatures putatively caused by CNVs. As summarized in, there have beenand (iv) a combination of the above. In addition, CNVs can be detected by using the de novo assembly approach, which first reconstructs contigs from short sequencing reads and then compares the assembled contigs with the reference genome sequence to identify the regions with discordant copy numbers (). Most existing CNV detection approaches focus on one single sample (individually) or multiple samples without considering the intersample relatedness (). Naturally, when genetic relatedness is known for multiple individuals, effective utilization of this information could potentially improve CNV detection accuracy. A common relevant study design with known inter-individual relationships is sequencing parent-offspring trios. Indeed, the parent-offspring trio design has been shown to be powerful in identifying disease-associated genetic variants for both common and rare diseases (). For trio-based NGS data, a joint modeling approach leveraging the parent-offspring relationship can potentially improve detection accuracy for CNVs, as the same principle has been successfully applied to improve detection accuracy for inherited and de novo single nucleotide variants and INDELs from NGS data () as well as that for CNVs from SNP array data (). Importantly, the joint modeling approach allows for an explicit identification of de novo mutations that have been increasingly recognized to play critical roles in many human diseases (). To our knowledge, there have been no approaches for calling CNVs from trio WGS data in a trio-aware manner. Due to the popularity of trio sequencing in both research and clinical settings, such a tool is urgently needed. In this study, we presented TrioCNV to fulfill this purpose. First, we modeled read depth signal with negative binomial regression to accommodate over-dispersion and considered GC content and mappability bias. Second, we leveraged parent-offspring relationship to apply Mendelian inheritance constraint while allowing for the rare incidence of de novo events. Third, we used a hidden Markov model (HMM) by combining the two aforementioned models to jointly perform CNV segmentation for the trio. We applied TrioCNV to a simulated trio and a WGS trio from 1000 Genomes Project (1000GP) to demonstrate its performance and strength over existing approaches.
DiscussionIn summary, we introduced TrioCNV, a novel approach to jointly detecting CNVs from WGS data in parent-offspring trios. First, we modeled read depth by the negative binomial regression to accommodate over-dispersion and account for GC content bias and mappability bias. Second, we incorporated parent-offspring relation-ship into our model to leverage Mendelian inheritance constraint while allowing the rare incidence of de novo mutations. Third, we used an HMM to jointly make CNV segmentation of the parent-offspring trio. To our knowledge, this is the first CNV detection method developed specifically to handle trio sequencing data. To evaluate the performance of TrioCNV and compare it with existing approaches, we applied TrioCNV to a simulated trio and a sequenced trio from 1000GP. Our results illustrate that TrioCNV achieves a better performance compared with existing approaches in the trio setting. Our approach may be further enhanced in several ways. For example, we only modeled the RD signal for emission probability, while not all CNVs are assessable by RD. Therefore, other types of mapping signals such as read pairs and split reads can be incorporated to detect CNVs that are not easily assessable by RD. Similar to other RD-based CNV detection methods, TrioCNV reports lower (i.e. window-based) breakpoint resolution than SR-, PEM-and de novo assembly-based methods, and these three kinds of signals can help refine breakpoints. In addition, our approach is now limited to WGS data, but it can be potentially adapted to support whole exome sequencing data.