Motivation: Identification of somatic single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in tumour genomes is a necessary step in defining the mutational landscapes of cancers. Experimental designs for genome-wide ascertainment of somatic mutations now routinely include next-generation sequencing (NGS) of tumour DNA and matched constitutional DNA from the same individual. This allows investigators to control for germline polymorphisms and distinguish somatic mutations that are unique to the tumour, thus reducing the burden of labour-intensive and expensive downstream experiments needed to verify initial predictions. In order to make full use of such paired datasets, computational tools for simultaneous analysis of tumour–normal paired sequence data are required, but are currently underdeveloped and under-represented in the bioinformatics literature. Results: In this contribution, we introduce two novel probabilistic graphical models called JointSNVMix1 and JointSNVMix2 for jointly analysing paired tumour–normal digital allelic count data from NGS experiments. In contrast to independent analysis of the tumour and normal data, our method allows statistical strength to be borrowed across the samples and therefore amplifies the statistical power to identify and distinguish both germline and somatic events in a unified probabilistic framework. Availability: The JointSNVMix models and four other models discussed in the article are part of the JointSNVMix software package available for download at http://ntfd.mit.edu/.
INTRODUCTION
DISCUSSIONIn this article, we examined the problem of simultaneous analysis of tumournormal pair NGS data for the purpose of identifying somatic point mutations. We developed a probabilistic framework called JointSNVMix to allow us to benchmark a model that can borrow statistical strength between samples against standard independent analysis. We showed that joint modelling of genotypes confers an increased specificity over simpler or independent analysis (Section 3.2). Interestingly, the frequentist statistics-based method, 'joint Fisher' method, which considers both datasets simultaneously shows an increased specificity over its 'independent'analogue, albeit considerably lower than what was achieved for JointSNVMix.