The KEGG PATHWAY database provides a widely used service for metabolic and nonmetabolic pathways. It contains manually drawn pathway maps with information about the genes, reactions and relations contained therein. To store these pathways, KEGG uses KGML, a proprietary XML-format. Parsers and translators are needed to process the pathway maps for usage in other applications and algorithms. We have developed KEGGtranslator, an easy-to-use stand-alone application that can visualize and convert KGML formatted XML-files into multiple output formats. Unlike other translators, KEGGtranslator supports a plethora of output formats, is able to augment the information in translated documents (e.g. MIRIAM annotations) beyond the scope of the KGML document, and amends missing components to fragmentary reactions within the pathway to allow simulations on those. Availability: KEGGtranslator is freely available as a Java ™ Web Start application and for download at http://www.cogsys.cs.uni-tuebingen.de/software/KEGGtranslator/.
INTRODUCTIONMany academic researchers, who want to use pathway-based information, utilize the KEGG PATHWAY database (). The database, established in 1995, contains manually created maps for various pathways. These maps are visualized on the web and can be downloaded free of charge (for academics) as XML-files in the KEGG Markup Language (KGML). The elements in a pathway XML-file (such as reactions or genes) are usually identified by a KEGG identifier only. Thus, KEGG PATHWAY is strongly related to other KEGG databases that resolve and further describe the identifiers. However, the content of these KGML-formatted XML-files itself is limited. Gene names are often encoded as barely readable abbreviations and elements are only annotated by a single KEGG identifier. By improving the annotation and translating the KGML-files to other file formats, researchers could use the KEGG database for many applications: individual pathway pictures could be created; pathway simulation * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and modeling applications could be executed; graph-operations on the pathways or stoichiometric analyses could be performed (see, e.g., chapter 3); or the KEGG pathway database could be used for gene set enrichment analyses. For these purposes, only a few converters are available: KEGGconverter () or KEGG2SBML () offer command-line or web-based conversion of KGML-files to SBML-files. KEGGgraph () is able to convert KGML-files to R-based graph structures. None of these tools has a graphical user interface, is capable to validate and autocomplete KEGG reactions, adds standard identifiers (such as MIRIAM URNs) to pathway elements, or is able to write KGML files in multiple ouput formats. Along with this work, the command-line toolbox SuBliMinaL (N.submitted for publication) overcomes some of these limitations. We here present KEGGtranslator, which reads and completes the content of an XML-file by retrieving online-annotation of all genes and reactions using the KEGG API. KGML-files can be converted to many output formats. Minor deficiencies are corrected (e.g. the name of a gene), new information is added (e.g. multiple MIRIAM identifiers for each gene and reaction (), or SBO terms describing the function) and some crucial deficiencies (like missing reactants) are addressed.
DISCUSSIONKEGGtranslator is a stand-alone application with a graphical user interface that runs on every operating system for which a Java  virtual machine is available. There are other tools for converting KGML to SBML and for converting KGML to graph structures in R. But, to our knowledge, no other KEGG converter is able to translate KGML formatted files to such a variety of output formats with important functionalities like the autocompletion of reactions or the annotation of each element in the translated file, using various identifiers. Furthermore, KEGGtranslator is simple, easy-to-use and comes with a powerful command-line and graphical user interface. The variety of output formats, combined with the translation options and comprehensive, standard-conform annotation of the pathway elements allow a quick and easy usage(B) The need for autocompleting reactions: the upper half shows the KGMLfile with only one substrate and product. On the lower half, the complete reaction equation is shown. As one can see, one substrate and product is missing in the XML-document. of files from the KEGG pathway database in a wide range of other applications.