Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) lack tertiary structure and thus differ from globular proteins in terms of their sequence–structure–function relations. IDPs have lower sequence conservation, different types of active sites and a different distribution of functionally important regions, which altogether make their multiple sequence alignment (MSA) difficult. The KMAD MSA software has been written specifically for the alignment and annotation of IDPs. It augments the substitution matrix with knowledge about post-translational modifications, functional domains and short linear motifs. Results: MSAs produced with KMAD describe well-conserved features among IDPs, tend to agree well with biological intuition, and are a good basis for designing new experiments to shed light on this large, understudied class of proteins. Availability and implementation: KMAD web server is accessible at
IntroductionMore than 30% of all human proteins contain unfolded regions (). This stands in marked contrast to how little we know about them (). Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) lack a stable tertiary structure, and thus lack a hydrophobic core. They thus also lack an active site. IDPs often interact with other proteins by means of short linear motifs (SLiMs), which are very abundant in disordered regions. This is a fundamental component of cell signalling (). These IDP characteristics have many consequences for aligning their sequences and thus for their study in general. Algorithms underlying existing MSA software are directly or indirectly based on knowledge obtained from studying 3D protein structures. Aligning a hydrophobic residue in the protein core with a hydrophilic one is penalized heavily when aligning ordered proteins, but this is much less the case when aligning IDPs simply because IDPs do not have a hydrophobic core. In addition, folded proteins contain large protein protein interaction surfaces, ion binding sites, active sites or other 3D motifs that MSA software capitalizes on, while IDPs generally consist of short motifs surrounded by stretches of highly variable length and composition. The main function determinants of IDPs are SLiMs, and posttranslational modifications (PTMs). For the specific purpose of aligning IDPs, we introduce Knowledge-based multiple sequence alignment (MSA) for IDPs, or KMAD, that incorporates SLiM, domain and PTM annotations in the alignment procedure. Obviously, the inclusion of this knowledge will cause these motifs to line up in the final MSA without certainty that this reflects biological reality. This way, however, KMAD generates hypotheses that can be validated experimentally to progress, for example, protein engineering, drug design or the analysis of genetic disorders. In these research fields, scientists most often are interested in one single protein and want to gather information for this one protein. In the particular case of IDPs such information normally relates to SLiMS and PTMs and how conserved these are in an MSA. In the HSSP project (), the concept of the insertion-free MSA was introduced specifically for this V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.