Motivation: In neuroscience, as in many other scientific domains, the primary form of knowledge dissemination is through published articles. One challenge for modern neuroinformatics is finding methods to make the knowledge from the tremendous backlog of publications accessible for search, analysis and the integration of such data into computational models. A key example of this is metascale brain connectivity, where results are not reported in a normalized repository. Instead, these experimental results are published in natural language, scattered among individual scientific publications. This lack of normalization and centralization hinders the large-scale integration of brain connectivity results. In this article, we present text-mining models to extract and aggregate brain connectivity results from 13.2 million PubMed abstracts and 630 216 full-text publications related to neuroscience. The brain regions are identified with three different named entity recog-nizers (NERs) and then normalized against two atlases: the Allen Brain Atlas (ABA) and the atlas from the Brain Architecture Management System (BAMS). We then use three different extractors to assess inter-region connectivity. Results: NERs and connectivity extractors are evaluated against a manually annotated corpus. The complete in litero extraction models are also evaluated against in vivo connectivity data from ABA with an estimated precision of 78%. The resulting database contains over 4 million brain region mentions and over 100 000 (ABA) and 122 000 (BAMS) potential brain region connections. This database drastically accelerates connectivity literature review, by providing a centralized repository of connectivity data to neuroscientists. Availability and implementation: The resulting models are publicly available at github.com/ BlueBrain/bluima.
IntroductionAccessing the vast amounts of data and knowledge embedded in the previous decades of neuroscience publications is essential for modern neuroinformatics. Making these data and knowledge accessible can help scientists maintain a state-of-the-field perspective and improve efficiency of the neuroscientific process by reducing repeated experiments and identifying priorities for new experiments. Efforts to build models of neural circuitry must integrate such data into the model building process to benefit from the data of many years of prior research. In the case of metascale brain region connectivity, thousands of experiments have been published in scientific journals. However, these have not been systematically normalized and
DiscussionWe demonstrate that an exploitable brain region connectivity database can be extracted from a very large amount of scientific articles. Our models extract large amounts of connectivity data from unstructured text and compare favorably against in vivo connectivity data. They provide a helpful tool for neuroscientists to facilitate the search and aggregation of brain connectivity data. Our work builds on top of) and French and Pavlidis (2012) and extends it in several aspects: Our connectivity extraction model uses a combination of three different extractors, including a novel rule-based extractor that achieves state-of-the-art precision. Models were applied to a comprehensive corpus of over 8 billion words, consisting of all available PubMed abstracts and a very large number of full-text articles related to neuroscience. New model features and extraction filters were added to improve robustness on full-text extraction. Connectivity results are presented to neuroscientist in an interface to rapidly search and evaluate connectivity results. We highlight the fact that the presented models are not meant to replace manual and individual evaluation of the connectivity between two brain regions. The objective is to speed-up this evaluation and complement in vivo or manually curated connectivity data. We assume that the extracted connectivity data will be reviewed and validated before being included in further analysis or models. Manual review is also mandatory since connection extractors have a very limited capacity to differentiate between hypothesized or contradictory connections, connections referred from another article or connections supported by experimental data. Therefore, the efficient representation of connectivity data is important, so that domain experts can rapidly evaluate it. A drawback of manual search (as it is most commonly performed for literature search) is the inability to provide feedback on search results. More that 3 million manual searches are performed daily on the PubMed web site (www.nlm.nih.gov/services/pubmed_ searches.html). Yet, a manual search performed by a researcher will neither improve future searches nor contribute to the building and curation of a structured knowledge base. In contrast, our database interface allows researcher to rate search results (collaborative filtering). Once enough feedback data are collected, the models can be retrained to achieve even higher performance. This study highlights the differences in complexity and performance between machine learning and rule-based approaches. The former delivers superior performance but requires a significantly more complex setup, in particular in terms of knowledge required (model and feature selection) and time for corpus annotation and model training. On the other hand, rule-based approaches are much simpler and require less time to develop. They are also less tightly. Comparison of the inter-region connectivity matrices, renormalized between 0 (white) and 1 (blue). Rows and columns correspond to ABA brain regions. Left: connection matrix from AMBCA (ipsilateral), using ABA's inter-region connectivity model, with values representing a combination of connection strength and statistical confidence [see. Middle: same matrix from AMBCA, but symmetrized (connection directionality is ignored, since the NLP models do not extract directionality). Right: connection matrix from the results extracted from the literature (LIT) with values representing the number of extracted connectivity statements, weighted by the estimated precision of each connectivity extractor bound to the domain they are applied to. For example, the FILTERS extractor (Section 3.2) could be applied to relationship extraction between other entities (like neurons or proteins) without significant modification. However, the performance of rule-based approaches is significantly lower, especially in terms of recall. In the future, we plan to extend the developed rule-based extractors with a large-scale data-driven strategy. We also plan to apply the presented models to support the selection of relevant seed regions when performing magnetic resonance imaging experiments.