Motivation: Drug combinations are a promising strategy for combating complex diseases by improving the efficacy and reducing corresponding side effects. Currently, a widely studied problem in pharmacology is to predict effective drug combinations, either through empirically screening in clinic or pure experimental trials. However, the large-scale prediction of drug combination by a systems method is rarely considered. Results: We report a systems pharmacology framework to predict drug combinations (PreDCs) on a computational model, termed probability ensemble approach (PEA), for analysis of both the efficacy and adverse effects of drug combinations. First, a Bayesian network integrating with a similarity algorithm is developed to model the combinations from drug molecular and pharmacological phenotypes, and the predictions are then assessed with both clinical efficacy and adverse effects. It is illustrated that PEA can predict the combination efficacy of drugs spanning different therapeutic classes with high specificity and sensitivity (AUC ¼ 0.90), which was further validated by independent data or new experimental assays. PEA also evaluates the adverse effects (AUC ¼ 0.95) quantitatively and detects the therapeutic indications for drug combinations. Finally, the PreDC database includes 1571 known and 3269 predicted optimal combinations as well as their potential side effects and therapeutic indications. Availability and implementation: The PreDC database is available at http://sm.nwsuaf.edu.cn/lsp/predc.php.
IntroductionDrug combination therapies have been used for the treatment of complex diseases such as cancer and infection for over 30 years due to the advantage of higher efficacy, fewer side effects and less toxicity compared with single-drug treatment (). The main reason is that complex diseases normally involve physiological processes controlled in a combinatorial/systems fashion featured asredundancy and multifunctionality, which limits the therapeutic opportunity of one gene-one drug applications (). Despite the increasing number of drug combinations in use, many of them were found in clinic by experience, or experimentally derived by doseresponse curves for each pair of drugs against a protein target. The mechanistic understanding of synergistic drug pairs remains largely elusive, which makes it difficult to propose new drug combinations. Systematic surveys of combination drugs in vitro have been proposed to investigate the synergistic drug pairs such as the highthroughput screening method () and the 'multiplex screening for interacting compounds' (). However, the large-scale experiments currently used to evaluate the drug combinations are very time consuming simply because they are severely dependent on the searches of a vast space of possible target combinations (). Alternatively, some computational approaches have been proposed which aimed at using network analysis and chemical biology data to identify novel combinatorial drugs (). But most of them are often limited in their capability to dissect the underlying molecular mechanisms, or to extract the information from a larger pharmacological space, or to associate the targets with multiple diseases for combinatorial drugs. Generally, simultaneous administration of two or more medications may result in significant drugdrug interactions (DDIs), leading to a high risk of adverse effects for patients (). DDIs may be pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic (). Previous work concerns the prediction of DDIs, mainly relying on the pharmacokinetic properties of the compound such as its solubility () or depending on pharmacodynamic constants () or handling both pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic DDIs (). However, an up-to-date combined analysis integrating both the efficacy and adverse effects for known or novel drug pairs, which may provide the basis for future clinical trials, is still lacking. Recently, we have developed a set of systems pharmacology strategies for systematic pursuit of optimal drug combinations. These works lay foundations for a more comprehensive understanding of pharmacological synergy in herbal medicine () and the combination rule of Traditional Chinese Medicine (). Furthermore, a large-scale systematic analysis combining pharmacokinetics, chemogenomics, pharmacology and systems biology data was performed through computational methods and experimental validation, which results in a superior output of information for systematic drug design strategies for complex diseases (). In this work, we propose a new systems pharmacology framework consisting of a new algorithm termed probability ensemble approach (PEA), through integrating the molecular chemical space, the pharmacological space, the gene annotations, in particular, the connectivity of biological networks, to predict effective drug combinations. In contrast to those previous studies mentioned above, the novelty of PEA is threefold: (i) to the best of our knowledge, PEA presents up to now the largest-scale unbiased prediction of effective drug combinations based on a complete set of drug-combination, drug-disease and drugside effect relations; (ii) PEA also provides a quantitative assessment of the therapeutic indications and side effects for each combination in clinical usage; (iii) to show the predictive value of our approach, the predictions were benchmarked against independent datasets and further tested using cancer cell and antibacterial models.
DISCUSSIONA major challenge in predicting the drug combination in a large scale is to achieve the desired prediction accuracy while dealing within the drug class. The first letter of each ATC category denotes the top level, anatomical class the complex conditions of missing data, different data types, unclear mechanisms, etc. One means to achieve this is to exploit a large database with sufficient information for drug combinations and a method that distinguishes the therapeutic efficacy from adverse effects that may make it feasible to more precisely select the optimal combinations. The incompleteness of target network information and the scarceness of the side effect features hinder the application of computational approaches to drug combinations (). Compared with the present available models (), the PEA algorithm shows several major advantages, such as high training efficiency and extensive applicability. More particularly, PEA provides two quantitative indexes to describe the property of a drug combination, which is convenient and easy to understand. PEA is specifically designed to accommodate those missing data and differing types of variables and handle unbalanced multiclass datasets. By integrating the weakly predictive features, such as Target sequence, Chemical structure, etc., PEA exhibits similar performances as the whole-feature model. The major reason is due to that Bayes algorithm extracts the underlying pattern of features by converting features to a common probabilistic framework so as to improve the performance of the ensemble-based scoring approach. In detail, Bayesian network algorithm transforms the features to a LR, which provides probabilistic scoring for drug combinations in an ensemble. The ensemble score is further converted to a P value based on a random raw score distribution to calculate the reliability for a predicted drug pair. In contrast to conventional method, where an optimal combination is often determined by comparing the similarity with a single known reference (), the ensemble approach compares a probability distribution of a query drug pair with all related combinations, resulting in the improvement of generalization ability of the PEA tool. However, the simple feature-enrich method (), as well as the one-nearest neighbor, may not be capable of dealing with this complex system due to the unadaptability and information loss. In addition, it should be noted that we just calculated the protein global similarity instead of the drug binding regions (). Our considerations are: (i) sequence similar proteins might have similar functions, since they might be homologs. However, similar drug binding regions may not reveal whether the two proteins are functionally similar; (ii) the analyses of drug binding regions are normally dependent of the crystal structures, which severely limits the algorithms for more general applications. And more importantly, even we have obtained the structures; we still need to define which amino acids are involved in drug binding, since different drugs might bind to different amino acids in most cases even in the same pocket for the same protein. The present computational solution considers drug actions and their clinical effects in the context of molecular network systems, which provides information for further understanding of the molecular mechanism and pharmacological effect underlying drug combinations. Generally, due to the unclearness of the molecular mechanisms underlying combination therapies, most drug combinations are inferred based on sets of clinical rules derived from clinical experience or randomized clinical trials. For example, combination therapy for hypertension has been assigned some preferred combinations from various classes of antihypertensive medications, such as renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) inhibitor  diuretic, RAAS inhibitor  calcium channel blocker (CCB), and CCB  diuretics (). Although these conventional rules facilitate searching for valid combinations, they limit this search into drug entities with similar functions, that is, drugs in combinations often have the same first level of the ATC code. This is confirmed by the fact that majority ($70%) of known 1571 drug combinations in our dataset belong to the same therapeutic category (from the first to fifth level of the ATC code) (Supplementary). To analyze whether PEA could overcome this limitation, we have counted the predicted EDCs in the database that are composed by drugs with different ATC classes (the first level). Extremely interesting, we found 43% of our high-confidence predictions (with P 1 ! 0.9 and P 2 0.1) are such kind of combinations, indicating that our model is not restrained by the functional similarity between two drugs for a combination. The benchmark dataset also shows that 121 such combinations have been proved to be effective. Moreover, we have experimentally validated 10 novel EDCs that are combined by antibacterial and anticancer drugs (Supplementary Tables S6S8). The results show that 80% pairs are synergistic to cancer models. For example, the antibacterial agent, tetracycline, as a bacterial 30 S ribosomal subunit inhibitor, displays synergistic cytotoxicity against A549 cells when being combined with some anticancer drugs, such as the DNA synthesis inhibitor fludarabine (CI 0.49), cross-linking reagent cisplatin (CI 0.69) and protein kinase inhibitor imatinib (CI 0.80). It is worth noting that the 'wet' experiment could only found $16% (38/200) synergistic pairs in antifungal test (), which partially proves that the PEA algorithm carries out high efficiency prediction in practice. Various approaches have been suggested to benefit-risk assessment during the development of new medicines (), but little has been reported of being applied on the combinational drugs, though they have attracted more and more interests from researchers and industry in recent years. Drug combinations may overcome the side effects by countering network robustness and bypass compensation, and thereby increasing the clinical efficacy while minimizing the overlapping toxicity and allowing reduced dosage of each compound (). The efficacy and side effect are normally coupled together, and the best end results actually depend on the side effects contributing to the overall therapeutic benefit. Thus, the decision to take a drug combination depends upon the benefit-risk weighting of all the potential risks and benefits, which up to date are still extremely difficult to predict on a global scale. The complex DDIs in multiple dimensions pose modeling challenges to classical linear approaches, as well as hinder the targeted experimental approaches due to a combinatorial explosion both in the pharmacological and molecular spaces. In an effective combinatorial setting, the PEA algorithm has incorporated the clinical efficacy and adverse effect evaluation into the current model, resulting in two standards, i.e. P 1 and P 2. The combined evaluation for a predicted combination opens new avenues of drug combination and even guides the drug dosage. For example, the fludarabine  tetracycline combination with high P 1 (0.87) and low P 2 (0.36) shows a significant synergistic effect (CI 0.46) on A549 cells. By lowering the dosage of fludarabine (from 0.08611 lM to 0.03538 lM at the 50% cytotoxicity level), tetracycline also reduces the risk of opportunistic infections induced by fludarabine. More importantly, those combinations with low P 1 and high P 2 predicted by PEA should be very carefully applied in practice due to their uncertain influence on the efficacy and safety of drug co-administration. For example, the monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitor, tranylcypromine, may increase the vasopressor effect of the alpha1-agonist, midodrine, whose P 1 and P 2 are 0.055 and 0.993, respectively. Thus, concomitant use of these two drugs should be avoided. One limitation for this work is that the dosage is not taken into account in the model. Till now, two methods are in common use for calculating the expected dose-response relationship for drug combination as compared to mono-therapy: Loewe additivity and Bliss independence (). They both need experiments to characterize drug combinations. Therefore, following in silico studies should focus not only strategies for predicting drug combinations but also improving the efficiency of trials.