Motivation: Large amount of research efforts have been focused on estimating gene networks based on gene expression data to understand the functional basis of a living organism. Such networks are often obtained by considering pairwise correlations between genes, thus may not reflect the true connectivity between genes. By treating gene expressions as quantitative traits while considering genetic markers, genetical genomics analysis has shown its power in enhancing the understanding of gene regulations. Previous works have shown the improved performance on estimating the undirected network graphical structure by incorporating genetic markers as covariates. Knowing that gene expressions are often due to directed regulations, it is more meaningful to estimate the directed graphical network. Results: In this article, we introduce a covariate-adjusted Gaussian graphical model to estimate the Markov equivalence class of the directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) in a genetical genomics analysis framework. We develop a two-stage estimation procedure to first estimate the regression coefficient matrix by  1 penalization. The estimated coefficient matrix is then used to estimate the mean values in our multi-response Gaussian model to estimate the regulatory networks of gene expressions using PC-algorithm. The estimation consistency for high dimensional sparse DAGs is established. Simulations are conducted to demonstrate our theoretical results. The method is applied to a human Alzheimers disease dataset in which differential DAGs are identified between cases and controls. R code for implementing the method can be downloaded at http://www.stt.msu.edu/ $cui. Availability and implementation: R code for implementing the method is freely available at http://www.ee.kth.se/ctsoftware;
IntroductionThe past decades have witnessed enormous methodology developments in gene network inference using gene expression data (e.g.). Such networks were developed mostly by assessing the pairwise correlation of gene expressions. From a statistical point of view, under the assumption that the joint distribution of the gene expressions of interest is a multivariate normal distribution, such networks can be constructed by assessing the nonzero elements of the inverse covariance matrix, the so called precision matrix or concentration matrix. Assume X  X 1 ; :::; and Lin (2007). Under certain assumptions, the positions of zero entries in the precision matrix indicate conditional independence between variables of study. When inferring a network only based on gene expressions, two genes could show correlation in expression simply because they share a common regulator, while they should be independent conditioning on the common regulator. Motivated by this, a few methodological developments have been focused on covariate-adjusted graphical models by using genetic markers as covariates to correct both false positives and false negatives (e.g.). In their estimation procedures, the effect of genetic variants is estimated in the first step. Then, the graphical structure is estimated in the second step while adjusting for the genetic effects. Their simulation results and real data analysis showed that graph estimates were substantially improved when taking the genetic effects into account. These models are all focused on the estimation of undirected graphs without considering direction information. The directed graphs, however, are more attractive in the sense that often people are interested in the causal relationships, i.e. interests are not only focused on whether two variables are conditionally independent but also if one causes the other one. In real life, gene expressions are often the results of directed regulations. Thus, the estimation of directed graphs should provide more biological information for further functional investigation. Genetical genomics data provide optimal resources to learn such directed graphical networks. In typical directed acyclic graph (DAG) inference, one probability distribution has a set of corresponding DAGs which are Markov equivalent under certain assumptions. The directions of the edges in the graphs indicate causal relations. Studies on directed graphs have flourished in the literature both in theory and in application (e.g.). The most common case is the Gaussian case. Let Y  Y 1 ; :::; Y p  be a p-dimensional Gaussian random vector, and each coordinate represents a gene expression. To infer the regulatory relationship of these p gene expressions, the PC-algorithm developed bycan be applied to construct a completed partially DAG (CPDAG). The CPDAG can uniquely represent all DAGs corresponding to the common distribution of Y and can be represented as the regulatory networks of the gene expressions. Kalisch and B hlmann (2007) later proved that the graph obtained from the PCalgorithm is consistent under some conditions, even in high dimensional cases. Directed graphs constructed with the PC-algorithm are more biologically relevant compared with undirected graphs. However, as mentioned before, if two genes share a common regulator, their expression relationship could be complicated or even distorted without considering the underlying genetic structure. When adjusting for the genotype (i.e. the common regulator) effects, the two related genes could be independent or vice versa. This motivates us to develop a covariate-adjusted directed graphical model by extending the CPDAG estimation procedure to a regression framework. We treat genetic markers as covariates and develop a two-stage estimation method, which combines the penalized estimation and PC-algorithm to estimate the marker-adjusted CPDAG structure. In the following of the article, we first provide some background knowledge about graphical models and the formulation of our model and the two-stage estimation procedure in Section 2. Theoretical results are given in Section 3. Simulations and real data analysis are given in Sections 4 and 5 to justify our method followed by discussions in Section 6. All the proofs of the theoretical results are rendered in the Supplementary File due to space limit.
DiscussionGenes function in networks and gene expressions often result from gene regulations. Hence, learning directed regulations can enhance. Simulation setup in the high dimensional case with varying p, q and jour knowledge about gene function and disease etiology. In this work, we introduced a covariate-adjusted model to study the graphical structures of multiple gene expressions with direction regulation information. We proposed a two-stage procedure to obtain the estimated CPDAG corresponding to the probability distribution. The marker adjusted expression network can reduce the false connections of two genes if they share a common regulator. Simulated data were used to test our method and showed supportive results both in low and high dimensional cases. We provided a consistency result for the case when p is increasing along with sample size n. We applied our method to a real case-control dataset to understand the gene regulation mechanism in Alzheimer disease. Different graphs were learned corresponding to the case and control group. For the Alzheimer pathway analysis, we were able to recover some of the structures for genes involved in Mitochondria function. In the real data analysis, we could not recover the exact causal relationships between variables that are shown in the KEGG database. This is due to the complexity of the biological structure and limited data samples. Moreover, the data may violate the normality assumption. Other robust methods such as the nonparanormal model () which implement a nonparametric transformation of the data may be applied to our framework. In addition, we expect more reliable structures can be obtained if we incorporate prior known information into our analysis by pre-setting some edges. We expect that more accurate and stable estimation can be achieved via incorporating both statistical and biological knowledge into the model development process. These will be incorporated into our future investigation. R code for implementing the method can be downloaded at http://www.stt. msu.edu/ $cui.