Motivation: Knowledge about the site at which a ligand binds provides an important clue for predicting the function of a protein and is also often a prerequisite for performing docking computations in virtual drug design and screening. We have previously shown that certain ligand-interacting triangles of protein atoms, called protein triangles, tend to occur more frequently at ligand-binding sites than at other parts of the protein. Results: In this work, we describe a new ligand-binding site prediction method that was developed based on binding site-enriched protein triangles. The new method was tested on 2 benchmark datasets and on 19 targets from two recent community-based studies of such predictions, and excellent results were obtained. Where comparisons were made, the success rates for the new method for the first predicted site were significantly better than methods that are not a meta-predictor. Further examination showed that, for most of the unsuccessful predictions, the pocket of the ligand-binding site was identified, but not the site itself, whereas for some others, the failure was not due to the method itself but due to the use of an incorrect biological unit in the structure examined, although using correct biological units would not necessarily improve the prediction success rates. These results suggest that the new method is a valuable new addition to a suite of existing structure-based bioinformatics tools for studies of molecular recognition and related functions of proteins in post-genomics research. Availability: The executable binaries and a web server for our method are available from http://sourceforge.net/projects/msdock/ and http://lise.ibms.
INTRODUCTIONThe number of sequences and structures of protein of unknown function is increasing rapidly as a result of genome research. These proteins can usually be assigned a putative function if their ligand-binding sites can be predicted. As such, ligand-binding site prediction (LBSP) is now a competition category in critical * To whom correspondence should be addressed. assessment of protein structure prediction (CASP) experiments (). LBSP is also often the starting point for protein ligand docking, the core methodology for virtual screening in drug design and development (). Ligands usually bind at specific sites of target proteins, and it is, therefore, generally believed that ligand-binding sites can be distinguished from other parts of the protein surface by certain specific features, for example, the electrostatic potential and size of a cavity formed on the protein surface. Many LBSP algorithms based on this line of thinking have been proposed in the past decade. Generally, the main difference between these algorithms is whether they perform geometric computations to identify cavities, i.e. binding site pockets, on the protein surface. Many methods that compute binding site pockets (), also known as geometry-based methods (), have been developed based on the assumption that a ligand always binds in the largest cavity in its target protein. This is, of course, not 100% correct but is a reasonable starting point, and the assumption has been shown to be correct 70% of the time in an analysis of a set of 210 known proteinligand complex structures (). However, how to precisely identify empty spaces (i.e. cavities) on the protein surface and determine their size is not trivial, as different cavity-computing algorithms do not always give the same result for the same protein structure (). To avoid relying on the inherently incorrect assumption that the largest cavity is the binding site, a different type of method searches for energetically favored regions for ligand binding using energy calculations (). To do so, these energy-based methods distribute probes (usually a sphere representing a small molecule or a chemical group with a particular function, e.g. hydrophobicity) around the target protein and calculate the interaction energy between the probes and the protein atoms with which they are in contact. Probes with favorable interaction energies are then clustered, and the most energetically favored region is identified and predicted to be the ligand-binding site. As these methods do not aim at identifying the largest cavity, they are more likely to succeed where geometry-based methods often fail, e.g. in cases in which the ligand binds in a shallow cavity on the protein surface; on the other hand, energy calculations may miss the largest cavity, and they are more expensive to compute and may require a sophisticated clustering scheme. Furthermore, in LBSP applications, the ligand molecule is usually not known, and it is difficult to devise a probe system that can simulate a variety of chemical properties to cover the large possible number of unknown ligands. As more and more protein structures are deposited in the PDB (), homology-based methods (), in which one finds structures resembling that of the target protein and predicts the ligand-binding site by inferring homology through structural alignments, have become viable; these can be more reliable than other methods but require the availability of homologous structures with known ligand-binding sites (). Another strategy that can be applied, thanks to the increase in structure data, is to statistically identify features that may have been evolutionarily imprinted in ligand-binding sites. Such methods are propensity-based methods. For example,found that the amino acid composition at ligand-binding sites is significantly different from that at non-binding site protein surfaces and that the difference between the two could be used to rescore the binding site pockets reported by others to improve the success rates of LBSP. As these different strategies have different strengths and weaknesses, methods, such as Fpocket (), that combine different strategies show potential to perform better than single-strategy methods. Indeed, using consensus of results of other methods, i.e. performing metapredictions, MetaPocket 2.0 (MPK2) reports the best LBSP success rates to date (). Finally, residue conservation is a critical property for increasing the success rate of LBSP and is commonly incorporated in LBSP methods (). In this study, we developed a novel algorithm for predicting protein's ligand-binding sites. This is an extension of our previous work (), in which we developed a novel docking score function, MotifScore, based on network motifs of 3D proteinligand contacts (i.e. interactions). During the derivation of MotifScore, we observed that some of the 3D protein ligand interaction motifs contributed much more significantly to MotifScore than others and that their three constituent protein atoms, which form a triangle on the protein surface, were often seen together, i.e. were concomitantly enriched, at the ligand-binding sites. This new LBSP method was named LISE on the basis that these protein triangles are Ligand I nteracting and binding Site Enriched. Benchmark predictions using the same set of structural data and the same evaluation criteria showed that, in cases where comparisons were made, LISE outperformed other methods on the whole, often with a significantly better accuracy for the first predicted site (i.e. top1 prediction). Furthermore, in a prediction for 19 recent CASP targets with a 'full' ligand molecule, as opposed to an ion or small solvent molecule, LISE correctly identified 17 (89%) as the top1 site, a level of accuracy similar to that achieved for the benchmark predictions, suggesting that LISE can be an accurate and reliable LBSP tool in helping to annotate proteins of unknown function.