Motivation: Classical nuclear export signals (NESs) are short cognate peptides that direct proteins out of the nucleus via the CRM1-mediated export pathway. CRM1 regulates the localization of hundreds of macromolecules involved in various cellular functions and diseases. Due to the diverse and complex nature of NESs, reliable prediction of the signal remains a challenge despite several attempts made in the last decade. Results: We present a new NES predictor, LocNES. LocNES scans query proteins for NES consensus-fitting peptides and assigns these peptides probability scores using Support Vector Machine model, whose feature set includes amino acid sequence, disorder propensity, and the rank of position-specific scoring matrix score. LocNES demonstrates both higher sensitivity and precision over existing NES prediction tools upon comparative analysis using experimentally identified NESs.
IntroductionActive transport of macromolecules between the nucleus and the cytoplasm controls the localization and functions of many proteins and RNAs. The majority of nuclear-cytoplasmic transport of macromolecules is mediated by nuclear transport receptors of the Karyopherin b (Kap) family, which bind nuclear localization or export signals (NLSs or NESs) in their cargoes (). CRM1 (for Chromosome Region Maintenance 1, also known as Exportin-1 or XPO1) is the best characterized export-Kap or exportin (). Approximately 300 broadly functioning protein cargoes for CRM1 have been experimentally identified and compiled into three separate databases NESbase, NESdb, and). Many CRM1 cargoes participate in important cellular processes such as gene expression, signal transduction, immune response, and cell differentiation. Aberrant CRM1-mediated nuclear export causes diseases such as cancer, viral and inflammatory diseases (). Cognate peptide segments in protein cargoes that bind CRM1 are known as classical nuclear export signals or NESs (previously also known as leucine-rich NESs). NES peptides are usually 815 amino acids long with regularly spaced conserved hydrophobic residues. The first NES consensus of L-X 2,3X 2,3-L-Xwas established from results of in vivo NES randomization-selection assays (). Subsequently, La Cour et al. re-defined the NES consensus as U1-X 2,3-U2-X 2,3-U3-X-U4 (Leu, Val, Ile, Phe or Met; X stands for any amino acid) according to alignment of 80 experimentally defined NESs (thereafter shortened as experimental NESs) collected in). Inclusion of additional hydrophobic residues significantly increased the NES consensus coverage. Kosugi et al. further expanded the NES consensus through analysis of 101 distinct NES peptides obtained from a random peptide library screen (). The Kosugi set of consensus sequences included four previously defined patterns, termed NES Classes 1a-d (Class 1a: U1-X 3-U2-X 2U3-X-U4; Class 1b: U1-X 2-U2-X 2-U3-X-U4; Class 1c: U1-X 3-U2X 3-U3-X-U4; Class 1d: U1-X 2-U2-X 3-U3-X-U4;) and two new patterns (Class 2: U1-X-U2-X 2-U3-X-U4; Class 3: U1-X 2-U2-X 3U3-X 2-U4), to describe additional spacings between key hydrophobic residues of their NES peptides. The set of consensus sequences also allowed Ala, Thr, Cys or Trp to occur only once at hydrophobic positions of an NES. Crystal structures of CRM1 bound to NESs from PKIa, Snurportin-1 and the HIV-1 Rev protein revealed that NESs bind directly to a groove on the convex surface of CRM1. The NES groove contains five hydrophobic pockets that accommodate conserved hydrophobic NES residues (). The PKIa (LALKLAGLDI, Class 1a) and Snurportin (MEELSQALASSFSV, Class 1c) NESs adopt a-helical conformations at their N-termini and transition to loops at the C-termini when bound to CRM1. In contrast, the CRM1-bound Rev NES (LPPLERLTL, Class 2) adopts an extended conformation. Examination of CRM1-NES interactions led to a structure-based consensus, which adds a fifth hydrophobic position at the Nterminus of the NES (U0) as modulator of CRM1-NES binding affinities (). Of the different proposed NES consensus patterns, the Kosugi set of consensus sequences has the highest sensitivity, with 89% coverage of experimental NESs versus 65% for the la Cour consensus. However, the precision rate of the Kosugi consensus is low (4% compared to 12% for the la Cour consensus). The generally low precision rates of the different consensus are probably due to degeneracy of the consensus patterns, which describe the 2-turn amphipathic helix that is ubiquitous in the proteome. We refined the Kosugi consensus sequences based on analysis of 234 experimental NESs collected in NESdb (). The refined consensus only marginally improved the prediction precision (6%), suggesting that NES consensus sequences alone are insufficient to accurately locate NESs in CRM1 cargoes. Several computational tools have been developed to predict classical NESs. A predictor named NES-Finder (http://research.nki.nl/ fornerodlab/NES-Finder.htm) was the first available web-server to identify sequence motifs that fit a subset of NES consensus (Classes 1a, 1b, and 1d). ELM is another pattern matching method although it uses different regular expressions to define NESs (, is the first NES predictor that does not explicitly use consensus patterns (la). Instead, it employs machine-learning algorithms like Neural Networks (NN) and Hidden Markov Models (HMM) and relies only on protein sequence as features. NetNES integrates the outputs of NN and HMM trained with experimental NESs in NESbase to assign a score to each residue in the input protein. NetNES increased prediction precision to $30% at the cost of lowering the maximum recall rate to $40% (). More recently, the NES predictor NESsential applied simplified consensus patterns to the query sequence as a pre-filter followed by Support Vector Machine (SVM) classification that incorporates both sequence and biophysical features such as predicted intrinsic disorder, secondary structure and solvent accessibilities (). NESsential achieved better precision at lower recall levels when tested with 85 experimental NESs collected in ValidNESs. For example, at 20% recall level, NESsential increased precision by 17% compared with NetNES (). In 2014, a NES prediction tool named Wregex was published (). Like NESsential, Wregex scans the query with regular expressions to generate a list of NES candidates. A position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM) is then used to compute a score for these candidates. Comparison between NESsential and Wregex using NES motifs in human deubiquitinases (DUBs) showed that Wregex produces fewer NES candidates than NESsential. However, since Wregex does not incorporate predicted biophysical features, it takes less time to predict NESs. In this study, we present a new computational tool named LocNES to locate classical NESs in CRM1 cargoes. LocNES first ranks the NES consensus fitting peptides according to its PSSM score. The PSSM score rank, protein sequence, consensus pattern, and disorder propensity are used as feature set of a SVM model. LocNES was tested with a large set of experimental NESs and showed improved performance over existing NES prediction methods.
Discussion
ConclusionLocNES is a supervised machine-learning algorithm to predict NESs in potential CRM1 cargoes. LocNES integrates the rank of PSSM score, peptide sequence, disorder propensity and NES consensus type into an SVM model. Performance comparison between LocNES and two latest NES predictors, NESsential and Wregex using two separate test datasets showed that LocNES achieved higher precision at most recall levels with more than 0.1 increase of AUC value than NESsential. LocNES produced at least 30% higher maximum recall rate than Wregex. In addition, LocNES is the only tool that can predict Class 3 NESs with over 60% recall rate at the default threshold.