In this article, we present LocusExplorer, a data visualization and exploration tool for genetic association data. LocusExplorer is written in R using the Shiny library, providing access to powerful R-based functions through a simple user interface. LocusExplorer allows users to simultaneously display genetic, statistical and biological data for humans in a single image and allows dynamic zooming and customization of the plot features. Publication quality plots may then be produced in a variety of file formats. Availability and implementation: LocusExplorer is open source and runs through R and a web browser. It is available at
IntroductionGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) are a powerful tool to interrogate genetic variation for association with a particular phenotype. A large number of loci associated with a variety of diseases and traits have been identified (); however, the statistically most significant GWAS variants only tag loci within the genome that contain the underlying functional variant(s), are rarely causal themselves and the association signals are frequently situated in non-coding regions. Whilst deep resequencing of GWAS loci would ultimately be desirable to precisely identify the causal functional variants behind each signal, this approach is not routinely applied due to cost and time constraints and instead imputation based fine-mapping strategies are more commonly employed to narrow down the spectrum of associated variation. These association data are subsequently annotated with biological information to prioritise an even smaller number of prospective candidate causal variants for functional evaluation (). Whilst this process is substantially computational, manual interpretation of the integrated statistical and biological data nonetheless remains an important stage of the analysis process, which is facilitated by intuitive visualization. Although tools for the graphical plotting of regional association data () or annotation of biological context () have previously been developed, these are generally unable to integrate both information types together for simultaneous scrutiny. The recent ENLIGHT web tool provided the first simultaneous annotation of diverse data types within the same plot (); however, as with all currently available programs, there remains an inherent limitation with respect to the ability to modify plots without starting over. We therefore developed a novel human GWAS data visualization application, LocusExplorer, to facilitate navigation and interpretation of our findings during a recent fine-mapping study of previously identified prostate cancer (PrCa) susceptibility loci (