Motivation: The challenge of template-based modeling lies in the recognition of correct templates and generation of accurate sequence-template alignments. Homologous information has proved to be very powerful in detecting remote homologs, as demonstrated by the state-of-the-art profile-based method HHpred. However, HHpred does not fare well when proteins under consideration are low-homology. A protein is low-homology if we cannot obtain sufficient amount of homologous information for it from existing protein sequence databases. Results: We present a profile-entropy dependent scoring function for low-homology protein threading. This method will model correlation among various protein features and determine their relative importance according to the amount of homologous information available. When proteins under consideration are low-homology, our method will rely more on structure information; otherwise, homologous information. Experimental results indicate that our threading method greatly outperforms the best profile-based method HHpred and all the top CASP8 servers on low-homology proteins. Tested on the CASP8 hard targets, our threading method is also better than all the top CASP8 servers but slightly worse than Zhang-Server. This is significant considering that Zhang-Server and other top CASP8 servers use a combination of multiple structure-prediction techniques including consensus method, multiple-template modeling, template-free modeling and model refinement while our method is a classical single-template-based threading method without any post-threading refinement.
INTRODUCTIONTemplate-based modeling (i.e. homology modeling and protein threading) is becoming more powerful and important for structure prediction along with the PDB growth and the improvement of prediction protocols. Current PDB may contain all templates for single-domain proteins according to the seminal studies in. This implies that the structures of many new proteins can be predicted using template-based methods. The error of a template-based model comes from template selection and sequence-template alignment, in addition to the structure difference between the sequence and template. At higher sequence identity (50%), template-based models can be accurate enough to be useful in virtual ligand screening (), designing site-directed mutagenesis experiments (), small ligand docking prediction, and function prediction (). When sequence identity is below 30%, it is difficult to recognize the best template and generate accurate sequence-template alignments, so the resultant models have a wide * To whom correspondence should be addressed. range of accuracies ().shown that 76% of all the models in MODBASE are from alignments in which the sequence and template share 30% sequence identity (). Therefore, to greatly enlarge the pool of useful models, it is essential to improve fold recognition and alignment method for the sequence and template with 30% sequence identity. Considering that currently there are millions of proteins without experimental structures, even a slight improvement in prediction accuracy can have a significant impact on large-scale structure prediction and its applications. As reported in Melo and, even 1% improvement in the accuracy of fold assessment for the 4.2 million models in MODBASE can correctly identify 42 000 more models. The alignment accuracy is determined by a scoring function used to drive sequence-template alignment. When the sequence and template are not close homologs, their alignment can be significantly improved by incorporating homologous information (i.e. sequence profile) into the scoring function. HHpred (), possibly the best profile-based method, is such a representative. HHpred uses only sequence profile and predicted secondary structure for remote homolog detection. It works very well when proteins under consideration have a large amount of homologous information in the public sequence databases, but not as well when proteins under consideration are low-homology. A protein is low-homology if there is no sufficient homologous information available for it in the sequence databases (see Section 2 for quantitative definition). Many threading methods, such as MUSTER (), Phyre2 () and SPARKS/SP3/SP5 (), aim at going beyond profile-based methods by combining homologous information with a variety of structure information. However, recent CASP evaluations () demonstrate that HHpred actually is as good as if not better than these threading methods. Clearly, it is very challenging to outperform HHpred by simply adding structure information into template-based methods. In fact,claimed that 'presently, the advantage of including the structural information in the fitness function cannot be clearly proven in benchmarks'. This article describes a new scoring function for protein threading. In this function, the relative importance of structure information is determined according to the amount of homologous information available. When proteins under consideration are low-homology, our method will rely more on structure information; otherwise, homologous information. This method enables us to significantly advance template-based modeling over profile-based methods such as HHpred, especially for low-homology proteins. The capability of predicting low-homology proteins without close homologs in the PDB is particularly important because (i) a large portion of proteins in the PDB, which will be used as templates, belong to this class; and (ii) a majority number of the Pfam () families without solved structures
DISCUSSIONHomologous information is very effective in detecting remote homologs, as evidenced by the profile-based method HHpred, which performed better than or as well as several top threading methods in recent CASP events. This paper proposes a new threading method and shows that homologous information is not sufficient for lowhomology protein threading. In particular, when NEFF 6 we can improve alignment accuracy over profile-based methods by using more structure information. Our experimental result indicates that our method outperforms all the top CASP8 servers on lowhomology targets (NEFF 4). Our method also performs well on both the CASP8 hard and easy targets and is slightly worse than the best CASP8 server. This result is encouraging considering that the top CASP8 servers use a combination of multiple techniques to do structure prediction while our method is only a classical single-template-based threading method. Our method is clearly better than several threading-based methods such as MUSTER, HHpred and Phyre2 on both low-homology and hard CASP8 targets. The capability of predicting structures for low-homology proteins is very important. The Pfam database contains 6600 families without solved structures. To predict structures for these families, we have to rely on templates remotely similar to these families. A simple statistics shows that 33, 58 and 90% of the 6600 Pfam families have NEFF 3, 4 and 6, respectively. In our current template database, approximately one-third of the templates have NEFF 6. Therefore, if we align the 6600 Pfam families to our templates oneby-one, around 93% of the threading pairs will contain at least one protein with NEFF 6. This is surprising given that the NCBI NR sequence database currently contains millions of protein sequences. Along with the NCBI NR growth, the NEFF values of the Pfam families are also likely to increase. It will be interesting to study how fast the NEFF values will increase. The percentage of low-homology proteins in CASP8 is much smaller than that in Pfam. Only 16 (13.4%) and 43 (36.1%) of the 119 CASP8 targets have NEFF 4 and 6, respectively. That is, the CASP8 targets are biased towards high-homology proteins. This is not unexpected since the CASP organizers obtain most of the targets from the worldwide structure genomics centers. These centers tend to solve structures for the targets in a large Pfam family to maximize the number of sequences within (homology) modeling distance of the structures in the PDB. A large Pfam family contains many proteins and thus, is more likely to have a large NEFF. Our data also show that most CASP8 hard targets are lowhomology. This is reasonable since it is very challenging to predict structures for a low-homology target. However, not all lowhomology targets are hard. We can easily predict structures for low-homology targets (i.e. T0471, T0458, T0447, T0442 and T0390) as long as they have good templates. The major challenge we are facing now is to identify the best template for a given target. As long as the best template can be identified, we can generate a reasonable alignment as shown in. Since our new threading method demonstrates its superiority over other similar methods such as HHpred, MUSTER, Phyre2 and SP3/SP5, in particular on low-homology targets without close homologs in the PDB. A natural extension of this work is to incorporate our new method into Zhang-Server to see how much we can advance the state-of-the-art of protein modeling.