We propose a three-step periodicity detection algorithm named LSPR. Our method first preprocesses the raw time-series by removing the linear trend and filtering noise. In the second step, LSPR employs a Lomb–Scargle periodogram to estimate the periodicity in the time-series. Finally, harmonic regression is applied to model the cyclic components. Inferred periodic transcripts are selected by a false discovery rate procedure. We have applied LSPR to unevenly sampled synthetic data and two Arabidopsis diurnal expression datasets, and compared its performance with the existing well-established algorithms. Results show that LSPR is capable of identifying periodic transcripts more accurately than existing algorithms.
INTRODUCTIONMost algorithms for analyzing cell cycle or circadian rhythm temporal expression data require that the input signals are equally sampled. For irregularly sampled time-series, the LombScargle periodogram has been proposed to analyze time-course gene expression data (). A comparison study of periodicity detection methods for irregularly sampled data concluded that the LombScargle method performed better than most existing methods (). However, this method is subject to noise and is not powerful for short time-series. In this study, we propose a new periodicity identification algorithm based on the LombScargle periodogram and harmonic regression method for unevenly sampled time-series. Our algorithm, named LSPR, has a similar procedure to that of the ARSER algorithm, which was proposed to analyze evenly sampled temporal expression profiles (). The main difference is that LSPR uses spectrum analysis for unevenly sampled data introduced by Lomb and additionally elaborated by Scargle, while ARSER employs autoregressive spectral estimation, which can only analyze evenly sampled data. For a given irregularly sampled time-series, LSPR first estimates the period by the LombScargle periodogram in the frequency domain, and then models the periodic signals by the harmonic regression method in the time domain. Such a joint strategy overcomes the limitations of the LombScargle periodogram and gives better descriptions of periodic patterns. By applying LSPR to the analysis of synthetic data and Arabidopsis diurnal expression data, we found our method was more powerful in detecting periodic transcripts compared with two well-established periodicity detection algorithms.