Genotype calling from high-throughput platforms such as Illumina and Affymetrix is a critical step in data processing, so that accurate information on genetic variants can be obtained for phenotype–genotype association studies. A number of algorithms have been developed to infer genotypes from data generated through the Illumina BeadStation platform, including GenCall, GenoSNP, Illuminus and CRLMM. Most of these algorithms are built on population-based statistical models to genotype every SNP in turn, such as GenCall with the GenTrain clustering algorithm, and require a large reference population to perform well. These approaches may not work well for rare variants where only a small proportion of the individuals carry the variant. A fundamentally different approach, implemented in GenoSNP, adopts a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based model to infer genotypes of all the SNPs in one individual, making it an appealing alternative to call rare variants. However, compared to the population-based strategies, more SNPs in GenoSNP may fail the Hardy–Weinberg Equilibrium test. To take advantage of both strategies, we propose a two-stage SNP calling procedure, named the modified mixture model (M 3), to improve call accuracy for both common and rare variants. The effectiveness of our approach is demonstrated through applications to genotype calling on a set of HapMap samples used for quality control purpose in a large case–control study of cocaine dependence. The increase in power with M 3 is greater for rare variants than for common variants depending on the model.
INTRODUCTIONGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) have resulted in the discovery of numerous genetic variants contributing to major human diseases (). These studies benefit from the success of the International HapMap Project in cataloging and characterizing millions of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for the purpose of GWAS (The International * To whom correspondence should be addressed.). Another major contributing factor is the availability of high-density and low-cost SNP arrays, such as those from Affymetrix and Illumina, which allow researchers to genotype millions of SNPs. For any microarray genotyping platform, an accurate genotyping algorithm is needed to convert the observed probe intensities into genotypes, and many methods have been proposed for SNP calling. For example, RLMM (), BRLMM (AFFYMETRIX, 2006) and CHIAMO () have been developed for the Affymetrix GeneChip, and Iluminus (), GenoSNP () and GenCall () for the Illumina BeadArray. In addition, some algorithms are applicable to both platforms, such as CRLMM () and BEAGLE with BEAGLECALL (). In this article, we focus on the Illumina platform. With greenred color single-base extension biochemistry (), Illumina microarrays use allele signal intensity to measure two alleles, A and a, at each SNP for every individual. One class of calling algorithms considers data from all study subjects for one SNP at a time. We call these algorithms the population-based ones. Their basic premise is that the three possible genotypes from an SNP with alleles A and a, namely AA, Aa and aa, will form three distinct clusters and each individual's genotype can be inferred from its cluster membership. However, this approach requires every cluster to contain a sufficient number of individuals to be correctly inferred, so that a large number of samples are needed if the minor allele frequency (MAF) of an SNP is low. In practice, three genotype clusters of a fraction of SNPs may be shifted away from their expected positions (), which will lead to a genotyping error rate of 1% from missing genotypes or miscalled genotypes (). Another algorithm, GenoSNP, is distinguished from the population-based algorithms in that it genotypes all SNPs within one individual at a time under the assumption that probes for different SNPs have similar response features across the genome (). That is, instead of genotyping SNP-by-SNP, this algorithm infers genotypes of all the SNPs for every individual in turn. We refer to this algorithm as the SNP-based strategy. Since genotypes are called at the individual level and the variation within a cluster may be smaller than that between clusters, there is no need to collect a large number of samples to achieve high accuracy of genotype calls for low MAF SNPs. However, compared with the population-based strategy, many more SNPs fail
DISCUSSION