Motivation: Identifying and prioritizing somatic mutations is an important and challenging area of cancer research that can provide new insights into gene function as well as new targets for drug development. Most methods for prioritizing mutations rely primarily on frequency-based criteria, where a gene is identified as having a driver mutation if it is altered in significantly more samples than expected according to a background model. Although useful, frequency-based methods are limited in that all mutations are treated equally. It is well known, however, that some mutations have no functional consequence, while others may have a major deleterious impact. The spatial pattern of mutations within a gene provides further insight into their functional consequence. Properly accounting for these factors improves both the power and accuracy of inference. Also important is an accurate background model. Results: Here, we develop a Model-based Approach for identifying Driver Genes in Cancer (termed MADGiC) that incorporates both frequency and functional impact criteria and accommodates a number of factors to improve the background model. Simulation studies demonstrate advantages of the approach, including a substantial increase in power over competing methods. Further advantages are illustrated in an analysis of ovarian and lung cancer data
IntroductionCancer is thought to result from the accumulation of causal somatic mutations throughout the lifetime of an individual. These cancerdriving mutations function by altering one of three broad classes of genes: oncogenes, which activate neoplastic activity; tumor-suppressor genes, which decrease a cell's ability to inhibit abnormal cell proliferation and stability genes, which affect a cell's damage repair mechanisms (). A first causal mutation in one of these classes of genes (or a rate-limiting combination thereof) leads to tumorigenesis, and subsequent causal mutational events drive tumor progression by providing a selective advantage to the cancer cells through positive selection (). A major area of cancer research revolves around identifying these causal mutations, as doing so may provide new insights into gene function as well as potential targets for drug development. Methods for distinguishing genes with causal mutations ('driver genes') from those containing only background mutations ('passenger genes') which are irrelevant to cancer growth are also vital in making sense of the vast amounts of information being gathered from tumor sequencing studies such as The Cancer Genome Atlas project (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/) and the Cancer Genome Project (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/research/projects/cancergenome/). A common approach to this problem is to identify genes that harbor significantly more somatic mutations than expected by chance. Methods using this approach, termed 'frequency-based' methods, rely on an estimate of a background mutation rate which represents the rate of random passenger mutations. Early frequencybased methods assumed a single background rate, constant across the genome and common to all samples (). However, a number of features are known to affect mutation rate: mutation type (transition versus transversion), nucleotide context (which base is at the mutation site), dinucleotide context (which bases are located at neighboring sites to the mutation), replication timing of the region and expression level of the gene. Further details are provided in Section 2.3. In an effort to get a more accurate estimate of the background mutation rate, subsequent frequency-based methods have been developed that adjust for one or more of these factors.account for nucleotide and dinucleotide context in searching for drivers of breast and colorectal cancer. MuSiC () accounts for mutation type and allows for sample-specific mutation rates; and in addition to these factors, Lawrence et al.(MutSigCV) also allow for the inclusion of gene-specific factors such as expression level and replication timing. Although useful, a main limitation of methods based solely on mutation frequency is the inherent assumption that driver genes have relatively high mutation rates. This is often not the case. Indeed, with a few notable exceptions such as TP53 and KRAS, which show consistently high mutation rates in many cancers, most driver genes harbor surprisingly few mutations (). Consequently, additional criteria need to be incorporated into the search beyond frequency if reliable driver gene identifications are to be made. Recent developments provide at least two new sources for such information. The first are methods such as Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT) [first reported by, later updated by, Polyphen () and MutationAssessor () that incorporate information from sequence context, position and protein characteristics to assess a mutation's functional impact. Recognizing the advantage of prioritizing genes by functional impact information, Gonzalez-Perez and Lopez-Bigas (2012) exploited bias in these scores as evidence of driver activity in their method OncodriveFM. To account for both frequency and function, Youn and Simon (2011) (referred to hereinafter as YS) model mutation type, account for sample-specific mutation rates and incorporate BLOSUM80 (BLOcks Substitution Matrix) alignment scores () into their approach. BLOSUM80 alignment scores reflect empirical probabilities associated with amino acid substitutions; and YS use these scores as a measure of functional impact. The idea is that if an amino acid substitution is rarely seen, it is likely detrimental. Although useful, power and specificity is gained by using methods such as those mentioned above that directly assess functional impact specific to the gene and mutation of interest (). In addition to advances regarding our ability to assess functional impact at the single nucleotide level, major advances have also been made with respect to our understanding of the spatial pattern of mutations within driver genes. Indeed,recently noted that the best way to identify driver genes is not through their mutation frequency as has often been done in the past, but rather through their spatial patterns of mutation. Vogelstein's claim is based on the recognition that oncogenes are often mutated recurrently at the same amino acid positions while tumor suppressor genes tend to have an over-abundance of truncating mutations (frameshift indels, non-sense mutations or mutations at the normal stop codon). These characteristic patterns were not known just a few years ago, since they only become apparent with very large sample sizes. For example, even when looking at a dataset with close to 500 samples such as the TCGA ovarian, spatial patterning of mutations is not obvious (see, left panel). Recognition of such spatial patterns has been facilitated largely by a project to catalogue somatic mutations in cancer (). The so-called COSMIC (Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer) project was initiated by the NIH in 2004 and is ongoing, with new datasets being added several times per year. The database currently contains mutation information for close to one million samples in over 40 tissue types, including data from several thousand whole exomes. Recent results from an integrative analysis across multiple cancers in COSMIC identified 'highly characteristic and non-random' patterns of mutation that were not apparent when studying cancers by type in isolation (). In particular, results demonstrated that many known oncogenes consistently harbor mutations at relatively few specific amino acid positions, suggesting that oncogenic activity does not result from random mutation(s) in an oncogene, but rather requires a mutation in one of a few locations. OncodriveCLUST () was designed to exploit such evidence of positional clustering to identify oncogenes (but like OncodriveFM does not utilize other sources of information such as frequency of mutation and functional impact). Non-random mutational patterns are also observed in known tumor suppressor genes, which tend to exhibit an over-abundance of protein-truncating alterations. The right panel ofprovides a few examples. As we demonstrate, accounting for these non-random spatial patterns and abundance of truncating mutations improves both the sensitivity and specificity with which driver genes may be identified. In addition to these recently characterized patterns of mutation, it is well known that alteration of DNA repair genes such as BRCA1 or BRCA2 leads to an increased accumulation of mutations (). For those samples with mutations in known DNA repair genes, any global increase in mutation rate will be accommodated by our model's sample-specific background rate estimation (see Section 2.3.2). In summary, the most important sources of information to consider when identifying driver genes include: mutation frequency, mutation type, gene-specific features such as replication timing and expression level that are known to affect background rates of mutation, mutationspecific scores that assess functional impact and the spatial patterning of mutations that only becomes apparent when thousands of samples are considered. Previously developed methods incorporate many of these features (seefor an overview), but not all at once. In this paper, we provide a unified empirical Bayesian Model-based Approach for identifying Driver Genes in Cancer (MADGiC) that utilizes each of these features. The Bayesian framework provides a natural way to leverage the mutational patterns observed in COSMIC as prior information and provides gene-specific posterior probabilities of driver gene activity. The posterior probabilities are informed by mutation frequency relative to a background model that incorporates mutation type and the gene-specific features mentioned above as well as position specific functional impact scores. Results from a simulation study in Section 3.1 suggest improved performance over currently available methods. Further advantages are demonstrated in an analysis of data from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project (Section 3.2).
DiscussionMADGiC is an integrative model that provides posterior probabilities for improved inference for driver gene identification. The empirical Bayesian framework provides a natural way to incorporate several critical features together that were previously only considered in isolation. In addition to modeling key features of the observed mutation data, MADGiC also leverages the non-random mutational patterns observed across many cancer types in the COSMIC database to inform the prior probability of driver activity. Until recently, these spatial patterns were only evident in well-studied cancer genes that were the focus of targeted sequencing studies. Over the past few years, however, the COSMIC database has accumulated data from thousands of whole genomes and whole exomes, enabling a systematic search over all genes. The use of a database that collects mutation position data from multiple studies for each cancer type is vital, as the characteristic spatial patterns observed across thousands of cancers are not discernible when analyzing data from a single cancer in isolation. The performance of MADGiC shows promise both in simulations and case studies. The simulation studies suggest that MADGiC has favorable operating characteristics relative to existing methods, and further highlights specifically the amount of advantage gained by incorporating functional impact scores. As the quality of these scores improves, so too should the power of MADGiC. In addition, the simulation study demonstrates that the operating characteristics of all approaches can vary widely with sample size, mutation frequency and heterogeneity in sample-specific mutation rates. It also demonstrates that MADGiC's integration of data across multiple sources facilitates the identification of putative driver genes showing relatively few mutations, a result also observed in the case studies. Specifically, as seen in Supplementary Tables S7 and S8, there are several genes with only three to five samples mutated that are identified as drivers by MADGiC but not other approaches. The fact that many of these are also on the putative driver list ofsuggests that they are not false positives. A limitation of all methods investigated stems from our assumption that the somatic mutation calls are complete and accurate. While it has been observed that properties of tumor samples (e.g. low allelic fraction) are responsible for introducing systematic sequencing bias, methods for improving the sensitivity of mutation callers have been developed (). As these methods continue to improve, so too will results from MADGiC. A further limitation of frequency-based methods that was noted inis the bias toward longer genes. Although MADGiC, YS and MutSigCV each account for gene length, the driver genes are still enriched for longer genes in all three methods in both case studies except for MutSigCV in the lung cancer study (see Supplementary Section S5 for details). However, MutSigCV is more conservative than the other two methods and the bias reappears as the gene list size increases. The bias is likely a result of additional, perhaps unknown factors that affect the rate of mutation of these longer genes. The fact that none of the methods are able to completely overcome this bias demonstrates that this is an ongoing challenge for frequency-based methods. So far, we have only considered modeling one gene at a time. Thus, when computing the posterior probability that a given gene is a driver, no information pertaining to any other genes is considered, beyond that used to estimate the parameters in the background mutation model. However, a non-silent mutation in any one of a group of coordinately regulated genes (e.g. A, B and C) could cause the same selective advantage to a cancer cell. In this situation, evidence of driver activity of gene A would increase given non-silent mutations in genes B and C in other samples. A number of methods are available for identifying pathways containing driver genes (). Extensions of MADGiC to accommodate pathway structure should further improve our ability to identify drivers of cancer.