Motivation: Recently, we made synthetic proteins from non-coding DNA of Escherichia coli. Encouraged by this, we asked: can we artificially express pseudogenes into novel and functional proteins? What kind of structures would be generated? Would these proteins be stable? How would the organism respond to the artificial reactivation of pseudogenes? Results: To answer these questions, we studied 16 full-length protein equivalents of pseudogenes. The sequence-based predictions indicated interesting molecular and cellular functional roles for pseudo-gene-derived proteins. Most of the proteins were predicted to be involved in the amino acid biosynthesis, energy metabolism, purines and pyrimidine biosynthesis, central intermediary metabolism, transport and binding. Interestingly, many of the pseudogene-derived proteins were predicted to be enzymes. Furthermore, proteins showed strong evidence of stable tertiary structures. The prediction scores for structure, function and stability were found to be favorable in most of the cases. Impact: To our best knowledge, this is the first such report that predicts the possibility of making functional and stable proteins from pseudogenes. In future, it would be interesting to experimentally synthesize and validate these predictions.
INTRODUCTIONThe term 'pseudogene' has been derived from the term 'pseudo' meaning false. These genes are also known as 'genomic fossils' (). The first pseudogene was reported in 5S DNA of Xenopus laevis (). Pseudogenes are obsolete stretches of DNA sequences that lack protein-coding potential owing to the presence of the frame shift mutation and premature stop codons even though they resemble functional genes (). They are considered dysfunctional relatives of ancestral functional genes that might have lost function during evolution (). Pseudogenes have been reported in plants (), bacteria (), yeast (), insects (Ramos-Onsins and Aguad e, 1998), nematodes () and mammals (). Based on their origins, pseudogenes have been categorized into(i) processed pseudogenesformed by retrotransposition of mRNA and have paralogs in the same genome (); (ii) duplicated pseudogenessometimes called unprocessed pseudogenes arise because of the duplication of functional genes that later on acquire mutation and finally become nonfunctional; and (iii) unitary or disabled pseudogenesthought to originate through disruptive mutation in the functional protein-coding genes (). As new duplicated genes, they could serve as a source of genomic innovations, resulting in novel functions (). Unprocessed and duplicated pseudogenes have intronexon structures, whereas processed pseudogenes have exonic region only (). The long protein-coding genes tend to produce non-processed pseudogenes, whereas short proteincoding genes tend to produce processed pseudogenes (). Currently, the origin, evolution and function of pseudogenes are incompletely understood. The biological role of pseudogenes were first reported nearly 15 years ago () in the form of regulating neuronal nitric oxide synthase gene expression. Recent studies have indicated more functional roles for pseudogenes (). The relationship between pseudogenes and long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) is beginning to be understood. Antisense RNA derived from PTEN pseudogene has been found to regulate the transcription and mRNA stability of PTEN tumor suppressor gene (). Pseudogene-derived non-coding RNAs amplified the expression level of their parent gene and functioning as endogenous RNAs with the PTEN pseudogene. Further, pseudogene-derived small RNAs have been found to play a role in regional chromatin repression (). Recent evidences indicate involvement of pseudogenes in regulating the growth of organism () by acting as miRNA decoy () encoding short peptides or proteins (African Trypanosoma brucei suppress the gene expression through RNA interference (). Given their mechanisms of origins, development of these sequences over evolutionary scale of complexity and their potential functional roles, pseudogenes make a strong case for understanding fundamental biology and generating novel applications. In this bioinformatics study on pseudogenes, our aim was to predict profile of proteins that can be made on demand. This thought has origins in our previous study (where the feasibility of experimentally making novel and functional proteins from non-coding DNA was demonstrated. Saccharomyces cerevisiae is among the most well-studied organism where pseudogenes have been identified and analyzed (). It is also one of the most precisely sequenced and annotated eukaryotic genome (). Due to this reason, S.cerevisiae was considered in the present study.
DISCUSSIONThe present study is an extension of previous work () where Escherichia coli non-coding DNA sequences were artificially expressed into functional proteins. This gave rise to a new questionwhat would happen if we artificially expressed pseudogene sequences? Would they make stable and functional proteins? How would their structure look like? What kind of molecules would they interact with? Given their increasingly complex role at both genetic and epigenetic levels (Guo et al.,), this study attempts to present a novel way of understanding pseudogene biology by artificially expressing candidate sequences that show most promising leads. Of the 20 pseudogenes that were computationally translated to protein sequences, 16 sequences gave full-length open reading frames (ORF) without any stop codons and were considered in this study. To understand potential property of pseudogene proteins, sequence-based and structure-based prediction studies were performed using the best computational tools available. Before this step, pseudogene sequences were sent for RNA structure prediction based on the reasoning that if pseudogene mRNA assumes a rigid secondary structure, it would be difficult to artificially synthesize proteins. Reports suggest that 'highly expressed genes' may not show stable mRNA secondary structure, whereas 'low expressed genes' may show highly stable mRNA secondary structure (). Thus, higher the value of "G, lower the possibility of forming a stable mRNA secondary structure. All pseudogene proteins exhibited "G ranging from 740 kcal/mol to 73.1 kcal/ mol () indicating that pseudogenes may have been possibly low-expressing genes in the past when they were in an active state. It would be interesting to see how they behave when artificially expressed using both a weak and a strong promoter. To strengthen pseudogene predictions for experimental validation, it is important to address the reliability of function predictions. Functions of selected pseudogenes and its relatives were predicted using sequence information, as tools have been developed that reliably predict the function from sequence data (). It was found that many pseudogeneencoded proteins (EKA-1, EKA-4, EKA-5, EKA-7, EKA-8, EKA-10, EKA-14 and EKA-15) had function similar to that of their relatives (). Furthermore, several pseudogene proteins were predicted to play a role in amino acid biosynthesis and energy metabolism. We found that three pseudogenes (EKA-8, EKA-9 and EKA-15) from the set of 16 pseudogenes showed similar functions based on both proteinprotein interaction network and Gene Ontology predictions. Majority of pseudogene proteins were found to localize to cytosol. Interestingly, pseudogene-encoded proteins (EKA-5, EKA-12 and EKA-15) that show up in the energy metabolism category also localize to cytosol (cytoplasm), thus strengthening the belief in predictions. Proteins with regulatory functions (EKA-2) were also localized to cytosol (cytoplasm). Interestingly, EKA-7 and EKA-11 showing up under purines and pyrimidines biosynthesis functional category were found to be localized to the nucleus subcellular compartment (). It was encouraging to observe that predicted pseudogene proteins showed high aliphatic index values and lower instability index indicating greater stability, if expressed. The low hydrophobicity score of predicted proteins indicate their polar nature. Tertiary structure of potential pseudogene proteins was determined by using I-TASSER because of the wide acceptance of this tool in the community. The quality of model is estimated based on the C-score. The convergence parameters of the structure assembly simulations and threading template alignments are used for calculating the C-score. Typically, C-score value is between 5 and 2, where higher value of C-score indicates a model with a high confidence and vice versa. The C-score value for all pseudogene proteins was found to be in the range of 4 to 0.58, indicating a strong foldability of the predicted proteins Structural stability of proteins is an important indicator of their potential function (). To further understand the strength of structural predictions, we studied proteins using stability parameters like stabilization centers, total energy, cation interaction energies, non-covalent, noncanonical interaction and instability index, and encouraging evidence of protein structure stability was found (Tables 35). Further, the total energy of the proteins was calculated using GROMACS force fieldwherein the lower the energy, the higher the possibility of stable configuration. The total energy of all the proteins individually was found to be negative () indicating that all the proteins are likely to exhibit a stable structure, if expressed. Further, 5 of the 16 proteins exhibited several stabilization centers. Among all the proteins, EKA-8 and EKA16 were found to have the lowest energy and highest numbers of stabilization centers (). We also studied non-covalent interactions like hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interactions, disulphide bridges, salt bridges and cation interactions in these proteins. The data obtained under all these categories give a strong indication of stable foldability of proteins. Among all the proteins, EKA-16 and EKA-8 show presence of higher non-covalent interaction indicating better stability (). These two proteins also showed the highest number of non-canonical interactions suggesting higher structural stability of proteins thus lending support to the 3D. Cation interaction energy and "G structure stability profiles (). Finally, to validate the strength of stability predictions, we performed tests that examine instability of these proteins. The instability index indicates whether a protein would be unstable in vivo ()the instability index of 540 is considered as a good evidence of stability (). Interestingly, EKA-15 sequence exhibited the lowest instability followed by EKA-9, EKA-8 and EKA-16 (). Overall, this study suggests that EKA-8 () and EKA-16 () are the two most promising pseudogenes for artificial expression into proteins. Experiments have been started to validate these predictions. It would be interesting to see how cell responds to deliberate expression of sequences that nature decided to switch off. Given the context dependency and emergent properties arising from protein interactions (), it would be interesting to see the experimental outcome of artificial pseudogene expression.