Here, we describe a tool suite that functions on all of the commonly known FASTQ format variants and provides a pipeline for manipulating next generation sequencing data taken from a sequencing machine all the way through the quality filtering steps. Availability and Implementation: This open-source toolset was implemented in Python and has been integrated into the online data analysis platform Galaxy (public web access: http://usegalaxy.org; download: http://getgalaxy.org). Two short movies that highlight the functionality of tools described in this manuscript as well as results from testing components of this tool suite against a set of previously published files are available at http://usega
INTRODUCTIONThe proliferation of next generation sequencing technologies has created numerous data management and analysis issues. The most troubling of these issues stems from the lack of standardized sequencer output and tools. The de facto standard, FASTQ, comes in a number of distinct variants (), causing much of the difficulty experienced by biologists when working with next generation sequencing data. The first steps following data acquisition involve preparing and quality checking the produced sequencing data. These steps typically follow the workflow: (i) parsing sequencer output; (ii) calculating and (iii) visualizing summary statistics on quality scores and nucleotide distributions; (iv) trimming reads if necessary; and (v) filtering reads by quality score and other various manipulations. Here, we describe a set of tools, able to handle all known FASTQ variants, that has been integrated into the online data analysis platform Galaxy (http://usegalaxy.org), allowing experimental biologists without any programming experience to easily manipulate * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.  http://galaxyproject.org sequencing data using a point and click interface. This open-source toolkit has no known data size limitations and was implemented in Python, allowing true cross platform availability. All of the following tools, unless mentioned otherwise, are found under the next generation sequencing (NGS): quality check (QC) and manipulation section within Galaxy. Furthermore, by integrating this toolset into Galaxy, researchers have access to a plethora of other genome analysis software as well as a fully customizable workflow (pipeline) system.),and http://galaxycast.org are recommended for users to familiarize themselves with genome analysis using Galaxy.