We describe Manta, a method to discover structural variants and indels from next generation sequencing data. Manta is optimized for rapid germline and somatic analysis, calling structural variants, medium-sized indels and large insertions on standard compute hardware in less than a tenth of the time that comparable methods require to identify only subsets of these variant types: for example NA12878 at 50Â genomic coverage is analyzed in less than 20 min. Manta can discover and score variants based on supporting paired and split-read evidence, with scoring models optimized for germline analysis of diploid individuals and somatic analysis of tumor-normal sample pairs. Call quality is similar to or better than comparable methods, as determined by pedigree consistency of germline calls and comparison of somatic calls to COSMIC database variants. Manta consistently assembles a higher fraction of its calls to base-pair resolution, allowing for improved downstream annotation and analysis of clinical significance. We provide Manta as a community resource to facilitate practical and routine structural variant analysis in clinical and research sequencing scenarios. Availability and implementation: Manta is released under the open-source GPLv3 license. Source code, documentation and Linux binaries are available from https://github.com/Illumina/manta.
IntroductionWhole genome and enrichment sequencing is increasingly used for discovery of inherited and somatic genome variation in clinical contexts, however tools for rapid discovery of structural variants (SVs) and indels in this scenario are limited. We address this gap with Manta, a novel method for accurate discovery and scoring of SVs, medium-sized indels and large insertions in a unified and rapid process. Manta discovers variants from a sequencing assay's paired and split-read mapping information using an efficient parallel workflow. Many advanced structural variant methods are available which focus on research and population genomics (). However, none to our knowledge combine as many variant types into a rapid workflow focused on individual or small sets of related samples. Per its focus on clinical pipelines, Manta provides a complete solution for discovery, assembly and scoring using only a reference genome and alignments from any standard read mapper. It provides scoring models for germline analysis of diploid individuals and somatic analysis of tumornormal sample pairs, with additional applications under development for RNA-Seq, de novo variants, and unmatched tumors. We describeManta's methods and compare with representative tools to demonstrate high variant call quality with dramatically reduced compute cost.