We present MASiVE, an expertly built tool for the large-scale, yet sensitive and highly accurate, discovery, preliminary analysis and insertion age estimation of intact Sirevirus LTR-retrotransposons in plant genomic sequences. Validation was based on the recently available and annotated large maize chromosome one. Results show a considerable improvement in the annotation of Sireviruses, and support our approach as an important addition to the bioinformatics toolbox of plant biologists. Availability: PERL source code and essential files are available online at
INTRODUCTIONThe availability of large and complex plant genome sequences has necessitated the development of algorithms that can facilitate high-throughput discovery and annotation of transposable elements, especially long terminal repeat retrotransposons (LTR-RTN) that comprise the majority of these genomes (). Tools like LTR_STRUC (), LTR_FINDER () and LTRharvest () are available; however, they are all based on general structural characteristics of LTR-RTNs, which may lead to misannotations or incomplete identification of the LTR-RTN set. The recent discovery that the abundant and plant-specific Sireviruses contain highly conserved motifs in key domains of their genome () provided the opportunity to develop MASiVE (Mapping and Analysis of Sirevirus Elements), presented herein, a tool able to identify, with high precision and sensitivity, intact Sirevirus elements in plant genomic sequences. All LTR-RTNs contain polypurine tract (PPT) and primer binding site (PBS) domains. However, their high sequence and length plasticities () render them inappropriate for the identification of a specific retrotransposon class. In contrast, Sireviruses have multiple identical PPTs at the upstream border of * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.. The MASiVE algorithm pipeline and the effect of filtering on the numbers of Sireviruses finally reported as intact. White parallelograms represent data, dark rectangles tools and grey diamonds filters. the 3 LTR and a highly conserved 5 LTR/internal domain junction that includes part of the PBS. These, along with several filters applied sequentially, are used by MASiVE to target full-length Sirevirus elements, while excluding false positives like other retrotransposons or non-retroelement-derived sequences resembling the structure of LTR-RTNs. MASiVE has been calibrated and validated in the largest chromosome of the now available, and expertly annotated, Zea mays (maize) B73 genome (), chromosome one.