Motivation: Isotope trace (IT) detection is a fundamental step for liquid or gas chromatography mass spectrometry (XC-MS) data analysis that faces a multitude of technical challenges on complex samples. The Kalman filter (KF) application to IT detection addresses some of these challenges; it discriminates closely eluting ITs in the m/z dimension, flexibly handles heteroscedastic m/z variances and does not bin the m/z axis. Yet, the behavior of this KF application has not been fully characterized, as no cost-free open-source implementation exists and incomplete evaluation standards for IT detection persist. Results: Massifquant is an open-source solution for KF IT detection that has been subjected to novel and rigorous methods of performance evaluation. The presented evaluation with accompanying annotations and optimization guide sets a new standard for comparative IT detection. Compared with centWave, matchedFilter and MZMine2— alternative IT detection engines—Massifquant detected more true ITs in a real LC-MS complex sample, especially low-intensity ITs. It also offers competitive specificity and equally effective quantitation accuracy. Availability and implementation: Massifquant is integrated into XCMS with GPL license ! 2.0 and hosted by Bioconductor: http://bio-conductor.org. Annotation data are archived at http://hdl.lib.byu.edu/ 1877/3232. Parameter optimization code and documentation is hosted at https://github.com/sanshu/protaeljs.
INTRODUCTIONThe most important automated data-analysis step in a typical quantitative-omics XC-MS analysis pipeline is the isotope trace (IT) detection (). In liquid or gas chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS or GC-MS, with either specified as XC-MS), analytes elute with chromatographic separation and are subsequently measured by the mass spectrometer. IT detection is the first and essential step in enumerating the signals of these analytes. IT detection is a trivial task when performed on data derived from simple mixtures, but can be highly challenging for complex mixtures because there are (i) large numbers of analytes that coelute, many show interlocking or overlapping isotope envelopes; (ii) an unknown number of analytes; (iii) an abundance of ITs with low signal-to-noise ratio; (iv) significant intensity variation in the signal composing lower abundance ITs because of dynamic range limitations of the spectrometer; and (v) heteroscedastic m/z variance as a function of intensity for most mass spectrometers. Unisotropic m/z variance means that the data comprising the tails of an IT have larger m/z variance than the data around the mode, and that low-abundance ITs have a larger m/z variance than high-abundance ITs. Though difficult to achieve, increasing the sensitivity and accuracy of IT detection software influences the entire downstream analytical pipeline (). An example: vast numbers of peptides go unidentified in proteomic analyses (); a more sensitive IT detection would allow researchers to track and quantify these peptides, leveraging identifications acquired in other samples. It goes without saying that accurately determining IT boundaries and distinguishing signal from noise improves quantitation results. Furthermore, accuracy in IT detection can also result in more accurate precursor mass estimates and therefore yield an increase in both the number and quality of peptide identifications. Most IT-detection software, such as matchedFilter, rely on the creation of fixed width m/z bins (buckets) to facilitate finding and quantifying eluting analytes. Though bucketing is computationally efficient, for complex datasets, it is impossible to find a bin size and position that excludes closely co-eluting ITs while also being broad enough to fully capture the IT of interest. To address this shortcoming,developed a software package, centWave, which uses a binless pre-scan to first identify regions of interest composed of centroids. A 'centroid' is a (m/z, intensity) measurement pair at a given time scan of the chromatographic dimension. Once a region is specified, the centroids are then collapsed into a one-dimensional chromatogram, and wavelet-based curve fitting is performed to separate closely eluting ITs. The approach is appealing because the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. initial algorithm identifies zones of interest in a binless way and because the algorithm used for detecting ITs using intensity fluctuation in the time domain is sophisticated. However, in this approach subtle shifts in m/z value are ignored when data are combined into a one-dimensional chromatogram. ITs that are close in m/z or with poor chromatographic profiles may not be properly resolved. The same yeardeveloped TracMass, which includes a binless IT detection algorithm that fully uses m/z information in distinguishing ITs. TracMass uses a chromatographically traversing 2D Kalman filter model (KF)one dimension focused on m/z values and the other on intensity valuesto determine which centroids belong with each extending IT. The decision to incorporate a centroid is made by carefully weighing all previous m/z and intensity evidence of that IT, so mis-incorporation of centroids is rare, as the KFs incorporate more data. Furthermore, the KF accounts for the heteroscedastic variance within the same IT as intensity values change. The KF approach can disentangle even the most closely eluting chromatographic ITs. Furthermore, for the non-expert user, TracMass requires few user parameters for effective operation. Despite its apparent promise for IT detection in complex samples, no peer-reviewed publication had compared TracMass performance to leading options () until just recently with TracMass2 (). This is not an isolated deficiencymost IT detection algorithms are not rigorously evaluated because of the difficulty of establishing ground-truth data, especially for lower abundance ITs (). Other compelling binless methods for quantitation may benefit from a similar evaluation as presented here (). Here, we make available an open-source implementation of the TracMass algorithm, called Massifquant, and integrate it into the popular XCMS software suite (). Like TracMass, Massifquant uses a 2D KF to quickly, accurately and adaptively find ITs in highly complex samples without resorting to binning, and its open license (GPL ! 2.0) enables further extension and inspection. We indicate how the KF adapts to m/z variance and describe two major modifications, which mitigate known limitations of TracMass. We detail novel metrics for evaluating XC-MS IT detection and use these metrics with manually annotated data to perform a detailed evaluation of Massifquant, centWave, matchedFilter and MZMine2 () performance on different LC-MS platforms.