Motivation: Peaks are the key information in mass spectrometry (MS) which has been increasingly used to discover diseases-related proteomic patterns. Peak detection is an essential step for MS-based proteomic data analysis. Recently, several peak detection algorithms have been proposed. However, in these algorithms, there are three major deficiencies: (i) because the noise is often removed, the true signal could also be removed; (ii) baseline removal step may get rid of true peaks and create new false peaks; (iii) in peak quantification step, a threshold of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is usually used to remove false peaks; however, noise estimations in SNR calculation are often inaccurate in either time or wavelet domain. In this article, we propose new algorithms to solve these problems. First, we use bivariate shrinkage estimator in stationary wavelet domain to avoid removing true peaks in denoising step. Second, without baseline removal, zero-crossing lines in multi-scale of derivative Gaussian wavelets are investigated with mixture of Gaussian to estimate discriminative parameters of peaks. Third, in quantification step, the frequency, SD, height and rank of peaks are used to detect both high and small energy peaks with robustness to noise. Results: We propose a novel Gaussian Derivative Wavelet (GDWavelet) method to more accurately detect true peaks with a lower false discovery rate than existing methods. The proposed GDWavelet method has been performed on the real Surface-Enhanced Laser Desorption/Ionization Time-Of-Flight (SELDI-TOF) spectrum with known polypeptide positions and on two synthetic data with Gaussian and real noise. All experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms other commonly used methods. The standard receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves are used to evaluate the experimental results.
INTRODUCTIONMass spectrometry (MS) is a crucial analytical tool in proteomics research to provide tremendous information for disease proteomics study and drug targets identification at the protein/peptide level. Due to measurement error, chemical and other background noise, MS usually contains high-frequency noise and consequently a multitude of misleading peaks. Peak detection is one of the most important steps in MS data analysis because its performance directly effects the final proteomics study results. Because the noise in MS comes from different resources and cannot be estimated, false positive peak detection results are * To whom correspondence should be addressed.unavoidable. This makes peak detection as a challenging problem. In recent years, several peak detection methods have been proposed (). Most previous algorithms have four common preprocessing steps: denoising, baseline correction, alignment of spectrograms and normalization. After preprocessing, local maxima is usually used to detect peak positions and design rules to quantify peaks. In this article, we will explore the limitations of existing peak detection methods and propose several new algorithms to solve them. Most peak detection methods employed denoising step by removing noise in each scale of wavelet, such as commonly used Cromwell () and continuous wavelet transform (CWT) () methods. However, true peaks in MS could have large frequency response and be removed by denoising step. As a result, these true peaks cannot be detected. We propose using bivariate shrinkage model, which considers relationship of two neighbor scales, to remove noise in stationary wavelet domain. Because utilizing relationship between two neighbor coefficients or two scales of wavelets can keep highfrequency true signal (). Stationary wavelet transform (SWT) utilizes spatial information of signals and suppress artifacts by redundant representations. Baseline removal step was widely used in peak detection methods, but it often got rid of true peaks and created new false peaks. To avoid removing baseline, the CWT-based pattern-matching algorithm was introduced in study by. Using Mexican Hat wavelet in multi-scale, this method gave good results in peak detection with high sensitivity and low false discovery rate (FDR). However, the more important property of multi-scale in wavelet domain was not used in this method (). Instead of considering peaks as the sum of delta functions, more generally, we consider MS peaks as a mixture of Gaussian in which each peak corresponds to one Gaussian. We propose to use Gaussian derivative wavelet, instead of Mexican Hat wavelet which is only the second derivative of Gaussian wavelet. Zero-crossing lines which are robust to noise are also introduced to replace Ridge-lines in. We study the zero-crossing lines in multi-scale wavelet and provide new theoretical analysis. In most peak detection methods, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) was used to remove the small energy peaks with SNR values less than a threshold. But MS noise cannot be correctly estimated in either time domain or wavelet domain. Thus, in this article, instead of SNR, frequency response, height and SD of Gaussian peaks calculated by zero-crossing in Gaussian derivative wavelet domain are used to remove false peaks. In order to improve sensitivity, the Envelope analysis () is also used to save some important peaks with small energy.