Motivation: Accurately predicting and genotyping indels longer than 30 bp has remained a central challenge in next-generation sequencing (NGS) studies. While indels of up to 30 bp are reliably processed by standard read aligners and the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK), longer indels have still resisted proper treatment. Also, discovering and genotyping longer indels has become particularly relevant owing to the increasing attention in globally concerted projects. Results: We present MATE-CLEVER (Mendelian-inheritance-AtTEntive CLique-Enumerating Variant findER) as an approach that accurately discovers and genotypes indels longer than 30 bp from contemporary NGS reads with a special focus on family data. For enhanced quality of indel calls in family trios or quartets, MATE-CLEVER integrates statistics that reflect the laws of Mendelian inheritance. MATE-CLEVERs performance rates for indels longer than 30 bp are on a par with those of the GATK for indels shorter than 30 bp, achieving up to 90% precision overall, with 480% of calls correctly typed. In predicting de novo indels longer than 30 bp in family contexts, MATE-CLEVER even raises the standards of the GATK. MATE-CLEVER achieves precision and recall of $63% on indels of 30 bp and longer versus 55% in both categories for the GATK on indels of 10–29 bp. A special version of MATE-CLEVER has contributed to indel discovery, in particular for indels of 30–100 bp, the NGS twilight zone of indels, in the Genome of the Netherlands Project. Availability and implementation:
INTRODUCTIONMore than 6 years after its introduction, next-generation sequencing (NGS) has become standard technology. Read length is steadily increasing and so is sequencing speed, at an overall still decreasing sequencing cost. One of the most evident advantages of NGS over array-based approaches is that it has enabled studying genetic variation beyond single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at both a larger scale and finer resolution. Several large-scale projects addressing this are under way [e.g. The 1000, The Genome of the Netherlands (GoNL), which have accumulated tera-scale amounts of NGS data. The goal is to discover and genotype variants in thousands of individuals at single basepair resolution, and, in a second step, to classify them according to population structure and phenotype, such as susceptibilities for diseases. For simplicity, we will refer to all insertion and deletion variants as indel variants, or simply indelswe are aware of the occasional clash with nomenclature for structural variants. We will refer to indel discovery as prediction of indels without predicting the zygosity status of indel alleles, and to genotyping indels as determining (e.g. computationally predicting) this zygosity status. Motivation. As one particular example of a nationwide directed effort, the GoNL Project puts particular emphasis on drawing links between population structure and inheritability. In the frame of this project, 769 Dutch individuals, consisting of 231 motherfatherchild trios, 11 monozygotic-and 8 dizygotic-twin quartets, have been sequenced. In the analysis, indels play a major rolethe obvious reason is that only NGS has made large-scale discovery of indels truly possible. Also for other large-scale projects (The 1000 Genomes Project), mapping and categorizing indels is of utmost relevance. However, both indel discovery and genotyping technology still lag considerably behind the advances made in sequencing technology itself (). Existing indel discovery tools still leave much room for improvement. On top of that, with only very few exceptions, they do not offer genotyping as an option. An analysis of existing state-of-the-art trio variant callsets (e.g. that of the 'platinum genome trio' issued by Illumina, see Appendix A.2 in the Supplementary Material for more details) points out that a surprisingly large fraction of indel calls violate the Mendelian laws. This decisively differs from SNPs, which have been genotyped soundly and reliably. In fact, genotyping SNPs has been standard for many years. Since 2011, smaller indels can also be reliably handled. The Unified Genotyper (UG), a tool from the Genome Analysis ToolKit (GATK) (), has been providing the corresponding technology. We will demonstrate the GATK-UG genotypes between 80 and 90% of indels correctly in the Results section. However, its performance sharply drops for indels of 30 bp and longer. The reason is that one commonly runs the GATK on standard read alignments, e.g. as delivered by BWA (), Bowtie2 () or Stampy (). *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.comFor indels longer than 30 bp, principled, statistically and algorithmically sound approaches have not been described. Our Contribution. We present a novel approach, MATE-CLEVER (Mendelian-inheritance-AtTEntive CLiqueEnumerating Variant findER) for sound discovery and genotyping of indels longer than 30 bp from NGS reads that were generated through contemporary library protocols [For old or non-standard protocols, we claim that we can discover and genotype indels longer than two times the standard deviation (stddev) of the fragment length distribution, which amounts to 30 on current protocols.]. MATE-CLEVER provides a novel (Bayesian) probabilistic framework to compute the probabilities that an indel allele is homozygous, heterozygous or not present. In case of a family, it integrates prior probabilities that reflect the laws of Mendelian inheritance, which yields enhanced performance rates when combinedly genotyping family members. Overall, MATE-CLEVER achieves performance rates on longer indels that are as favorable as those of the GATK-UG on small indels. Thus, our approach considerably raises the limits of sound indel genotyping. For accomplishing this, we have combined the two most recent approaches of ours, CLEVER () and LASER (Marschall and SchonhuthSchonhuth, 2013), into a hybrid approach that specifically targets indels longer than 30 bp. While CLEVER has proven to be able to discover indels of 30100 bpsometimes referred to as the (NGS) twilight zone of indelsat highly favorable recall and precision rates, LASER allows us to re-evaluate calls and adds split-read alignment information, which leads to enhanced genotyping and high breakpoint resolution. Related Work. Structural variant (SV) discovery tools can be divided into four large classes of approaches, for each of which we restrict ourselves to naming a few state-of-the-art tools. 1. Internal segment size (also: insert size)-based approaches identify groups of paired-end reads whose alignments exhibit abnormal internal segment lengths with respect to a background distribution. That is, they consider the distance between the two alignments of a read pair (called internal segment size or insert size). Groups of alignment pairs with deviating distance suggest the presence of indel breakpoints in the internal segment. We will refer to such alignment pairs as spanning alignments (see, top). Examples of methods using this type of signal are Breakdancer (), VariationHunter (), HYDRA (), PEMER (), MoDIL () as well as our tool CLEVER (). It is characteristic for these approaches to successfully predict indels longer than 100 bp. However, methods that impose a hard threshold and only work on 'discordant' reads, like BreakdancerMax, VariationHunter, HYDRA and PEMER cannot detect smaller indels. [Note that the initial Breakdancer release consisted of BreakdancerMini and BreakdancerMax. Maintenance/development of BreakdancerMini has been stopped, and current releases only containMoDIL and BreakdancerMini can, in principle, detect shorter indels, but the former is prohibitively slow (see discussion in), and the implementation of the latter is no longer maintained. CLEVER was designed to process all alignments in a short time and thus achieves good performance also for indels in the 'twilight zone' (30100 bp). For insert sizebased approaches, placement of breakpoints is commonly rather little accurate. 2. Split-read aligners aim at aligning reads across the breakpoints of insertions and deletions. When the alignment of a read end contains an indel breakpoint, we refer to it as breakpointcovering alignment (see, bottom). Examples for split-read methods are PINDEL (), SplazerS () as well as our tool LASER (Marschall and SchonhuthSchonhuth, 2013). Split-read aligners predict breakpoints at single-base-pair resolution. However, most of them apply predominantly for indels up to 30 bp. Longer indels can be challenging for split-read aligners if the alignment of split parts of reads is not properly guided. 3. Coverage-based approaches aim at detecting deletions and duplications by measuring amounts of reads mapped to locations. Examples are CNVer () and CNVnator (). Although coverage-based approaches are the only reliable technique to predict large duplications, they only work for very large deletions and duplications. 4. De novo assembly methods focus on reconstructing sequences without using a reference genome. A few more wellknown examples are ALLPATHS (), SOAPDenovo () and VELVET (). An approach that focuses exclusively on novel sequence insertions is NovelSeq (). Our method, MATE-CLEVER, falls among the so-called hybrid methods, as it makes use of both insert size signal and split-read information. Such hybrid methods have established a new class of approaches and have arisen in the literature only from 2012 onward. Examples are DELLY (), SVSeq2 () and PRISM (). The only discovery method for larger indels currently available that addresses family settings is CommonLAW (), which draws from VariationHunter () as a core approach. CommonLAW collects information on frequencies of variants that are supported by combinations of family members in a preprocessing step. It uses this information in the form of prior weights in a combinatorial algorithm to predict variants parsimoniously.Although approaches that aim at genotyping indels have rarely been described, there have been reliable techniques for shorter indels since 2011. Examples for processing indels of length up to 30 bp are the above-mentioned UG () from the GATK () and the earlier approach DINDEL (), whose core ideas initially inspired the GATK-UG. An option for indels from 125 bp or longer is GASV-Pro (), which reportedly achieves sufficiently reliable classification rates on very long indels. Reliable pipelines for genotyping indels that are $30100 bp long, in particular in the context of family settings, have not been described in the literature so far.
DISCUSSION
CONCLUSIONWe have described a novel combinedly insert size-and split-readalignment-based (hybrid) approach by which to discover and genotype indels longer than 30 bp. Although the GATK has set the standards for indels of size up to 30 bp, approaches for indels larger than 30 bp had not been available. Here, we close this gap. Our tool MATE-CLEVER discovers and genotypes deletions larger than 30 bp at performance rates that are on apar with those of the GATK for deletions smaller than 30 bp. In doing this, MATE-CLEVER also integrates statistics reflecting the laws of Mendelian inheritance, for enhanced performance rates when dealing with ancestry-related contexts. We focus exclusively on results for deletions here. With some minor modifications, however, MATE-CLEVER also applies for insertionsboth its core engines (, CLEVER); (Marschall and SchonhuthSchonhuth, 2013, LASER) have been designed for also reliably handling insertions (note that the usual limitations owing to read and fragment length do not allow to discover insertions larger than 80 bp). Extrapolating CLEVER's and LASER's performance rates for insertions, which largely agree with those for deletions, may yield reasonable guesses on MATE-CLEVER's performance on insertions. Still, challenges remain. Neither the GATK nor MATECLEVER achieves recall of 470%. Future work will be concerned with raising sensitivity even further, by using improved alignment scores, and also by integrating elements that allow for further improved recalibration of read alignments, such as constructing local haplotypes. For further results on real data, we refer the interested reader to the GoNL Project (http://www.nlgenome.nl), where MATECLEVER contributed to predicting indels in all 231 trios and 19 quartets.