Gene duplication occurs via different modes such as seg-mental and single-gene duplications. Transposed gene duplication, a specific form of single-gene duplication, copies a gene from an ancestral chromosomal location to a novel location. MCScanX is a toolkit for detection and evolutionary analysis of gene colinearity. We have developed MCScanX-transposed, a software package to detect transposed gene duplications that occurred within different epochs, based on execution of MCScanX within and between related genomes. MCScanX-transposed can be also used for integrative analysis of gene duplication modes for a genome and to annotate a gene family of interest with gene duplication modes. Availability: MCScanX-transposed is freely available at http://chibba.pgml.uga.edu/mcscan2/transposed/.
INTRODUCTIONGene duplication is a primary mechanism for increasing genetic complexity and diversity (). It has long been known that gene duplication occurs via different modes (). Large-scale gene duplications including whole-genome duplication (WGD) and segmental duplication have occurred in different eukaryotic lineages such as fungi, plants and vertebrates (). Single-gene duplications, also widespread in eukaryotic genomes, by mechanisms include local (tandem or proximal) duplication, which creates two nearby duplicated genes (), and transposed duplication, which 'copies' a gene from an ancestral location to a novel (transposed) location via either DNA or RNA-based mechanisms (). Different modes of gene duplication may contribute differentially to the evolution of specific lineages (). The retention of duplicated genes following different modes of gene duplication is biased (). For example, in Arabidopsis thaliana, following WGDs, genes related to transcription factors, protein kinases and ribosomal proteins were preferentially retained; local duplicates are enriched for genes that encode membrane proteins and function in abiotic and biotic stress; gene families such as F-box, MADS-box, NBSLRR and defensins are more likely to have transposed than others (). Moreover, different modes of gene duplication often show distinct evolutionary consequences (De Smet and Van). In rodents, transposed duplications show higher degrees of asymmetric sequence divergence than local duplications (). In A.thaliana, duplicated genes retained from single-gene duplications, especially transposed duplication, are more likely to show rewiring of gene networks than those retained from WGDs (Arabidopsis Interactome Mapping Consortium, 2011;). To study the evolutionary dynamics of duplicated genes, it is helpful to investigate gene duplication modes. Duplicated genes originating from WGD, and segmental duplication can be obtained by using software for detection of gene colinearity (homologous genes are in corresponding chromosomal regions and conserved orders). However, to our knowledge, automated tools for detecting transposed gene duplications are not available. Transposed duplications in a genome, and the epochs during which they occurred, can be inferred based on colinearity conservation within and between related genomes (). MCScan is an algorithm to scan genomes to identify colinear homologs and duplicated chromosomal regions (). MCScanX is a toolkit for colinearity detection based on an adjusted MCScan (i.e. MCScanX) algorithm and evolutionary analyses of identified colinearity (). Here, we present MCScanX-transposed, a software package based on execution of MCScanX within and between related genomes, for detecting transposed gene duplications, which occurred within different epochs, as well as integrative analysis of gene duplication modes.or the Java SE Development Kit and 'libpng' should be pre-installed, respectively. The user is advised to read the 'readme.txt' file that provides detailed instructions on input file formats and command line options.
DESCRIPTION