Motivation: Membrane proteins (MPs) are important drug targets but knowledge of their exact structure is limited to relatively few examples. Existing homology-based structure prediction methods are designed for globular, water-soluble proteins. However, we are now beginning to have enough MP structures to justify the development of a homology-based approach specifically for them. Results: We present a MP-specific homology-based coordinate generation method, MEDELLER, which is optimized to build highly reliable core models. The method outperforms the popular structure prediction programme Modeller on MPs. The comparison of the two methods was performed on 616 target–template pairs of MPs, which were classified into four test sets by their sequence identity. Across all targets, MEDELLER gave an average backbone root mean square deviation (RMSD) of 2.62 Å versus 3.16 Å for Modeller. On our easy test set, MEDELLER achieves an average accuracy of 0.93 Å backbone RMSD versus 1.56 Å for Modeller.
INTRODUCTIONMembrane proteins (MP) constitute about 30% of all known proteins and are one of the largest classes of drug targets. They have roles in a multitude of biological processes such as cell recognition and neurotransmitter transport (). Currently, the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt;) contains more than 11 million protein sequences. In comparison, the Protein Data Bank (PDB;) contains only about 65 thousand known protein structures. Both numbers have been following an exponential growth trend. For MPs, the sequence-structure gap is even larger. Over 1.7 million UniProt entries contain the word 'membrane', whereas only 4700 PDB entries match this criterion and only 616 structures are * To whom correspondence should be addressed. specifically annotated as belonging to the SCOP () class 'membrane and cell surface proteins and peptides' (the stated numbers were obtained from the respective databases on). Physically, MPs differ significantly from water-soluble proteins (). These differences have been used in various computational methods (), e.g. to identify MPs from sequence alone (). Soluble proteins often adopt a globular conformation, with their hydrophobic residues mainly in the protein core and their polar and charged residues predominantly on the water-exposed surface. Membrane proteins sit in a lipid bilayer and thus contain stretches of residues that are exposed to the hydrophobic environment at the core of the membrane (). These transmembrane (TM) segments usually have one of two structure types: -helices or -strands. Many protein structure prediction algorithms have been developed in order to close the gap between the number of known sequences and the number of known structures. Current structure prediction methods can be classified into two main types: templatebased and ab initio modelling. So far, ab initio methods have only been truly successful for small globular proteins. Template-based modelling methods, however, have succeeded in producing high accuracy models, if a good template exists, for proteins of almost any type or size (CASP;). Template-based protein structure prediction for any type of protein can be divided into several steps. For globular, water-soluble proteins a multitude of programmes are available to perform each of these separate steps (). The input to the entire modelling procedure is a single target sequence, whose structure is to be predicted. The steps of a typical template-based modelling protocol are briefly described below. The first step is the identification of a template protein of known structure. Structural databases are scanned for proteins homologous to the target protein. One or more templates are then selected from the homologues. By choosing one or more template structures, a 3D-fold is implicitly assigned to the target sequence. A targettemplate alignment is then generated. The alignment between target and template is one of the major contributors to the accuracy of the final model. An incorrect alignment will almost always result in an inaccurate model (). The final step in modelling is coordinate generation based on the alignment between template protein structures and the target sequence. The three main approaches to this problem are(i) assembly of rigid bodies (), (ii) segment matching () and (iii) satisfaction of spatial restraints (). In order to improve the final model, this entire procedure may be iterated. This has been shown to produce superior results as well as being able to correct errors in the initial alignment between target sequence and template structures (). The current computational structure prediction methods may not be ideal for TM proteins, designed as they are for water-soluble proteins (). The physical differences between water-soluble and MPs may mean that many of the steps in structure prediction should be approached differently. The successful ab initio fragment assembly method ROSETTA has been adapted to specifically predict MP structure (ROSETTA Membrane;). The adapted method included an energy function that modelled a multi-layer artificial membrane environment. The performance of ROSETTA Membrane was tested on 12 MPs of known structure, producing complete models with backbone root mean square deviations (RMSDs) between 6  and 10 . Sub-sets of each model (between 51 and 145 residues long) achieved RMSDs of 34 . More recently, the method was modified to include experimentally derived constraints, such as known helixhelix contacts (). The best models selected by the method had RMSDs of 4 , with all test proteins being single chains of at most 230 amino acids. The authors ventured that for larger proteins, multiple constraints were likely to be required in order to obtain accurate results. It should also be noted that, being a combinatorial ab initio method, ROSETTA requires large amounts of computing time and is typically run across large (possibly distributed) computing clusters. Homology modelling methods on the other hand, while relying on the availability of a template, can be run on a single desktop computer. In this article, we consider the coordinate generation step in a homology modelling framework and show how it can be significantly improved, without the use of experimental information, by considering the different physical environment of MPs.demonstrated that existing coordinate generators, on soluble proteins, showed little difference in terms of overall accuracy and none of the methods consistently produced models that were much closer to the native target structure than the template. In general, the models were also worse than simply copying the backbone co-ordinates of the template. They identified Modeller () as one of the best methods, due to its reliability and consistent model quality. Modeller attempts to satisfy spatial restraints in order to build a target protein structure. Its probability density function uses data obtained from the input targettemplate alignment, as well as prior knowledge obtained from a database of structural alignments (). This original database contained 105 families of soluble proteins and no MPs. In this article, we use the most up-to-date version of Modeller (9v7, at the time of the experiment) as a representative of existing modelling methods and compare it to our own method. Modeller's accuracy for modelling MPs has been tested previously (). It was noted that it was possible to build models whose TM region had 2  C- RMSD to the native structure, given a template with 30% sequence identity. The accuracy for the whole protein was much lower than that of the TM region. This reflected important local differences in the regions connecting TM segments in MPs with similar topology. This result indicated that template-based approaches can be successfully applied to MPs. However, this result also showed that Modeller (as a representative of the current standard in homology modelling software), in its current state, is not ideal for creating complete, accurate models of MPs. A 2  RMSD in the TM region is surprisingly high, given that the problem of TM protein prediction should theoretically be simplified by the additional physical constraints imposed by the presence of the lipid bilayer. Modelling errors in the TM region can then propagate to the loops that connect TM segments, thus resulting in even lower accuracy outside the TM region. Nevertheless, scientists commonly use Modeller, and comparable methods, to predict MP structure (software reviews:; example case studies:). We present MEDELLER, a new method for coordinate generation specialized for MPs. The input is a template protein structure and a sequence alignment between the target and template proteins. This alignment is not altered by MEDELLER. The most important part of the method is the identification of the reliable 'core' structure shared by the template and target proteins. First, the template protein's membrane insertion is calculated using iMembrane (). The 'core' is initially restricted to the template residues buried in the middle layer of the membrane. It is then gradually extended using a specialized membrane-specific substitution score. The model is then completed, as far as possible, using the loop modelling protocols FREAD () and Modeller. We test the modelling accuracy of our method on four large test sets, containing a total of 616 targettemplate pairs of TM proteins. Our method, MEDELLER, builds highly reliable core models (which usually correspond to a protein's TM region). Averaged over all test sets, MEDELLER produces more accurate core models and achieves a core model accuracy of 1.97  RMSD versus 2.57  for Modeller. With added high-accuracy loops, MEDELLER remains the more accurate method in 65% of test cases and at least as good as Modeller in 77% of test cases, with an average accuracy of 2.62  RMSD versus 3.16  for Modeller.
DISCUSSIONWe present MEDELLER, a new template-based coordinate generation protocol for MPs. First, a common core between target Page: 2839 28332840