We have developed medpie, a software package for preparing medical message board corpora and extracting patient mentions and statistics for drugs, herbs and adverse effects experienced from them. The package is divided into web-crawling, HTML-cleaning, de-identification and information extraction modules. It also includes a sample controlled vocabulary of drugs, herbs and adverse effect terms.
INTRODUCTIONMedical message boards (MMBs) are sites where patients with similar conditions seek and exchange information by posting messages to threads, collections of messages with similar topics. MMBs can contain a very large number of posts (e.g. over a million messages on http://www.breastcancer.org/), are often freely available and contain patient opinions and experiences that would be potentially useful to clinicians and researchers. However, due to the large number of messages in many MMBs, reviewing each message by hand would be prohibitively slow. In addition, MMB text frequently contains spelling and grammatical errors that may hinder relevant medical information from being automatically extracted as well as personal identifiers such as MMB users' phone numbers, e-mail address and personal names that should be removed before using these data for research. In order to overcome these hurdles, we present medpie, a software package that can be used to generate a de-identified corpus of MMB posts and then extract information from it. Although researchers have examined message boards and other online communities (), they do not generally make their framework available to others. We have found medpie useful as a first stage in collecting and analyzing MMBs and believe it could facilitate further research of online communities such as MMBs (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
DESCRIPTIONThe medpie software package consists of four modules written in Python: web-crawling, HTML-cleaning, de-identification and information extraction. The package relies on and includes the CRF++ toolkit (http://crfpp.sourceforge.net/), the BeautifulSoup XML parser (http://www.crummy.com/software/ BeautifulSoup/), the porter stemmer implementation from NLTK (http://www.nltk.org/) and a slightly modified Python implementation of Fisher's exact test (http://pypi.python.org/pypi/ fisher).