Motivation: Subcellular localization is a key feature in the process of functional annotation of both globular and membrane proteins. In the absence of experimental data, protein localization is inferred on the basis of annotation transfer upon sequence similarity search. However, predictive tools are necessary when the localization of homologs is not known. This is so particularly for membrane proteins. Furthermore, most of the available predictors of subcellular localization are specifically trained on globular proteins and poorly perform on membrane proteins. Results: Here we develop MemLoci, a new support vector machine-based tool that discriminates three membrane protein localizations: plasma, internal and organelle membrane. When tested on an independent set, MemLoci outperforms existing methods, reaching an overall accuracy of 70% on predicting the location in the three membrane types, with a generalized correlation coefficient as high as 0.50. Availability: The MemLoci server is freely available on the web at:
INTRODUCTIONKnowledge of protein subcellular localization is crucial for unraveling its cellular function/s (). Different membrane types partition eukaryotic cells into functional compartments and mediate exchange of matter, energy and information. Biological activity within the different compartments strictly depends on proteins that are associated to their surrounding membranes and in turn knowing the subcellular localization of a given membrane protein helps in elucidating its functional role. About 30% of the human proteins included in the SwissProt database are annotated as interacting with membranes (6609 out of 20 286 in release 08_2010). Nearly 20% of these are integral membrane proteins (also known as transmembrane proteins) that span the lipid bi-layer, either with -helical or -barrel domains. The remaining portion consists of peripheral membrane proteins * To whom correspondence should be addressed. associated to membranes with different mechanisms () that includes:(i) posttranslational covalent attachment to lipid anchors such as glycophosphatidylinisitol (GPI) anchors (), palmitoyl anchors () and myristoyl anchors ();(ii) interaction between the phospholipid bilayer and specific membrane-targeting domains exposed on the protein surface (); and (iii) association with proteins that directly interact with membranes.The interaction of any single protein with a specific membrane can involve more than one of the above mechanisms. Eukaryotic cell membranes can be divided into two main classes on the basis of both functional and phylogenetic considerations: the endomembrane system and the organelle membranes. The endomembrane system comprises the plasma membrane, the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the Golgi complex, the nuclear envelope, the vesicles, the lysosomes and the vacuoles. These membranes are thought to have originated from invaginations of the ancestral prokaryotic plasma membrane (). Moreover, they form a single functional system, since they are either directly connected or communicate with each other through the vesicle transport system. The plasma membrane holds a special role in the endomembrane system, being the interface between the cell and its external environment. The other class of membranes comprises the inner and outer membranes of mitochondria, chloroplasts and other plastids that do not exchange materials through the vesicle transport and that are likely to have an independent phylogenetic origin (). The trafficking of membrane proteins from ribosomes to their final localization is a complex process that involves several molecular mechanisms, only partially unraveled. The best known is the recognition of specific targeting peptides that are present in the N-or C-terminal segments of the sequence. The most investigated among them are:(i) N-terminal signal peptides targeting the proteins towards the ER, from where they are re-directed to the rest of the endomembrane system and to the secretory pathway ();(ii) N-terminal transit peptides targeting the proteins towards the intracellular organelles, namely mitochondria and plastids ();Page: 1225 12241230