The significance and function of posttranscriptional cytosine methylation in poly(A)RNA attracts great interest but is still poorly understood. High-throughput sequencing of RNA treated with bisulfite (RNA-BSseq) or subjected to enrichment techniques like Aza-IP or miCLIP enables transcriptome wide studies of this particular modification at single base pair resolution. However, to date, there are no specialized software tools available for the analysis of RNA-BSseq or Aza-IP data. Therefore, we developed meRanTK, the first publicly available tool kit which addresses the special demands of high-throughput RNA cytosine methylation data analysis. It provides fast and easy to use splice-aware bisulfite sequencing read mapping, comprehensive methylation calling and identification of differentially methylated cytosines by statistical analysis of single-and multi-replicate experiments. Application of meRanTK to RNA-BSseq or Aza-IP data produces accurate results in standard compliant formats. Availability and Implementation: meRanTK, source code and test data are released under the GNU GPLv3þ license and are available at http://icbi.at/software/meRanTKl.
IntroductionModifications of DNA by methylation and hydroxymethylation of the carbon 5 atom of cytosine (m 5 C, hm 5 C) are well-established epigenetic mechanisms that affect the activity state of genomic regions. In contrast to the relatively limited array of DNA modifications, RNA can be target to 100 chemically distinct modifications, roughly two-thirds of which are methylations (). Most of these RNA modifications were studied on rRNAs and tRNAs, where m 5 C plays a role in structural and metabolic stabilization (). Surprisingly, little is known about the significance and function of m 5 C in poly(A)RNAs. Recently, one of the first studies to globally evaluate RNA cytosine methylation showed that m 5 C occurred throughout the human transcriptome in coding and non-coding RNAs (). Moreover, cytosine methylation in the long non-coding RNAs HOTAIR and XIST was found to have the ability to interfere with RNAprotein interaction (). RNA m 5 C modifications can be detected by bisulfite treatment which converts all unmethylated cytosines into uracils leaving methylated cytosines unaffected. An alternative technique is the enrichment of RNAs covalently bound to RNA-methyltransferases (RMT) that were trapped on their substrate either by the precence of 5-azacytidine (Aza-IP) () or by mutating the catalytic center of the respective RMT (miCLIP) (). When these methods are combined with high-throughput sequencing it is possible to obtain either global (RNA-BSseq) or enzyme-specific (Aza-IP, miCLIP) m 5 C-modified transcriptomes. To date, numerous software tools are available for the analysis of DNA-BSseq data (), but to the best of our knowledge none of these tools supports the analysis of V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com data from RNA-BSseq or Aza-IP, which causes a C to G conversion at the RMT-bound cytosine. Aligners and methylation callers specific for DNA methylation data are of limited use when dealing with RNA. The major shortcomings are due to the fact that transcripts may exist in multiple different splice forms and that they may be transcribed from either of the two DNA strands. At present, a few methylation studies using RNA-BSseq and Aza-IP have been published. However, the analysis strategies used in these works are time-consuming and cumbersome involving many steps utilizing many differentin part commercialtools and on top they require the development of custom programs (). To address these issues and improve the RNA m 5 C data analysis, we developed meRanTK, a tool kit that provides programs for fast mapping of high-throughput RNA-BSseq data and enables accurate identification of methylated and differentially methylated cytosines from BS-seq and Aza-IP experiments at single base pair resolution.
ConclusionPreviously proposed analysis approaches for RNA cytosine methylation data consist of many time-consuming non-automated steps involving the usage of different tools and still demand writing of custom programs. meRanTK solves these issues and enables easy, time saving and accurate analysis of RNA-BSseq and Aza-IP experiments.