Motivation: Two-component systems (TCS) are the main signalling pathways of prokaryotes, and control a wide range of biological phenomena. Their functioning depends on interactions between TCS proteins, the specificity of which is poorly understood. Results: The MetaPred2CS web-server interfaces a sequence-based meta-predictor specifically designed to predict pairing of the histidine kinase and response-regulator proteins forming TCSs. MetaPred2CS integrates six sequence-based methods using a support vector machine classifier and has been intensively tested under different benchmarking conditions: (i) species specific gene sets; (ii) neighbouring versus orphan pairs; and (iii) k-fold cross validation on experimentally validated datasets. Availability and Implementation: Web server at:
IntroductionTwo-component systems (TCSs) are the most common signal transduction pathway found in prokaryotes, and they regulate crucial biological functions such as antibiotic resistance, chemotaxis, sporulation, virulence, stationary phase transition, nitrogen regulation, competence and phosphate regulation (). TCSs function via phosphoryl group transfer between a histidine kinase (HK) and a response regulator (RR) protein. HK-RR pairing is highly specific and experimental validations are both costly and lengthy. Here, we present MetaPred2CS, a web-server that interfaces a meta-predictor designed to predict interactions between HK and RR proteins based on six sequence-based prediction methods (). Moreover, users have also access to the source code distributed on a git-hub repository or as virtual machine to execute the method on local computers, thus providing full flexibility with regards to execution parameters, reference datasets, size of alignments, etc. We also present the prediction at genome-wide scale of the TCS interactome of Myxococcus xanthus DK1622 as exemplar of large-scale applicability of the method.
ConclusionIn this work, we present a web server for prediction of PPIs in prokaryotic TCS signalling pathways. Predictions are generated by a sequence-based meta-predictor, which is interfaced through a freely available user-friendly web-server (http://metapred2cs.ibers.aber.ac. uk/). For local use, the source code and installation instruction is available at: https://github.com/martinjvickers/MetaPred2CS; and a virtual machine implementing the method at: http://metapred2cs. ibers.aber.ac.uk/MetaPred2CS.ova. MetaPred2CS also contains precomputed predictions for a number of organisms.