Motivation: Many pathway analysis (or gene set enrichment analysis) methods have been developed to identify enriched pathways under different biological states within a genomic study. As more and more microarray datasets accumulate, meta-analysis methods have also been developed to integrate information among multiple studies. Currently, most meta-analysis methods for combining genomic studies focus on biomarker detection and meta-analysis for pathway analysis has not been systematically pursued. Results: We investigated two approaches of meta-analysis for pathway enrichment (MAPE) by combining statistical significance across studies at the gene level (MAPE_G) or at the pathway level (MAPE_P). Simulation results showed increased statistical power of meta-analysis approaches compared to a single study analysis and showed complementary advantages of MAPE_G and MAPE_P under different scenarios. We also developed an integrated method (MAPE_I) that incorporates advantages of both approaches. Comprehensive simulations and applications to real data on drug response of breast cancer cell lines and lung cancer tissues were evaluated to compare the performance of three MAPE variations. MAPE_P has the advantage of not requiring gene matching across studies. When MAPE_G and MAPE_P show complementary advantages, the hybrid version of MAPE_I is generally recommended.
INTRODUCTIONMicroarray technology provides the ability to detect genome-wide gene expression activities with thousands of probes printed on each high-density chip. It has evolved rapidly in the past decade and has gradually become a standard tool for many biomedical studies. The high-throughput nature of the technology requires development of suitable statistical and bioinformatic methods to analyze the data. Pathway analysis (a.k.a gene set analysis) was developed to correlate the identified gene list from microarray data with a priori defined * To whom correspondence should be addressed. gene sets usually from biological pathway databases. As shown in, pathway analysis usually has three main steps. The first step is to calculate the association of each gene's expression pattern with phenotype, which is often evaluated by t-statistics or correlations. The second step is to map the genes into a predefined pathway database and compute the enrichment evidence score of a pathway, which summarizes association scores of genes in the pathway. Finally, the P-value and Q-value of each pathway are calculated based on an appropriate permutation test. The first nave way for pathway analysis is to compare the number of differentially expressed (DE) genes in and outside a pathway using Fisher's exact test (). This method was improved by gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) (), an innovative method that consider the gene order and is based on association strength with phenotype instead of 01 indicator of being a DE gene or not. Despite the popularity of GSEA, later studies have reported its low statistical power. Tian () and Geoman () discussed the statistical framework of pathway analysis and Tian proposed two powerful procedures: one permuting genes and the other permuting samples.introduced a random set approach. Efron and Tibshirani () further improved GSEA by introducing a maxmean procedure and a re-standardization procedure. The wide applications of microarray technology have led to an explosion of gene expression profiling studies publicly available. However, the noisy nature of microarray data, together with the relatively small sample size in each study, often results in inconsistent biological conclusions (). Therefore, methods for synthesizing multiple microarray studies are in tremendous need. Meta-analysis, a set of statistical techniques to combine results from several studies, has been recently applied to microarray analysis to increase the reliability and robustness of results from individual studies. In traditional statistics literature, Fisher's statistic () (sum of log-transformed P-values), minimum P-value statistic () and maximum P-value statistic () have been proposed and compared. For combining microarray studies, current 'meta-analysis' in the biological literature contains a widespread use of naive intersection/union operations or simple counting of appearances in the DE gene lists obtained from individual studies under certain criteria (e.g. false discovery rate = 0.05) () and many more. One can quickly note that intersections arePage: 1317 13161323 MAPEoften too conservative and unions are anticonservative, especially when the number of studies increases.was the first to apply Fisher's method to microarray data for a real sense of meta-analysis. Many other approaches have been proposed since then, including random effects model (), latent variable approach () and Bayesian approaches (). Currently, meta-analysis methods for microarray studies are mostly aimed at combining different studies to identify DE genes, an analysis at the gene level. However, DE gene analysis has two main shortcomings. First, the identified DE genes often do not directly relate to the phenotype of interest. Second, a gene set from an important pathway may act in concert with moderate activities, which cannot be detected by DE gene analysis, while the pathway may have important biological effects on the phenotype of concern. Pathway analysis has an inherent advantage for work with meta-analysis. It is well known that the lists of DE genes from independent studies associated with the same phenotype often have little overlap (), while pathway analysis often generates improved consistency (). This situation motivates us to develop systematic approaches of meta-analysis for pathway enrichment (MAPE), which provides a more robust and powerful tool than standard gene set analysis. In this article, we investigate two natural approaches of MAPE by combining statistical significance across studies at the gene level (MAPE_G) before pathway analysis or at the pathway level (MAPE_P) after pathway analysis (and C). Simulation results and applications to real datasets show their complementary advantages under different scenarios. We, thus, introduce an integrated method (MAPE_I) that incorporates the advantages of both MAPE_G and MAPE_P. MAPE_G and MAPE_P have been implicitly or explicitly used in a few publications () while a systematic methodology and a rigorous evaluation have not been investigated. To our knowledge, this is the first article to systematically develop and evaluate meta-analysis for pathway analysis in microarray studies.presents the general framework of pathway enrichment analysis for single study () and three variations of MAPE methods proposed in this article (D). MAPE_G combines P-value information from multiple studies at the gene level in Step II of. In contrast, MAPE_P integrates P-values at the pathway level in Step III of. Since MAPE_G and MAPE_P have complementary advantages under different scenarios that will be demonstrated by extensive simulations in a later section, a hybrid form of MAPE_I is proposed into incorporate merits of both methods (). Mathematical notations and data structure ofare described below.describes framework for pathway analysis in a single study. Suppose a data matrix {x gs } (1  g  G, 1  s  S) represents the gene expression intensity of gene g and sample s. A binary phenotype label is available for each sample: {y s } (1  s  S) and y s {0,1} (e.g. 0 represents normal patients and 1 represents tumor patients). A pathway database matrix {z gp } (1  g  G, 1  p  P) represents the pathway information of P pathways where z gp = 1 when gene g belongs to pathway p and z gp = 0 otherwise. In Step I of, the association score with phenotype in each gene g is first calculated as t g (usually by t-statistics or a correlation measure). In Step II, a pathway enrichment evidence score v p is calculated for each pathway pand C, denote by {x kgs } (1  k  K, 1  g  G, 1  s  S k ) the expression intensity of gene g and sample s in study k. {y ks } (1  k  K, 1  s  S k ) and y ks {0,1} represents the phenotype label for sample s in study k.shows the procedure for the MAPE_G method. In Step I, the association scores with phenotype are calculated in each study [i.e. {t gk }, 1  g  G, 1  k  K]. In Step II, meta-analysis is performed for biomarker detection and produces a new association score after meta-analysis at the gene level [i.e. {u g }, 1  g  G]. In Step III, the pathway enrichment analysis is performed as in Step II in. The evidence scores {v p }, corresponding Q-values {q(v p )} and a list of enriched pathways are then generated. This method can be viewed as a natural combination of meta-analysis for biomarker detection (Steps I and II) and pathway enrichment analysis (Step III) in a sequential manner. Rhodes () has implicitly performed similar analysis by first querying DE genes from meta-analysis and then assess pathway enrichment using the KEGG database (). For MAPE_G proposed in this article, we replace the ad hoc two-stage procedure with a unified evaluation by permutation test. In, the framework for MAPE_P is shown. The Step I of association scores for each study is identical to that in MAPE_G. In Step II, instead of performing meta-analysis at the gene level, we performed pathway enrichment analysis in each individual study to obtain the studywise pathway enrichment evidence scores: {v pk } (1  k  K, 1  p  P). The meta-analysis on the pathway level was then performed in Step III to derive the combined evidence score w p. Finally, the corresponding Q-values, q(w p ), are assessed by permutation test.