Motivation: The data deluge phenomenon is becoming a serious problem in most genomic centers. To alleviate it, general purpose tools, such as gzip, are used to compress the data. However, although pervasive and easy to use, these tools fall short when the intention is to reduce as much as possible the data, for example, for medium-and long-term storage. A number of algorithms have been proposed for the compression of genomics data, but unfortunately only a few of them have been made available as usable and reliable compression tools. Results: In this article, we describe one such tool, MFCompress, specially designed for the compression of FASTA and multi-FASTA files. In comparison to gzip and applied to multi-FASTA files, MFCompress can provide additional average compression gains of almost 50%, i.e. it potentially doubles the available storage, although at the cost of some more computation time. On highly redundant datasets, and in comparison with gzip, 8-fold size reductions have been obtained. Availability: Both source code and binaries for several operating systems are freely available for non-commercial use at
INTRODUCTIONSaying that the volume of genomic data produced every day is large is clearly a euphemism. With the dramatic drop in price of the sequencing machines (the $1000 limit for sequencing a human genome will be history shortly), virtually everyone will want to sequence everything. Unfortunately, the pace at which storage and communication resources are evolving is not enough, and the genomic data centers are being flooded with data. It is a data deluge (). The interest for DNA compression was started with the Biocompress algorithm of. The subsequent two decades have seen the publication of a considerable number of algorithms for compressing DNA sequences and several other forms of genomic data (e.g.), although usually aiming more at proving the concept than at providing usable compression tools. For example, the majority of these algorithms assume data drawn from the four-letter alphabet, ACGT, ignoring other letters that can be found in DNA data sequences. No doubt that for the purpose of showing the potentialities of the algorithms, this is often a fair approach, because those letters outside the main alphabet are usually rare and, therefore, represent only a small fraction of the bits required to represent the sequence. However, a usable lossless compression tool needs to be capable of handling every letter that it finds in the file and to reproduce it exactly during decompression. Moreover, genomic files rarely contain only sequence information. Usually, they also include additional data, such as headers, quality scores and alignment information. Therefore, the compression tools need to compress these data as well in an efficient way. In this article, we describe MFCompress, a tool for compressing FASTA and multi-FASTA files. Recently,proposed DELIMINATE, also a compression method for FASTA and multi-FASTA files, which relies on a preprocessing stage, where header and sequence data are separated and transformed, followed by a general purpose compressor (7-Zip). The MFCompress tool described here provides better compression than DELIMINATE for the large majority of the files used in the benchmarking dataset, at a similar compression and decompression time. This dataset is an extended version of the benchmarking dataset used by, to which we added some larger files, due to its increasing importance and commonness. MFCompress relies on multiple competing finite-context models and arithmetic coding, a powerful approach for DNA data compression ().