Motivation: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play critical roles in gene regulation. Although it is well known that multiple miRNAs may work as miRNA modules to synergistically regulate common target mRNAs, the understanding of miRNA modules is still in its infancy. Results: We employed the recently generated high throughput experimental data to study miRNA modules. We predicted 181 miRNA modules and 306 potential miRNA modules. We observed that the target sites of these predicted modules were in general weaker compared with those not bound by miRNA modules. We also discovered that miRNAs in predicted modules preferred to bind unconventional target sites rather than canonical sites. Surprisingly, contrary to a previous study, we found that most adjacent miRNA target sites from the same miRNA modules were not within the range of 10–130 nucleotides. Interestingly, the distance of target sites bound by miRNAs in the same modules was shorter when miRNA modules bound unconventional instead of canonical sites. Our study shed new light on miRNA binding and miRNA target sites, which will likely advance our understanding of miRNA regulation. Availability and implementation: The software miRModule can be freely downloaded at http://darwin.informatics.indiana.edu/MultiGlycan/.
IntroductionMicroRNAs (miRNAs) play critical roles in gene regulation (). MiRNAs are a family of small ($22 nucleotides) non-coding RNAs. They can bind mRNAs at 5 0 untranslated regions (UTRs), coding sequences (CDSs), and 3 0 UTRs. The binding is traditionally thought to be through base-pairing of the seed regions in miRNAs with the partially complementary sequences in target mRNAs (). The seed region refers to the 5 0 end of miRNAs from position 2 to position 7 (). Depending on the pairing quality, miRNA target sites are classified into two categories: canonical sites and non-canonical sites. The former are target sites that are perfect complementary to the seed regions, while the latter are target sites with imperfect seed complementarity (G:U wobbles or mismatches). With the advance of biotechnology, it is accepted that base-pairing can involve both seed regions and non-seed regions (). That is, other types of target sites exist in addition to the canonical and non-canonical target sites. We define unconventional sites as target sites other than the canonical sites. Regardless of the types of target sites, the binding of miRNAs to their target mRNAs during diverse cellular processes may degrade target mRNAs, and/or repress the translation of target mRNAs to proteins (). Due to such pivotal roles in gene regulation, it is critical to study miRNAs and their target sites. miRNAs often form modules to regulate target mRNAs (). In this study, a miRNA module is V C The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.
DiscussionWe studied miRNA modules based on experimentally determined miRNA target sites. We predicted 181 miRNA modules and 306 potential miRNA modules. We demonstrated that miRNA modules preferred to bind weak sites and favoured a combination of all unconventional sites. We also observed that miRNA modules preferred to bind in CDSs and favoured the first and the last exons. We confirmed that more than 70% of miRNA modules bound sites within specific ranges, with enrichment in two previously known ranges. However, many more adjacent sites bound by miRNA modules were 130 nucleotides apart. We further showed that unconventional target sites of miRNA modules were often within shorter distances than other combinations of target sites. Our study shed new light on miRNA binding. The majority of adjacent target sites of miRNA modules were 130 nucleotides apart, which contradicted with previous observations (). To understand what resulted in different observations, we focused on target sites of the 181 miRNA modules in 3 0 UTRs. We found even when we considered only target sites in 3 0 UTRs, more than 75% of adjacent target sites of miRNA modules were 130 nucleotides apart. We also predicted miRNA module candidates using only the 6096 CLASH target sites in 3 0 UTRs and then studied the distances of adjacent target sites of these candidates. We still observed that the majority of adjacent target sites of these candidates were 130 nucleotides apart (Supplementary File S4). Therefore, the different observations were unlikely because we used target sites in entire mRNA regions while previous studies used only target sites in 3 0 UTRs. Instead, it may be due to the small number of experimentally determined sites in previous experimental studies and the limited quality of predicted sites in the previous computational study, compared with the 18 514 high-quality experimentally determined sites we used. We predicted (potential) miRNA modules on the condition that they downregulated target genes significantly more than some of their miRNA subsets. We further checked whether these (potential) modules downregulated their target genes significantly more than any subset contained in the modules. We confirmed that for all (potential) miRNA modules, their target genes were significantly more down-regulated than the target genes of any of their subsets. We discovered 201 non-synergistic modules. The non-synergistic modules may also play important roles in regulating target genes, as supported by GO and pathway analyses, order preference, and the literature. Moreover, these non-synergistic modules may be competitive miRNA modules that are worth further investigation ().