mimicMe is a web server for prediction and analysis of host-like proteins (mimics) encoded by microbial pathogens. Users select a host species and any set of pathogen and control proteomes (bacterial, fungal, protozoan or viral) and mimicMe reports host-like proteins that are unique to or enriched among pathogens. Additional server features include visualization of structural similarities between pathogen and host proteins as well as function-enrichment analysis. Availability and implementation: mimicMe is available at http://compbio.ddns.comp.nus.edu.sg/%7elipidgo/index.php.
INTRODUCTIONMany pathogens encode virulence factors that mimic the function of one or more host proteins. These host-like proteins, called mimics, exploit host pathways and/or facilitate evasion of host immune detection (). Mimics may be homologous to their host counterparts, and originate through host-to-pathogen horizontal transfer, or may evolve through convergent evolution (). Several studies have focused on the latter type, identifying pathogen mimics of short host peptide fragments (). Here, we focus on pathogen mimicry involving host-pathogen sequence homology, which can be more easily detected through standard bioinformatic approaches. In previous work, we used a BLAST-based, comparative proteomics approach to detect mimics of this type in human pathogenic bacteria (). By detecting human-like proteins highly unique to pathogens and relatively absent in non-pathogens (controls), known mimics [e.g. Legionella RalF mimicry of human ADP-ribosylation factor guanine nucleotide exchange factors (, and novel ones (e.g. multi-species mimics of human collagen and leucinerich repeats) could be identified. Here, we report mimicMe, a web server for exploration of host-like proteins and potential mimics in pathogens. mimicMe automates and extends our previous analysis to include a range of common host species from mammals to plants, and pathogens from bacteria, viruses, protozoans and fungi. The tool is best suited for predicting mimics that are homologous to host proteins, but other types of mimicry may be detected through altered parameters. The tool allows for structural visualization of predicted mimicry relationships as well as function-enrichment analysis to identify host gene families, functions or pathways that are targets of molecular mimicry by pathogens of interest. We anticipate that the tool will be useful in comparative analyses of pathogens, where it may serve to generate hypotheses for future experimental studies.