Motivation: Secondary structure underpins the folding pattern and architecture of most proteins. Accurate assignment of the secondary structure elements is therefore an important problem. Although many approximate solutions of the secondary structure assignment problem exist, the statement of the problem has resisted a consistent and mathematically rigorous definition. A variety of comparative studies have highlighted major disagreements in the way the available methods define and assign secondary structure to coordinate data. Results: We report a new method to infer secondary structure based on the Bayesian method of minimum message length inference. It treats assignments of secondary structure as hypotheses that explain the given coordinate data. The method seeks to maximize the joint probability of a hypothesis and the data. There is a natural null hypothesis and any assignment that cannot better it is unacceptable. We developed a program SST based on this approach and compared it with popular programs, such as DSSP and STRIDE among others. Our evaluation suggests that SST gives reliable assignments even on low-resolution structures.
INTRODUCTIONPeriodic hydrogen-bonding patterns in globular proteins give rise to elements of secondary structurehelices and sheets. The -helix and -sheets were among the first structural motifs predicted from first principles of stereochemistry by. We now know these specific motifs are almost ubiquitous across the corpus of known structures. Eventually, other repetitive motifs were also identified, and the alphabet of secondary structures was expanded to include 3 10-helix, -helix, -turn, -turn,-turn and -bulges, among other minor elements. In what follows, we use the term secondary structure to include both the classical helices and sheets, and other common substructural elements. Accurate assignment of secondary structure of proteins from coordinate data is an important and a challenging problem (). Secondary structure underpins the architectural organization in proteins. It simplifies the complex atom-level description of proteins and is therefore the key to generation of schematic diagrams of their three dimensional (3D) folding patterns (). They are central in training methods geared for predicting secondary structure from * To whom correspondence should be addressed. amino acid sequence (). They form a linchpin to efficient methods for structural comparison and analysis (). Over the last 30 years, many programs were developed to address the problem of assigning secondary structure to protein coordinate data. A broad classification can be made of the assignment strategies:(i) methods that use distance and angle profiles of local fragments; (ii) methods that detect hydrogen bonds between backbone atoms; (iii) methods that use 3D geometry of local fragments; and (iv) methods that approximate the backbone trace with a set of straight lines. The following reviews some of the major earlier contributions to the literature of this problem. Levitt andwere the first to generate an automatic method for secondary structure assignment, based on distance and dihedral angle profiles of C  atoms over a sliding window of four residues. P-SEA () is another method in this category which assigns secondary structural states using a short C  distance mask and two C  dihedral angle criteria. PROSS () proposes an assignment based solely on backbone dihedral angles. Xtlsstr () calculates backbone dihedral angles and distances and assigns secondary structural types that would be consistent with interactions of amide-amide groups observed from circular dichroism of a protein in ultraviolet range (). More recently, PALSSE () was designed to delineate protein structure into helices and strands, mainly using distance and torsion angle constraints to identify core elements which are later extended to longer segments. KAKSI () is based on C  distances and backbone dihedral angles and designed primarily to show concordance with the manual assignments found in the protein data bank (PDB). The most popular method in this space is 'Dictionary of Secondary Structure of Proteins' (DSSP) developed by Kabsch and Sander (1983). DSSP is based on detecting hydrogen bonds between nitrogen and carbonyl groups along the protein polypeptide chain using a Coulomb approximation of the hydrogen-bond energy function (). Many now consider this method a standard for secondary structural assignment (). Since DSSP was published, several methods have been designed that rely on computing the hydrogen-bond energy between backbone atoms. STRIDE () is among the successful variants of DSSP which uses a modified hydrogen-bond energy function as well as backbone dihedral angles to compute its assignment. SECSTR () is another variant which improves the detection and assignment of helices which both DSSP and STRIDE have difficulty characterizing ().
CONCLUSIONReliable secondary structure assignment is an important problem. We have developed a novel information theoretic method to address this problem using the Bayesian framework of MML inference. Careful examination of the results over a large number of structures suggests that our method gives consistent assignments even on lowresolution data. We note that our method uses a dictionary of models composed of ideal secondary structural elements. The details of the models are explicit and open to scrutiny. It is likely that these models can be improved. ('Essentially, all models are wrong, but some are useful.'George Box.) However, modification to the models is an improvement if, and only if, it yields extra compression.