Motivation: Ultra-deep sampling of small RNA libraries by next-generation sequencing has provided rich information on the microRNA (miRNA) transcriptome of various plant species. However, few computational tools have been developed to effectively deconvolute the complex information. Results: We sought to employ the signature distribution of small RNA reads along the miRNA precursor as a model in plants to profile expression of known miRNA genes and to identify novel ones. A freely available package, miRDeep-P, was developed by modifying miRDeep, which is based on a probabilistic model of miRNA biogenesis in animals, with a plant-specific scoring system and filtering criteria. We have tested miRDeep-P on eight small RNA libraries derived from three plants. Our results demonstrate miRDeep-P as an effective and easy-to-use tool for characterizing the miRNA transcriptome in plants.
INTRODUCTIONmiRNAs are an important class of endogenous small RNAs that regulate gene expression at the post-transcription level (). There has been a surge of interest in the past decade in identifying miRNAs and profiling their expression pattern using various experimental approaches (). Most recently, deep sequencing of specifically prepared low-molecular weight RNA libraries has been used for both purposes in diverse plant species (). A major drawback of these efforts is the exclusive focus on mature miRNAs, the final gene product and ignorance of sequence information associated with other parts of the miRNA genes. New strategies and tools are thus highly desirable to analyze the increasingly available sequencing data to gain insights into the miRNA transcriptomes. Although miRNAs are only 2024 nt long, they are processed from longer, stemloop structured precursors called pre-miRNAs (). Maturation of miRNAs releases small RNAs derived from different parts of the stemloop structure with asymmetric abundance. The program miRDeep employs a probabilistic model of miRNA biogenesis in animals to score compatibility of the * To whom correspondence should be addressed.nucleotide position and frequency of sequenced small RNA reads with the secondary structure of pre-miRNAs (). However, two significant differences in miRNA precursors between animals and plants prevent straightforward adaptation of miRDeep to the plant systems. First, plant pre-miRNAs are much longer with more variable lengths. Second, more miRNAs in plants belong to paralogous families with multiple members encoding identical or near-identical miRNAs (Supplementary Materials 1 and 2). We have demonstrated that miRDeep modified with plantspecific parameters is useful in analyzing the miRNA transcriptome in the model plant Arabidopsis (). Here we describe the improved package, called miRDeep-P, and its applications in plants.