Motivation: Protein phosphorylation, driven by specific recognition of substrates by kinases and phosphatases, plays central roles in a variety of important cellular processes such as signaling and enzyme activation. Mass spectrometry enables the determination of phosphorylated peptides (and thereby proteins) in scenarios ranging from targeted in vitro studies to in vivo cell lysates under particular conditions. The characterization of commonalities among identified phosphopeptides provides insights into the specificities of the kinases involved in a study. Several algorithms have been developed to uncover linear motifs representing position-specific amino acid patterns in sets of phosphopeptides. To more fully capture the available information, reduce sensitivity to both parameter choices and natural experimental variation, and develop more precise characterizations of kinase specificities, it is necessary to determine all statistically significant motifs represented in a dataset. Results: We have developed MMFPh (Maximal Motif Finder for Phosphoproteomics datasets), which extends the approach of the popular phosphorylation motif software Motif-X (Schwartz and Gygi, 2005) to identify all statistically significant motifs and return the maximal ones (those not subsumed by motifs with more fixed amino acids). In tests with both synthetic and experimental data, we show that MMFPh finds important motifs missed by the greedy approach of Motif-X, while also finding more motifs that are more characteristic of the dataset relative to the background proteome. Thus MMFPh is in some sense both more sensitive and more specific in characterizing the involved kinases. We also show that MMFPh compares favorably to other recent methods for finding phosphorylation motifs. Furthermore, MMFPh is less dependent on parameter choices. We support this powerful new approach with a web interface so that it may become a useful tool for studies of kinase specificity and phosphorylation site prediction.
INTRODUCTIONProtein phosphorylation plays vital roles in numerous key cellular processes including the regulation of enzyme activation and protein localization and degradation, as well as the propagation of signals *To whom correspondence should be addressed. through pathways that control higher-level cellular activities such as proliferation, migration, differentiation and death (). The importance of phosphorylation is underscored by the fact that 1.52.5% of eukaryotic genes encode kinases (). Investigations into phosphorylation have been greatly enhanced by the advent of high-throughput mass spectrometry, which enables large-scale phosphoproteomics studies identifying peptides phosphorylated under particular conditions (). Such sets of identified phosphopeptides in turn provide information about the specificities of the kinases involved, revealing common patterns of amino acids underlying specific kinase-substrate recognition. Databases such as Phospho.ELM (), PhosPhAt () and PHOSIDA () collect sets of identified phosphopeptides for different kinases, and have enabled the development of methods to predict and classify kinase-substrate relationships, e.g. Scansite (), NetPhosK (), GPS (), KinasePhos () and NetPhorest (). In general, a phosphoproteomics study provides the opportunity to identify kinases that might be present in a sample, as well as to characterize the specificities of the kinases. Since a phosphoproteomics dataset can contain a large number of phosphopeptides produced by a mixture of different kinases, a typical first step is to aggregate and summarize the phosphopeptides in a manner that reveals more general patterns of phosphorylation. Phosphorylation motifs represent common amino acids up-and down-stream from an identified phosphorylation site. For example, if we see a number of phosphopeptides with a proline two residues before a phospho-serine and an arginine immediately following the phospho-serine, we could summarize them with the motif PxSR (where 'x' indicates that any amino acid is allowed). A positionspecific scoring matrix could further refine such a motif, indicating the frequencies of amino acids at the non-fixed positions (e.g. if that 'x' tended to be an acidic residue). Matching such summaries against databases then provides evidence that particular kinases have been active, while the amino acid patterns of the motifs give additional insights into the kinase specificities. Several motif-finding algorithms for phosphoproteomics have been developed, taking advantage of the fact that a motif is anchored by a phosphorylation site, to do better than more general motif finders (e.g. those employed to identify transcription factor motifs). The basic problem was first addressed by Motif-X (), which employs a greedy algorithm to incrementally build up a motif from statistically over-represented position/amino acid pairs. Motif-X was demonstrated to identifyCopyedited by: TRJ MANUSCRIPT CATEGORY: ORIGINAL PAPER) and phosphoproteomic analysis of organisms including mouse (), Drosophila () and yeast (Wilson). MoDL () adopted a fundamentally different approach, formulating the problem as one of compactly encoding the phosphorylated peptides, and employing an informationtheoretic approach to find a good encoding. It was demonstrated to successfully uncover compact sets of informative motifs, both known and novel, in several published human and mouse phosphoproteomic datasets. Motif-All () employed a data mining approach to uncover all motifs that have sufficient support and are statistically significant under an odds ratio assessment. The approach was demonstrated on the PhosPhAt database of Arabidopsis phosphorylation sites. Most recently, FMotif (), an approach that incorporates clustering into the Motif-X-style iterative, greedy selection of motifs and reduction of foreground, was demonstrated to outperform Motif-X and MoDL on four synthetic datasets extracted from Phospho.ELM and a large-scale experimental dataset from mouse. We present here an approach called MMFPh (Maximal Motif Finder for Phosphoproteomics) that pursues the Motif-X goal of identifying motifs comprised of over-represented amino acid/position pairs, but does so by performing a complete search instead of making greedy choices. Thus MMFPh identifies all statistically significant, sufficiently frequent motifs, while Motif-X (and likewise F-Motif) may miss some due to greedy choices and foreground reduction. The greedy approach is justifiable in cases of a few kinases with distinct specificities, though we show that even there it can miss motifs; this problem can only get worse with larger sets of phosphopeptides or with highly overlapped motifs. Furthermore, we show that the complete approach is much more stable over the choice of the key parameter, the minimum occurrence threshold. As its name suggests, MMFPh returns only those motifs that are maximal, not subsumed by motifs with more fixed amino acids, as for example SP would be by RxSP. This ensures that in addition to being more sensitive, we are also in some sense more specific. We show that the relative coverage by maximal motifs (occurrences in the phosphopeptides versus the rest of the proteome) can be better than that of the non-maximal ones. However, recognizing that a more general motif (e.g. SP) might capture some of the identified phosphopeptides not matching the more specific motifs (e.g. RxSP), we also reassess for the possibility of a residual motif among the unmatched phosphopeptides (e.g. those with an SP but not the up-stream R). To summarize our contribution, MMFPh is a complete approach, identifying all maximal, statistically significant and sufficiently frequent motifs. Its completeness and maximality stand in contrast to Motif-X and F-Motif, and result in better specificity and sensitivity. MoDL pursues a different goal, but to some extent (as demonstrated by ()) these contrasts carry over, as MoDL can miss important motifs, as well as make specificity and sensitivity trade-offs. While Motif-All also seeks completeness, it employs a different significance assessment from that of Motif-X, rendering it harder to directly assess the importance of completeness. It also does not restrict to maximal motifs and does not identify residual motifs. The conference publication of Motif-All () did not rigorously demonstrate its utility. In contrast, we use both synthetic datasets and large-scale experimental datasets to thoroughly substantiate the importance of completeness (including biologically relevant specificities missed by greedy methods), characterize relative coverage of data versus background, and assess stability over parameter choices. In some cases, the differences between MMFPh and Motif-All do not matter much if at all. However, in others, they apparently lead to Motif-All finding many more motifs than MMFPh, and many more than are biologically supported. Furthermore, Motif-All can require substantially more time to find the motifs. Finally, in contrast to both MoDL and Motif-All, we provide a convenient web server so that the wider community may easily find, characterize and visualize motifs present in phosphoproteomics datasets.
CONCLUSIONWe have developed and demonstrated a new method, MMFPh, that identifies all significant maximal motifs in a phosphoproteomics dataset, to summarize the data and help identify involved kinases and characterize their specificities. Tests with both synthetic and experimental datasets demonstrate the importance of employing a complete search rather than a greedy search, obtaining better specificity, sensitivity and stability to parameter choices. To enable the wider community to take advantage of this approach, we provide a web server that finds motifs, aggregates and summarizes the supporting peptides, and presents logos and hierarchical clusters to aid analysis.