Motivation: Cancer researchers seeking immunotherapy targets in cancer cells need tools to locate highly expressed proteins unique to cancer cells. Missense mutation and frameshift location reporter (MMuFLR), a Galaxy-based workflow, analyzes next-generation sequencing paired read RNA-seq output to reliably identify small frameshift mutations and missense mutations in highly expressed protein coding genes. MMuFLR ignores known SNPs, low quality reads and poly-A/T sequences. For each frameshift and missense mutation identified, MMuFLR provides the location and sequence of the amino acid substitutions in the novel protein candidates for direct input into epitope evaluation tools.
INTRODUCTIONNext-generation sequencing (NGS) holds promise for individualized targeted treatment, particularly in the realm of cancer immunotherapy (). Identifying aberrant transcripts from a patient's tumor cells may provide candidate target epitopes, which can be used to generate patient-specific vaccines. Given the quantity of data generated by NGS, it is important to have an efficient and repeatable process to deconstruct the data and present the most relevant vaccine targets, which includes missense and small frameshift mutations located in proteincoding regions of highly expressed genes. We offer missense mutation and frameshift location reporter (MMuFLR) as a process to analyze NGS RNA-seq paired read output to identify a limited set of peptides that may be targets for immunotherapy. MMuFLR is implemented as a workflow in Galaxy (). Galaxy is a server-based workflow system designed to run a series of applications, presented to the user as tools, in an easy-to-use repeatable manner. MMuFLR uses a few custom-developed Galaxy tools and those in the standard distribution of Galaxy. In this pilot project, MMuFLR's ability to identify potential vaccine targets was tested in RNA-seq datasets derived from two benign human meningiomas. However, the use of MMuFLR is not limited to cancer immunotherapy. It can also be used to locate prominent mutations responsible for cancer development and for other maladies, such as genetic diseases, developmental defects and drug resistance.