Motivation: The analysis of multiple sequence alignments is allowing researchers to glean valuable insights into evolution, as well as identify genomic regions that may be functional, or discover novel classes of functional elements. Understanding the distribution of conservation levels that constitutes the evolutionary landscape is crucial to distinguishing functional regions from non-functional. Recent evidence suggests that a binary classification of evolutionary rates is inappropriate for this purpose and finds only highly conserved functional elements. Given that the distribution of evolutionary rates is multi-modal, determining the number of modes is of paramount concern. Through simulation, we evaluate the performance of a number of information criterion approaches derived from MCMC simulations in determining the dimension of a model. Results: We utilize a deviance information criterion (DIC) approximation that is more robust than the approximations from other information criteria, and show our information criteria approximations do not produce superfluous modes when estimating conservation distributions under a variety of circumstances. We analyse the distribution of conservation for a multiple alignment comprising four primate species and mouse, and repeat this on two additional multiple alignments of similar species. We find evidence of six distinct classes of evolutionary rates that appear to be robust to the species used. Availability: Source code and data are available at http://doc.aporc.org/wiki/CNetQ
INTRODUCTIONMuch attention has been given to delineating protein-coding regions, believed to account for  1.2% of the human genome (). However, it is the extensive non-protein-coding regions that remain a largely untapped resource for the identification of novel classes of functional elements. Recent studies have indicated that there exists a vast amount of functionality in the non-coding regions (; Pheasant and * To whom correspondence should be addressed.). The task of delineating and identifying the functional elements is hindered by the lack of understanding of the constraints shaping such elements. Studying rates of evolution in genomes is also key to understanding genomic function. Humanmouse and humandog sequence comparisons suggest that  5% of the mammalian genome is subject to purifying evolutionary selection (). This figure is supported by the recent finding that 5% of bases are confidently predicted as being under evolutionary constraint in mammals by two out of three algorithms employed in the ENCODE project analysis () and in analyses of large alignments of mammals (). What remains unclear is the relationship between the rate at which a functional element evolves and its functional type. It is understood that conserved sequences are likely to harbour functional elements: the length of evolutionary time the segments have remained unchanged is evidence of biological or functional significance. It should be stressed, however, that the amount of conserved sequence is a lower bound on the amount of functional sequence, since lack of evolutionary constraint on a sequence does not imply lack of function (). Indeed, the ENCODE pilot study found many functional elements that are seemingly unconstrained across mammalian evolution. There is a strong demand for the development of more sophisticated bioinformatic approaches to studying distributions of evolutionary rates. Current approaches such as the simple per cent identity within a sliding window () and the two state phylo-Hidden Markov Model () hide a multitude of sins: most importantly, the implicit assumption of a dichotomy of evolutionary rates: conserved and non-conserved. Conservation estimates are based on a continuous model of a known distribution of evolutionary rates for ancient repeat (AR) sequences, assumed to be neutrally evolving, and an unknown distribution for functional sequences. This unknown distribution is estimated through the computationally efficient sliding window technique; however, results are affected by window size. It is assumed that the conserved fraction is the difference, estimated by mixture decomposition, between the level of similarity across all windows in the alignable fraction of the genome versus that in AR sequences or other supposedly neutrally evolving sequences. This fundamental assumption of a dichotomy of conservation levels does not adequately capture the complexity of the evolutionary rate distribution and may lead to invalid estimates of
DISCUSSION
CONCLUSIONWe have presented an overview of information criterion approaches to model selection in genomic segmentation, and presented three methods of approximating information criterion using posterior samples. We conclude that the approximate information criteria are reasonable for model selection. In the simulation study, we successfully chose the true number of components for all three scenarios, differing in number of components and also the underlying Dirichlet parameters. Although, these criteria are very blunt instruments, used on their own they may result in incorrect model choice; however, a better choice can be made when these criteria are used in conjunction with an examination of the other model parameters such as the mixture proportions, model deviance and number of changepoints. Hence, it is advised that they be used with care and intelligence. Another important result is that the information criterion approach to model selection does not inflate the number of modes; if anything it is a conservative estimate of the number of modes. We applied the information criterion to determine the number of classes for an alignment of four primates and mouse and found six wellresolved classes. A previous analysis () using a parsimony score mapping of columns from an alignment of three primates (human, chimp, Rhesus-monkey) and mouse found evidence of seven classes, and moreover a comparison ofto Figure 5c insuggests that many of the classes identified in the two analyses correspond. The fact that such similar results were obtained is particularly intriguing because the estimated divergence times for the four primates (human, chimp, gorilla, orangutan) are much less than those of the three primates, yet there is still substantial evidence that there are multiple wellresolved classes of evolutionary rates. Hence, our methods are applicable to quite closely related species provided that a suitable outgroup is included. Moreover, the results from the simulation study increase our confidence in the results reported in. We have shown that the use of fixed changepoints does not result in an over-inflated estimate of the number of non-fixed changepoints, hence modelling natural boundaries such as alignment block boundaries as fixed changepoints apparently has no detectable influence. There is still much work needed in the area of model selection and its application to these models. While information criterion approaches to estimating the number of classes in the BSCM appear to be justified, they are computationally expensive, even with high powered clusters of computers. Further investigation would be warranted in applying a GGS scheme to sample over the model space, and this is a direction of future research. The ultimate goal of genomic segmentation is to attribute a specific functional class to each of the discovered segment classes; however, at this stage results suggest that the classes contain mixtures of functional classes (). Multiple sources of data indicative of function can be incorporated into the model by defining a suitable input sequence. In preliminary work by the authors, we have used these methods to identify a large number of classes when other information is accounted for in the input sequence, such as GC content, frequency of indels and also mutation types. This has led to the discovery of many novel functional elements in regions once thought of as largely not functional. The work presented here shows that we can be confident that any classes identified through changepoint analysis are most likely real classes and not artefacts of the data, and the information criteria should be used with a degree of caution. Our results also show the model is not influenced by the number of fixed changepoints or the number of segment classes underlying the input sequence. Funding: Australian Research Council (grants DP0879308 and DP1095849).