Motivation: Public and private repositories of experimental data are growing to sizes that require dedicated methods for finding relevant data. To improve on the state of the art of keyword searches from annotations, methods for content-based retrieval have been proposed. In the context of gene expression experiments, most methods retrieve gene expression profiles, requiring each experiment to be expressed as a single profile, typically of case versus control. A more general, recently suggested alternative is to retrieve experiments whose models are good for modelling the query dataset. However, for very noisy and high-dimensional query data, this retrieval criterion turns out to be very noisy as well. Results: We propose doing retrieval using a denoised model of the query dataset, instead of the original noisy dataset itself. To this end, we introduce a general probabilistic framework, where each experiment is modelled separately and the retrieval is done by finding related models. For retrieval of gene expression experiments, we use a probabilistic model called product partition model, which induces a clustering of genes that show similar expression patterns across a number of samples. The suggested metric for retrieval using clusterings is the normalized information distance. Empirical results finally suggest that inference for the full probabilistic model can be approximated with good performance using computationally faster heuristic clustering approaches (e.g. k-means). The method is highly scalable and straightforward to apply to construct a general-purpose gene expression experiment retrieval method. Availability and implementation: The method can be implemented using standard clustering algorithms and normalized information distance, available in many statistical software packages.
IntroductionAs the use of high-throughput molecular measurement technologies continues to spread, an ever increasing amount of data from biological experiments is being stored in publicly available repositories. It is then often of interest for researchers to retrieve experimental datasets with relevance to a given experiment, in order to increase the power of statistical analyses and to be able to make novel findings not obtainable from one experiment alone. The current standard practice relies on). However, despite efforts to maintain compliance with standard formats of documenting experiments, e.g. the MIAME standard (), information about experiments may often be missing, insufficient or suffer from variations in terminology (e.g.). In view of the challenges associated with keyword-based retrieval, the complementary task of querying a database of experiments using measurement data, instead of keywords, has recently received increased attention in the literature. Most earlier content-driven methods used for retrieval of gene expression data represent each experiment in terms of a profile over genes, or alternatively, over known gene sets or gene modules predicted from other data sources, see(2012) and references therein. A representative example is to compute differential expression profiles of case versus control, use the correlation between activity profiles as the measure of relevance, and retrieve the experiments with the highest correlations (e.g.). This requires auxiliary information about the experiments, namely case and control labels of experiment samples, and possibly additional a priori defined sets of important genes. In the context of gene expression time series, representative examples of retrieving gene expression profiles include. Recently, two feasibility studies have gone beyond reducing experiments into single profiles by using probabilistic modelling of the experiments in the database being queried., assumed that the query dataset can be explained as a mixture of the learnt models, each model learnt from one dataset, such that the measure of relevance is given by the inferred mixture weights. In a slightly different approach (), experiments were retrieved by evaluating the posterior marginal likelihoods, given the query data, of individual models stored for the experiments in the database. In this paper, we introduce a method for retrieving full datasets, i.e. experiments consisting of multiple samples, which is also based on probabilistic modelling. However, instead of using the query dataset itself as a query, we use a model learnt from it. The measure of relevance is therefore not a likelihood, but instead a suitably defined metric between the models. The argument is that for noisy and complex datasets, it is beneficial to extract relevant characteristics of the query dataset in the same way as was done with the datasets that are being queried. We also make explicit the importance of marginalizing out nuisance parameters which are not directly relevant for the retrieval task. For example, in a gene expression study, one is often more interested in how sets of genes are co-regulated, rather than their exact expression values which are additionally affected by numerous other influences. We tackle the specific problem of retrieving gene expression experiments by using a product partition model () to cluster together genes that show similar expression patterns across a number of samples. By integrating out expression levels of the gene sets (i.e. cluster-specific information), only the co-expression patterns revealed by the clustering structure are retained. The clustering induced by the query dataset is then finally compared with the clusterings associated with the experiments in the database using the normalized information distance (). Notice that this approach does not involve any 'training stage', compared to that of, and the retrieval step does not involve solving an optimization problem, compared toWhile gene clustering has a long history in characterizing gene expression datasets (), it appears not to have been used in the context of experiment retrieval before. The use of gene clustering provides a straightforward way of characterizing each experiment with minimal preprocessing of the data while capturing central co-expression patterns. Essentially all previous approaches for retrieving gene expression data have converted the data to differential expression (or gene set enrichments) requiring fixed and known casecontrol distinctions. In contrast, we have only applied standard quality control and RMA normalization steps carried out in-house at the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) for datasets in the Expression Atlas database (see). Our experimental evaluation further suggests that, for the current application, inference of the full probabilistic model can be approximated by some computationally faster heuristic clustering algorithm, such as k-means (see Supplement Section A of the online material). The computational simplicity makes the method highly scalable and easy to apply in a black-box manner, as a general-purpose retrieval scheme.
DiscussionIn this paper, we have introduced a general probabilistic framework for content-driven retrieval of experimental datasets. Compared to earlier works which also employ probabilistic modelling (e.g.), we do not use the likelihood of the query data as a measure of relevance, but instead learn a model of the query data and compare models. We argue that this reduces noise in the query input. With nuisance parameters further marginalized out, only characteristics relevant for the retrieval task are retained. A special instance of the general framework introduced in this paper has been previously used as a comparative method in a simulation study () with performance slightly inferior to a likelihood-based approach. The simulation setting in that earlier study was, however, very simplistic compared to datasets encountered in many real-life scenarios, such as that of Section 4, where the model-distance-based approach was now seen to clearly outperform its likelihood-based counterpart. Contrary to likelihood-based approaches, the model-distancebased approach requires all models under consideration to belong to the same family. Although this may seem somewhat restrictive, in particular for the potential future scenario in which individual researchers independently store models in a repository along with their datasets (e.g.), there are also scenarios where the assumption is feasible. Datasets which arise as a result of some specific type of experiment are often in practice modelled using a fairly standardized set of approaches. In particular, if the models are constructed automatically, or by a curator of a data repository, the assumption of the models belonging to the same family is feasible. As a specific application of the general framework, in Sections 3 and 4 we proposed a retrieval scheme for gene expression experiments based on gene clustering. It turned out, with our current data, that clustering was even a surprisingly good model for this purpose; with minimal preprocessing and prior knowledge about the experiments, it was able to yield reasonable retrieval performance (Section 4.2) and to capture biologically relevant characteristics about the experiments (Section 4.3). Finally, we showed that it is straightforward to combine model-distance-based (or any modelling-based) retrieval with retrieval using available keywords (Section 4.4).. Evaluation of model-distance-based retrieval scheme with respect to a ground truth requiring (a) at least one, (b) at least two, (c) exactly three matching EFO types. The rightmost subfigure compares the ground truth matrix (rectangles with black borders) with the single most relevant retrieved experiment per query (grey rectangles) for the six experiments having a simultaneous match in all three EFO types. Accession numbers for the experiments are provided as a reference