Motivation: Tumour Necrosis Factor alpha (TNF) initiates a complex series of biochemical events in the cell upon binding to its type R1 receptor (TNF-R1). Recent experimental work has unravelled the molecular regulation of the signalling complexes that lead either to cell survival or death. Survival signals are activated by direct binding of TNF to TNF-R1 at the cell membrane whereas apoptotic signals by endocytosed TNF/TNF-R1 complexes. Here we describe a reduced, effective model with few free parameters, where we group some intricate mechanisms into effective modules, that successfully describes this complex set of actions. We study the parameter space to show that the model is structurally stable and robust over a broad range of parameter values. Results: We use state-of-the-art Bayesian methods (a Sequential Monte Carlo sampler) to perform inference of plausible values of the model parameters from experimental data. As a result, we obtain a robust model that can provide a solid basis for further modelling of TNF signalling. The model is also suitable for inclusion in multi-scale simulation programs that are presently under development to study the behaviour of large tumour cell populations. Availability: We provide supplementary material that includes all mathematical details and all algorithms (Matlab code) and models (SBML descriptions).
INTRODUCTIONTumour Necrosis Factor alpha (TNF) is a cytokine that acts as a key regulator of immune functions (;). TNF is the prototypical member of a growing family of cytokines () but, unlike the other members, it can trigger intracellular signals that lead either to cell survival and proliferation or death (). This dual role is important in the regulation of immune response, because it provides a molecular * To whom correspondence should be addressed. basis to cellular homeostasis. These opposing signals might lead to inhibition of tumour growth or, on the contrary, to the promotion of tumour development through direct (see, e.g.) and indirect mechanisms [e.g. by tissue remodelling and stromal development (. This motivates a detailed study of the molecular mechanisms involved in TNF signalling. Many molecular actors of this complex intracellular machinery have been discovered and studied in a variety of cells (see, for a comprehensive review). This has attracted the attention of modellers who have attempted to unravel the switching mechanism that leads either to cell survival or death, using standard methods of systems biology (). They have mostly stressed the interplay among intracellular molecules and the network of reactions stimulated by the binding of TNF to its type 1 receptor (TNF-R1). Recent data show that the path that leads to cell survival is triggered by TNF binding to its receptor at the cell membrane, while the celldeath pathway is triggered by internalized TNF/receptor complexes (). Here, we focus on this important bifurcation and develop a reduced model of TNF action, and we use modern statistical techniques to estimate the model parameters.
DISCUSSIONThe modular model sketched in, and defined by Equations (1a1g) is a robust, structurally stable description of the dual TNF action. Although it replaces an accurate description of known mechanisms with effective actions, it provides a solid basis for more elaborate models, it establishes kinetic bounds for modelPage: 1757 17541757, we have computed the fraction of surviving cells has been computed after 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, , 48 h of treatment, for different initial TNF concentrations. For all times the response to TNF has a nearly sigmoid shape. This figure is reproduced at a larger scale in the Supplementary Material (Supplementary). parameters, and helps understand the differences in sensitivity to TNF of various cell lines. The model is also suitable for integration into complex multi-scale simulation programs of tumour growth such as VBL (), or other computational models (). We plan to use the model to explore in detail the response of tumour cell clusters to TNF therapy and to investigate tumour/immune system interaction dynamics.