The MolClass toolkit and data portal generate computational models from user-defined small molecule datasets based on structural features identified in hit and non-hit molecules in different screens. Each new model is applied to all datasets in the database to classify compound specificity. MolClass thus defines a likelihood value for each compound entry and creates an activity fingerprint across diverse sets of screens. MolClass uses a variety of machine-learning methods to find molecular patterns and can therefore also assign a priori predictions of bioactivities for previously untested molecules. The power of the MolClass resource will grow as a function of the number of screens deposited in the database. Availability and implementation: The MolClass webportal, software package and source code are freely available for non-commercial use at http://tyerslab.bio.ed.ac.uk/molclass. A MolClass tutorial and a guide on how to build models from datasets can also be found on the web site. MolClass uses the chemistry development kit (CDK), WEKA and MySQL for its core functionality. A REST service is available at http://tyerslab.bio.ed.ac.uk/molclass/api based on the OpenTox API 1.2.
INTRODUCTIONBioactive molecules can serve as powerful tools for interrogation of biological systems and/or as precursors in drug discovery. An objective in chemical systems biology is to model biological systems in order to understand the effects of small molecules on cellular processes, and thereby explain the basis for small molecule action (). Realization of this ambitious goal will require extensive experimental datasets. The generation of chemical datasets from biological screening assays is usually limited by cost and throughput. Pharmaceutical companies and academic groups use high-throughput screens to test large libraries of small molecules that elicit a desired biological response, typically against a single target or at most a few related targets. However, chemical space is estimated to contain on the order of 10 60 molecular entities, which greatly exceeds even the multi-million compound libraries at the disposalThe user can examine the model statistics, the likelihood scores for screens of interest and, as shown in, single molecule likelihood fingerprints for existing models. Finally, MolClass also enables a substructure search using the JME Editor in the event a molecule of interest is not present in the database.
CONCLUSIONMolClass provides a comprehensive overview of compound activity in different screens. These profiles can reveal promiscuous activities across several screens, which may reflect undesirable off-target effects. For experimental datasets, the user can discover structure activity relationships because similar structures and activities will lead to specific likelihood patterns. As the data collection is expanded by users to different biological responses and assay formats, the classification power of the portal will increase, and thereby facilitate chemical systems biology.