Motivation: While the size and number of biobanks, patient registries and other data collections are increasing, biomedical researchers still often need to pool data for statistical power, a task that requires time-intensive retrospective integration. Results: To address this challenge, we developed MOLGENIS/connect, a semi-automatic system to find, match and pool data from different sources. The system shortlists relevant source attributes from thousands of candidates using ontology-based query expansion to overcome variations in terminology. Then it generates algorithms that transform source attributes to a common target DataSchema. These include unit conversion, categorical value matching and complex conversion patterns (e.g. calculation of BMI). In comparison to human-experts, MOLGENIS/connect was able to auto-generate 27% of the algorithms perfectly, with an additional 46% needing only minor editing , representing a reduction in the human effort and expertise needed to pool data. Availability and Implementation: Source code, binaries and documentation are available as open-source under LGPLv3 from
IntroductionBiobanks, patient registries and other human data collections have become an indispensable resource to better understand the epidemiology and biological mechanisms of disease. While these collections have grown to include data from over 100 000s of individuals (), many research questions still require data from multiple collections to reach sufficient statistical power or to achieve sufficient numbers of subjects having rare (disease) characteristics. To make data integration easy, all collections would ideally use the same data collection protocols and questionnaires. In practice however, biobanks collect different data because of differences in their scientific goals. For integration to be valid, data must be compared and harmonized before combined analyses are carried out (). Substantial efforts are now underway to make data 'inferentially equivalent' or 'harmonized' as a basis for pooled analysis. The Maelstrom Research group has taken the lead in defining protocols for retrospective data integration (https://www.maelstrom-research.org/) (). Within the BioSHaRE project, we have re-used and refined this protocol to harmonize and integrate 90 variables from 9 biobanks as a basis for pooled analysis (). This research-question-driven approach consists of three steps: 1. Defining the target DataSchema: the list of targeted variables necessary to address the research questions in a specific study; 2. Matching biobank schemas to the target DataSchema: match data elements from participating data sources/biobanks to the variables in the target DataSchema; 3. Generating of Extract-Transform-Load algorithms: define the algorithms that take the matched source data elements as the input and convert these data values to the target DataSchema for data integration.
ConclusionWe have introduced and demonstrated the utility of MOLGENIS/ connect, a generic computer system for semi-automatic harmonization and integration of data with focus on human phenotypes in biobanks, patient registries and biomedical research. The system includes a novel method to automatically generate harmonization/integration algorithms based on ontological query expansion, lexical matching and algorithm template matching. Evaluation in 184 BioSHaRE matches showed MOLGENIS/connect is able to generate useful matches and algorithms in 73% of the cases while only 11% still needed to be created by completely hand. Users can use these auto-generated algorithms to rapidly design and execute the integration via a user-friendly online web application. The application and source code are available as open source via the MOLGENIS software suite at http://github.com/molgenis/molgenis and a demo can be found at http://www.molgenis.org/connect.