Structural modeling of biochemical networks enables qualitative as well as quantitative analysis of those networks. Automated network decomposition into functional modules is a crucial point in network analysis. Although there exist approaches for the analysis of networks, there is no open source tool available that combines editing, visualization and the computation of steady-state functional modules. We introduce a new tool called MonaLisa, which combines computation and visualization of functional modules as well as an editor for biochemical Petri nets. The analysis techniques allow for network decomposition into functional modules, for example t-invariants (elementary modes), maximal common transition sets, minimal cut sets and t-clusters. The graphical user interface provides various functionalities to construct and modify networks as well as to visualize the results of the analysis. Availability and implementation: MonaLisa is licensed under the Artistic License 2.0. It is freely available at http://magi.ucsd.edu.
INTRODUCTIONThe development of powerful experimental high-throughput technologies supports the development of large-scale biochemical network models with hundreds to several thousands of reactions. However, because detailed kinetic data are often incomplete, structural and stoichiometric properties become critically important for the analysis and validation of these networks. Various visualization and/or analysis tools for biochemical hypergraphs as well as bipartite graphs have been developed, such as CellDesigner (), COPASI (), Vanted (), Cytoscape (), CellIllustrator () and Snoopy (). The Petri net (PN) formalism () implements bipartite, directed graphs and provides a rich variety of rigorous analysis methods. In the past decades, PN has been applied to various biochemical systems, for example to signal transduction pathways, gene regulatory networks and metabolic models; for an overview see. Functional modules at steady state have been defined in several concepts, such as transition and place invariants (t-invariants and p-invariants) (), elementary modes, (), minimal cut sets (MCS;), enzyme subsets (), maximal common transition sets (MCT-sets;) and transition clusters (t-clusters;). Because the number of invariants exponentially grows up to millions, the computation and evaluation of all invariants is still a challenging task. There exist tools for the automated detection of functional modules, but none of them comprises so many concepts and provides a suitable visualization combined with a graphical editor. We want to fill this gap by providing an open source tool for functional analysis without prior knowledge of detailed kinetic data. MonaLisa is partly based on earlier implementations in PInA () and TInA ().