Motivation: Probabilistic approaches for inferring transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) and regulatory motifs from DNA sequences have been developed for over two decades. Previous work has shown that prediction accuracy can be significantly improved by incorporating features such as the competition of multiple transcription factors (TFs) for binding to nearby sites, the tendency of TFBSs for co-regulated TFs to cluster and form cis-regulatory modules and explicit evolutionary modeling of conservation of TFBSs across orthologous sequences. However, currently available tools only incorporate some of these features, and significant methodological hurdles hampered their synthesis into a single consistent probabilistic framework. Results: We present MotEvo, a integrated suite of Bayesian probabilistic methods for the prediction of TFBSs and inference of regulatory motifs from multiple alignments of phylogenetically related DNA sequences, which incorporates all features just mentioned. In addition, MotEvo incorporates a novel model for detecting unknown functional elements that are under evolutionary constraint, and a new robust model for treating gain and loss of TFBSs along a phylogeny. Rigorous benchmarking tests on ChIP-seq datasets show that MotEvos novel features significantly improve the accuracy of TFBS prediction, motif inference and enhancer prediction. Availability: Source code, a user manual and files with several example applications are available at www.swissregulon.unibas.ch.
INTRODUCTIONWhat the sequence specificities of different transcription factors (TFs) are and where in the genome their transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) occur remain central questions in gene regulation. For over two decades, a large number of computational methods has been developed that aim to support answering such questions, see e.g.for reviews. Although *To whom correspondence should be addressed. much progress has been made, it remains highly challenging to obtain accurate computational TFBS predictions, especially on a genome-wide scale. For example, although from a biophysical point of view identical sequence segments should have equal affinity for the TF, one typically finds that only a small fraction of the sequences with high binding affinity act as functional TFBSs. That is, TFBS functionality is context dependent and thus researchers have searched for additional features that are predictive for the functionality of putative sites. One approach that has proven particularly fruitful is comparative genomic analysis of the conservation of putative TFBSs across related species, i.e. putative TFBSs that are highly conserved are generally more likely to be functional. A large number of approaches for incorporating conservation information has been proposed including several simple ad hoc methods, e.g., but it has become clear that highest performance is obtained by methods that use explicit evolutionary models for the evolution of TFBSs along a phylogeny (). As a consequence, there has been considerable interest in extending methods for regulatory motif finding and TFBS prediction to include such explicit phylogenetic models. For example, the well-known Gibbs sampling () and expectationmaximization strategies () for ab initio motif finding have been extended to methods that work on multiple alignments of orthologous sequences and use explicit evolutionary models (). Beyond conservation information, other features have also proven highly useful in improving the accuracy of TFBS prediction. For example, especially in higher eukaryotes, functional TFBSs often come in clusters where multiple binding sites for a small subset of TFs co-occur in close proximity to each other (). Several methods were developed that, instead of looking for TFBSs for one TF at a time, explicitly look for clusters of sites for a collection of TFs. These methods have been especially successful in identifying cis-regulatory modules that are distal to their target gene (). It has also proven useful to take into account the contribution of many weak binding sites and the competitive binding of multiple TFs to a DNA sequence by explicitly considering all possible configurations of non-overlapping binding sites using a dynamic programming procedure, e.g.;. However, currently these methodologies are spread over multiple computational tools each of which only implements some of these methods. For example, the methods for finding cis-regulatory modules have been extended to analyze pairs of aligned species () but not to general multiple alignments and phylogenetic relationships. Other methods can only make predictions for one TF at a time, ignoring the competitive binding of multiple TFs [e.g.;] and the methods that incorporate sophisticated models for explicitly considering all possible binding configurations of multiple TFs cannot incorporate conservation information [e.g.. Beyond this, as we show below, current methods that incorporate explicit evolutionary models make several implicit assumptions that cause 'pathologies' that significantly affect their performance. Here we present a computational tool, MotEvo, that integrates a suite of Bayesian probabilistic methods for the prediction of regulatory sites and motifs on multiple alignments of phylogenetically related sequences. MotEvo not only implements and extends the functionality of many of the tools and methods mentioned in the introduction into a single integrated method, it also incorporates a number of new features that address the 'pathologies' that current methods suffer from, as we explicitly demonstrate below.
DISCUSSIONFrom a theoretical point of view, the major advantage of the MotEvo method we presented here is that it integrates cuttingedge Bayesian probabilistic methods for the prediction of TFBSs, regulatory motifs and conservation patterns within one consistent theoretical frame work, developing several novel features such as the UFE model and species selection in the process. In addition, our benchmarking tests have demonstrated that these features improve MotEvo's performance, and that MotEvo outperforms currently available methods. Another major advantage of the MotEvo tool is its versatility, i.e. by simple changes to the parameter file the tool can perform a wide array of tasks ranging from motif inference, to enhancer prediction, to conservation profile mapping, site density estimation and of course TFBS prediction. Moreover, essentially all variables used by the algorithm, from phylogeny to background models, to priors, can be controlled by the user, allowing these to be adapted to a wide range of applications. For example, using MotEvo in combination with genome-wide mapping of transcription start sites we have predicted functional TFBSs for hundreds of WMs in proximal promoters in human, mouse (), yeast () and Escherichia coli. We have also obtained refined WMs using MotEvo on ChIP-seq datasets for a number of TFs beyond those studied here. All these TFBS and motif predictions are available for download from our SwissRegulon database at www.swissregulon.unibas.ch. As experimental validation of the functionality of individual TFBSs is extremely labor intensive, it remains highly challenging to estimate the accuracy of large-scale TFBS predictions. In the past, it has sometimes been assumed that ChIP-chip and ChIP-seq datasets can be treated as a gold standard, but our own analysis suggests that computational predictions can, in fact, be considerable more accurate in mapping functional sites than such high-throughput experimental approaches (). What is clear is that TF binding and function is highly context dependent. For a TF with a short degenerate motif, there may be millions of sites genome wide with motif matches at least as high as known functional sites, but in a typical ChIP-seq experiment only a few thousand of these are found to be actually bound, and even among these only a subset may directly affect gene expression. In the search for variables that provide important context, it is important to distinguish those that are merely predictive for the functionality of TFBSs from those that are explanatory. Crossspecies conservation is an example of an explanatory variable, i.e. highly conserved TFBSs are more likely to be functional, but conservation is not explanatory; sequences in other species cannot explain why a particular sequence is bound or functional in a given species. In higher eukaryotes, the chromatin state is likely to be an important explanatory variable. In areas where the nucleosomes are densely packaging the DNA, it may be hard for a TF to access an individual site in the DNA. This may explain why functional TFBSs come in clusters of nearby sites for co-expressed TFs: these TFs may passively cooperate in displacing the nucleosomes from the DNA. Such a model can potentially explain the observation that the genomic binding pattern observed for a given TF is dependent on the expression profiles of other TFs (). However, to what extent binding and function of TFBSs is dependent on a high-order 'grammar' of TFBS configurations, i.e. the precise Page: 494 487494