Functional annotation represents a key step toward the understanding and interpretation of germline and somatic variation as revealed by genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), respectively. GWAS have revealed numerous genetic risk variants residing in non-coding DNA associated with complex diseases. For sequences that lie within enhancers or promoters of transcription, it is not straightforward to assess the effects of variants on likely transcription factor binding sites. Consequently we introduce motifbreakR, which allows the biologist to judge whether the sequence surrounding a polymorphism or mutation is a good match, and how much information is gained or lost in one allele of the polymorphism or mutation relative to the other. MotifbreakR is flexible, giving a choice of algorithms for interrogation of genomes with motifs from many public sources that users can choose from. MotifbreakR can predict effects for novel or previously described variants in public databases, making it suitable for tasks beyond the scope of its original design. Lastly, it can be used to interrogate any genome cura-ted within bioconductor. Availability and implementation: https://github.com/Simon-Coetzee/MotifBreakR, www.bioconductor. org.
IntroductionTranscription factor binding sites (TFBS) are typically short DNA sequence motifs that facilitate binding of a specific transcription factors via proteinDNA interactions (). There are some software tools that facilitate the scoring of non-coding variants with respect to either predefined or user-specified motifs. RegulomeDB, HaploReg and FunSeq each enable assessment of the effects of single nucleotide variants on predicted binding sites (). Each of these packages has strengths, but does not provide the analysis independent of its other functions. Many users generate their own motifs, but users are limited to built-in motif collections and functions. The functions are largely unavailable to non-human data sets. We hereby introduce an R/bioconductor software package called motifbreakR that addresses these major concerns. Implementation in R has the advantage of universality: R and bioconductor are widely used for bioinformatics and well supported across different platforms including Galaxy ().
ConclusionIn principle, a SNP label contains all the information necessary to characterize a variant or mutation, since it points to information in external databases somewhere. Our package makes it possible to rapidly explore TFBS disruptions for a large number of SNPs within the R framework, with no need to install third party software or massage arcane output files for downstream analysis. Although the intention is to study the relationship of human variation to disease, use of motifbreakR is not limited to this application. Indeed, one may access any genome in BSgenome, and query it with custom SNPs and PWMs, or specify organism-specific sets of PWMs from MotifDb. motifbreakR uses a highly efficient information contentbased algorithm for discriminating between truly disruptive variants versus neutral. Because motifbreakR is designed to work with the existing bioconductor framework, we believe it to be the most flexible and extensible package available for this type of analysis.. Example of motifbreakR output from plotMB function for a previously published SNP (). Genomic sequence and coordinates are at the bottom of the display; the positions of the matches represented (light blue boxes). The position of the SNP within the motif is indicated with red bounding box and alternate allele below, and as red text on the motif logo position bar above. The motif logos generated from motifstack are shown above using the color conventions of the genomic sequence below