Molecular recognition features (MoRFs) are small, intrinsic-ally disordered regions in proteins that undergo a disorder-to-order transition on binding to their partners. MoRFs are involved in pro-tein–protein interactions and may function as the initial step in molecular recognition. The aim of this work was to collect, organize and store all membrane proteins that contain MoRFs. Membrane proteins constitute 30% of fully sequenced proteomes and are responsible for a wide variety of cellular functions. MoRFs were classified according to their secondary structure, after interacting with their partners. We identified MoRFs in transmembrane and peripheral membrane proteins. The position of transmembrane protein MoRFs was determined in relation to a proteins topology. All information was stored in a publicly available mySQL database with a user-friendly web interface. A Jmol applet is integrated for visualization of the structures. mpMoRFsDB provides valuable information related to disorder-based protein– protein interactions in membrane proteins.
INTRODUCTIONIntrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) possess no rigid three-dimensional structure under physiological conditions, yet they are functionally active (). IDPs are separated in fully disordered proteins and partially disordered proteins (). Partially disordered proteins contain intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs). IDRs are found in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In all, 2030% of prokaryotic proteins () and more than half of eukaryotic proteins contain IDRs (). Vast abundance and functional importance characterize these proteins. For a deeper understanding of IDPs and IDRs, several databases have been developed: DisProt (), (), MobiDB (), IDEAL (), ComSin () and D(2)P(2) () provide information about experimentally determined or theoretically predicted IDPs and IDRs. Moreover, a variety of predictors have been developed for the prediction of IDRs from protein sequence (). Special cases of IDRs are molecular recognition features (MoRFs) or molecular recognition elements (). MoRFs are small regions (between 10 and 70 residues) in proteins that undergo a disorder-to-order transition on binding to their partners (). Proteins containing MoRFs play an important role in molecular recognition. When they are bound to their partners, MoRFs can take various shapes according to their secondary structure. They can form alpha-helices (-MoRFs), beta-strands (-MoRFs), irregular structures (i-MoRFs) or a combination of the previous elements (complex-MoRFs). A number of predictors are available for the prediction of MoRFs from protein sequences (). Membrane proteins constitute 30% of fully sequenced proteomes and are responsible for a wide variety of crucial cellular functions, such as binding and signaling (). Membrane proteins are separated in transmembrane proteins, peripheral membrane proteins and lipid-anchored proteins. Transmembrane proteins are divided into single-spanning and multi-spanning proteins, according to the number of transmembrane segments. An important number of MoRFs can be found in membrane proteins () and especially in transmembrane proteins (). IDRs are included in both alpha-helical and beta-barrel transmembrane proteins () and occur mostly on the cytoplasmic side of human plasma transmembrane proteins (). mpMoRFsDB is the first publicly available database that collects and provides information about MoRFs found in membrane proteins.
DISCUSSIONA database containing MoRFs in membrane proteins was constructed. Data were collected with automated Perl scripts and verified manually. The whole process can easily be repeated, and we intend to update the database every 6 months. The proteins in our database are highly connected nodes in protein interaction networks (52% of mpMoRFsDB's entries have more than five interactions in molecular interaction databases) and are essential to cell survival (). mpMoRFsDB provides an up-to-date dataset, which can be used for the design and evaluation of methods predicting MoRFs in membrane proteins. The database will contribute to the emerging 'protein non-folding problem' () and provide insights in disorder-based interactions in membrane proteins.