MulRF is a platform-independent software package for phylogenetic analysis using multi-copy gene trees. It seeks the species tree that minimizes the Robinson–Foulds (RF) distance to the input trees using a generalization of the RF distance to multi-labeled trees. The underlying generic tree distance measure and fast running time make MulRF useful for inferring phylogenies from large collections of gene trees, in which multiple evolutionary processes as well as phylogenetic error may contribute to gene tree discord. MulRF implements several features for customizing the species tree search and assessing the results, and it provides a user-friendly graphical user interface (GUI) with tree visualization. The species tree search is implemented in C++ and the GUI in Java Swing. Availability: MulRFs executable as well as sample datasets and manual are available at
INTRODUCTIONResolving phylogenetic trees from large genomic datasets remains a challenge for evolutionary biologists. One major problem is to reconcile the often conflicting phylogenetic signals from different genes. Although some of these conflicts can be explained by stochastic or systematic error, biological processes such as incomplete lineage sorting, gene duplication and loss and lateral transfer also contribute to gene tree discord (). An effective phylogenetic method must address the multiple sources of discord among gene trees while remaining computationally tractable for large genomic datasets. Non-probabilistic methods like those implemented in GeneTree (), iGTP (), PhyloNet () and SPRSupertree (), and probabilistic methods like those implemented in BEST (),), *BEAST (), STEM (), MP-EST () and PHYLDOG () can infer species trees while accounting for incongruence among genes. Although these methods differ widely in their details, with the exception of BUCKy, their reconciliation models are based on a single biological cause of discordance among gene trees (e.g. deep coalescence). Also, some of these methods, like SPRSupertree and BUCKy, are designed only for singly labeled input trees.introduced an alternative approach for building unrooted species trees from collections of unrooted, multi-copy gene trees (i.e. trees with multiple leaves having the same label). This approach is based on the MulRF distance, a generalization of the RobinsonFoulds (RF) distance (). The MulRF distance between a species tree and an input gene tree is obtained by first extending the species tree by adding additional copies of a leaf label in the star tree topology (). The RF distance is then calculated between the multi-copy gene tree and the extended species tree. The MulRF distance between a species tree and an input gene tree can be computed in time linear in the number of leaves of the multicopy gene tree (). A MulRF supertree is a species tree that minimizes the sum of the MulRF distances to the input gene trees. The MulRF cost function is not explicitly linked to any biological process, and its input gene trees are not limited to orthologous gene sequences. Computing MulRF supertrees is NP-hard (), but there is an efficient hill-climbing heuristic for estimating them based on the unrooted subtree prune and regraft (SPR) local search (). Here we describe MulRF version 1.2, a software package that incorporates this heuristic, along with several features to improve the species tree search and assess the results. These features include the ability to: (i) weight the input gene trees, (ii) constrain the species tree topology in the tree search, (iii) automate multiple heuristic searches and (iv) evaluate the score of alternate species tree topologies. The software package also provides a graphical user interface with tree visualization to facilitate the evaluation of the results.
CONCLUSIONMulRF is a software package for phylogenetic inference using multi-copy gene trees based on a generalization of the RF distance. In experiments on biological or simulated datasets, MulRF has performed well compared with both probabilistic and non-probabilistic supertree approaches. MulRF's speed and performance on a variety of datasets suggests that the program is well suited for species tree reconstruction from large genomic datasets.. Multi-copy gene tree G and the species tree S. The extension S* of S relative to G is also shown. The MulRF distance between G and S, which is the RF distance between G and S*, is 5