Multiple sequence alignment is an important tool in bioinformatics. Although efficient heuristic algorithms exist for this problem, the exponential growth of biological data demands an even higher throughput. The recent emergence of multi-core technologies has made it possible to achieve a highly improved execution time for many bioinformatics applications. In this article, we introduce an implementation that accelerates the distance matrix computation on x86 and Cell Broadband Engine, a homogeneous and heterogeneous multi-core system, respectively. By taking advantage of multiple processors as well as Single Instruction Multiple Data vectorization, we were able to achieve speed-ups of two orders of magnitude compared to the publicly available implementation utilized in ClustalW. Availability and Implementation: Source codes in C are publicly available at https://sourceforge.net/projects/distmatcomp/
INTRODUCTIONMultiple sequence alignment (MSA) of many nucleotides or amino acids is an important tool in bioinformatics. It can identify patterns or motifs to characterize protein families, and is therefore utilized to detect homology between sequences as well as to perform phylogenetic analysis. Many MSA heuristics have been proposed to reduce the exponential complexity of computing optimal MSAs. Heuristic MSA implementations include MSA (), ClustalW (), T-Coffee (), MUSCLE () and PRALINE (). ClustalW is considered to be one of the most popular MSA tools. It is based on the progressive alignment method. Although not optimal, this method can produce reasonably good alignments at a good efficiency. However, the exponential growth of biological data demands an even higher throughput. Thus, software approaches to improve the performance of ClustalW have been introduced, including caching () and parallel processing (). Recent usage of easily accessible accelerator technologies to improve the ClustalW algorithm include FPGAs () and GPUs (). Profiling of ClustalW reveals that the distance matrix computation is the most time-consuming phase and takes typically 90% of thePage: 1369 13681369