Motivation: Gene set analysis has revolutionized the interpretation of high-throughput transcrip-tomic data. Nowadays, with comprehensive studies that measure multiple-omics from the same sample, powerful tools for the integrative analysis of multi-omics datasets are required. Results: Here, we present GeneTrail2, a web service allowing the integrated analysis of transcrip-tomic, miRNomic, genomic and proteomic datasets. It offers multiple statistical tests, a large number of predefined reference sets, as well as a comprehensive collection of biological categories and enables direct comparisons between the computed results. We used GeneTrail2 to explore patho-genic mechanisms of Wilms tumors. We not only succeeded in revealing signaling cascades that may contribute to the malignancy of blastemal subtype tumors but also identified potential bio-markers for nephroblastoma with adverse prognosis. The presented use-case demonstrates that GeneTrail2 is well equipped for the integrative analysis of comprehensive-omics data and may help to shed light on complex pathogenic mechanisms in cancer and other diseases. Availability and implementation: GeneTrail2 can be freely accessed under https://genetrail2.bioinf.
IntroductionThe advent of high-throughput analysis technologies during the last decades has revolutionized biology and medicine and has lead to a tremendous increase in the amount of available, high-dimensional biological data. However, technologies like microarrays, next-generation sequencing or mass spectrometry are highly sensitive to changes in the experimental conditions or protocols, giving rise to technological noise that must be carefully accounted for (). Due to the above reasons, the development of automated and robust statistical analysis methods for high-throughput data has become a necessity. Enrichment methods are one fundamental class of analysis procedures for the study of pathogenic mechanisms and the identification of deregulated pathways and categories. Widely-applied enrichment methods are Over Representation Analysis (ORA) () and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) (). Other approaches, e.g.,, employ straightforward averaging methods that, despite their simplicity, offer competitive performance. Building upon such averaging approaches, Efron andpresented the maxmean statistics. More specialized approaches, which complement the generally applicable methods presented above, are e.g. topGO () and GO-Bayes (), which operate on the Gene Ontology (GO) () and account for its hierarchical structure. Another class of algorithms uses the topology of known biological networks to improve the computed enrichments. Examples are GGEA () and EnrichNet (). Due to the popularity of enrichment methods, many implementations are available, both as stand-alone applications and as web services. Some focus on a certain database while others are limited to one or two algorithms (). Examples for available tools are the Broad Institute's GSEA implementation () or the GSEA-SNP () R package. Also a wide variety of web services for enrichment analysis exists, which we discussed briefly in Supplementary Note S1. Moreover, a comprehensive collection of enrichment tools can be found in the OMICtools database (). Extensive reviews on enrichment methods (; Efron and) have been published and reveal that no real gold standard exists. This is due to the fact that each of the proposed methods is based on differing definitions of enriched categories (differing null hypotheses), making their results incomparable in general. Instead of using a single 'magic bullet', an appropriate algorithm needs to be chosen carefully for each individual research task. Finally, as heterogenous datasets, e.g. datasets comprised of genomic variations, miRNA and mRNA expression measurements, are becoming increasingly common, integrative platforms for enrichment analyses are needed. Unfortunately, only few such tools are readily available. Examples are miRTrail (), which links mRNA, miRNA and disease phentotypes, Genevar (), focusing on the association between SNPs and eQTLs, or RAMONA using a Bayesian Model for linking arbitrary-omics to ontology terms (). In this study, we present GeneTrail2, a new web server for the analysis of multi-omics datasets, with which we provide one of the most comprehensive tools for enrichment analysis. For human alone, it features over 46 000 categories collected from over 30 databases including KEGG, Reactome, GO, WikiPathways, DrugBank, Pfam, miRWalk and miRDB (cf. Supplementary). It natively supports transcriptomics, miRNomics, proteomics, and genomics data and can convert between 32 common identifier types. In total, we implemented 13 identifier-level statistics, 10 set-level statistics (see Section 2.3), two Pvalue computation strategies and eight P-value adjustment methods. Data from all major-omics are supported, making it possible to analyze and explore heterogeneous datasets in an interactive fashion using GeneTrail2's web interface. The web interface is built on top of modern web technologies with special attention to usability. Non-expert users can quickly perform comprehensive analyses using the predefined workflow, which is complemented with thorough documentation. Moreover, the interface enables users to integrate enrichments obtained from multiple-omics using the integrated mapping procedures and our side-by-side view. For further analysis tasks, we offer a deep integration into existing applications like the network visualization tool BiNA () or the NetworkTrail () web service. Another key feature of GeneTrail2 is its RESTful API, through which power users can script the web service. This scripting interface allows the seamless integration of GeneTrail2 into workflow systems such as Galaxy () or Taverna (). The backend of GeneTrail2 relies on highly optimized C  code leading to excellent computation times. GeneTrail2 can be accessed under https://genetrail2.bioinf.uni-sb.de. We demonstrate the capabilities of GeneTrail2 by applying it to a Wilms tumor expression dataset with the goal of identifying molecular determinants for the increased malignancy of certain Wilms tumor subtypes. Further use cases are discussed on the website.