Motivation: With an increase in the number of known biological functions of non-coding RNAs, the importance of RNA sequence alignment has risen. RNA sequence alignment problem has been investigated by many researchers as a mono-objective optimization problem where contributions from sequence similarity and secondary structure are taken into account through a single objective function. Since there is a trade-off between these two objective functions, usually we cannot obtain a single solution that has both the best sequence similarity score and the best structure score simultaneously. Multi-objective optimization is a widely used framework for the optimization problems with conflicting objective functions. So far, no one has examined how good alignments we can obtain by applying multi-objective optimization to structural RNA sequence alignment problem. Results: We developed a pairwise RNA sequence alignment program, Cofolga2mo, based on multi-objective genetic algorithm (MOGA). We tested Cofolga2mo with a benchmark dataset which includes sequence pairs with a wide range of sequence identity, and we obtained at most 100 alignments for each inputted RNA sequence pair as an approximate set of weak Pareto optimal solutions. We found that the alignments in the approximate set give benchmark results comparable to those obtained by the state-of-the-art mono-objective RNA alignment algorithms. Moreover, we found that our algorithm is efficient in both time and memory usage compared to the other methods. Availability: Our MOGA programs for structural RNA sequence alignment can be downloaded at http://rna.eit.hirosaki-u.ac.jp/cofolga2mo/
INTRODUCTIONSince sequence alignment is a fundamental technology for various biological analyses such as gene prediction and phylogenetic inference, a number of sequence alignment algorithms has been proposed for protein, DNA and RNA. Compared to the cases of protein and DNA sequence alignment, RNA sequence alignment algorithms are usually computationally more demanding in both time and space because consensus secondary structure information has to be taken into account in addition to sequence similarity. This is true even when we align two RNA sequences, e.g. the pioneering dynamic programming algorithm () for structural RNA sequence alignment has computational complexities of O(N 6 ) in time and O(N 4 ) in space (where N indicates sequence length) for pairwise alignment in contrast to the lower complexities of nonstructural (pure-sequence) pairwise sequence alignment algorithms such as NeedlemanWunsch algorithm (). To emphasize on the inclusion of secondary structure score, we refer to RNA sequence alignment as 'structural RNA sequence alignment' in the present article. To overcome the high computational complexities of structural RNA sequence alignment problem, various algorithms have been proposed and used so far: dynamic programming (), formal grammar (), graph representation (), linear integer programming (), Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling (), stochastic sampling (), simulated annealing (), max-margin model (), maximum expected accuracy () and genetic algorithm (). Constraints () and suboptimal solutions () are also used combined with the approaches mentioned above. In the previous structural RNA sequence alignment methods, structural RNA sequence alignment problem is formulated as a mono-objective optimization, where a sequence similarity contribution and a structural contribution are taken into account through a mono-objective function. However, structural RNA sequence alignment is essentially multi-objective optimization problem since competing two objective functions, sequence similarity score and secondary structure score, are simultaneously taken into account and there is a trade-off between the two scoring schemes: e.g. at a low sequence similarity, it is difficult to discriminate an accidental sequence similarity and evolutionary conserved nucleotides, hence non-structural alignment methods can give an inaccurate alignment due to accidental matches of nucleotides; on the other hand, if we construct an RNA alignment by maximizing a secondary structure score alone, the alignment can have a reduced sequence similarity score compared to the alignment obtained by a non-structural alignment method. The previous structural RNA sequence alignment methods explicitly or implicitly assign relative weights to a sequence similarity score and structural score to scalarize the multiple objective functions, and the weights were usually determined based on a training data. In this sense, such a scalarized objective function of structural RNA sequence alignment methods can have a bias due to the training data. Multi-objective optimization is a useful framework for exploring a system with conflicting objective. A schematic illustration of the 'dominance' in a bi-objective optimization, where a higher value is better in each objective function (OF 1 and OF 2 ). Each circle indicates one solution. In this example, Solution B strongly dominates Solution A since the OF 1 and OF 2 of Solution B are strictly better than the OF 1 and OF 2 of Solution A, respectively. Solution C strongly dominates Solution A and B 1. Solution B 1 and B 2 are dominated (weakly dominated) by Solution B, where the value of at least one of the objective functions of the dominated solution is equal to the corresponding value of Solution B. functions without introducing such a bias to the optimization procedure. In multi-objective optimization, solutions are evaluated based on their 'dominance'; according to, Solution A dominates Solution B if 'all objective function values of Solution A are better than or equal to the corresponding values of Solution B' and 'at least one objective function of solution A is strictly better than that of solution B'. This type of 'dominance' is sometimes called 'weak dominance'. The solution which is not dominated by any other solution is referred to as a Pareto optimal solution. If all objective function values of Solution A are strictly better than the corresponding values of Solution B, Solution A strongly dominates Solution B. The solution which is not strongly dominated by any other solution is referred to as a weak Pareto optimal solution. The concept of dominance is illustrated in. The definitions of dominance, weak dominance, Pareto optimal solution, strong dominance and weak Pareto optimal solution are taken from Deb (2001). The two solutions share strictly the same objective function values, which are neither dominated nor strongly dominated on each other. In Cofolga2mo, we explore not Pareto optimal solutions but weak Pareto optimal solutions. This is because we have an interest in all solutions with the highest P or highest s. For example, when multiple solutions have the highest P in a solution set and they have values of s different from each other, only one solution (with the highest s) of the solutions with the highest P is included in Pareto optimal solutions, whereas weak Pareto optimal solutions contain all solutions with the highest P in the solution set. When we align RNA sequences with a very low sequence identity, the solutions with a low s and the highest P also can contain a good alignment since the sequence identity becomes less reliable in such a case. In addition, if we use an iterative-refinement approach to solve a multi-objective optimization problem, weak Pareto optimal solutions in a solution set can give a good guess for the better approximate set at the later steps (e.g. a weak Pareto optimal solution may evolve to a Pareto optimal solution by a slight increase in s); for this reason, we assign a dominance rank of one to the weak Pareto optimal solutions in a solution set (for the dominance rank, see the 'Section 2.3.2'). The goal of multi-objective optimization is to find all Pareto or weak Pareto optimal solutions in the set of all possible solutions. By using a multi-objective optimization method, we can obtain lessbiased solutions for a system with conflicting multiple objective functions compared to when using its mono-objective counterparts. Since previous structural RNA sequence alignment methods utilize a biased single objective function, 'how good alignments can we obtain by using a multi-objective optimization?' is a natural question for structural RNA sequence alignment problem. To explore weak Pareto optimal RNA sequence alignments, we propose a multi-objective genetic algorithm (MOGA;) for pairwise structural RNA sequence alignment. MOGA is a powerful approach for solving multi-objective optimization problems, where Pareto or weak Pareto optimal solutions are explored with a dominance-based selection and genetic operators. So far, multi-objective optimization has been applied to various problems in bioinformatics () such as sequence alignment (). To our knowledge, the present article is the first report on the application of multi-objective evolutionary algorithm to the structural RNA sequence alignment.
CONCLUSIONIn the present article, we have proposed MOGAs, Cofolga2mo and Cofolga2ns, which compute the approximate set of weak Pareto optimal solutions for structural pairwise RNA sequence alignment. By performing a BRAliBase 2.1 benchmark test, we found that the approximate set for RNA sequence alignments contain highquality alignments comparable to the alignments obtained by the other recent mono-objective structural RNA alignment programs. Moreover, we found that Cofolga2mo can give accurate tRNA and 5S rRNA alignments comparable to the suboptimal alignments by Dynalign with much smaller computational resources. Although the algorithm proposed in the present study is designed for pairwise alignment construction, its extension to multiple alignment will be possible in various ways: e.g. we can generate approximate Pareto optimal multiple alignments by straightforwardly extending the present MOGA, i.e. by using crossovers and mutation operators for modifying a multiple alignment like SAGA (); constructing a multiple alignment based on the approximate set of the pairwise alignments obtained for all pairwise combinations of inputted RNA sequences is also an interesting approach. Since MOGA usually outputs multiple solutions, development of a methodology for selecting the solution which is favorable for the decision-maker is also an important direction of the future research. A graphical user interface might be helpful for the purpose.