As new methods for multivariate analysis of genome wide association studies become available, it is important to be able to combine results from different cohorts in a meta-analysis. The R package MultiMeta provides an implementation of the inverse-variance-based method for meta-analysis, generalized to an n-dimensional setting. Availability and implementation: The R package MultiMeta can be downloaded from CRAN.
IntroductionGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been a powerful tool for genetic discovery for almost a decade. Results have shed light on many different biological processes from lipid metabolism to blood composition as well as social and behavioral patterns (, www.genome.gov/gwastudies.). A key to the success of GWAS was the ability to combine several studies in a meta-study, which allowed sufficiently large sample sizes for powered association studies even for variants of small phenotypic effect. Although typically GWAS test one phenotype at a time, many biological features are better described by a combination of several variables. Thus, addressing multiple phenotypes can give great increase in power, by taking into account the underlying correlations between variables. Multivariate regression is a straightforward generalization of standard GWAS, where a linear multivariate mixed model can be fit and allows controlling for population stratification and relatedness (). In particular, a new set of algorithms included in the GEMMA software () allows for a fast multivariate fitting and testing up to 10 phenotypes in large sample sizes. As for the univariate GWAS, it might be desirable in some settings to be able to combine multivariate results from different studies to further increase statistical power in genotypephenotype associations. Here, we describe a novel statistically efficient method to perform meta-analysis in a multivariate setting. It is an inversevariance-based method that allows different weights for each cohort to take into account the accuracy of each effect estimate. The inversevariance method has been successfully used for single-trait association testing () and is suitable for n-dimensional generalization. Finally, it is implemented as part of the R package MultiMeta to benefit from flexible environment and open access, as well as extra plotting functions for results visualization.