Motivation: With the development of experimental methods and technology, we are able to reliably gain access to data in larger quantities, dimensions and types. This has great potential for the improvement of machine learning (as the learning algorithms have access to a larger space of information). However, conventional machine learning approaches used thus far on single-dimensional data inputs are unlikely to be expressive enough to accurately model the problem in higher dimensions ; in fact, it should generally be most suitable to represent our underlying models as some form of complex networksng;nsio with nontrivial topological features. As the first step in establishing such a trend, we present muxstep, an open-source library utilising multiplex networks for the purposes of binary classification on multiple data types. The library is designed to be used out-of-the-box for developing models based on the multiplex network framework, as well as easily modifiable to suit problem modelling needs that may differ significantly from the default approach described. Availability and Implementation: The full source code is available on GitHub: https://github.com/
IntroductionMachine learning algorithms that tackle problems such as classification, clustering and decoding have been frequently found in a variety of applications, a significant share of which is of bioinformatical nature.have presented a review of these applications, which includes but is not limited to knowledge extraction, genomics and proteomics, systems biology and text mining. In a variety of fields, perhaps especially bioinformatics, the algorithms can be faced with learning from multiple types of data simultaneously. The exact ways in which the processes producing each data type are connected may well be unknown or incompletely understood, which often results in having to make certain assumptions on their form (to make the problem tractable). One possible assumption is to model these 'inter-process connections' as multilayer networks (); in particular, the special case of multiplex networks could be very appropriate while still maintaining tractability. Informally, a multiplex network is a multi-layered graph in which each layer is built over the same set of nodes, and there may exist edges between nodes in different layers. This models. suitability arises from the fact that there exists a wide variety of systems exhibiting 'natural' multiplexity: social networks and epidemics modelling (), transportation networks (), biochemical and genetic networks () and research communities (), to name a few. We have developed the muxstep library motivated by the examples above, as the (to the best of our knowledge) first publicly available machine learning library acquiring this methodology. The problem we focus on is the very common problem of binary classification (the Supplementary Materials also detail workflows thatextend it to k-ary classification). Briefly, muxstep is designed to process any ordered sequence of data points, where each data point is actually a tuple of several real-valued data types. Furthermore, it is possible to assign a discrete 'sub-output' to each tuple in the sequence, thus encompassing a kind of mixture model. The muxstep library and this applications note are designed with the following primary goals in mind: (i) Out-of-the-box usefulness for new problems, and providing an overview of its essential internals and a worked case study in a way that makes it easy for bioinformaticians to develop models based on multilayer networks; (ii) Ease of extending (in the spirit of open-source), with clear descriptions of the most common ways to extend it; (iii) User-friendliness and potential educational value of its codebase, with a well-structured coding style and an abundance of comments and explanations of key algorithms involved.