Motivation: The exponential growth of scientific literature has resulted in a massive amount of unstructured natural language data that cannot be directly handled by means of bioinformatics tools. Such tools generally require structured data, often generated through a cumbersome process of manual literature curation. Herein, we present MyMiner, a free and user-friendly text annotation tool aimed to assist in carrying out the main biocuration tasks and to provide labelled data for the development of text mining systems. MyMiner allows easy classification and labelling of textual data according to user-specified classes as well as predefined biological entities. The usefulness and efficiency of this application have been tested for a range of real-life annotation scenarios of various research topics.
INTRODUCTIONScientific literature is one of the main sources of knowledge on which working hypotheses are built. To organize and represent biological information for researchers as well as for bioinformatics analyses, many literature biocuration efforts have been carried out (). Their aim is to extract biologically relevant information from articles and transform it into structured database records. With regard to the rapid literature growth, text-mining efforts are becoming increasingly important to speed up this process. Powerful infrastructures such as GATE (General Architecture for Text Engineering) () usually require a good degree of technical expertise and sometimes even basic knowledge of computational linguistics, making them challenging to use for biocuration purposes. To develop text-mining systems, it is crucial to produce high-quality labelled textual data that can serve as training and test datasets. At present, most biomedical text mining applications/methods utilize a restricted number of annotated text data (corpora) prepared by biology domain experts. To help increasing this number, we have implemented MyMiner, an online annotation tool intended for expert biologists with no programming skills. Compared to other applications [e.g. BRAT (), PubTator (), Knowtator (), NCBO Annotator () and DOMEO/SWAN () (Supplementary)], MyMiner provides within one single web-based application user interfaces to classify documents, compare classification efficiencies, detect entities to annotate texts and link them to identifiers.
CONCLUSIONMyMiner is an online application designed to allow biologists and non-IT experts to semi-automatically classify and annotate (biomedical) information in text with the help of text-mining tools. It allows validating these automatically generated results, as it provides a simple interface to manipulate the recognized bio-entities and permits the addition of new labels for manual tagging. This system can be exploited to efficiently label text for document classification and prioritization tasks, for entity recognition purposes and for manual annotation of relationships between entities. It has been used during various annotation efforts by diverse groups of biomedical scientists. During the past 2 years, MyMiner has been used by 240 unique visitors. On the MyMiner webpage we provide a comprehensive set of related systems to point visitors to complementary software. The MyMiner repository offers the possibility to host and share corpora provided by the user community.