Motivation: The Oxford Nanopore MinION sequencer, currently in pre-release testing through the MinION Access Programme (MAP), promises long reads in real-time from an inexpensive, compact , USB device. Tools have been released to extract FASTA/Q from the MinION base calling output and to provide basic yield statistics. However, no single tool yet exists to provide comprehensive alignment-based quality control and error profile analysis—something that is extremely important given the speed with which the platform is evolving. Results: NanoOK generates detailed tabular and graphical output plus an in-depth multi-page PDF report including error profile, quality and yield data. NanoOK is multi-reference, enabling detailed analysis of metagenomic or multiplexed samples. Four popular Nanopore aligners are supported and it is easily extensible to include others. Availability and implementation: NanoOK is an open-source software, implemented in Java with supporting R scripts. It has been tested on Linux and Mac OS X and can be downloaded from https://github.com/TGAC/NanoOK. A VirtualBox VM containing all dependencies and the DH10B read set used in this article is available from http://opendata.tgac.ac.uk/nanook/. A Docker image is also available from Docker Hub—see program documentation https://documentation.tgac.ac.uk/ display/NANOOK.
IntroductionThe Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT) MinION is one of the latest of a new generation of single molecule sequencing technologies. Originally revealed at the 2012 Advances in Genome Biology and Technology conference, it arrived in the labs of MinION Access Programme (MAP) members in May 2014. Offering multi-kilobase reads, the MinION attracted interest due to its compact size, USB connection, relatively inexpensive expected purchase price and a streamed mode of operation that enables analysis of data as it generated. Though not out of pre-release testing, the device is in the hands of research groups around the world who are evaluating the performance and suitability of the platform for a wide range of applications including medical diagnostics, environmental surveillance and de novo sequencing. ONT's technology involves the detection of current changes across biological nanopores through which DNA molecules move. The degree of current change depends on the bases (5-mer) present in the pore at any given time and multiple measurements are made as the molecule advances, resulting in a characteristic 'squiggle' plot which ONT's basecalling software (Metrichor) processes to a nucleotide sequence. The MinION will read both strands of DNA (