Motivation: Set-based network similarity metrics are increasingly used to productively analyze genome-wide data. Conventional approaches, such as mean shortest path and clique-based metrics, have been useful but are not well suited to all applications. Computational scientists in other disciplines have developed commu-nicability as a complementary metric. Network communicability considers all paths of all lengths between two network members. Given the success of previous network analyses of protein–protein interactions , we applied the concepts of network communicability to this problem. Here we show that our communicability implementation has advantages over traditional approaches. Overall, analyses suggest network communicability has considerable utility in analysis of large-scale biological networks. Availability and implementation: We provide our method as an R package for use in both human protein–protein interaction network analyses and analyses of arbitrary networks along with a tutorial at
INTRODUCTIONMany types of biological data, for example proteinprotein interactions, coexpression data and biomedical research literature naturally lend themselves to formation of interconnected networks. While finding meaningful connections between network members (i.e. nodes, proteins or genes) can be challenging, networks provide an opportunity to contextualize results at the system level. Standard analyses rely on relationships between individual pairs of nodes and can be vulnerable to stochasticity and technical errors. Identifying sets of relationships between individual nodes and groups of others is one strategy for a more robust metric of connectedness. The challenge remains to retain topological information while simplifying network interactions into univariate representations for statistical analysis and comparison with other data types. A number of metrics have been successfully applied to the analysis of biological networks previously (). Shortest path analysis assesses the fewest connections (i.e. edges) required to connect a query node to one or more targets. However, nodes which themselves have many connections (i.e. high degree) are on average closer to all nodes. Therefore, identifying meaningful relationships by shortest path often requires some form of degree correction. Another weakness of shortest path analysis is that two or more paths of the same length are equivalent to a single path of that length. Thus, information regarding connectedness is lost. Jaccard similarity between two nodes is the quotient of the intersection and the union of their kth degree interactors (). This metric is useful for testing connections to 'near by' nodes, but performs poorly for nodes that are far apart. The method of random walk mean first passage assesses how soon a random walk leaving a node takes to reach a given target (). This metric may also require degree correction. Researchers in physics have proposed communicability as a metric of connectedness (). We previously used communicability to identify proteins connected in the human PPI network to a set of epilepsy proteins to aid identification of novel epilepsy genes (). Communicability considers paths of all lengths between two nodes scaled by the factorial of path length (), retaining more information about connectedness compared with shortest path metrics. It remains useful across greater path lengths compared with Jaccard similarity and avoids algorithmic stochasticity. Communicability is still influenced by degree and is challenged by large networks such as the human proteinprotein interaction network. Here, we propose a degree-normalized network connectedness metric inspired by network communicability and suitable for analysis of large complex networks. We provide an implementation for the human PPI network, as well as tools for arbitrary networks.