Motivation: Owing to recent advancements in high-throughput technologies , protein–protein interaction networks of more and more species become available in public databases. The question of how to identify functionally conserved proteins across species attracts a lot of attention in computational biology. Network alignments provide a systematic way to solve this problem. However, most existing alignment tools encounter limitations in tackling this problem. Therefore, the demand for faster and more efficient alignment tools is growing. Results: We present a fast and accurate algorithm, NetCoffee, which allows to find a global alignment of multiple protein–protein interaction networks. NetCoffee searches for a global alignment by maximizing a target function using simulated annealing on a set of weighted bipartite graphs that are constructed using a triplet approach similar to T-Coffee. To assess its performance, NetCoffee was applied to four real datasets. Our results suggest that NetCoffee remedies several limitations of previous algorithms, outperforms all existing alignment tools in terms of speed and nevertheless identifies biologically meaningful alignments.
INTRODUCTIONDiscovering functionally conserved proteins across different species is a fundamental task in comparative systems biology (). With the development of highthroughput technologies such as mass spectrometry (), microarrays (), yeast two-hybrid assays () and next-generation sequencing, a tremendous amount of genomic, proteomics and protein interaction data has been generated and became available in public databases (). This comprehensive experimental data provide a basis for analyses that aim at discovering conservation of protein function among different species, i.e. functional orthologs (FO). Orthologs are genes/ proteins of different species that have descended from the same gene in a common ancestor. The FO are orthologs whose functions are conserved in different species. It is often assumed that two proteins with similar sequences or similar structure have similar functions, and conversely that functionally related proteins have similar sequences. Based on this assumption, a number of approaches that use sequence similarity have been developed, e.g. reciprocal-best-BLAST-hits (RBH), for predicting FO. This resulted in several orthologs databases such as the Clusters of Orthologous Groups (), Inparanoid (O') and OrthoDB (). However, high sequence similarity does not necessarily indicate functional conservation. Because functional sites of proteins are usually only one or several small parts of the whole sequence, two proteins can have a highly significant overall similarity even though all functional sites are completely different (). To overcome this problem, network alignment approaches () have been proposed that supplement sequence-based algorithms with information from proteinprotein interaction (PPI) networks. Network alignment approaches can be generally classified into pairwise or multiple and into local or global approaches. Pairwise approaches align two networks and multiple approaches three and more networks. Local alignment approaches detect conserved subnetworks of two (pairwise local alignment) or more (multiple local alignment) networks. These conserved subnetworks are usually independent high-scoring local regions of the compared networks, each implying a putative functional module such as a protein complex () or a metabolic pathway (). Global alignment approaches determine an overall alignment between the input networks (). The resulting alignments can be used to transfer annotation from characterized to uncharacterized proteins. Typically, pairwise global alignment algorithms attempt to provide only a one-to-one node mapping between proteins of compared networks (), whereas multiple global alignment algorithms attempt to provide a many-to-many node mapping (). A many-to-many node mapping allows to find a set of functionally similar proteins that have descended from the same protein in a common ancestor based on four types of evolutionary events: protein deletion, protein duplication, protein mutation and paralog mutation (). For more information on the difference between local and global alignment, see the Supplementary Material. *To whom correspondence should be addressed. Many pairwise local and pairwise global alignment tools have been developed in the last decade. Among pairwise local alignment tools are PathBlast (), MaWISh (), NetworkBlast (), NetAligner (), PINALOG () and SIPINAL (). A review by Sharan et al. () extensively discusses some of these methods. Well-known pairwise global alignment tools are IsoRank (), PISwap (), MI-GRAAL (), Natalie 2.0 () and GHOST (). With the increasing availability of PPI networks, the demand for local and global alignment tools of multiple networks has risen. Several multiple alignment tools have been developed, most notably the multiple global alignment tools Graemlin 2.0 (), IsoRank-N () and SMETANA (), and the multiple local alignment tool NetworkBlast-M (). However, these tools have some limitations. Graemlin 2.0 requires a training dataset of known alignments to learn its many network-dependent parameters and a phylogenetic tree, which means it can not be applied to species without known alignments or without a phylogenetic tree. NetworkBlast-M does not work on networks containing protein nodes with large vertex degree, such as the yeast network in our test datasets. Both IsoRank-N and SMETANA need a lot of computing time for aligning six or more species. Thus, there is a demand for tools that can deal with many networks in a more efficient way. As a remedy for these limitations, we present a fast and accurate tool NetCoffee, which addresses the problem of global alignment of multiple networks. The algorithm implemented in NetCoffee has four main steps: (i) building the PPI networks and a library of bipartite graphs, (ii) assigning an integrated weight to each edge in the bipartite graphs using a triplet extension approach similar to T-Coffee, (iii) building a search space that consists of candidate edges (protein pairs) and (iv) simulated annealing (SA) with a large number of iterations of a Metropolis Scheme to maximize a scoring function for global alignments. We ran NetCoffee on four datasets consisting of up to six PPI networks. Our results show that NetCoffee overcomes the limitations of existing algorithms, outperforms all existing alignment tools in terms of speed and nevertheless identifies a biologically meaningful alignment.
CONCLUSIONWe have proposed a fast and accurate algorithm for global alignment of multiple networks. It overcomes several limitations of existing tools by aligning multiple networks without additional. Consistency comparison on dataset 2 between NetCoffee (gray boxes) and IsoRank-N (white boxes). Box plots for the semantic similarity measures BPscore, MFscore and rfunSim of match sets conserved by i 2 f3, 4, 5g species, with respect to the parameter (the horizontal axis) training data, finding a global alignment of six species within several minutes and scaling to networks with tens of thousands of proteins and interactions. Further, it is the first alignment tool that can run with multiple cores in parallel. We rigorously combine protein sequence similarity and network topology similarity into a suitable scoring scheme for multiple networks, adapting a successful technique from multiple sequence alignment. This allows us to model the problem as a combinatorial optimization problem, which we solve with SA. On PPI networks of five eukaryotic species, such as human, mouse, fruit fly, nematode and yeast, our implementation NetCoffee successfully finds a global alignment covering $50% of the proteins; and $45% of the match sets are qualified. We compared NetCoffee with four existing tools, three of which fail to run on at least one of the three test datasets in our benchmark. The results indicate that NetCoffee outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithm IsoRank-N in terms of coverage and consistency, and at the same time is $13 orders of magnitude faster. Compared with NetworkBlast-M, Graemlin 2.0 and SMETANA, NetCoffee not only overcomes their limitations but also retains the quality of alignments in terms of both coverage and consistency. This suggests that NetCoffee provides substantial improvements to global network alignment and that the research community working on function annotation and phylogenetic analysis can benefit from it. Further, its application is not restricted to PPI networks. It could also be extended to other types of complex networks, such as Scientific Collaboration Networks (SCN) and World Wide Web Networks (WWWN).