The graph orientation problem calls for orienting the edges of a graph so as to maximize the number of pre-specified source–target vertex pairs that admit a directed path from the source to the target. Most algorith-mic approaches to this problem share a common preprocessing step, in which the input graph is reduced to a tree by repeatedly contracting its cycles. Although this reduction is valid from an algorithmic perspective, the assignment of directions to the edges of the contracted cycles becomes arbitrary, and the connecting source–target paths may be arbitrarily long. In the context of biological networks, the connection of vertex pairs via shortest paths is highly motivated, leading to the following problem variant: given a graph and a collection of source–target vertex pairs, assign directions to the edges so as to maximize the number of pairs that are connected by a shortest (in the original graph) directed path. This problem is NP-complete and hard to approximate to within sub-polynomial factors. Here we provide a first polynomial size integer linear program formulation for this problem, which allows its exact solution in seconds on current networks. We apply our algorithm to orient protein–protein interaction networks in yeast and compare it with two state-of-the-art algorithms. We find that our algorithm outperforms previous approaches and can orient considerable parts of the network, thus revealing its structure and function. Availability and implementation: The source code is available at http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/GMD/
INTRODUCTIONProteinprotein interactions (PPIs) form the skeleton of signal transduction in the cell. Although many of these interactions carry directed signaling information, current PPI measurement technologies, such as yeast two hybrid () and coimmunoprecipitation (), reveal the presence of a signal flow but not of its directionality. Identifying this directionality is fundamental to our understanding of how signaling networks function. Although some interactions are naturally directed, such as kinasesubstrate and phosphatasesubstrate interactions (KPIs), the directions of the vast majority of PPIs remain unknown. From a theoretical point of view, graph orientation problems have been studied by several authors. In the following, we emphasize algorithmic results pertaining to mixed graphs (i.e. graphs with both directed and undirected edges), which are the focus of this work.showed that the problem of orienting a mixed graph so that it admits directed paths for a given set of sourcetarget vertex pairs is NP-complete.showed that the corresponding maximization problem is NP-hard to approximate to within a factor of 7/8, and provided a sublinear approximation for it. Recently,studied the problem of orienting the edges of an undirected graph so as to maximize the number of pre-specified sourcetarget pairs that admit a directed shortest path between them (i.e. a directed path whose length is equal to the distance between them in the unoriented graph). They showed that for an undirected graph with a vertex set of size n, edge set of size m and p source-target pairs the problem is NP-hard to approximate within factors of Op 1  and Om 1=3  for any fixed 40, and provided an approximation algorithm with a factor of Omaxfn; pg 1= ffiffi 2 p . For the k-length-bounded orientations in a weighted undirected graph, which aims to maximize the weight of all satisfied paths between sources and targets with length at most k,showed that while the resulting problem is NP-hard, it can still be approximated to within a factor O2 k =k. In the biological domain, previous work to infer interaction directionality has mostly used unsupervised methods, with the exception of, which represents each directed interaction using topological features and trains a classifier to predict the directions of unseen interactions. Specifically, previous unsupervised methods relied on information from perturbation experiments, in which a gene is perturbed (cause) and as a result other genes change their expression levels (effects), to guide the inference (). They assumed that for an effect to take place, there must be a directed path in the network from the causal gene to the affected gene. As there are many paths that can link two proteins in the interaction network, previous solution methods relied on either length-bounded paths () or parameterized and integer programming techniques (). The former are limited by the length of the considered paths (at most five). The latter, while producing highly precise predictions, are limited in their coverage, as they start by contracting cycles of the input network, eliminating the vast majority of the interactions (492% on the network) from further consideration. It is likely that biological responses are controlled by relatively short signaling cascades (); however, in a large-scale network, enumerating all possible paths between two vertices can still be computationally intractable, even when considering only paths of limited length. In this article, we propose an orientation method that overcomes the limitations of previous approaches by focusing attention on shortest paths, which allows the efficient *To whom correspondence should be addressed. representation of all such paths and avoids the contraction problem. The method aims to orient the edges of an input graph G so that a maximum number of input sourcetarget pairs admit a directed source-to-target path whose length is the shortest possible (i.e. equal to distance between the two vertices in G). Our algorithm builds on a first efficient (for realistic instances) integer linear program (ILP) formulation of the problem, allowing the computation of optimal solutions in seconds on current networks. We applied our method to large-scale datasets of yeast physical interactions and evaluated it using cross-validation experiments. Our method outperformed two previous stateof-the-art orientation methods () by a significant margin.
DISCUSSIONThe orientation of a network is key to understanding its function. Here we have presented the SHORTEST approach, which allows us for the first time to confidently orient the majority of the edges in a network. The most natural use of such an orientation is in enhancing methods for pathway inference. Specifically, current pathway inference algorithms, like, receive as input an undirected PPI network and search for likely paths that start and end at specific proteins.The search space of such methods can be greatly reduced by the orientation information. To test the potential utility of our orientation method in a pathway inference context, we checked its power in filtering candidate pathways by their agreement with the predicted orientations. To this end, we inspected the sourcetarget pairs connected by more than one possible pathway within the networks in Section 3.3: (i) In the orientation instance because of, there are 740 possible shortest paths from source to target (6.2 paths per sourcetarget pair). However, when filtering these paths against the confident orientation predictions, only 589 (4.9 on average per pair) remain. (ii) In the orientation instance because ofthere are 46 782 shortest paths from source to target (11.9 on average per pair), of which only 28 273 (7.2 on average per pair) agree with the confident orientations. Thus, the use of our method can potentially reduce the search space by up to 40%.. Performance comparison of GITTER and SHORTEST using different confidence cutoff. Labels denote the confidence cutoff used by SHORTESTNote: Algorithm run times in seconds. The full dataset was used, with 256 source target pairs.