Motivation: The evolution of multicellular organisms is associated with increasing variability of molecules governing behavioral and physiological states. This is often achieved by neuropeptides (NPs) that are produced in neurons from a longer protein, named neuropeptide precursor (NPP). The maturation of NPs occurs through a sequence of proteolytic cleavages. The difficulty in identifying NPPs is a consequence of their diversity and the lack of applicable sequence similarity among the short functionally related NPs. Results: Herein, we describe Neuropeptide Precursor Identifier (NeuroPID), a machine learning scheme that predicts metazoan NPPs. NeuroPID was trained on hundreds of identified NPPs from the UniProtKB database. Some 600 features were extracted from the primary sequences and processed using support vector machines (SVM) and ensemble decision tree classifiers. These features combined biophysical, chemical and informational–statistical properties of NPs and NPPs. Other features were guided by the defining characteristics of the dibasic cleavage sites motif. NeuroPID reached 89–94% accuracy and 90–93% precision in cross-validation blind tests against known NPPs (with an emphasis on Chordata and Arthropoda). NeuroPID also identified NPP-like proteins from extensively studied model organisms as well as from poorly annotated proteomes. We then focused on the most significant sets of features that contribute to the success of the classifiers. We propose that NPPs are attractive targets for investigating and modulating behavior, metabolism and homeostasis and that a rich repertoire of NPs remains to be identified. Availability: NeuroPID source code is freely available at http://www.protonet.cs.huji.ac.il/neuropid
INTRODUCTIONPeptides are known to be key modulators in behavior, sensation and homeostasis (). Biologically active peptides that are produced and secreted from neurons and act to modulate their function are collectively called peptide modulators or neuropeptides (NPs). NPs represent a widespread mode of communication that is found from Cnidarians to Bilaterians, including mammals. NP precursors (NPPs) are subjected to regulated cleavages that result in the production of functionally active NPs. The processing of NPs occurs along the secretory pathway (). In most instances, NPs locally modulate presynaptic or postsynaptic cell activity (). From a functional perspective, known effects of NPs include stress control, pain perception, social behaviors and sleepwake cycle (). NPs also regulate food uptake, maintaining appetite and body weight. The peripheral NPs that act outside the central nervous system regulate gastrointestinal and immunological functions (). For example, some NPs induce chemotactic response in attracting immature dendritic cells to the site of inflammation. In this context, substances P and K, two extensively studied NPs, induce the production and release of inflammatory cytokines from blood monocytes (). 'Social' NPs, such as oxytocin and arginine vasopressin, regulate complex social cognition and behavior (including pair-bonding, social recognition and maternal behavior) (). The immense diversity among NPs contributes to the wide range of behavioral tasks that are carried out. A common feature for the majority of NPs is their production from a larger precursor (NPP). The production of short bioactive peptides is a result of a series of cleavages and maturation events (). NPP can produce multiple copies of different NPs (). Notably, a cluster of basic residues specifies these cleavage sites. The occurrence of dibasic residues specifies the canonical sites for intracellular endopeptidases such as Furin (). However, some NPs that act in cellcell communication () (e.g. cathepsin L) do not obey the dibasic residues specificity rule. The identity and regulation of the key peptidases that are responsible for the processing of the NPP remains an active research field. NPs typically bind cell surface G-proteins coupled receptors (GPCRs) that initiate a signaling cascade. An evolutionary analysis of NPPs and their cognate GPCRs suggested a diversification that occurred in certain taxonomical branches (). The NPs and their receptors are attractive targets for drug development and translational medicine based on their role in feeding, sexual behavior and cellular homeostasis (). The goal of this research is to enable systematic identification of NPPs (and NPs) at a genome-wide scale. The difficulty in identifying NPs and classifying genes as potential NPs stems from the following: (i) Current gene annotation tools mostly rely on sequence conservation traits (). However, NPs that exhibit the same function may share minimal sequence similarity (). Additionally, homologous NPPs may still produce NPs that are species-specific. (ii) Structural inference tools () fail when applied to short peptides. Consequently, assigning functions to known NPPs and identifying previously overlooked related genes call for developing an alternative strategy. Furthermore, the shortage of experimental validated sequences is large and growing. Thus, methods that are primarily based on rules extracted from the limited number of known examples lack the ability to generalize to unseen instances. In this research, we applied a supervised machine learning (ML) model based on extracting features directly from the primary sequence. Importantly, our method for identifying NPP candidates is 'alignment free'. Statistical support vector machine (SVM) models and decision tree-based classifiers (e.g. Random forests) were chosen as the preferred strategy (). We present Neuropeptide Precursor Identifier (NeuroPID), a predicting machine that was trained on a curated set of NPPs. The high accuracy of NeuroPID was confirmed based on cross-validation (CV) tests. Furthermore, we selected a sparse set of features that contributed maximally to the successful classification by NeuroPID. Finally, we provide a candidate list of NPP-related proteins. A list of filtered NPP predictions from the fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster), the worm (Caenorhabditis elegans), the silkworm (Bombyx mori) and the red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta) is available at www.protonet.cs.huji.ac.il/neuropid/results. In addition, we analyzed the proteome of the honeybee (Apis mellifera) and the Monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus). The NeuroPID code is available at www.protonet.cs.huji.ac.il/ neuropid.
DISCUSSION