Motivation: Detection of protein spots in two-dimensional gel electrophoresis images (2-DE) is a very complex task and current approaches addressing this problem still suffer from significant shortcomings. When quantifying a spot, most of the current software applications include a lot of background due to poor segmentation. Other software applications use a fixed window for this task, resulting in omission of part of the protein spot, or including background in the quantification. The approach presented here for the segmentation and quantification of 2-DE aims to minimize these problems. Results: Five sections from different gels are used to test the performance of the presented method concerning the detection of protein spots, and three gel sections are used to test the quantification of sixty protein spots. Comparisons with a state-of-the-art commercial software and an academic state-of-the-art approach are presented. It is shown that the proposed approach for segmentation and quantification of 2-DE images can compete with the available commercial and academic software packages. Availability: A command-line prototype may be downloaded, for non-commercial use, from http://w3.ualg.pt/~aanjos/prototypes .html. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONDeveloping new bioinformatics tools, both computational and experimental, such as those for membrane protein type prediction (), protein subcellular location prediction (), drugtarget interaction prediction (), substrateenzymeproduct triad network prediction (), and so on, can timely provide very useful information and insights for both basic research and drug development and hence are widely welcome by the science community. Using image feature or graphic approaches to study biological systems is currently a hot topic in the biological and medical science because it can provide useful intuitive insights, as indicated by * To whom correspondence should be addressed. many previous studies on a series of important biological topics such as enzyme-catalyzed reactions (), protein folding kinetics and folding rates (), inhibition kinetics of processive nucleic acid polymerases and nucleases () and others (). These kind of approaches are also of great importance in the field of proteomics (). The present study is an attempt to propose a new approach for the segmentation and quantification of two-dimensional gel electrophoresis images (2-DE). The proteome was originally defined as the protein complement of the genome (). The proteome is complex and highly dynamic, since the proteins present in a sample will depend on e.g. the tissue, cell, organelle and/or development stage analyzed. Analysis of proteomes requires techniques that can simultaneously separate thousands of proteins in complex mixtures. Classical proteome analysis is based on separation of proteins by 2-DE, a technique originally described decades ago (O'), which has since been a subject to continuous developments enabling high resolution and reproducibility. In the first dimension of 2-DE, proteins are separated by isoelectric focusing during which they migrate along a pH gradient to their isoelectric point (pI). The second dimension separation, perpendicular to the first, separates proteins by sodium dodecyl sulpfatepolyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDSPAGE) according to their molecular size. 2-DE is unique in its ability both to resolve differently modified forms of the same gene product in separate spots, facilitating analysis of protein posttranslational modifications, and to enable simultaneous analysis of synthesis and amounts of hundreds of proteins in the same gel. Thus, 2-DE is a widely used and important tool in proteome analysis (). In a typical 2-DE-based proteomics experiment, aimed at detecting changes in the proteome related to a specific treatment, several biological replicates each for treated and control samples are separated on 2-DE. Proteins on the gels may be visualized by one of many staining techniques (e.g. Coomassie blue dye, silver staining, fluorescent dyes, radiolabeling). In 2-DE, image analysis software is required for objective and quantitative comparison of 2-DE spot patterns, and several software packages are commercially available. Usually, 2-DE image pipeline analysis consists of: @BULLET spot detection; @BULLET alignment of multiple 2-DE images; and @BULLET quantification of protein spots.
DISCUSSIONWhen comparing protein profiles with Progenesis Samespot, using a reference gel that defines the spot area for all gels, the end-result will'ProgA' and 'ProgB' are the results from progenesis with different gels chosen as reference. N/A means that the spot was not detected on any of the gels.  and , mean that the spot was only detected in the first or the second gel, respectively. depend on which gel is chosen as reference. In Progenesis, it is most likely that the user chooses the gel with most round uniform spots, because it will be easier to align this to the others. The problem arises when the other gels/spots vary in quality with respect to shape and size. Having defined the spots' areas in the 'best' gel, and using these definitions in the other gels, if the analysis is repeated with a new reference gel, different results will be provided to the user, as demonstrated by the results presented in. Since the proposed approach independently defines the spot area in each gel, the program is more likely to give less-biased end-results for being reference-gel independent. Another issue is how the spot area is detected. Progenesis uses spot and background to define the spot area. Pinnacle centers a fixed size window on the pinnacle of the spot. The proposed approach defines the spot area from near the border of the spots and, therefore, avoids potential problems with less uniform spots in between gels. Furthermore, by defining the spot area from the border of the spot, it is easier to get at a more realistic estimate of spots placed close to each other as well as partially overlapping non-saturated spots, which will be present in most experiments. In comparison with the other software packages tested, the proposed method is shown to be able to detect the majority of validated protein spots in a series of gel images, while at the same time minimizing the number of false positives. This represents a considerable improvement in terms of the time needed for manual validation and correction of spot boundaries, a common bottleneck in proteomics studies. When analyzing samples based on biological material with unknown absolute quantities of individual protein forms, it is not possible to say which is the 'true' answer. Other software packages also give slightly different results, but again, it is not possible to say from this type of analysis which is the 'correct' answer. A complete gel image is included in the support data, segmented by Progenesis Samespot, PDQuest and proposed method for comparison. It is noticeable that PDQuest is the result that requires more user intervention and manual editing, as also witnessed by other studies (). In summary, this article presents an efficient way of automatic detection of quality markers to use in conjunction with the Marker Controlled Watershed Transform or even with the Image Foresting Transform () for the segmentation of 2-DE images and quantification of protein spots. Also, the presented technique can be used in the segmentation step for approaches that use common spot boundaries such asor even Progenesis Samespots. The results can also be used by gel alignment for gel alignment methods such as the one presented in. Post-processing the results produced by the method proposed in this article, using the domain expertise, will allow the correction of most of the discussed shortcomings but, as stated before, the topic of postprocessing is not in the scope of this article. This article contributes to the field of 2-D gel-based proteomics with an alternative approach that may compete with Progenesis Samespot and other important academic approaches in the detection of spots and the estimation of the spot volume for gel comparison.