Motivation: It has long been hypothesized that incorporating models of network noise as well as edge directions and known pathway information into the representation of protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks might improve their utility for functional inference. However, a simple way to do this has not been obvious. We find that diffusion state distance (DSD), our recent diffusion-based metric for measuring dissimilarity in PPI networks, has natural extensions that incorporate confidence, directions and can even express coherent pathways by calculating DSD on an augmented graph. Results: We define three incremental versions of DSD which we term cDSD, caDSD and capDSD, where the capDSD matrix incorporates confidence, known directed edges, and pathways into the measure of how similar each pair of nodes is according to the structure of the PPI network. We test four popular function prediction methods (majority vote, weighted majority vote, multi-way cut and functional flow) using these different matrices on the Bakers yeast PPI network in cross-validation. The best performing method is weighted majority vote using capDSD. We then test the performance of our augmented DSD methods on an integrated heterogeneous set of protein association edges from the STRING database. The superior performance of capDSD in this context confirms that treating the pathways as prob-abilistic units is more powerful than simply incorporating pathway edges independently into the network. Availability: All source code for calculating the confidences, for extracting pathway information from KEGG XML files, and for calculating the cDSD, caDSD and capDSD matrices are available from http://dsd.
INTRODUCTIONOne of the most well-studied problems in computational network biology is the prediction of protein functional labels from distance and neighborhood structure in the proteinprotein interaction network (PPI network). In 2013, based on the observation that paths through high-degree 'hub' nodes in the PPI network were less informative than short paths through protein nodes with fewer interaction partners, () introduce the diffusion state distance (DSD) metric that is able to quantify topological similarity in a PPI network in a more fine-grained way. Diffusion-based methods had been previously proposed for clustering similar proteins () and for ranking candidate disease genes (), but by explicitly taking an L1 norm of the vector of the random walks to all other nodes in the network to measure the distance between nodes, DSD is able to capture a more global view of the network than other prior work we are aware of, with the exception of Vavien () for candidate disease gene ranking, and ISORANK-N (), which also is based on a global embedding, but for a very different problem (network alignment).showed that when a DSD-based distance is substituted for ordinary next-hop shortest-path distance in four classical network-based function prediction methods, functional label prediction performance for the GO (Gene Ontology), as well as all three levels of the MIPS (Munich Information Center For Protein Sequences) ontology, improved across the board in cross-validation experiments on both the Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the S.pombe PPI networks. However, these results were based only on a simple undirected model of the PPI network, which additionally assumed that all the edges listed in the BioGRID data were uniformly correct. On the other hand, it is well-established both that there is noise in the PPI interaction network data (), and that some interactions are naturally directed in the PPI network (). In addition, looking just at pairwise interaction data as edges does not fully capture all the information that is known about the PPI network. In particular, there is increasingly available data on biological pathways, for example, TGF-binds TGF-receptor 1, which phosphorylates Smad3, which with importin-1 enters the nucleus and binds DNA to regulate expression (). In this article, we revisit the DSD metric we designed in earlier work for function prediction in the ordinary undirected PPI network. We find that its diffusion-based framework gives a natural way to incorporate edge confidences and directed edges (when known). However, the main contribution of this article is to show that there is a way to capture the cohesiveness of known pathways by calculating DSD on an augmented network, and that this way of representing pathways results in better performance than just incorporating the pathway edges themselves for most, but not all of the function prediction methods we study. We show this first in cross-validation on the standard network consisting of just experimentally verified physical interaction edges from S.cerevisiae, and then on an integrative network with heterogeneous protein association data edges derived from the STRING database (). *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com
DISCUSSIONIncorporating confidence and pathways into our diffusion-based distance metric DSD, we studied whether it was best to incorporate pathway information as edges or as controlled-access highways in an augmented graph. We showed that the augmented graph improved the best function prediction method we tested, weighted majority vote, especially in our experiments on the STRING database, where there were additional edges whose correlation with function was weaker. The performance of other methods was not as clearly served by the augmented pathways; capDSD improved functional flow in the noisier STRING setting, but not on BioGRID. The performance of multi-way cut degraded across the board. We hypothesize that the methods that will improve using capDSD versus just caDSD are those that use only some sort of information about the local neighborhood of a node to predict its function; here, making pathways 'closer' with highways is helpful, whereas the amount of distortion in augmenting the graph causes too much noise for more global methods such as multi-way cut. Functional flow, has both local and global aspects, so its mixed performance would be consistent with this theory. Finally, the best modern function prediction methods are all integrative methods, and may do something more sophisticated than adding in data from other high-throughput data sources as edges with different confidences (). Thus the next step would be to integrate our results into a hybrid method along these lines. We note that all code for calculating the confidences, for extracting pathway information from KEGG XML files, and for calculating the cDSD, caDSD and capDSD matrices is available from http://dsd.cs.tufts.edu/capdsd.