Motivation: Pairwise relatedness estimation is important in many contexts such as disease mapping and population genetics. However, all existing estimation methods are based on called genotypes, which is not ideal for next-generation sequencing (NGS) data of low depth from which genotypes cannot be called with high certainty. Results: We present a software tool, NgsRelate, for estimating pairwise relatedness from NGS data. It provides maximum likelihood estimates that are based on genotype likelihoods instead of genotypes and thereby takes the inherent uncertainty of the genotypes into account. Using both simulated and real data, we show that NgsRelate provides markedly better estimates for low-depth NGS data than two state-of-the-art genotype-based methods.
IntroductionEstimation of how related two individuals are from genetic data plays a key role in several research areas, including medical genetics and population genetics. For example, in medical genetics it is used for excluding closely related individuals from association studies and thereby to avoid inflated false positive rates. How related two individuals are is usually described through the concept of identityby-descent (IBD), i.e. genetic identity due to a recent common ancestor. Historically, several summary statistics have been used, such as the kinship coefficient h, however almost all of these statistics can be calculated from R  k 0 ; k 1 ; k 2 , where k m is the fraction of genome in which the two individuals share m alleles IBD. For example h  k1 4  k2 2. We will therefore here focus on R. Many estimators for R have been proposed, both method of moments () and maximum likelihood (ML) estimators (). Common to them all is that they are based on genotype data and it has been shown that they work well on single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chip data. However, next-generation sequencing (NGS) is becoming increasingly common and often NGS data are only of low depth, which means that genotypes can only be called with high uncertainty (O'). For such data it has been shown that it can be an advantage to take the uncertainty of the genotypes into account by basing statistical methods on so-called genotype likelihoods (GLs), instead of genotypes (). Motivated by this we developed NgsRelate; a ML method for estimating the pairwise relatedness parameter R from NGS data based on GLs. In the following, we present this method and show that for low-depth NGS data it performs markedly better than two state-of-the-art genotype-based methods.