
INTRODUCTIONIn recent years, there has been a massive expansion of knowledge regarding the non-coding RNA (ncRNA) gene universe. Following the Encode project (), it is now accepted that while $80% of the genome is transcribed, only $2% of the genome is protein coding. Whereas an increasing body of evidence () supports the existence of purifying selection as well as binding of transcription factors to regulate the expression of ncRNA genes and lends strength to some ncRNA entries, it is still unclear what fraction of this immense molecular repertoire is functional (). Furthermore, well-documented ncRNA genes do not exceed 1% of all transcripts. Obviously, this state of affairs points to a potential of tremendous future augmentation of ncRNA gene counts. Some classes of ncRNA genes (e.g. rRNA and tRNA) have been known for a very long time (), while the discovery of the diversity and magnitude of ncRNA genes has been accelerated in the past few years, reviewed in Mattick and Makunin (2006). Unlike protein-coding genes, which have been extensively studied in structure, orthologue identification and single-nucleotide polymorphism annotation, the study of ncRNA genes lags behind. There exist more than a dozen ncRNA gene databases. Some are dedicated to particular ncRNA classes, such as miRBase (), snoRNA-LBME-db () and piRNABank (Sai), while others such as Rfam (), RNAdb () and fRNAdb () include a variety of ncRNA classes. Many ncRNA genes are also included in the conventional gene databasesEnsembl (), NCBI's Entrez Gene (), HGNC () and GeneCards (). Interestingly, these databases vary greatly in their human ncRNA gene counts, partly because of the use of different sources and integration mechanisms. Grand unification is thus urgently needed (). We have initiated some steps towards this ambitious goal based on the integration capacities within GeneCards. GeneCards is an integrated human gene compendium, which strives to consolidate information about all human genes (). Its previous V3.07 included 15 118 RNA genes, mined from a limited number of sources: Ensembl, Entrez Gene and HGNC (). We have launched an expansion and integration protocol, based chiefly on the use of fRNAdb (), which in turn is mined from seven sources currently untapped by GeneCards. Using judicious unification protocols, we report here the augmentation of the ncRNA gene count to 79 344 in V3.09. While this 5-fold enhancement is in large part due to the addition of 21 812 non-redundant piRNA genes (Sai), our pipeline has also resulted in the addition of 36 151 genes belonging to other classes, yielding a comprehensive, upgradable compendium of ncRNA genes. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
DISCUSSIONThe field of ncRNA genes is a dynamic one; new genes and even new classes are continuously discovered. We have strived to generate a comprehensive integrated list of human ncRNA genes within GeneCards, thereby placing them in the context of a complete human gene compendium. For that, two large and mutually complementary sources of human ncRNA genes were put to use, conveying the content of 15 more restricted databases. This resulted in the inclusion of 79 344 GeneCards for ncRNAs, when compared with 15 118 in GeneCards V3.07, and to 21 451 after the reclassification of 6333 previously 'uncategorized' entries as ncRNAs, respectively, $5-fold and $3.5-fold increases. The $58 000 ncRNAs added in this unification process were derived from $180 000 genome-mapped fRNAdb and other source entries. The latter were pruned to $75 500 unique, more reliable ncRNAs (i.e. after clustering and removal of purely predicted singletons), candidates for integration into GeneCards. There was a surprisingly small overlap of $13 900 entries between the pruned ncRNAs and the past GeneCards embodiment, probably stemming from the existence of partially orthogonal worldwide pipelines for ncRNA discovery, and the almost mutually exclusive source lists for fRNAdb and GeneCards (). GeneCards V3.09 thus contains 101 004 molecularly identified functional gene entries (protein coding and ncRNAs). In addition, this version has 21 409 entries for pseudogenes, gene clusters, genetic disease loci and 'uncategorized', providing a grand total of 122 413. A major step in the fRNAdb pruning process was clustering of ncRNA entries with extensive genome overlaps, greatly extending the removal of redundant entries already performed within fRNAdb (). The arguably arbitrary clustering cutoff we have used is not much different from that employed by others, as exemplified by the case of piRNABank (Sai), whereby the 32 148 entries represented in fRNAdb have undergone local removal of redundancies to 23 439, quite similar to our procedure. Our method further eliminated sequences that were predicted only once as ncRNAs on the basis of sequence conservation and/or secondary structure alone. This is because such predictions were reported to comprise a high fraction of false positives, up to 5070% (). We believe that the resulting list of $79 300 ncRNAs represents an adequately comprehensive compendium, in which purely predicted entries are only minimally presented ($3%), allowing effective future scrutiny. GeneCards V3.07 already included 114 piRNA-related entries (with symbols PIRC*). These were mined from HGNC (and originally from piRNABank) and constitute clusters of $404000 (Sai) individual piRNAs. We have decided that GeneCards will have a card for each individual piRNA, with annotation indicating cluster affiliation in GeneCards' Aliases and Descriptions section. Forcontinuity and comprehensive consistency with HGNC, the PIRC entries are included as well. This decision is inspired by the fact that PIRC coordinates are computationally predicted with limited hard evidence for the existence of the 114 PIRCs as transcripts (). Another reason is not omitting piRNAs that are not included in PIRC clusters. Finally, recent studies have found a link between individual piRNAs and tumour development (), emphasizing the importance of regarding each piRNA as an individual gene. In the future, we also intend to add annotations for PIRCs according to several algorithms that provide cluster boundaries often differing from one another (; Sai Lakshmi and). Some of the criteria applied in our clustering procedure are somewhat arbitrary, such as the use of 70% positional overlap. However, we verified that this criterion does not impact much the number of multi-membered clusters created (Supplementary). When comparing the original GeneCards (version 3.07) to the newly added ncRNA sources (), we found that only $13 900 ncRNA entries were shared, while $7800 entries were unique to GeneCards and $57 600 were seen only in the added sources. This is surprising, since our expectation from the much larger size of newly introduced ncRNA collection was that it would include most or all of the original GeneCards ncRNA entries ($21 500). However, many of the non-overlap cases are easily explainable; $21 800 of these fRNAdb-unique entries are piRNAs and $2500 are ncRNA predictions from Evofold, RNAz and ncRNAsearch, both not included in GeneCards V3.07, leaving $33 500 ($58%) to be accounted for. Conversely, $72% of the GeneCards-unique entries come from Ensembl (), a data source not mined by fRNAdb, which addresses only ncRNA-specific databases. Thus, such mutual omissions may not be suspected as erroneous. The foregoing underline the fact that our unification process results in the most comprehensive dataset of human ncRNA genes, containing 7801 entries absent in the newly added sources. These are ncRNA genes uniquely found in the 'general' gene databases Entrez Gene and Ensembl, but not in ncRNA-specific compendia. Further, fRNAdb and the other added sources contain a considerable number ($45 500) of redundant entries, which in our procedure are judiciously unified into $14 000 clusters based on genomic location. Finally, the reduced compendium of ncRNA genes within GeneCards V3.09 is based on the notion that genes predicted by only one source are less likely to be valid. In the current version such genes are removed; in the future, they will be presented with a prediction score probability indicator (see below). We make a distinction between two sets of predicted ncRNAs. The first set is predicted purely by computational algorithms, as exemplified by RNAz and Evofold entries in fRNAdb. The second set includes Rfam entries, predicted based on known ncRNA seeds, and in turn serving (along with miRBase entries) as prediction templates for Ensembl ncRNAs (). Similarly, Ensembl relies on lincRNA discovery that includes identification of chromatin methylation outside protein-coding genes (). Therefore, we included all Ensembl ncRNA predictions while the fRNAdb predictions were further filtered. In the future, other filtration methods will be considered, e.g. based on the reported prediction scores (). In addition, we will make the predictive arsenal more comprehensive, including the use of additional algorithms such as AlifoldZ (), or improved versions of presently utilized algorithms such as RNAz 2.0 (). While at present GeneCards policy is to mine existing repositories of prediction outputs, we will consider also performing prediction runs on our own when needed. We provide here a status description for GeneCards version 3.09. Notably, GeneCards is a dynamic data structure, with three version updates each year. The mining of ncRNA genes from all sources () has now become part of the standard GeneCards generation process. Thus, all inclusion and annotation aspects would be frequently revised. fRNAdb released a minor update in March 2012 and is expected to undergo a major update in December 2012, followed by subsequent releases about every half year. GeneCards in turn will retrieve new fRNAdb content at each of its own updates (three times a year) and add directly primary sources not updated by fRNAdb. The Encode project predicts that $80% of all genomic territories are transcribed in one fashion or another. Using integrated GeneCards information, and disregarding overlaps, we estimate that 56% of the 3.1 Gb of the genome is occupied by genes, taking into account cumulative lengths of all preprocessed mRNA, including introns. The cumulative gene territories of all ncRNA genes in our GeneCards integration effort is 25%, of which the newly added 57 636 clusters add $15%. The total genome territory thus covered amounts to 71% of the human genome. Such difference between ENCODE and GeneCards may simply be due to dataset input and computation discrepancies. However, at least some of this difference may represent genes (mainly ncRNAs) still awaiting identification and characterization.