A major roadblock towards accurate interpretation of single cell RNA-seq data is large technical noise resulted from small amount of input materials. The existing methods mainly aim to find differentially expressed genes rather than directly de-noise the single cell data. We present here a powerful but simple method to remove technical noise and explicitly compute the true gene expression levels based on spike-in ERCC molecules.
IntroductionSingle-cell RNA-seq is a promising technology with broad applications and discerning biological noise from technical noise is critical for correctly interpreting the data (). Recently, statistical methods are developed to model the technical noise from spike-in ERCC molecules, whose concentrations are presumably same across the samples, and then identify differentially expressed genes, whose variations across samples are significantly larger than technical noise (). A limit for such an approach is that the true gene expression level is not explicitly calculated, which is needed for many analyses based on quantification of transcriptions. Here we propose a novel strategy to normalize and de-noise single cell RNA-seq data. This method calculates RNA concentrations from the sequencing reads, which is opposite to the other published methods that model sequencing reads from RNA concentrations; it is much simpler than the existing methods but importantly it allows to remove technical noise and explicitly compute gene expression. Specifically, we fit a gamma regression model (GRM) between the sequencing reads (RPKM, FPKM or TPM) and the concentration of spike-in ERCC molecules. The trained model is then used to estimate the de-noised molecular concentration of the genes from the reads. GRM shows great power of reducing technical noise and superior performance compared to several popular normalization methods such as FPKM (), TMM () and FQ () in analyzing single cell RNA-seq data.
ConclusionWe present here a simple but powerful method for removing technical noise of single cell RNA-seq data. This method is distinct from the existing approaches as it derives the relationship between RNA concentrations and sequencing read counts from ERCC molecules and then applies this relationship to calculate gene expression from read counts. We demonstrated the success of normalization and noise reduction of single cell RNA-seq data by showing significantly improved clustering of single cells after denoise. Furthermore, this method is general and also applicable to bulk RNA-seq data with spike-in ERCCs.