Motivation: Compared with complementary DNA (cDNA) or messenger RNA (mRNA) microarray data, microRNA (miRNA) microarray data are harder to normalize due to the facts that the total number of miRNAs is small, and that the majority of miRNAs usually have low expression levels. In bead-based microarrays, the hybridization is completed in several pools. As a result, the number of miRNAs tested in each pool is even smaller, which poses extra difficulty to intrasample normalization and ultimately affects the quality of the final profiles assembled from various pools. In this article, we consider a measurement error model-based method for bead-based microarray intrasample normalization. Results: In this study, results from quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) assays are used as gold standards for validation. The performance of the proposed measurement error model-based method is evaluated via a simulation study and real bead-based miRNA expression data. Simulation results show that the new method performs well to assemble complete profiles from subprofiles from various pools. Compared with two intrasample normalization methods recommended by the manufacturer, the proposed approach produces more robust final complete profiles and results in better agreement with the qRT-PCR results in identifying differentially expressed miRNAs, and hence improves the reproducibility between the two microarray platforms. Meaningful results are obtained by the proposed intrasample normalization method, together with quantile normalization as a subsequent complemental intersample normalization method. Availability: Datasets and R package are available at
INTRODUCTIONMiRNAs are short, non-coding RNA molecules that modulate gene expression by base pairing with the 3 untranslated region of their target mRNAs. It has been shown that miRNAs regulate about 30% of all transcripts in mammalian genomes. Each miRNA can regulate the expression level of hundreds of different mRNAs (). As regulators of gene expression, potential therapeutic targets * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and biomarkers, miRNAs were extensively studied in the past few years. As the number of annotated miRNAs continues to increase, several large-scale miRNA expression profiling microarrays have been developed, including quantitative PCR and sequencing. As an alternative arraying strategy to planar substrates that are widely used in microarrays, bead-based microarrays (beads arrays hereafter) have been developed either by impregnating beads with different concentrations of fluorescent dye or by some type of barcoding technology. The beads are addressable and used to identify specific binding events that occur on their surface. Bead-based arrays allow for the inclusion of many combinations of miRNA capture beads into a single pool, and provide greater flexibility over time as miRNAs are discovered and corresponding beads are created. In addition, beads arrays are expected to have increased specificity over the traditional glass-based microarrays (). Normalization is a crucial process of removing systematic bias as a result of the experimental artifacts from the data. Many existing normalization methods assume that the majority genes are not differentially expressed in the control and treated samples. Such an assumption might not hold true for miRNA arrays due to the facts that the total number of miRNAs is small (less than 1000), and the current miRNA microarray platforms possibly do not include enough miRNAs that are stably expressed (). As a result, methods such as normalizing by mean or median might not work well for miRNA microarray data analyses. In addition, because of the capacity limit of the pools in beads arrays, the miRNAs are divided into small subsets and the tests are finished in various pools separately. The subprofiles of the miRNAs from different pools need to be normalized to assemble a complete profile. Such a normalization procedure is called intrasample normalization. Because the miRNA sets in different pools are different, and the numbers of miRNAs in different pools are small, intrasample normalization is difficult. Furthermore, most of the existing normalization methods are not applicable. In this study, we investigate a measurement error model-based approach to improve beads array intrasample normalization.