Omokage search is a service to search the global shape similarity of biological macromolecules and their assemblies, in both the Protein Data Bank (PDB) and Electron Microscopy Data Bank (EMDB). The server compares global shapes of assemblies independent of sequence order and number of subunits. As a search query, the user inputs a structure ID (PDB ID or EMDB ID) or uploads an atomic model or 3D density map to the server. The search is performed usually within 1 min, using one-dimensional profiles (incremental distance rank profiles) to characterize the shapes. Using the gmfit (Gaussian mixture model fitting) program, the found structures are fitted onto the query structure and their superimposed structures are displayed on the Web browser. Our service provides new structural perspectives to life science researchers. Availability and implementation: Omokage search is freely accessible at http://pdbj.org/omokage/.
IntroductionElectron microscopy of cellular macromolecules provides 3D density maps of many important molecular machines. More than 3000 density maps are now stored in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank (EMDB) (). Atomic models, obtained by X-ray crystallography and the current hybrid method, are also available in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (). We have been providing Web-based services, EM Navigator and Yorodumi, for both databanks (). Shape comparisons among these 3D density maps and atomic models facilitate the elucidation of structural differences and conformational changes, and the generation of atomic models from the density maps. However, very few Web services look for shapes represented as 3D density maps that are similar to the atomic models. The Web server EM-SURFER () was recently developed for searching 3D density maps. However, it only handles 3D density maps in the EMDB, and not in the PDB, and does not provide 3D superimpositions.Here, we describe our new search service, Omokage search, based on the global shape similarity of the structure data, for both the PDB and EMDB. Our server provides superimposed structures, using the program gmfit. Users can visually assess the similarities by the 3D superimpositions.