Motivation: Gene expression measurements are the most common data source for reverse engineering gene interaction networks. When dealing with destructive sampling in time course experiments, it is common to average any available measurements for each time point and to treat this as the actual time series data for fitting the network, neglecting the variability contained in the repeated measurements. Proceeding in such a way can affect the retrieved network topology. Results: We propose a fully Bayesian method for reverse engineering a gene interaction network, based on time course data with repeated measurements. The observations are treated as surrogate measurements of the underlying gene expression. As these measurements often contain outliers, we use a non-Gaussian specification for dealing with measurement error. The network interactions are assumed linear and an autoregressive model is specified, augmented with indicator variables that allow inference on the topology of the network. We analyse two in silico and one in vivo experiments, the latter dealing with the circadian clock in Arabidopsis thaliana. A systematic attenuation of the estimated regulation strengths and a concomitant overestimation of their precision is demonstrated when measurement error is disregarded. Thus, a clear improvement in the inferred topology for the synthetic datasets is demonstrated when this is included. Also, the influence of outliers in the retrieved network is demonstrated when using the in vivo data.
INTRODUCTIONIdentifying and understanding gene regulatory networks is of key importance in Systems Biology. Reverse engineering such networks is thus paramount and a plethora of literature dealing with the problem has developed in recent years (seeand references therein). Bayesian networks (BNs) have been used previously in gene network determination (). However, it is * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. well known that when followed through time, biological processes have feedback loops and thus the validity of BNs is questionable when modelling such systems. Dynamic BNs (DBNs) have been proposed for modelling time course (longitudinal) gene expression data (;). These can be thought of as 'unfolding' a BN for every time point and when folding it back self-regulation and cliques may be obtained. Formally, a DBN is characterized by a set of conditional relations, p(y t+1 | y t ). In the case of a regression-based DBN, these relations can be written aswhere y t g is the expression level of gene g = 1,...,G, measured atand  t g is an idiosyncratic error term. The approaches above assume one observed time series for each gene. However, gene expression measurement normally requires destruction of the sample, e.g. microarrays, and, therefore, the idea of a longitudinal time series becomes problematic. This is because a single individual is not followed throughout the experiment, but rather a population of cells or individuals are sampled and their gene expression measured. The phenomenon is particularly acute in experiments with multicellular organisms, where not even the same population of cells can be followed through time. Thus, rather than 'real' gene expression measurements, we are faced with a set of surrogate measures. In addition to the uncertainty involved in the sampling process, it is well known that gene expression measurement technologies, such as microarrays, render noisy data and frequently exhibit outliers (). When repeated measurements are available, time course data used for reverse engineering gene interaction networks are commonly obtained as a (weighted) average of these replicates and, therefore, these sources of uncertainty are ignored. Neglecting the variability within the replicates can have severe effects when fitting a linear model, with perhaps the most important being attenuation of the coefficient estimates (see). Working within a univariate first-order linear autoregressive setting,demonstrated that neglecting measurement error yields severe attenuation, of the autoregressive coefficient and the variability of this estimate. Interpreting this result within the framework of (1) with a linear specification of f i (y t ), this suggests that an averaged time series will yield attenuated estimates of the interactions within the network, with a spurious sense of security given the concomitant underestimation of the variability of these estimates.
DISCUSSIONWe demonstrate here that the uncertainty conveyed in repeated measurements of time course gene expression data can have a strong effect when estimating a gene interaction network. In the case of a linear autoregressive network specification, not accounting for this uncertainty leads to attenuation of the autoregressive coefficients and overestimation of the precision of these estimates. This in turn can affect the network topology retrieval. To address this issue, we propose a model that explicitly includes this variability. Our modelling is fully Bayesian, with the true gene expression unobserved and thus inferred. Inference of these expression values draws information from both the surrogate measurements and the linear AR(1) process assumed for the gene network interaction, with the influence of each source weighted by the relative value of the AR(1) precision, , and the measurement precision, . When  is relatively small, inference on the expression values will be predominately determined by the AR(1) part of the model. In the case where there is little information in the data about the regulatory process, the prior on  must thence be carefully elicited. We provide a benchmark prior for the kinds of datasets arising from microarrays. Our model accommodates simultaneous inference of the network topology along with the interaction coefficients. We showed that attenuation of the network coefficients as well as the underestimation of the variability of these estimates is systematic. Such behaviour is then passed on to the estimated link probabilities, yielding a more concentrated distribution of link probabilities towards either one or zero. The retrieved networks are obtained by setting an (arbitrary) threshold on the posterior link probabilities, and thusBold values are those links that were predicted present in more than one half of the 30 subsets, using a threshold of 1/2. Genes in columns are regulators and rows are regulatees.