Motivation: Several computational methods have been developed to identify cancer drivers genes—genes responsible for cancer development upon specific alterations. These alterations can cause the loss of function (LoF) of the gene product, for instance, in tumor suppressors, or increase or change its activity or function, if it is an oncogene. Distinguishing between these two classes is important to understand tumorigenesis in patients and has implications for therapy decision making. Here, we assess the capacity of multiple gene features related to the pattern of genomic alterations across tumors to distinguish between activating and LoF cancer genes, and we present an automated approach to aid the classification of novel cancer drivers according to their role. Result: OncodriveROLE is a machine learning-based approach that classifies driver genes according to their role, using several properties related to the pattern of alterations across tumors. The method shows an accuracy of 0.93 and Matthews correlation coefficient of 0.84 classifying genes in the Cancer Gene Census. The OncodriveROLE clas-sifier, its results when applied to two lists of predicted cancer drivers and TCGA-derived mutation and copy number features used by the classifier are available at
INTRODUCTIONResearch in cancer genomics has identified hundreds of genes involved in different stages of tumorigenesis due to specific somatic events. Single nucleotide variants, and large-scale amplifications and deletions of chromosomal regions have been identified as two of the main driver alterations in human tumors. The genes suffering these alterations are traditionally classified as oncogenes and tumor suppressors, depending on their role in cancer development. When the product of tumor suppressors lose their function, tumor cells tend to proliferate faster. Driver alterations in these genes frequently exhibit a recessive behavior. The loss of function (LoF) can be achieved through truncating or missense mutations, DNA deletions or hypermethylation of their promoters. Some known LoF genes, most notably BRCA1 and BRCA2, carry germline variants that increase the susceptibility to develop a tumor because only one hit is required to inactivate their function. Oncogenes, on the other hand, increase or change their function upon somatic variants in tumorigenesis. Therefore, their mode of action follow a dominant pattern, as one faulty copy of the gene is frequently enough to provide the required phenotype. A copy number gain may exponentiate the oncogenic function of the gene; a point mutation may achieve the same result by changing key amino acid residues, which results in constitutive activation of the protein, or produce a new biochemical function. These special cases are also regarded as activating driver mutations, as the new function is gained much like in the case of classic oncogenes. The Cancer Gene Census (CGC;) is a regularly updated compilation of well-studied cancer genes, which classifies their mode of action as dominant or recessive, following the oncogene/tumor suppressor paradigm, LoF and Act (activated), hereafter. The CGC contains some 500 genes implicated in cancer (). This is a rather small fraction of the 20 000 genomes in the human genome (International Human Genome Sequencing), but recent largescale re-sequencing projects of tumor genomes () suggest many additional genes may be involved in tumorigenesis. One important first step in the analysis of datasets of cancer genomics alterations is the identification of the genes that drive tumorigenesis. This is a non-trivial problem because tumor samples contain up to thousands of somatic alterations. The list of genes altered in tumors is heterogeneous, even within the same cancer type. Therefore, the difficult task is to distinguish between driver and passenger alterations. The most intuitive way to identify driver genes is to detect signals of positive selection across tumor samples because cancer cell populations undergo a selection process during the progression of the disease. Different methods that aim to identify driver genes tackle different evidences to achieve their goal (). Two recent efforts to comprehensively identify driver genes across large cohorts carried out by, combining several signals of positive selection () detected, respectively, 291 and 260 likely driver genes. Although years of experimental work have revealed the role of most well-known cancer genes, now our capability of detecting drivers has surpassed our capacity to probe their mode of action. Thus, revealing the mode of action of driver genes in tumorigenesis is becoming crucial to fully understand the mechanisms of tumorigenesis. This is essential for the development of new targeted cancer therapies because as a general rule only Act drivers are in principle susceptible to targeted drugs. Although exceptionally, some mutated tumor suppressors may be targeted (e.g. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com), other strategies, such as synthetic lethality, are needed to compensate for their LoF. This is the reason why we need to develop bioinformatics approaches to make this classification as accurately as possible. Vogelstein et al. recently described the so-called '20/20 rule' to detect tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes based on their mutational pattern across tumor samples (). It states that genes with !20% truncating mutations are tumor suppressors, whereas genes with 420% of missense mutations in recurrent positions are oncogenes. While it correctly detects and classifies most of the well-known cancer genes, the rule fails to identify drivers included in newer catalogs (), mostly the lowly recurrent ones. Building upon the same idea, Davoli et al. developed a machine learning approach to directly identify tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes from the somatic alterations observed across cohorts of tumor samples through their mutational and copy number patterns. Many cancer drivers are recognized correctly by carefully selected features (). We recently proposed a strategy to obtain a comprehensive list of drivers minimizing the probability of detecting false-positive findings by combining complementary methods that detected different signals of positive selection (). Once a list of high-confidence drivers (HCDs) is obtained, it is important to classify those in their mode of action. To this aim, we first carefully assessed the capability of 30 features to differentiate between these two groups of cancer genes. Then, we combined different sets of features with various classification algorithms to create several automated classifiers. We trained these classifiers with CGC genes, and after careful check of their performance, we selected a random forest algorithm that achieves an accuracy (ACC) of 93%, which we call OncodriveROLE. It is the first freely available automatic classifier that undertakes the task of assessing the mode of action of driver genes. Used in this setting, it may shed light upon the mechanisms of tumorigenesis in major cancer types. We have used it to classify the two previously mentioned lists of mutational drivers that have been recently published, namely, HCDs () and Cancer5000 (), and describe the results of this analysis.
DISCUSSIONTwo main rationales to detect LoF and Act driver genes acting across tumor samples exist. The first approach consists in directly detecting genes that exhibit known alterations patterns corresponding to these two classes from mutations and CNA data. This strategy was first conceptualized byto be implemented later on as a machine learning algorithm by. In the second approach, first driver genes acting in tumor samples are detected by combining the signals of positive selection they exhibit (). Then, in a second step, these drivers are classified into the two aforementioned classes exploiting similar alteration patterns as in the first approach. This second two-step approach has two main advantages. First, genes that do not exhibit clear alterations pattern that define them as LoF or Act can still be detected as drivers if they show clear signals of positive selection. Second, the combination of several signals controls the ratio of false-positive drivers identified (), which is unattainable to the direct classification of genes. This is the reason why we have decided to develop OncodriveROLE, a machine learning classifier, which takes a list of pre-selected driver genes and sorts them according to their mode of action. We first carefully compared and selected a set of features that best captures the differences of alterations patterns of these two groups of drivers. We then used those features to train the classifier, on a carefully trimmed subset of the CGC genes. When applied to two recent lists of drivers, we found that, even under strict classification conditions, OncodriveROLE was able to classify more drivers than the 20-20 rule and the Tuson machine learning algorithm. The OncodriveROLE validation procedure identified several likely misclassified drivers in the CGC. The most salient examples of these are probably some genes that drive hematopoietic malignancies upon translocation and fusion with other genomic regions, all classified as Dom in the GCG. However, when analyzed using mutational and CNAs data from the pancancer 17 dataset, some of them appear as clear LoF drivers. For instance, OncodriveROLE assigns MLL, RUNX1 and SUZ12 classification probabilities under 0.003 (see Supplementary Tables S3S6 for feature and classification values). These genes could be Act drivers upon fusion to other genes, but LoF upon mutations. Even though OncodriveROLE is able to classify most of the genes in the two drivers lists as LoF or Act, it still leaves few of them unclassified. Some of these correspond to lowly recurrent drivers whose mutational features are not correctly computed because of the scarcity of their alterations. Sequencing more tumors will certainly improve their classification. Others may not have a clear enough pattern to be classified in one of the two classes, as they could be exhibiting different roles in different contexts. In some rare cases, the method misclassifies known cancer genes. For example, KEAP1 is classified as an Act driver, although it is reported to lose its function upon mutation (). A close look at its mutational pattern reveals missense mutations dominate and accumulate in certain regions of the protein. As member of a ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis complex, the function of KEAP1 is probably essential to the cell, and its impairment is likely lethal. Therefore, few truncating mutations may appear in KEAP1, and it is ultimately misclassified by OncodriveROLE. Future finer measurements of the impact of missense mutations may help correcting this problem. Summing up, in this article, we have described the development and validation of OncodriveROLE, an approach to differentiate between LoF and Act driver genes. The OncodriveROLE classifier is freely available at http://bg.upf.edu/oncodrive-role as an R object that researchers may use to classify the drivers they have detected across a cohort of tumor samples. At the same URL, the pre-computed TCGA pan-cancer 17 mutational and copy number features used for the classification are available for download.