Motivation: Next-generation DNA sequencing platforms are becoming increasingly cost-effective and capable of providing enormous number of reads in a relatively short time. However, their accuracy and read lengths are still lagging behind those of conventional Sanger sequencing method. Performance of next-generation sequencing platforms is fundamentally limited by various imperfections in the sequencing-by-synthesis and signal acquisition processes. This drives the search for accurate, scalable and computationally tractable base calling algorithms capable of accounting for such imperfections. Results: Relying on a statistical model of the sequencing-by-synthesis process and signal acquisition procedure, we develop a computationally efficient base calling method for Illuminas sequencing technology (specifically, Genome Analyzer II platform). Parameters of the model are estimated via a fast unsupervised online learning scheme, which uses the generalized expectation– maximization algorithm and requires only 3 s of running time per tile (on an Intel i7 machine @3.07GHz, single core)—a three orders of magnitude speed-up over existing parametric model-based methods. To minimize the latency between the end of the sequencing run and the generation of the base calling reports, we develop a fast online scalable decoding algorithm, which requires only 9 s/tile and achieves significantly lower error rates than the Illuminas base calling software. Moreover, it is demonstrated that the proposed online parameter estimation scheme efficiently computes tile-dependent parameters, which can thereafter be provided to the base calling algorithm, resulting in significant improvements over previously developed base calling methods for the considered platform in terms of performance, time/complexity and latency.
INTRODUCTIONRecent development of next-generation sequencing platforms has enabled cost-effective whole-genome sequencing and resequencing, reinvigorated transcriptomics, and has provided an essential tool for research in functional and comparative genomics, epigenetics * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and metagenomics (). However, before the promised benefits of widespread applications of DNA sequencing come to fruition, sequencing technology requires further improvements. Although next-generation sequencing systems are cost-effective and capable of providing very high number of reads in a relatively short time, their accuracy and read lengths are still lagging behind those of conventional Sanger sequencing method. In this article, we focus on Illumina's sequencing platform () and, relying on a mathematical model of sequencing-bysynthesis, propose a fast online algorithm for unsupervised learning of the parameters of the model and a computationally efficient technique for sequential base calling. The model captures the different sources of uncertainty in the sequencing process and signal acquisition procedure. Illumina's current base calling software, Bustard, is very fast but its performance leaves a lot of room for improvement. Consequently, several novel base calling methods for Illumina's sequencing platform have been proposed in recent years ().developed an approach referred to as Alta-cyclic which relies on a supervised training stage (using a rich DNA library with a known reference genome on a control lane) to find parameters of a model, and uses support vector machines for optimal basecalling.proposed model-based clustering and information theoretic ideas for basecalling. The developed method, referred to as Rolexa, uses a Gaussian mixture model for classification, and uses filters which cut off bases/reads with quality scores that are below a certain threshold.proposed Ibis which uses a machine learning scheme similar to Alta-cyclic, and relies on base-specific parameters and multiclass support vector machines with polynomial kernels for acceleration of the algorithm. Recently,proposed a Bayesian inference method for base calling. In particular, this approach relies on a batch expectationmaximization algorithm to infer parameters of a detailed mathematical model of sequencing-by-synthesis on Illumina's platform, and applies the Markov Chain Monte Carlo technique to perform base calling. The approach, named BayesCall, was shown to significantly improve base calling error rates over state-of-the-art techniques. However, the approach turned out to be computationally demanding and therefore infeasible for basecalling millions of reads obtained from Illumina's sequencing platforms. The follow-up article by the same authors presents naiveBayesCall (), a simplified heuristic, which runs significantly faster than BayesCall at the cost of small-to-moderate deterioration of the error rate performance. The basecalling method we propose, OnlineCall, relies on a mathematical model that is a simplified version of the model used by BayesCall and naiveBayesCall. Parameters of the proposed model can be inferred in a computationally efficient manner.
DISCUSSION
CONCLUSIONIn this article, we proposed a novel model and developed a fast online parameter estimation and base calling scheme for Illumina's next-generation sequencers. The error rates and discrimination ability of the proposed method are better than those of the existing competing schemes. At the same time, the proposed method is three orders of magnitude faster than some of the recently proposed competing schemes, and is practically feasible. We demonstrated positive impact of the developed method on downstream applications (in particular, extended lengths of the contigs in sequence assembly). Improved base calling will enable performance advancements of genome and transcriptome assembly as well as genotype/SNP calling. As a part of our future work, we will investigate the impact of read-by-read parameter estimation and base calling on the overall platform performance. Studies of intertile and intratile parameter variations presented in the current article are a useful starting point. We also intend to investigate the information content metric in more details and explore fundamental relationships between quality scores, error rates and read/base rejection.