Motivation: Ontology-like domain knowledge is frequently published in a tabular format embedded in scientific publications. We explore the re-use of such tabular content in the process of building NTDO, an ontology of neglected tropical diseases (NTDs), where the representation of the interdependencies between hosts, pathogens and vectors plays a crucial role. Results: As a proof of concept we analyzed a tabular compilation of knowledge about pathogens, vectors and geographic locations involved in the transmission of NTDs. After a thorough ontological analysis of the domain of interest, we formulated a comprehensive design pattern, rooted in the biomedical domain upper level ontology BioTop. This pattern was implemented in a VBA script which takes cell contents of an Excel spreadsheet and transforms them into OWL-DL. After minor manual post-processing, the correctness and completeness of the ontology was tested using pre-formulated competence questions as description logics (DL) queries. The expected results could be reproduced by the ontology. The proposed approach is recommended for optimizing the acquisition of ontological domain knowledge from tabular representations. Availability and implementation: Domain examples, source code and ontology are freely available on the web at
INTRODUCTIONThe results of life sciences research are published in a variety of formats. Large-scale experimental data and research results are disseminated in databases such as Uniprot (http://www .uniprot.org/), Ensembl (http://www.ensembl.org/index.html) or ArrayExpress (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/), whereas parts of the more aggregated and manually reworked information are published in the scientific literature in the form of tables. In contradistinction to databases, where entries follow pre-defined database schemas, scientific authors are free in the composition of tables. Aside from tables that mainly contain numeric values, we frequently encounter symbolic entries, i.e. text strings, often from controlled vocabularies. In these tables, terms are displayed in a repetitive form for which interpretations are provided by the row and column headings, the legend and the reference in the text. The proper interpretation by the reader often requires considerable background * To whom correspondence should be addressed. knowledge, and no semantic standard interpretation can be assumed for this kind of data. Controlled terms in tabular representations of research results may denote individuals, such as names of geographic entities, persons or institutions, but also general terms, which denote classes or types of individuals such as molecules, organisms or diseases. It is this kind of tabular information that we will scrutinize under a viewpoint of Formal Ontology. Our hypothesis is that many tables in scientific papers at least partly convey ontological content, which can be diligently exploited in the construction process of formal ontologies. As both ontology building and maintenance are labor-intensive tasks, semi-automated knowledge acquisition from tabular representations may constitute an interesting rationalization measure. We are, however, equally aware that the symbolic content may frequently cross the boundaries of what is expressible by ontologies (), thus requiring other knowledge representation formalisms. This article is structured as follows. After this introduction, biomedical ontologies and their standards are shortly introduced, followed by the biomedical background of our case study, the field of neglected tropical diseases (NTDs). In the third section, the resources and methods for table-guided ontology construction and evaluation are presented; results are given in the fourth section. The article concludes with a brief review of related work.
DISCUSSIONOur case study has shown that it is possible to represent moderately complex biological situations in standard DL using tools and standards recommended by the Semantic Web community. We proved the ability to reason over such DL models and illustrate the dependency of this approach on principled ontological foundations imposing strict categorial distinctions. Our formal patterns profited in particular from the re-use of a rigid set of object properties found in the upper-level ontology BioTop, which had their domains and ranges strictly constrained. Our study shows the usefulness and expressive superiority of the use of true DL queries instead of simple resource description framework (RDF)-based SPARQL queries, the latter being much more popular and the former unfortunately still not finalized in a W3C recommendation (with SPARQL-DL being under development). However, both query syntaxes are complex and their appropriate use requires considerable training. An advantage of DL queries lies in the absence of free variables and the natural way of reasoning over taxonomic hierarchies. Although the latter is of only marginal interest in our use case, it becomes highly relevant as soon as a similar ontology is linked, e.g. to a representation of biological taxa or a gazetteer with geographic names. For the representation of the latter, we recommend reifying expressions which include particulars, such as 'hasLocus value Brazil'. As a result, all reasoning can be performed on a TBox level, i.e. without explicit reference to particulars. Tooling support for the construction of complex DL queries could be significantly improved, especially in cases where the underlying ontology provides rich domain and range constraints. Their use as a guidance to the query-builder is still a desideratum for Protg or other ontology editors and workbenches. The support of reasoning use cases which include both subclass retrieval and satisfiability testing was the main rationale for the described effort, which makes extensive use of OWL-DL constructors such as disjunction, negation and value restrictions, as well as numerous large and complex full-class definitions. The drastic decrease in reasoning performance was therefore not surprising. Expressivity, together with a strong focus on DL reasoning is certainly one major distinctive criterion when comparing NTDO with OBO ontologies or the ontologies developed bywhich represent a similar domain with a i354Page: i355 i349i356
CONCLUSIONIn this study, we investigated two questions. First, how can canonical domain knowledge about the transmission of rare tropical diseases be expressed in a way that warrants reliable answers to relevant competency questions formulated by epidemiologists. Secondly, how legacy information contained in tables, mainly within scientific papers, can be transformed into a formal ontology which obeys the principles of philosophically founded and formally accurate ontology design. We found satisfactory results for both questions, but also encountered serious performance limitations. Comprehensive domain knowledge can be represented in expressive DL and can be queried by DL expressions and a reasoner. However, the scalability is limited due to the inherent computational complexity. Furthermore, the construction of such queries is currently not satisfactorily supported by user-friendly tools. Constraining the users by making them choose an optimized OWL 2 profile will either lead to constraints in modeling expressivity (OWL 2 QL) or to performance problems in larger ontologies (OWL 2 EL). We successfully developed an export tool based on ontology design patterns which have to be individually crafted for each table. Here, the limitation lies in the content of many tables, which do not contain ontological knowledge in a strict sense. In these cases other representational formalisms (e.g. for probabilistic knowledge) need to be employed, which clearly lie outside the realm of ontology and DL.