Motivation: There exist few simple and easily accessible methods to integrate ontologies programmatically in the R environment. We present ontoCAT—an R package to access ontologies in widely used standard formats, stored locally in the filesystem or available online. The ontoCAT package supports a number of traversal and search functions on a single ontology, as well as searching for ontology terms across multiple ontologies and in major ontology repositories. Availability: The package and sources are freely available in Bioconductor starting from version 2.8:
INTRODUCTIONThe R package ontoCAT was created to support basic operations on ontologies: traversal and search, uniform access to ontologies in OWL () and OBO () formats and to provide R access to major ontology repositories OLS and BioPortal. Several hundreds of public ontologies and numerous private ontologies for describing biological data exist today. Using ontologies in R () is difficult due to the lack of uniform package support. At the same time numerous Java-based ontology projects are available. ontoCAT takes advantage of a standard Java library with the same name 'ontoCAT' () to implement its functionality. The ontoCAT package: @BULLET gives unified, format-independent access to ontology terms and the ontology hierarchy represented in OWL and OBO formats;@BULLET provides basic methods for ontology traversal, such as searching for terms, listing a specific term's relations, showing paths to the term from the root element of the ontology, showing flattened-tree representations of the ontology hierarchy; and @BULLET supports working with groups of ontologies and with major public ontology repositories: searching for terms across * To whom correspondence should be addressed. ontologies, listing available ontologies and loading ontologies for further analysis as necessary.No other package with similar functionality exists at the moment in the R environment. The integration of the above functionality into R allows combining and automating ontology-related tasks. Different examples of ontology-related tasks that can be accomplished with the help of the ontoCAT package are given in the package documentation (http://www.ontocat.org/wiki/OntocatGuide): gene enrichment test and grouping of results, search and re-annotation of free-text to ontology and operations with relationships. ontoCAT has been included into Bioconductor, the main R open source project in bioinformatics. ontoCAT has been downloaded 347 times since its first release in December 2010. There is a large research community already using R to work with Gene Ontology (GO). Working with other ontologies is not as welldeveloped and ontoCAT helps to fill the gap.
CONCLUSIONThe ontoCAT R package consists of convenient methods for working with ontologies in the R environment. The package has been successfully used in a number of