Biomedical ontologies are often very large and complex. Only a subset of the ontology may be needed for a specified application or community. For ontology end users, it is desirable to have community-based labels rather than the labels generated by ontology developers. Ontodog is a web-based system that can generate an ontology subset based on Excel input, and support generation of an ontology community view, which is defined as the whole or a subset of the source ontology with user-specified annotations including user-preferred labels. Ontodog allows users to easily generate community views with minimal ontology knowledge and no programming skills or installation required. Currently 4100 ontologies including all OBO Foundry ontologies are available to generate the views based on user needs. We demonstrate the application of Ontodog for the generation of community views using the Ontology for Biomedical Investigations as the source ontology.
INTRODUCTIONA biomedical reference ontology represents an agreed upon understanding of terms and relations between terms in a specific domain and is often developed collaboratively by various communities. Reference ontologies can be very large and complex. With large ontologies, it is not efficient to work with the entire reference ontology for an application when only a part of the ontology is used. For example, the Gene Ontology (GO) () contains 430 000 terms to support consistent annotation of gene and gene product attributes across various species. For a particular model organism, only a part of GO relevant to that specified organism is needed. The GO slim mechanism has been developed for meeting this need (http://www. geneontology.org/GO.slims.shtml). Slim is a cut-down version of an ontology containing a subset of terms defined in the ontology according to users' needs. An implementation of the slim mechanism using a Perl script is available. However, the script only works for ontologies using the OBO format. The Ontoviews project aims to build application-oriented ontologies based on an 'ontology view', defined as a set of ontology terms retrieved from input ontologies through a SPARQL-based query, and may not be a subset of one ontology (). That project has not developed tools for users without programming skills to retrieve a subset of an ontology based on their needs. Ontology term labels are generally chosen for ontological clarity and may not be end user (i.e. biologist) friendly. Here we define 'ontology community view' as a whole or a portion of the ontology that maintains textual and logical term definitions and provides additional user-specified annotations including user-preferred labels. The community views are dependent on the source ontology. With changes in the source ontology, the views might be affected and require updating to reflect the latest changes in the source ontology which may occur frequently. To facilitate ontology community view generation, we have generated a web-based tool Ontodog (http://ontodog.hegroup.org/).