Motivation: We propose a novel algorithm to combine multiple kernels and Laplacians for clustering analysis. The new algorithm is formulated on a Rayleigh quotient objective function and is solved as a bi-level alternating minimization procedure. Using the proposed algorithm, the coefficients of kernels and Laplacians can be optimized automatically. Results: Three variants of the algorithm are proposed. The performance is systematically validated on two real-life data fusion applications. The proposed Optimized Kernel Laplacian Clustering (OKLC) algorithms perform significantly better than other methods. Moreover, the coefficients of kernels and Laplacians optimized by OKLC show some correlation with the rank of performance of individual data source. Though in our evaluation the K values are predefined, in practical studies, the optimal cluster number can be consistently estimated from the eigenspectrum of the combined kernel Laplacian matrix. Availability: The MATLAB code of algorithms implemented in this paper is downloadable from
INTRODUCTIONClustering is a fundamental problem in unsupervised learning and a number of different algorithms and methods have emerged over the years. K-means (KM) and spectral clustering are two popular methods for clustering analysis. K-means is proposed to cluster attribute-based data into K numbers of clusters with the minimal distortion (). Another well-known method, spectral clustering (SC) (), is also widely adopted in many applications. Unlike KM, SC is specifically developed for graphs, where the data samples are represented as vertices connected by non-negatively weighted undirected edges. The problem of clustering on graphs belongs * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  Present address: Department of Medicine, Institute for Genomics and Systems Biology, The University of Chicago.to another paradigm than the algorithms based on the distortion measure. The goal of graph clustering is to find partitions on the graph such that the edges between different groups have a very low weight (von). To model this, different objective functions are adopted and the typical criteria include the RatioCut (), the normalized cut () and many others. To solve these objectives, the discrete constraint of the clustering indicators is usually relaxed to real values; thus, the approximated solution of spectral clustering can be obtained from the eigenspectrum of the graph Laplacian matrix. Many investigations (e.g.) have shown the connection between KM and SC. Moreover, in practical applications, the weighted similarity matrix is often used interchangeably as the kernel matrix in KM or the adjacency matrix in SC. Recently, a new algorithm, Kernel Laplacian (KL) clustering , is proposed to combine a kernel and a Laplacian simultaneously in clustering analysis (). This method combines the objectives of KM and SC in a quotient trace maximization form and solves the problem by eigen-decomposition. KL is shown to empirically outperform KM and SC on real datasets. This straightforward idea is useful to solve many practical problems, especially those pertaining to combine attribute-based data with interaction-based networks. For example, in web analysis and scientometrics, the combination of text mining and bibliometrics has become a standard approach in clustering science or technology fields toward the detection of emerging fields or hot topics (). In bioinformatics, proteinprotein interaction network and expression data are two of the most important sources used to reveal the relevance of genes and proteins with complex diseases. Conventionally, the data are often transformed into similarity matrices or interaction graphs, then consequently clustered by KM or SC. In KL, the similarity-based kernel matrix and the interactionbased Laplacian matrix are combined, which provides a novel approach to combine heterogeneous data structures in clustering analysis. Our preliminary experiments show that when using KL to combine a single kernel and a single Laplacian, its performance strongly depends on the quality of the kernel and the Laplacian, which results in a model selection problem to determine the optimal settings of the kernel and the Laplacian. To perform model selection on unlabeled data is non-trivial because it is difficult to evaluate the models. To tackle the new problem, we propose a novel algorithm to incorporate multiple kernels and Laplacians in KL clustering. Our recent work proposes a method to integrate multiple kernel matricesclustering, submitted for publication). The main contribution of the present work lies in the additive combination of multiple kernels and Laplacians; moreover, the coefficients assigned to the kernels and the Laplacians are optimized automatically. This article presents the mathematical derivations of the additive integration form of kernels and Laplacians. The optimization of coefficients and clustering are achieved via a solution based on bi-level alternating minimization (). We validate the proposed algorithm on heterogeneous datasets taken from two real applications, where the advantage and reliability of the proposed method are systematically compared and demonstrated.