Finding and translating stretches of DNA lacking stop codons is a task common in the analysis of sequence data. However, the computational tools for finding open reading frames are sufficiently slow that they are becoming a bottleneck as the volume of sequence data grows. This computational bottleneck is especially problematic in metagenomics when searching unassembled reads, or screening assembled contigs for genes of interest. Here, we present OrfM, a tool to rapidly identify open reading frames (ORFs) in sequence data by applying the Aho–Corasick algorithm to find regions uninterrupted by stop codons. Benchmarking revealed that OrfM finds identical ORFs to similar tools (GetOrf and Translate) but is four-five times faster. While OrfM is sequenc-ing platform-agnostic, it is best suited to large, high quality datasets such as those produced by Illumina sequencers. Availability and Implementation: Source code and binaries are freely available for download at http://sydney.edu.au/science/biology/meep/softwarel.
IntroductionIn genomics, stretches of DNA uninterrupted by stop codons are known as open reading frames (ORFs). The TAG ('amber'), TAA ('ochre') and TGA ('opal') stop codons signal the ribosomal machinery to cease translation, with few exceptions. An extended stretch of DNA free of in-frame stop codons is evidence that a gene may be encoded on that region. ORF prediction in metagenomics can be performed on finished population genomes, draft population genomes, assembled contigs or individual reads. Searching for genes in individual metagenomic reads ('gene-centric analysis') is useful when reference genomes are unavailable and assembly of reads is either computationally prohibitive or a microbial community is too complex for successful assembly (). In long assembled sequences, conventional gene predictors use information such as codon usage to more accurately predict genes, but these signals become unreliable in the limited genomic context of short read data. In bacterial and archaeal genomes, genes are not interrupted by exons and intergenic space is minimal, so short read sequences derived from these genomes are more likely to encode a fragment of a gene uninterrupted by a stop codon. ORF prediction directly on early next generation sequencing platforms (e.g. Roche 454) was difficult as they produced reads prone to insertion deletion (indel) errors. In contrast, newer Illumina-based sequencers generate reads where indel errors are rare; reads are higher quality and the errors that do occur are chiefly substitution errors (). The current widespread use of Illumina sequencing in metagenomics () presents an opportunity to find ORFs in microbial reads directly. Identification of ORFs in short read data simplifies downstream comparative analysis and allows use of tools that require protein sequence as input e.g. searching for protein families with HMMER (). Using ORFs instead of six-frame translating sequences for downstream sequence comparison tools e.g. BLAST V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.