The R/Bioconductor package Protein Array Analyzer (PAA) facilitates a flexible analysis of protein microarrays for biomarker discovery (esp., ProtoArrays). It provides a complete data analysis workflow including preprocessing and quality control, uni-and multivariate feature selection as well as several different plots and results tables to outline and evaluate the analysis results. As a main feature, PAAs multivariate feature selection methods are based on recursive feature elimination (e.g. SVM-recursive feature elimination, SVM-RFE) with stability ensuring strategies such as ensemble feature selection. This enables PAA to detect stable and reliable biomarker candidate panels. Availability and implementation: PAA is freely available (BSD 3-clause license) from http:// www.bioconductor.org/packages/PAA/.
IntroductionProtein microarrays (PMs) such as the ProtoArray by Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA, are used for autoimmune antibody screening studies, e.g. to discover biomarker candidate panels in human body fluids to discriminate two groups of samples (e.g. 'diseased' and 'controls'). For ProtoArray data analysis the software Prospector is often used because it provides the advantageous univariate feature ranking approach minimum M statistic (mMs) () and a ProtoArray-specific robust linear model normalization (rlm) (). However, since Prospector provides hardly any further functionality for biomarker discovery it is a quite limited tool (). Therefore, we have adopted and extended Prospector's key features (mMs, rlm) and implemented PAA which provides a complete data analysis pipeline for ProtoArrays and other single color PMs.
ConclusionPAA provides a comprehensive toolbox and an adaptable workflow for PM data analysis. It comprises the most important methods of Prospector and goes far beyond. Especially the multivariate feature selection based on RFE embedded in FFS or EFS, which is a cutting edge strategy for biomarker discovery, enables PAA to identify stable and reliable feature panels. Finally, PAA is flexible since the R/Bioconductor framework facilitates workflow extension and customization.