Motivation: Next-generation sequencing technologies have facilitated the study of organisms on a genome-wide scale. A recent method called restriction site associated DNA sequencing (RAD-seq) allows to sample sequence information at reduced complexity across a target genome using the Illumina platform. Single-end RAD-seq has proven to provide a large number of informative genetic markers in reference as well as non-reference organisms. Results: Here, we present a method for de novo assembly of paired-end RAD-seq data in order to produce extended contigs flanking a restriction site. We were able to reconstruct one-tenth of the guppy genome represented by 200–500 bp contigs associated to EcoRI recognition sites. In addition, these contigs were used as reference allowing the detection of thousands of new polymorphic markers that are informative for mapping and population genetic studies in the guppy. Availability: A perl and C++ implementation of the method demonstrated in this article is available under http://guppy .weigelworld.org/weigeldatabases/radMarkers/ as package RApiD.
INTRODUCTIONThe availability of increasing amounts of DNA sequence information has greatly facilitated studying of many biological questions, especially in the context of genome evolution, natural variation and adaptive processes and association mapping. Nextgeneration sequencing (NGS) technologies have revolutionized the field of genome research, at first by allowing cheap resequencing projects for organisms with an already existing reference genome. Recently, more and more methods have been developed incorporating NGS to analyze also non-reference organisms, taking advantage of improvements such as longer read lengths and pairedend (PE) reads. However, de novo assemblies of large genomes from very short reads remain difficult, in spite of recent improvements in assembly algorithms (). Yet, for a large number of interesting questions a high number of genetic markers equally distributed over the genome would already be very informative, even without a complete genome sequence.* To whom correspondence should be addressed. developed a protocol for high-throughput sequencing of restriction site-associated DNA (RAD) tags using the Illumina platform (RADseq). It has the advantage that only a reduced representation of the genome is sequenced leading to deep sequence coverage of fragments near a specific type of restriction site. They showed that single end (SE) sequencing of RAD tags could be used for rapid marker development in Stickleback for which a reference genome is available. Since then, SE RAD-seq has become a popular tool in next-generation population genetics (). In addition, Illumina PE sequencing could extend the sequence information on each side of the restriction sites (). Because each RAD can provide a unique genomic sequence tag that can be characterized without its immediate genomic context, the first reads may be aligned to each other, building subsets that are associated to one restriction site each. As a strategy for obtaining longer sequence tags, we exploited the fact that random mechanical shearing leads to a family of staggered second reads that can be assembled to longer subsets associated to the RE site defined by the first read cluster. This strategy subdivides the assembly problem into a high number of less complex local assemblies. In this study, we analyze PE RAD-seq data from two very diverged guppy populations, namely Quare and Cumana, which have been previously used to generate a genetic linkage map (). The guppy (Poecilia retitculata) is an important model organism in ecological genetics, and adaptation to contrasting habitats has been extensively studied in field experiments (). However, due to the lack of a sufficient number of genetic markers the molecular background is still unknown. We show that our approach can generate de novo 283 842 RAD tags that are 200400 bp long and cover 10% of the guppy genome. Furthermore, these tags can be used as reference to design thousands of new polymorphic markers useful for population genetic and mapping studies. All tools developed for the analysis can be downloaded from http://guppy.weigelworld.org/weigeldatabases/radMarkers/ as package RApiD.