Motivation: Computational biologists have demonstrated the utility of using machine learning methods to predict protein function from an integration of multiple genome-wide data types. Yet, even the best performing function prediction algorithms rely on heuristics for important components of the algorithm, such as choosing negative examples (proteins without a given function) or determining key parameters. The improper choice of negative examples, in particular, can hamper the accuracy of protein function prediction. Results: We present a novel approach for choosing negative examples , using a parameterizable Bayesian prior computed from all observed annotation data, which also generates priors used during function prediction. We incorporate this new method into the GeneMANIA function prediction algorithm and demonstrate improved accuracy of our algorithm over current top-performing function prediction methods on the yeast and mouse proteomes across all metrics tested. Availability: Code and Data are available at: http://bonneaulab.bio.
INTRODUCTIONThe rate of new protein discovery has, in recent years, outpaced our ability to annotate and characterize new proteins and proteomes. To combat this functional annotation deficit, many groups have successfully turned to computational techniques, attempting to predict the function of proteins to guide experimental verification. Specifically, there has been a surge of interest in applying machine learning methods to the problem of protein function prediction (FP), to take advantage of the wealth of biological data available for each protein beyond its sequence, such as computationally predicted tertiary structure, which has already been shown to aid FP (). While traditional approaches to FP mainly involved either homology (with limitations of accuracy) or manual curation (dependent on rare expertise), these new methods present new evaluation and comparative challenges. The MouseFunc competition (Pen) was organized to test the ability of machine learning methods to take advantage of large integrated datasets and provide useful predictions of gene function. The validity of integrative approaches to FP was first demonstrated by the works of, which respectively used linkage graphs and a Bayesian network to predict function. By the time of the MouseFunc competition, FP methods had become diverse, including Support Vector Machines, Random Forests, Decision Trees and several composite methods (), but a recurring theme was to use proteinprotein networks of various types to determine function based on guilt by association (). In such a method, genes are represented by nodes in a network, with weighted edges defined by a similarity metric obtained from raw data (often the Pearson correlation coefficient of feature vectors). Predictions are then formed by propagating information from genes known to have a function, through the network to unlabeled genes. While providing unprecedented accuracy, the methods of the MouseFunc competition exposed several general challenges still remaining for the FP problem: (i) choosing a set of high-confidence negative examples, (ii) using available data to form prior beliefs about the biological functions of a gene and (iii) effectively combining disparate data sources. As no comprehensive database of functional negative examples currently exists, and nearly all major machine learning methods require a negative class for the training of a classifier, the selection of high-confidence negative examples is especially important for the FP problem. In this work, we begin to address these challenges by presenting a parameterizable Bayesian technique for computing prior functional biases for each gene, and a novel method for selecting negative examples using these biases. To apply our method, we use the framework of the GeneMANIA algorithm (), one of the highest-performing competitors in MouseFunc. In addition to our new priors and negative examples, we present a framework for tuning our Bayesian parameters and other parameters in the original GeneMANIA algorithm. To facilitate this parameter tuning, we incorporate new optimization techniques that take advantage of the structure *To whom correspondence should be addressed of the optimization problem. We also integrate our novel negative examples into the GeneMANIA network combination algorithm that synthesizes heterogeneous data into one affinity network. While well-established procedures exist for the comparison of machine learning methods, recent work () has exposed and discussed problems that can be introduced into these comparisons by the nature of biological data. To mitigate these biases, we heed the suggestions of Greene and Troyanskaya (2012), and focus on evaluation with a temporal holdout (an evaluation set of annotations obtained later in time than the training data, referred to in this article and in the MouseFunc competition as the 'novel evaluation setting'). We also include one of the few available gold standard evaluation sets (an exhaustive experimental evaluation of the presence of a particular protein function across an entire genome), obtained from Huttenhower et al. (2009). Our goal is to demonstrate the performance improvements of our new algorithm over the existing state of the art in a fair (apples-to-apples) comparison across several datasets. We expect that these comparative results will generalize to other datasets as they become available.
CONCLUSIONWe have addressed several of the key problems encountered by protein function prediction efforts by proposing novel algorithms, including a method of choosing negative examples, and a parameterized Bayesian methodology for computing prior functional biases from existing annotation data. These methods, applied using the framework of the GeneMANIA algorithm, have resulted in a significant performance increase across three large benchmarks. We also introduced a new optimization methodology, which significantly decreased computational costs. We devised a framework for tuning parameters in a synthetic novel set, which added further performance gain in the novel scenario in mouse, but it requires additional work to be more broadly applicable to other evaluation scenarios. Our new SWSN network combination algorithm shows even more promise in settings with more extensive negative example information. Finally, we presented a new evaluation metric designed to be easily interpretable by experimentalists, even when averaged over many function categories. When comparing performance statistics of different algorithms, a difference of a few percentage points can mean hundreds of new true annotations when applied across all functions. For example, a 1% increase in TopScore 10 would result in 187 new true annotations were an experimentalist to use that metric to guide experiments over the 1874 GO MF categories in the mouse genome (at the time of MouseFunc publication). Thus, we believe the algorithms presented here have the potential to guide experimentalists to a large number of fruitful assays, andNote: For both algorithms using the SW network combination algorithm, negative examples were chosen according to the sibling technique discussed in Section 3.2. are in general aligned with current biological understanding of how genes are functionally related to each other through different data types. We have shown that our algorithm can perform function prediction through data integration and guilt by association with substantially more accuracy and efficiency than previously published algorithms, and provided insight into some of the inherent difficulties encountered by the development and evaluation of protein function prediction algorithms.