Motivation: Segmental duplications 1 kb in length with ≥ 90% sequence identity between copies comprise nearly 5% of the human genome. They are frequently found in large, contiguous regions known as duplication blocks that can contain mosaic patterns of thousands of segmental duplications. Reconstructing the evolutionary history of these complex genomic regions is a non-trivial, but important task. Results: We introduce parsimony and likelihood techniques to analyze the evolutionary relationships between duplication blocks. Both techniques rely on a generic model of duplication in which long, contiguous substrings are copied and reinserted over large physical distances, allowing for a duplication block to be constructed by aggregating substrings of other blocks. For the likelihood method, we give an efficient dynamic programming algorithm to compute the weighted ensemble of all duplication scenarios that account for the construction of a duplication block. Using this ensemble, we derive the probabilities of various duplication scenarios. We formalize the task of reconstructing the evolutionary history of segmental duplications as an optimization problem on the space of directed acyclic graphs. We use a simulated annealing heuristic to solve the problem for a set of segmental duplications in the human genome in both parsimony and likelihood settings. Availability: Supplementary information is available at
INTRODUCTIONA striking feature of mammalian genomes is the prevalence of segmental duplications or low-copy repeats. Approximately 5% of the human genome consists of segmental duplications 1 kb in length with 90% sequence identity between copies (). Segmental duplications account for a significant fraction of the differences between humans and other primate genomes, and are enriched for genes that are differentially expressed between the species (). Segmental duplications remain an extreme challenge for evolutionary reconstruction, as they are the 'most structurally complex and dynamic regions of the human genome' (). Human segmental duplications are frequently found within complicated mosaics of duplicated fragments ().produced a comprehensive annotation of this mosaic organization; they derived an 'alphabet' of approximately 11 000 duplicated segments, or duplicons, and delimited 437 duplication blocks or 'strings' of at least 10 (and * To whom correspondence should be addressed.typically dozens) different duplicons found contiguously on a chromosome. However, the relationships between these annotated duplication blocks are complex and straightforward analysis does not immediately reveal the evolutionary relationships between blocks. Numerous authors have considered the problem of analyzing relationships between genome sequences that contain duplicated segments. This work falls into roughly two categories. The first focus is the problem of computing genome rearrangement distances, like reversal distance, in the presence of duplicated genes or synteny blocks (, for example). However, such rearrangement distances do not model the creation of new duplicates and thus are not well-suited to describe the evolutionary history of segmental duplications in the genome. The second focus is to analyze regions with duplications under 'local' operations like tandem duplications (, for example). While tandem duplication is undoubtedly important in the generation of duplication blocks, there is strong evidence that an important characteristic of the history of segmental duplications is the frequent duplication and transposition of long segments over large physical distances; as many as 5060% of segmental duplications were transposed interchromosomally (). Several general models of rearrangement that allowed for both local operations and duplicationtranspositionlike operations between different strings were studied by, but the generality of those models meant that the distances were NP-hard to compute and only approximation algorithms were given. Here, we present a novel formulation of the problem of computing an evolutionary history for a set of segmental duplications that are organized in duplication blocks. We represent evolutionary relationships between a set of duplication blocks as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), and we formalize the evolutionary reconstruction problem as an optimization over the space of DAGs. We present two different methods for scoring a DAG: one based on parsimony and one based on likelihood. The parsimony score for a DAG is a straightforward extension of 'duplication distance', a measure introduced by some of us () that describes the most parsimonious sequence of duplicate operations needed to construct a given target string. The likelihood score for a DAG is the product of the likelihood scores for each of the duplication blocks, where a duplication block's likelihood is derived by computing the weighted ensemble of all possible duplication scenarios that could have generated it. We describe how to compute the partition function of the ensemble efficiently using a dynamic program that generalizes the duplication distance (i.e. parsimony score) recurrence. Deriving a probabilistic model from a dynamic program this way is analogous to the
DISCUSSIONOur maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood reconstructions show some differences, both from each other and from the analysis of. In particular, we identify non-core duplicons and subsequences that are arguably as promiscuous within a clade as core duplicons. There are several directions for future work. From a theoretical perspective, one can incorporate other types of operations into the probabilistic model, such as deletions and inversions which we have described in the parsimony setting (), as well as single nucleotide mutations. Also, our method could be used to sample over the space of DAGs using a Markov Chain Monte Carlo strategy. From the perspective of applications, a more comprehensive analysis of genes or other elements in the newly identified core duplicons and core subsequences from our reconstruction is warranted, as is a further refinement of the clade annotation by analyzing the clade-induced subgraphs of the DAGs. Funding: Career Award at the Scientific Interface from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund (to B.J.R.).