Motivation: Developmental DNA elimination occurs in a wide variety of multicellular organisms, but ciliates are the only single-celled eukaryotes in which this phenomenon has been reported. Despite considerable interest in ciliates as models for DNA elimination, no standard methods for identification and characterization of the eliminated sequences are currently available. Results: We present the Paramecium Toolbox for Interspersed DNA Elimination Studies (ParTIES), designed for Paramecium species, that (i) identifies eliminated sequences, (ii) measures their presence in a sequencing sample and (iii) detects rare elimination polymorphisms.
IntroductionProgrammed DNA elimination during somatic development is widely distributed in animal species. First discovered by Boveri in ascaris worms in the 19th century, the phenomenon has to date been characterized in multiple species of nematodes, insects, arachnids, crustaceans, lampreys, fish, birds and mammals, and can involve the programmed reduction of up to 85% of the genome (review:). Ciliates, the only unicells that undergo somatic DNA elimination, resemble animals in that they make a germ/soma distinction. One or more diploid germ line nuclei and a polyploid somatic nucleus coexist in a unique cytoplasm. Only the somatic nucleus is transcriptionally active during vegetative growth. As in metazoans, somatic DNA elimination in ciliates can silence transposable elements and cellular genes (), regulate gene dosage () and determine mating type (). Among ciliates, Paramecium is an outstanding model to study DNA elimination. Sexual processes are readily controlled under laboratory conditions and a third of the germ line genome is lost through two types of reproducible, programmed deletions: (i) repeated sequences are heterogeneously eliminated leading to chromosome fragmentation; (ii) single copy elements, called Internal Eliminated Sequences (IESs), are precisely excised. Somatic DNA is also endoreplicated to reach $ 800 haploid copies. As the 45 000 IESs in the Paramecium tetraurelia genome interrupt non-coding and coding sequences (), their elimination is essential to reconstitute open reading frames (ORFs). Both types of DNA elimination depend on a piggyBac domesticated transposase (named PiggyMac) (), which may be guided by short-RNA driven epigenetic signals (). Cost decrease in High Throughput Sequencing (HTS) is allowing researchers to produce massive genome-wide data to study DNA elimination, but specific bioinformatic methods are still lacking. Here we describe ParTIES: Paramecium Toolbox for IES Interspersed DNA Elimination studies. With Illumina DNA-Seq paired-end reads and a somatic reference genome as input, ParTIES performs IES identification, quantitates their presence in the sample and detects rare excision polymorphisms. Benchmarks are provided in Supplementary Materials.
DescriptionGiven an input somatic reference genome and any Illumina DNASeq sample, be it from germ line or from somatic DNA, ParTIES provides 3 complementary methods which can be run consecutively or independently ().
DiscussionWe benchmarked ParTIES using real and simulated data with the P. tetraurelia 72 Mb somatic reference genome () and IES reference set (). The results are presented in Supplementary Materials, and can be used to plan optimal, cost-effective sequencing experiments. We found the minimal requirement for high sensitivity and specificity IES identification and excision quantification is 35 sequencing of a short-insert library of 75 nt paired-end reads, provided the sequencing sample contains at least 25% germ line DNA. The ParTIES package is expected to set the standard for quantitative analysis of Paramecium genomes and DNA elimination.Conflict of Interest: none declared.