Motivation: Traditionally, microarrays were almost exclusively used for the genome-wide analysis of differential gene expression. But nowadays , their scope of application has been extended to various gen-omic features, such as microRNAs (miRNAs), proteins and DNA methylation (DNAm). Most available methods for the visualization of these datasets are focused on individual platforms and are not capable of integratively visualizing multiple microarray datasets from cross-platform studies. Above all, there is a demand for methods that can visualize genomic features that are not directly linked to protein-coding genes, such as regulatory RNAs (e.g. miRNAs) and epigenetic alterations (e.g. DNAm), in a pathway-centred manner. Results: We present a novel pathway-based visualization method that is especially suitable for the visualization of high-throughput datasets from multiple different microarray platforms that were used for the analysis of diverse genomic features in the same set of biological samples. The proposed methodology includes concepts for linking DNAm and miRNA expression datasets to canonical signalling and metabolic pathways. We further point out strategies for displaying data from multiple proteins and protein modifications corresponding to the same gene. Ultimately, we show how data from four distinct platform types (messenger RNA, miRNA, protein and DNAm arrays) can be integratively visualized in the context of canonical pathways. Availability: The described method is implemented as part of the InCroMAP application that is freely available at www.cogsys.cs.uni-tuebingen.de/software/InCroMAP.
INTRODUCTIONThe first generation of microarray platforms was developed as a high-throughput technique for profiling the transcriptome of diverse biological systems (i.e. cells, organs or organisms) under various experimental conditions (). To date, a plethora of different microarray platforms are readily available. These include gene-centred platforms that rely on current genome annotations and unbiased tiling arrays that interrogate large non-repetitive regions of the genome. Diverse types of platforms have been specifically designed for the interrogation of different genomic features, ranging from messenger RNA (mRNA) or microRNA (miRNA) transcripts, through proteins or protein modifications, to relevant functional elements, such as exons, single-nucleotide polymorphisms or promoters (). In addition to arrays serving for the quantification of global gene expression on the RNA or protein level, also epigenetic modifications, such as DNA methylation (DNAm), can be monitored on a genome-wide level using microarray technology (). Microarray datasets are typically not only inspected on the level of individual genes, but rather differential gene expression in the context of groups of functionally related genes. For instance, the overrepresentation of genes related to the same biological process or involved in the same pathway is investigated by using statistical tests (e.g. Fisher test or hypergeometric test) or gene set enrichment analysis (). Traditional overrepresentation analysis methods require fixed sets of up-or downregulated genes that are usually defined with fold-change and/or P-value cut-offs. Modern gene set enrichment analysis-like methods, in contrast, do not require cut-offs to detect sets of functionally related genes showing a trend towards differential gene expression (). As a result of pathway enrichment, a list of significant pathways that contain genes with strong differential expression is returned. To obtain more details about this result (e.g. which genes are up-or downregulated within a pathway), suitable visualization methods are required. Several tools exist for the visual inspection of datasets from individual platforms (see, for some examples). As the first microarrays were mostly limited to mRNA transcripts, the majority of these visualization tools are still focused on mRNA datasets. However, the current inventory of publicly available tools, which are capable of integrating and jointly visualizing data from multiple microarray platforms, is still limited. Although for genomic features, which are not directly linked to genes (such as DNAm or single-nucleotide polymorphism data), region-based visualization methods [e.g. the UCSC genome browser (are commonly used, data from gene-centred genomic features (mRNAs, proteins,. . .) are often visualized using network-based visualization methods [e.g. Cytoscape () or KEGG Atlas (. Although the former approach may provide more detailed information about individual genes or genomic loci, conclusions about higher order mechanisms can often be more easily drawn from a pathway-based view of the data. Thus, we propose to first focus on pathways relevant to the studied phenomenon, which can be identified using enrichment analysis methods. Subsequently, network hubs or key regulators can be inspected in more detail using complementary region-based visualization methods. Here, we introduce a method for integrated pathway-centred visualization of datasets, generated from the same biological samples using different microarray platforms, which monitor complementary genomic and epigenomic features. In recent years, diverse tools were developed, which are specialized in pathway analysis (e.g. Ingenuity) or pathway visualization. Some of these tools offer visualizing experimental data in a pathway [e.g. KegArray (), Pathline (), GenMAPP () or MGV (. For this purpose, the experimental data are typically mapped to a colour gradient and displayed in the background colour of the pathway nodes. GenMAPP or MGV even have capabilities to display multiple colours in a single node (e.g. for the visualization of time-series experiments). MGV goes one step further and offers additional features to put profile plots or heatmaps inside nodes. However, all of these tools are not able to handle data from genomic features that have no direct reference to the genes in a pathway (e.g. miRNAs or genomic regions). Furthermore, none of these tools offers viable solutions that are tailored for the integration of multiple datasets obtained from heterogeneous microarray platforms.