Motivation: Ancestral gene order reconstruction problems, including the median problem, quartet construction, small phylogeny, guided genome halving and genome aliquoting, are NP hard. Available heuristics dedicated to each of these problems are computationally costly for even small instances. Results: We present a data structure enabling rapid heuristic solution to all these ancestral genome reconstruction problems. A generic greedy algorithm with look-ahead based on an automatically generated priority system suffices for all the problems using this data structure. The efficiency of the algorithm is due to fast updating of the structure during run time and to the simplicity of the priority scheme. We illustrate with the first rapid algorithm for quartet construction and apply this to a set of yeast genomes to corroborate a recent gene sequence-based phylogeny.
INTRODUCTIONMany comparative genomic problems require the reconstruction of unknown genomes, more specifically their gene orders, starting from knowledge of one or more given, contemporary, genomes. These include the inference of ancestral genomes as part of the small phylogeny problem (), and its archetypical cases, the median () and quartet () problems, based on three or four given genomes, respectively. These also include the genome halving (El) and genome aliquoting () problems, based on a single genome where every gene is duplicated or in a gene family of size m  2; the idea being to infer the immediate pre-polyploid ancestor. There are various hybrid problems, such as guided genome halving (GGH;), which combines genome halving with phylogenetic inference, or small phylogeny on unequal genomes (), which integrates missing data considerations. In addition, there are also problems where one or more current, rather than ancestral, genomes, lacking full gene order (), gene orientation (), or affected by paralogy () or high levels of gene order error, are to be completed or corrected based on comparative evidence. We do not study this latter group of problems here, having previously shown how to leverage the minimization inherent in rearrangement distance definitions in order to optimally complete or correct the genomes (). The computational status of most of the ancestral reconstruction problems have been reviewed inand in a recent textbook (). With few exceptions (such as genome halving or multichromosomal breakpoint median), they are NP hard problems, especially the more realistic versions. Nevertheless, with high demand from the phylogenetics community (), a great variety of exact and heuristic algorithms have been developed, some of which are in wide use (). At the heart of many of these methods, especially those that find, or at least seek, a most economical solution in terms of genomic distances is the strategy of maximizing the number of cycles in the breakpoint graph () [or its dual, the adjacency graph (, while reconstructing the unknown genome. In this article, we propose a data structure that is designed entirely for this type of strategy. Pathgroups is a compact and flexible way of storing partially completed cycles, so that genome-wide greedy searches (allowing look-ahead strategies and problem-specific constraints) are rapidly executed and the database rapidly updated. Pathgroups is readily adapted to virtually all the gene-order reconstruction problems and indeed its virtues can be appreciated by studying the basic steps in such procedures as diverse as genome halving (El) and the median problem (). The procedure handles constraints on the reconstructed genomes (e.g. exact tetraploidy in genome halving problems) efficiently. A key advantage of the method is that its running time depends only on genome size and not the rearrangement distances among the input genomes, while run time of other reconstruction methods are highly dependent on the distance. In this article, after formalizing a number of ancestral reconstruction tasks, we present the basic structure of pathgroups, and show how it is adapted to all of the problems. In particular, we use it in a new heuristic to efficiently search for a solution to the quartet problem. As applied to a number of yeast gene orders, we show that gene order data confirm the phylogeny previously obtained from gene sequence data.Page: 1588 15871594
DISCUSSION