Motivation: Recent studies reveal an important role of non-coding circular RNA (circRNA) in the control of cellular processes. Because of differences in the organization of plant and mammal gen-omes, the sensitivity and accuracy of circRNA prediction programs using algorithms developed for animals and humans perform poorly for plants. Results: A circRNA prediction software for plants (termed PcircRNA_finder) was developed that is more sensitive in detecting circRNAs than other frequently used programs (such as find_circ and CIRCexplorer), Based on analysis of simulated and real rRNA-/RNAase R RNA-Seq data from Arabidopsis thaliana and rice PcircRNA_finder provides a more comprehensive sensitive, precise prediction method for plants circRNAs. Availability and Implementation
IntroductionNon-coding circular RNA (circRNA) is a covalently continuous closed loop that usually originates from exonic regions (named exonic circRNA), but can also arise from intronic and intergenic regions. CircRNAs can function as a miRNA sponge () and have the potential to enhance transcription of their host genes (). The emergence of rRNA-depleted high-throughput RNA-Seq technology provides a revolutionary approach for the systematic discovery of circRNAs in various species, including human, mouse, Arabidopsis and rice (). A robust method for circRNA identification is an important tool for investigating the role of these molecules. The available circRNA prediction methods (e.g. find_circ and CIRCexplorer) were primarily developed for use with human or animal datasets (). There are large differences between mammal and plant genomes and therefore the prediction accuracy and sensitivity of detecting circRNAs in plants using the currently available methods are relatively low (. In this study, we developed a software (termed PcircRNA_finder) that shows a more comprehensive ability and greater sensitivity and precision in predicting circRNAs in plants. false predictions dues to the high copy number of genes in plants (Supplementary Data). (ii) Annotator, that can be used to annotate the candidate exonic backsplice sites based on available gene annotation. Recent studies have demonstrated that circRNA's backsplicing site is flexible and alternative splicing of circRNAs is prevalent (). Much of the alternative splicing of circRNAs occurred near by canonical splicing sites () and therefore, 5-bp flanking the two canonical backsplice sites (acceptor and donor) were allowed for our candidate backsplice sites and (iii) Filter, which is a quality control module for the above candidate circRNAs. It creates a pseudoRef file with the flanking sequences of chiastic backsplice sites and then maps raw reads to it and confirms the backsplice sites. It also requires that the candidate circRNAs contain at least one of two kinds of splicing signals, either a U2 based spliceosome (usually with a consensus sequence of GT-AG and GC-AG) and a U12-based minor spliceosome (usually with a consensus sequence of AT-AC) ().