Motivation: Many drugs interact with numerous proteins besides their intended therapeutic targets and a substantial portion of these interactions is yet to be elucidated. Protein–Drug Interaction Database (PDID) addresses incompleteness of these data by providing access to putative protein– drug interactions that cover the entire structural human proteome. Results: PDID covers 9652 structures from 3746 proteins and houses 16 800 putative interactions generated from close to 1.1 million accurate, all-atom structure-based predictions for several dozens of popular drugs. The predictions were generated with three modern methods: ILbind, SMAP and eFindSite. They are accompanied by propensity scores that quantify likelihood of interactions and coordinates of the putative location of the binding drugs in the corresponding protein structures. PDID complements the current databases that focus on the curated interactions and the BioDrugScreen database that relies on docking to find putative interactions. Moreover, we also include experimentally curated interactions which are linked to their sources: DrugBank, BindingDB and Protein Data Bank. Our database can be used to facilitate studies related to polypharmacology of drugs including repurposing and explaining side effects of drugs. Availability and implementation: PDID database is freely available at http://glycosciences.de/glycocd/index.php
IntroductionMajority of the molecular targets of drugs are proteins () and there are several databases of the already characterized proteindrug interactions. DrugBank () provides access to biochemical and pharmacological information about a large set of 7759 drugs, including 1600 Food and Drug Administration (FDA)approved compounds, and their known 4104 protein targets. Therapeutic Target Database () offers a comprehensive coverage of over 20 000 drugs, including close to 15 000 experimental drugs, and their interactions with 2360 protein targets. This database also links targets and drugs to about 900 diseases. Other databases expand beyond the drug molecules to cover small drug-like ligands. BindingDB () gives experimentally V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com measured binding affinities between about 7000 known protein targets and a large set of almost half a million of small ligands. ChEMBL () contains structures, physicochemical properties and bioactivity (e.g. binding constants, pharmacology data) of drug-like small molecules. The current release of ChEMBL incorporates 1.7 million distinct compounds and 13.5 million bioactivity data points which are mapped to over 10 thousand protein targets, where the corresponding binding sites are defined at varying levels of granularity (protein, protein domain or residue level). SuperTarget () includes about 6200 protein targets from several dozens of species and close to 200 000 drug-like compounds. It integrates drug-related information from BindingDB, DrugBank and the SuperCyp database of cytochromedrug interactions (), adverse drug effects from SIDER (), drug metabolism and pathways and Gene Ontology (GO) terms for the target proteins. The PROMISCUOUS database (von) integrates data from DrugBank, SuperTarget and SuperCyp and covers about 6500 protein targets and over 25 thousands drug-like compounds that are annotated with side effects. This database also provides facilities that can be used to predict novel targets based on structural similarity between drugs and between side effect profiles of drugs. STITCH () combines information from many sources of experimentally and manually curated interactions between small ligands and proteins including ChEMBL, Protein Data Bank (PDB), DrugBank, Therapeutic Target Database, text mining of articles from MEDLINE and PubMed and several other resources. It currently houses data on 390 000 chemicals and 3.6 million proteins. The recently released IntSide database () links about 1000 drugs with their human protein targets collected from DrugBank and STITCH, and with close to 1200 side effects and other annotations of associated diseases, pathways and cellular functions. Although most of these resources summarize the interactions at the protein or residue level, scPDB () includes molecular-level (all-atom) information for native binding sites in proteins structures collected from PDB () that are suitable for docking of drug-like ligands. It includes molecular-level details of about 9200 binding sites (all-atom annotation of binding sites and list of ligand-binding residues grouped by various types of bonds) and binding modes (all-atom position of ligand inside the site) in 3600 proteins, and summary of physicochemical properties of approximately 5600 drug-like ligands. However, many of the established drugs interact not only with the intended therapeutic target protein(s) but also with other protein targets (off-targets). Individual compounds were shown to on average target 6.3 proteins (). Given a high degree of incompleteness of this information (), the number of off-targets is likely substantially higher. To compare, DrugBank includes 15 199 proteindrug interactions for 7759 drugs with the average number of targets per drug at 1.96, which further substantiates incompleteness of the currently available data. Moreover, this polypharmacology can be both beneficial if a given drug can be repurposed for a different disease and harmful, leading to side effects (). A couple of high-profile examples include imatinib that was repurposed for treatment of gastrointestinal stromal tumors () and sorafenib for the kidney and liver cancers (). The incompleteness of the data combined with the importance of polypharmacology motivates research toward elucidation of novel proteindrug interactions. Conventional (non-computational) methods for the identification of novel off-targets rely on an in vitro counter-screen of a given drug against a 'large' set of enzymes and receptors (). Recognizing corresponding implications related to side effects, pharmaceutical companies have implemented screening protocols for the drugs that they currently develop. For instance, Novartis screens against interactions with a panel of 24 targets associated with serious side effects and high hit rates (), Pfizer screens against between 15 and 30 targets (), and Roche uses a panel of 48 targets (). Compared with the experimental screens, computational methods that find novel drug targets are more cost-and time-effective, allow screening of a larger number of targets and provide insights into the molecular-level mechanisms of proteindrug interactions (). These in silico methods are successful in the context of drug repositioning and identification of off-targets (). A couple of databases that focus on the putative proteindrug and druggable proteinprotein interactions (PPIs) were recently released. BioDrugScreen () stores results of docking of about 1600 small drug-like molecules against 1589 known proteins targets in human, which were annotated based on DrugBank and HCPIN () databases. Docking was ran for close to 2000 cavities on the surfaces of these proteins, for the total of about 3 million receptorligand complexes. Druggable Protein Protein Interaction Assessment System (Dr. PIAS) () is a database of druggable PPIs predicted by a machine learning method. This database lists druggable interactions predicted from over 83 thousand PPIs in human, mouse and rat but they are not associated with specific compounds. We developed ProteinDrug Interaction Database (PDID) that complements existing repositories and addresses the lack of access to a comprehensive set of putative proteindrug interactions. Based on close to 1.1 million of all-atom predictions over the entire structural human proteome (10 thousand structures for over 3700 proteins), PDID provides access to all putative targets (between 4444 and 7184, depending on the prediction method used) of several dozens of popular drugs. Unique features of our database are: @BULLET It incorporates accurate predictions generated by three methods, ILbind (), SMAP () and eFindSite (), which are complementary and independent of docking that was used in the BioDrugScreen database @BULLET It uniformly covers the entire structural human proteome @BULLET It includes molecular-level information on localization of the putative binding sites in the structures of the corresponding protein targets @BULLET It includes comprehensive annotations of known drug targets that are linked to their sources: DrugBank, BindingDB and PDB The methods that we use were shown empirically to provide high-quality predictions of drug targets () and their results were already successfully used to predict novel off-targets. Examples include applications to find new off-targets of estrogen receptor modulators (), cholesteryl ester transfer protein inhibitors (), comtan (), inhibitors of Trypanosoma brucei RNA editing ligase 1 (), nelfinavir (), raloxifene () and cyclosporine A ().
DiscussionNumerous drugs are highly promiscuous and we do not know many of their targets. PDID database addresses this issue by providing access to a complete set of putative proteindrug interactions and a set of known proteindrug interactions in the structural human proteome. Our database includes data that otherwise would be accessible only to individuals and research groups with significant computational expertise and resources. The putative interactions were generated by three accurate predictors, ILbind, SMAP and eFindSite, that were shown to produce results that led to finding new drug targets () and which complement the existing BioDrugScreen database that relies on docking. The databasealso integrates annotations of known protein targets collected across DrugBank, BindingDB and PDB, links proteins to the corresponding records in UniProt and provides coordinates of the location of binding sites in the structures of the putative drug targets. PDID can be used to systematically catalog proteindrug interactions and to facilitate various studies related to polypharmacology of drugs (), such as explaining side effects caused by interactions with off-targets and for the drug repurposing. Relevant recent examples include use of predictions with ILbind to find three novel off-targets of cyclosporine A that explain nephrotoxicity associated with use of this immunosuppressant (). Another example involves repurposing of raloxifene, which is used for prevention and treatment of osteoporosis, as a potential compound to treat Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections based on predictions with the SMAP method ().