Motivation: Copy number alterations (CNAs) associated with cancer are known to contribute to genomic instability and gene deregulation. Integrating CNAs with gene expression helps to elucidate the mechanisms by which CNAs act and to identify the transcriptional downstream targets of CNAs. Such analyses can help to sort functional driver events from the many accompanying passenger alterations. However, the way CNAs affect gene expression can vary in different cellular contexts, for example between different subtypes of the same cancer. Thus, it is important to develop computational approaches capable of inferring differential connectivity of regulatory networks in different cellular contexts. Results: We propose a statistical deregulation model that integrates copy number and expression data of different disease subtypes to jointly model common and differential regulatory relationships. Our model not only identifies CNAs driving gene expression changes, but at the same time also predicts differences in regulation that distinguish one cancer subtype from the other. We implement our model in a penalized regression framework and demonstrate in a simulation study the feasibility and accuracy of our approach. Subsequently, we show that this model can identify both known and novel aspects of cross-talk between the ER and NOTCH pathways in ER-negative-specific deregulations, when compared with ER-positive breast cancer. This flexible model can be applied on other modalities such as methylation or microRNA and expression to disentangle cancer signaling pathways. Availability: The Bioconductor-compliant R package DANCE is available from www.markowetzlab.org/software/ Contact:
INTRODUCTIONSomatic copy number alterations (CNAs) are known to be associated with cancer (). They are particularly important for tumourigenesis, contributing to genomic instability and gene deregulation. Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) has been used extensively to assess genome-wide copy number states in cancer, * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  Present address: Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. and statistical methods can be used to identify recurrent alterations in a particular disease state or subtype (). However, while some CNAs are driver mutations that are functionally important and impact tumour progression, they are often accompanied by numerous passenger events that confer no selective growth advantage (). One of the challenges in cancer genomics is to identify functional driver events amidst many passenger alterations. To better understand the mechanisms by which CNAs influence disease progression, it is necessary to integrate copy number data with an intermediate phenotype like gene expression (). Integrating CNA data and RNA expression data can help discover the primary aberrations that lead to downstream changes (). However, this is a challenging task for several reasons: first, CNAs can influence the expression of the proximal genes within a several mega base window (cis-acting), and can also exert effects elsewhere throughout the genome (trans-acting). Second, CNAs can span several mega base and thus make it difficult to distinguish between driver genes and passenger genes in this region. Thus, there is a need for new efficient computational approaches to refine the location of drivers. While describing the regulatory role of CNAs for gene expression is already a difficult task, it is only the first step needed in understanding how tumours differ from normal tissue and how regulatory relationships vary between different disease subtypes. Cancer is triggered by collaborating factors and deregulated genes acting through signaling pathways are relevant for tumour growth and survival (). Several known examples of pathway deregulation result in aberrant signaling, the inhibition of apoptosis and increased cell proliferation (). Components in the deregulation network of signaling pathways represent attractive targets for therapeutic purpose (). A better understanding of the impact of CNAs on pathway activity and its variation in different cancer subtypes would be a major step forward in molecular medicine. Many experimental and computational approaches have been proposed to identify the deregulation of cellular components, such as tumour suppressor silencing or oncogene activation, that contribute to tumour development, based on gene expression (). All these works are important steps in this field; however, many different regulatory events are reflected in gene expression, including the activity of transcription factors, small non-coding RNAs, as well as gene dosage. From microarray expression data alone, it is very hard to decide which of these resulted in the observed expression change. Investigating changes in regulatory relationships between CNAs and gene expression in different cancer subtypes has seldom been explored. While there is an increasing number of methods that integrate DNA copy number data and RNA expression data (; The Cancer Genome Atlas Research), most methods that compare cancer subtypes are geared toward supervised classification of tumor samples (). Only few integration methods address the topic of differential regulation: one example is a bivariate approach byto search for abnormalities jointly at the DNA/RNA level. The abnormalities represent strong deviations from the reference, e.g. the amplification of a genomic region and overexpression of the proximal gene. Another example (that we compare against on real data) is DRI (), which can discover joint aberrations between two sample classes in paired copy number and expression data. Both methods are computationally efficient, but are restricted to paired expression and CNA profiles on individual genes. In other words, these two methods can only infer cis-effects. Here, we present DANCE (Deregulation Analysis in Networks of Copy number-driven Expressions) a systematic approach to decipher both common and differential regulatory mechanisms between disease subtypes. We propose a statistical deregulation model that integrates copy number and expression data to jointly model common and differential regulatory relationships. Our model not only identifies CNAs driving gene expression changes, but at the same time also predicts differences in regulation that distinguish one cancer subtype from the other. Using one subtype as a reference, we summarize the differential regulatory relationships of the other subtype in a deregulation network. To our knowledge, it is the first model to integrate both copy number and expression data to discover changes in the regulatory architecture between cancer subtypes. The next section introduces our model, which, in a simulation study over a range of different experimental settings, outperforms alternative models and competing methods. Following, we use DANCE to study the deregulation between estrogen receptor (ER) positive and negative breast cancer (), which represent relatively good and poor outcome groups, respectively. While DANCE is able to tackle high-dimensional problems, to add interpretability we focus our analysis on signaling pathways. In particular, we are interested in the cross-talk between NOTCH and ER pathways, which may guide decisions about patients likely to benefit from Notch inhibitors. The results show that DANCE uncovers and extends known aspects of differential ERNotch crosstalk in ER-positive versus-negative disease. Thus, it can be a useful approach to infer critical aspects of pathway deregulation among cancer subtypes.