Site-directed mutagenesis is frequently used by scientists to investigate the functional impact of amino acid mutations in the laboratory. Over 10 000 such laboratory-induced mutations have been reported in the UniProt database along with the outcomes of functional assays. Here, we explore the performance of state-of-the-art computational tools (Condel, PolyPhen-2 and SIFT) in correctly annotating the function-altering potential of 10 913 laboratory-induced mutations from 2372 proteins. We find that computational tools are very successful in diagnosing laboratory-induced mutations that elicit significant functional change in the laboratory (up to 92% accuracy). But, these tools consistently fail in correctly annotating laboratory-induced mutations that show no functional impact in the laboratory assays. Therefore, the overall accuracy of computational tools for laboratory-induced mutations is much lower than that observed for the naturally occurring human variants. We tested and rejected the possibilities that the preponderance of changes to alanine and the presence of multiple base-pair mutations in the laboratory were the reasons for the observed discordance between the performance of computational tools for natural and laboratory mutations. Instead, we discover that the laboratory-induced mutations occur predominately at the highly conserved positions in proteins, where the computational tools have the lowest accuracy of correct prediction for variants that do not impact function (neutral). Therefore, the comparisons of experimental-profiling results with those from computational predictions need to be sensitive to the evolutionary conservation of the positions harboring the amino acid change.
INTRODUCTIONSite-directed mutagenesis followed by functional assays has enabled scientists to directly profile the functional differences among proteins that only differ by a single amino acid (). Through such experiments, one can identify sequence domains critical for specific functions and evaluate the degree of functional change induced  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. by a mutation (). Frequently the functional outcomes of laboratory experiments have also been compared with predictions yielded by computational tools that annotate whether or not a single amino acid mutation will impact protein function. If they are successful, computational tools would offer a costefficient way to prioritize variants to explore in the laboratory. However, investigators have reported a wide range of success of computational tools from perfect accuracy (e.g.) to rather poor results [e.g. 60% accuracy (. These differences might occur due to limited sample sizes (number of mutations) investigated in individual studies that are focused on one protein or members of a protein family (e.g.). The availability of information on over 10 000 laboratory-induced mutations provides an opportunity to (1) measure the performance of computational tools for accuracy in diagnosing laboratory mutations and (2) compare them with the performance observed for a large collection of naturally occurring human variants with and without disease implications. Here, we report a computational analysis of 10 913 protein point mutations from 2372 proteins investigated in a variety of functional assays in the laboratory, which are available online in the UniProt resource (). Although a large number of computational tools are available, we focused our investigation on three tools: Condel, which is reported to have the highest accuracy (); PolyPhen-2, which has widespread and long-term usage in the field (); and SIFT (), which is intended to guide laboratory experiments and has also been used for diagnosing protein variation for many years.