Structure-based approaches complement ligand-based approaches for lead-discovery and cross-reactivity prediction. We present to the scientific community a web server for comparing the surface of a ligand bound site of a protein against a ligand bound site surface database of 106 796 sites. The web server implements the property encoded shape distributions (PESD) algorithm for surface comparison. A typical virtual screen takes 5 min to complete. The output provides a ranked list of sites (by site similarity), hyperlinked to the corresponding entries in the PDB and PDBeChem databases. Availability: The server is freely accessible at
INTRODUCTIONThe numerous genome sequencing projects have 'revealed that proteins involved in entirely different biochemical pathways, and even residing in different tissues and organs, may possess functional binding pockets with similar shapes and physiochemical properties' (). The need to compare protein binding sites and establish structurefunction relationships across protein families has become ever more important. Three direct outcomes of such an effort are: (i) identification of lead compounds for 'target-hopping', (ii) repositioning an existing drug and (iii) predicting adverse side-effects (). The discovery of low molecular weight somatostatin receptor subtype 5 (hSST5R) antagonists involved use of astemizole as the lead structure whose original target was H1, a histamine receptor. H1 has binding site amino acid composition similar to hSST5R's (). The work byutilizing the SOIPPA algorithm () is an example of how a catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitor used for treating Parkinson's disease can be repositioned as a lead compound for treating multi-drug resistant and extensively drug resistant tuberculosis. Since the compound has an excellent safety profile, repositioning it to treat drug-resistant tuberculosis offers * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. significant incentives. Side effects are a serious cause for concern in chemotherapy. A study byfound that out of 276 122 active compounds, over 96 000 had activity for more than one target (). While ligand-based approaches can point to such cross-reactivity, they may not be sufficient in cases where ligands with low apparent similarity bind on to the same target (). The property encoded shape distributions (PESD) algorithm () offers high-throughput binding site comparison that makes it suitable for mining large databases such as the Protein Data Bank (PDB;). There are several web-based services and stand-alone programs for comparison of ligand binding sites in proteins. The SitesBase () server uses a geometric hashing algorithm on an allatom-based representation of the binding site. The SiteEngine and Multibind () servers also utilize a geometric hashing based search protocol that compares pseudo-center representations of binding sites. The Catalytic Site Search server (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/databases/cgi-bin/ CSS/makeEbiHtml.cgi?file=form.html) based on the Jess algorithm () searches for specific groups of residues. PDBSiteScan () works on a reduced representation of atoms (utilizing N, C and C  ) and implements a combinatorial extension () algorithm followed by alignment for similarity detection. The SuMo server () matches graphs representing triplets of functional groups such as unbound hydrogen bond donors or acceptors, accessible sides of aromatic rings and carboxylate, primary amide, etc. The FuzCav program utilizes a generic cavity fingerprint generated from a labeled C  representation of the binding site (). In, we have shown that binding sites can have similar shape and property distributions on the surface and yet show low conservation in underlying residue, pseudo-center or atom composition. In such cases, methods based on residue, pseudo-center or atom representations may not be able to detect the similarity that is evident from the surface. The eF-site server () can work directly on electrostatic potential-mapped surfaces; however, it uses a clique-detection-based algorithm that is NP-hard and slow for high-throughput global similarity searches. The PESD algorithm implemented in the PESDserv binding site comparison server presented here overcomes this limitation and quickly returns a list of globally similar ligand-bound site surfaces from the PDB in a few minutes.