Finding related conformations in the Protein Data Bank is essential in many areas of bioscience. To assist this task, we designed a dihedral angle database for searching protein segment homologs. The search engine relies on encoding of the protein coordinates into text characters representing amino acid sequence,  and dihedral angles. The search engine is advantageous owing to its high speed and interactive nature and is expected to assist scientists in discovering conformation homologs and evolutionary kinship. The search engine is fast, with query times lasting a few seconds, and freely available at http://metscape.ncibi.org.It
INTRODUCTIONOver the past years, structural data in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) has grown exponentially. At the present time, $92 000 structures are available in the PDB (). The data abundance makes it difficult to navigate the information, particularly when one tries to retrieve segment motifs (). To find segment motifs in the PDB structures, several computational engines have been designed. One such engine is SPASM, which finds spatial motifs consisting of arbitrary main-chain and side-chain conformation in a database of protein structures (). An additional search engine named Fragment Finder was designed to identify similar structural motifs based on backbone dihedral angles (). Another engine, PAST, is based on translationand rotation-invariant representation of protein backbone-dihedral angles (). Both PAST and Fragment Finder suffer from dihedral angle discretization of 5 , which coarse grains the results, and preclude amino acid sequence, which prevents a comprehensive search. Also noteworthy is the Dali Server, which enables the user to browse for homologs in Cartesian space (). None of these engines allows a combined search using amino acid sequence and dihedral angles in a rapid manner.Here we describe an online search engine that rapidly finds protein segments based on amino acid sequence and ' and dihedral angles. The search engine, named Protein Homology through Dihedral Angle Constraints (PHI-DAC), is advantageous owing to its speed, generality and simplicity. It is expected to be helpful to the scientific community by easing the identification of conformation homologs and distilling useful information from the PDB.
CONCLUSIONOur method of encoding the backbone ' and dihedral angles into text characters has proven to be a fast solution for answering queries about local structural similarities in the PDB. Compared with SPASM, PHI-DAC shows similar results, while being much faster and addressing a different question compared with Dali. Therefore, compared with Dali, we consider PHI-DAC to be a valuable tool for the fast detection of protein segments based on dihedral angle conservation.. The PHI-DAC search engine. The search engine finds protein segment homologs based on ' and dihedral angles and amino acid sequence. (A) Search parameters include PDB coordinates, PDB and chain ID, as well as residue range. (B) The result page of PHI-DAC lists the segments that matched the query. Shown here is an example query for segment 710 of chain A of PDB ID 1L4W with a torsion angle tolerance of 8. The results are listed in order of the RMSD of dihedral angles between the query and result. Notice sequence identity indicated by pipes