Motivation: Quantification of cellular changes to perturbations can provide a powerful approach to infer crosstalk among molecular components in biological networks. Existing crosstalk inference methods conduct network-structure learning based on a single phenotypic feature (e.g. abundance) of a biomarker. These approaches are insufficient for analyzing perturbation data that can contain information about multiple features (e.g. abundance, activity or localization) of each biomarker. Results: We propose a computational framework for inferring phenotypic crosstalk (PHOCOS) that is suitable for high-content microscopy or other modalities that capture multiple phenotypes per biomarker. PHOCOS uses a robust graph-learning paradigm to predict direct effects from potential indirect effects and identify errors owing to noise or missing links. The result is a multi-feature, sparse network that parsimoniously captures direct and strong interactions across phenotypic attributes of multiple biomarkers. We use simulated and biological data to demonstrate the ability of PHOCOS to recover multi-attribute crosstalk networks from cellular perturbation assays. Availability and implementation: PHOCOS is available in open source at https://github.com/
IntroductionA fundamental challenge in molecular biology is to understand how information flows through complex signal transduction networks (). Targeted perturbation experiments provide a powerful approach for identifying evidence of 'crosstalk' or influence between signaling components or pathways (). Generally, these approaches allow one to assess whether perturbing one part of a signaling pathway alters the behavior of another part. Investigation of crosstalk could be at the level of individual components (e.g. specific genes or proteins) or collections of components (e.g. modules). Inferring crosstalk from experimental perturbation data conceptually requires two steps (): (i) quantification of perturbation-induced changes among selected biomarkers of the network; and (ii) application of statistical approaches that convert these observed changes into a crosstalk graph. Most approaches for inferring crosstalk model interactions are based on a single attribute or 'feature' of a biomarker (). This is sufficient for modeling interactions for many high-throughput assays, for example, RNA abundance in transcriptomics is commonly studied (). However, this approach is not adequate in cases where it is possible or desired to investigate multiple different features per biomarker. In the case of proteomics, both abundance and level of modification (e.g. phosphorylation) could be simultaneously measured per protein species. In high-content imaging assaysthe focus of our current studyhundreds of different features can be extracted for each biomarker per cell (). Such features could include standard biomarker measurements, such as intensity (reflecting biomarker abundance or activity level) or localization (reflecting properties such as cytosolic versus nuclear levels, or unpolarized versus polarized states), as well as other measurements, such as texture or statistical properties of the brightest pixels. Thus, the challenge is that perturbation assays can cause simultaneous changes to multiple phenotypic features even on the same biomarker (). Information can be lost when modeling crosstalk for a single feature (right cartoon): when only examining the intensity feature, a perturbation to biomarker 'A' may have no effect on biomarker 'B'; however, the perturbation may alter the localization of B from wild type. For example, in the classic MAPK signaling cascade (), activated MAPKKK protein may be observed to alter the activation level of its downstream MAPKK partner, whereas activated MAPKK protein may be observed to alter both the activity levels and localization of its downstream (transcription factor) MAPK partner.
DiscussionWe propose PHOCOS as a framework for inferring multi-feature crosstalk networks from perturbation assays. Previous approaches have been developed to analyze gene regulatory networks from image readouts (). These approaches focused on single measurements on each biomarker. To the best of our knowledge, PHOCOS is the first crosstalk inference method that explicitly considers the potential interactions among different features (attributes) of biomarkers. The contributions of PHOCOS are summarized in the following three points. First, from the view of data analysis, we conducted feature screening to identify common phenotypic classes from patterns of feature deviation profiles. In particular, for microscopy there are many possible features that could be extracted from images, and it is often not obvious which features offer novel insights into crosstalk. Our feature-screening step identified a small number of archetypical deviation patterns, which helped reduce the complexity of graph inference. Second, from the view of graph inference, we proposed a dualsparse optimization framework for direct-effect pursuit from experimental observations. The effectiveness of PHOCOS was demonstrated by its ability to identify core, direct-effect motifs from missing links, noise and indirect effects. From simulation studies, PHOCOS handled difficult cases (with noise and missing links) well for directeffect graph learning. While the PHOCOS reduction method is motivated by the multi-feature network problem, it is based on a general framework that can be directly applied to other network inference problems, e.g. for gene or protein interaction networks. Third, from the view of systems biology, we applied PHOCOS to study multiple phenotypic responses across multiple modules and time periods defined within the neutrophil polarization network. Consistent with previous work, we found that crosstalk can evolve dynamically and differently across different features. More importantly, we were able to identify novel cross-feature interactions that were missed by single-feature graph-learning approaches. With the ability to infer multi-feature crosstalk influence networks comes both increased resolution and increased complexity. Depending on the features selected, some links may be immediately interpretable (e.g. activity levels of A affect localization of B), while others (e.g. activity levels of A affect the texture of B) may be difficult to interpret directly in terms of molecular mechanisms and interactions. As previously mentioned, new techniques, including optogenetics, will allow perturbation of specific features while holding others constant; these experimental approaches will both inspire the development of multi-feature crosstalk inference methods, such as PHOCOS, and be invaluable for testing predictions. PHOCOS has the potential to help provide deeper insights into how biological networks transduce information. Content-rich approaches for monitoring cellular phenotypes, such as microcopy, provide multi-dimensional views into how molecular components respond to perturbations. PHOCOS can use these data to provide 'high-resolution' views of which phenotypic attributes support interaction among biomarkers. While PHOCOS was developed and tested on microscopy images, it can be extended to infer crossfeature interactions for other biological datasets that capture multiattributes per biomarker.