Motivation: Protein phosphorylation is critical for regulating cellular activities by controlling protein activities, localization and turnover, and by transmitting information within cells through signaling networks. However, predictions of protein phosphorylation and signaling networks remain a significant challenge, lagging behind predictions of transcriptional regulatory networks into which they often feed. Results: We developed PhosphoChain to predict kinases, phosphat-ases and chains of phosphorylation events in signaling networks by combining mRNA expression levels of regulators and targets with a motif detection algorithm and optional prior information. PhosphoChain correctly reconstructed $78% of the yeast mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway from publicly available data. When tested on yeast phosphoproteomic data from large-scale mass spectrometry experiments, PhosphoChain correctly identified $27% more phosphorylation sites than existing motif detection tools (NetPhosYeast and GPS2.0), and predictions of kinase–phosphatase interactions overlapped with $59% of known interactions present in yeast databases. PhosphoChain provides a valuable framework for predicting condition-specific phosphorylation events from high-throughput data. Availability: PhosphoChain is implemented in Java and available at
INTRODUCTIONProtein post-translational modifications (PTMs) enable proteins to rapidly switch from one state to another. Signaling networks exploit this feature to transmit information from the cytoplasm and outside the cell to the genome by interfacing with transcription factors, which themselves form complex gene regulatory networks. In comparison with gene regulatory networks, our understanding and prediction of signaling networks is undeveloped, yet critical to a systems view of complex regulatory dynamics. Protein phosphorylation is by far the most commonly studied and predominant post-translational modification of signaling networks. Moreover, phosphorylation of signaling proteins is fundamental to cellular responses, health and disease (). Kinases and phosphatases, which are responsible for adding and removing phosphates from proteins, are common drug targets (). The vast majority of existing tools for predicting phosphorylation events tend to focus on predicting phosphorylation sites from amino acid sequences (). This approach is limited because kinases and phosphatases tend to act on many of the same sites, and thus it is not clear which factors are active under which conditions (). Therefore, we sought to include activity data to improve the predictability of phosphorylation events and to reconstruct signaling networks. Studies of signaling networks in both yeast () and mammalian () cells reveal that the expression of genes encoding kinases often increases with the activation of the signaling pathway, suggesting that expression might be a predictor of signaling network activities. Similarly, high-throughput phosphoproteomics studies using biochemical enrichment and mass spectrometry have led to large experimentally validated proteomic databases annotating phosphorylation on target proteins (). These data map the potential changes of protein activities and can be used to predict new phosphorylation events and phosphorylation-driven regulatory networks. Therefore, we developed a tool, called PhosphoChain, which includes condition-specific regulatory information (i.e. kinase and phosphatase activities or proxies thereof) to predict PTM regulatory events and signaling network activities. In comparison with 70 other phosphorylation prediction tools (Supplementary), only RegPhos () and HeR Module () included activity data, and RegPhos only used it to verify their predictions. PhosphoChain works by constructing an alternating decision tree (ADTree) containing nodes that predict whether a kinase or phosphatase is active as well as the activities of target proteins based on protein activity patterns and phosphorylation sequence *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. motifs that occur in multiple experiments. Here, we apply PhosphoChain to the yeast MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) network as a test case and on a genome-wide scale to predict the entire kinase-phosphatase-transcription factor regulatory network in yeast. The decision tree provides three biologically relevant predictions: (i) given the measured activity for a few factors, it predicts the activity levels for many targets; (ii) it predicts the target sequence for factors (kinases or phosphatases); and (iii) it predicts the chain of post-translational modifications (such as in the MAPK pathway) that are responsible for downstream transcriptional changes.