Phosphorylation plays an important role in cellular signal transduction. Current phosphorylation-related databases often focus on the phosphorylation sites, which are mainly determined by mass spectrometry. Here, we present PhosphoNetworks, a phosphorylation database built on a high-resolution map of phosphorylation networks. This high-resolution map of phosphorylation networks provides not only the kinase–substrate relationships (KSRs), but also the specific phosphorylation sites on which the kinases act on the substrates. The database contains the most comprehensive dataset for KSRs, including the relationships from a recent high-throughput project for identification of KSRs using protein microarrays, as well as known KSRs curated from the literature. In addition, the database also includes several analytical tools for dissecting phosphorylation networks. PhosphoNetworks is expected to play a prominent role in proteomics and phosphorylation-related disease research. Availability and implementation: http://www.phosphonetworks.org
INTRODUCTIONThe reversible phosphorylation of proteins regulates many aspects of cellular physiology. Abnormal phosphorylation is known to be both a cause and a consequence of many diseases, such as cancer, diabetes, heat attack, hypertension and rheumatoid arthritis (). The systematic study of phosphorylation can greatly benefit disease-related biomedical research. In a recent project, we developed a combined protein microarray and bioinformatics approach to identify kinasesubstrate relationships (KSRs) in a high-throughout manner (). Based on the results of these studies, we experimentally identified substrates for 289 unique kinases, resulting in 3656 high-quality KSRs. The study generated more human KSRs than all previous studies combined. To facilitate the use of this information, we created the 'Database for a HighResolution Map of Human Phosphorylation Networks (PhosphoNetworks)', an integrated information system for the storage, retrieval, visualization and analysis of human phosphorylation data. To enhance the discovery of phosphorylation relationships between kinases and their downstream substrates, we also connected the kinases with the specific phosphorylation site on substrate protein sequences, which will help users design mutagenesis experiments of phosphorylation sites to block the phosphorylation event. Therefore, the PhosphoNetworks database provides not only a powerful information resource but also an integrated analysis platform.