Motivation: We have created an R package named phylogeo that provides a set of geographic utilities for sequencing-based microbial ecology studies. Although the geographic location of samples is an important aspect of environmental microbiology, none of the major software packages used in processing microbiome data include utilities that allow users to map and explore the spatial dimension of their data. phylogeo solves this problem by providing a set of plotting and mapping functions that can be used to visualize the geographic distribution of samples, to look at the relatedness of microbiomes using ecological distance, and to map the geographic distribution of particular sequences. By extending the popular phyloseq package and using the same data structures and command formats, phylogeo allows users to easily map and explore the geographic dimensions of their data from the R programming language.
IntroductionDeep sequencing of environmental metagenomes provides scientists with a way to assess the structure and function of microbial communities including the majority of microorganisms that cannot be cultured in the laboratory. In the course of a typical microbiome study, a number of datasets are generated that may include raw sequencing reads, tables of clustered reads, taxonomic tables, phylogenetic trees and sample collection information. This data can be organized and analyzed by a number of computational suites including QIIME (), mothur () and phyloseq (). While these are robust tools for processing data, none of them support mapping, a valuable tool for hypothesis generation that not only displays the physical location of samples but can also answer basic questions that have a spatial component (e.g. How are sample variable such as pH and carbon content distributed? Where are ecologically similar samples located? Are there sequences found in only one region?). To address this shortcoming we built phylogeo, an R package containing a set of functions for creating geography-centric plots of microbiome data. phylogeo was engineered as an extension of the phyloseq package, chosen for its simple design and its high-quality, programmable, ggplot-based () figures. By adding mapping capabilities to a preexisting software package, phylogeo minimizes the effort needed to generate maps, and thereby facilitates the exploration of the geographic relationships in microbiome sequencing data.
ConclusionThe geographic component of environmental microbiomes has been underexplored in microbial ecology studies due, in part, to the difficulty of combining microbiome data with geographic plotting tools. phylogeo makes it possible for any user of R to easily and reproducibly generate maps showing the geographic patterns in their microbiome data.