Motivation: Analyses in comparative genomics often require non-redundant genome datasets. Eliminating redundancy is not as simple as keeping one strain for each named species because gen-omes might be redundant at a higher taxonomic level than that of species for some analyses; some strains with different species names can be as similar as most strains sharing a species name, whereas some strains sharing a species name can be so different that they should be put into different groups; and some genomes lack a species name. Results: We have implemented a method and Web server that clusters a genome dataset into groups of redundant genomes at different thresholds based on a few phylogenomic distance measures. Availability: The Web interface, similarity and distance data and R-scripts can be accessed at
INTRODUCTIONGenomic databases contain several sequenced strains for species of high interest, whereas other species contain only one genome and no evolutionarily close relatives (). These biases might result in different qualities when predicting such features as functional interactions by comparative genomics. The problem has often been solved by using a measure of phylogenetic distance either directly as a score (e.g.) or for normalizing scores (e.g.). The problem has also been solved by choosing single representatives for particular clades (e.g. Moreno). However, selecting representatives by species name can be problematic because strains of different species, for example Escherichia coli and Shigella flexneri, can be so evolutionarily close that they should share their names, whereas strains of single species such as Prochlorococcus marinus might be very distant to each other (Moreno). Besides, some sequenced genomes do not have a species name, and the level of acceptable similarity among genomes for some applications might be lower than the most common for species (Moreno). The Genomic Similarity Score (GSS) and other phylogenomic measures have been shown to concur with more computationally demanding phylogenetic distances (). We have used GSS to produce datasets of non-redundant genomes, maximizing the number of predicted interactions by phylogenetic profiles (Moreno-Hagelsieb and), and other practical uses, such as displaying the relationship between conservation of gene order and genomic similarity (). The datasets were built by ordering the genomes available by importance (e.g. Escherichia coli K12 would take priority because of its annotation quality), and then from largest to smallest. We would then take the first genome in the list, and put any genome with a GSS above a chosen threshold into the list of redundant genomes. In the present work, we tested instead two clustering methods to group genomes, besides a couple variants of the GSS and DNA signatures (). As other research groups have asked us for lists of non-redundant genomes, here we make them available to the wider community.