Motivation: Several international collaborations and local projects are producing extensive catalogues of genomic variations that are supplementing existing collections such as the OMIM catalogue. The flood of this type of data will keep increasing and, especially, it will be relevant to a wider user base, including not only molecular biologists, geneticists and bioinformaticians, but also clinical researchers. Mapping the observed variations, sometimes only described at the amino acid level, on a genome, identifying whether they affect a gene and—if so—whether they also affect different isoforms of the same gene, is a time consuming and often frustrating task. Results: The PICMI server is an easy to use tool for quickly mapping one or more amino acid or nucleotide variations on a genome and its products, including alternatively spliced isoforms.
INTRODUCTIONThe availability of novel high-throughput technologies for identifying variations, both pathological and physiological, in sequenced genomes is producing a wealth of data that is readily available to researchers. These data will continue to be produced at an unprecedented speed not only in projects based on large international collaborations, but also in individual labs and will add to existing collections such as OMIM (), SwissProt (The UniProt) and the related mutation portal SwissVar (). It can be easily foreseen not only that more and more data will be available, but also that the scientists who will need to access and analyze them will not be limited to molecular biologists, geneticists and bioinformaticians, as it has been mostly the case so far, but will include clinical researchers and in the future also medical doctors. This implies that tools to easily access and interpret these data should be provided to the community and that they have to be simple, reliable and user-friendly. Given one or more variations of interest, one needs to map them back to the corresponding genome, verify in which region they fall and, if they map to a coding region, understand whether they affect, and in which way, one or more of the isoforms of the gene. This task is not made easier by the fact that the version of the genome might have changed since the time of identification of the mutation.
DESCRIPTIONThe server allows the selection of the relevant species and, if more than one genome assembly exists, of the specific version from Ensembl. Multiple nucleotide and amino acid variations can be used as input (). Nucleotide variations are identified by their position on a chromosome and by the wild-type and mutated nucleotide. The server uses the information on the wild-type nucleotide to identify the correct strand and to verify that the selected base is indeed present in the correct position of the selected version of the specific genome. The VCF 1000 genome format can be selected as input as well by checking the appropriate box. Unless the input position falls in an intergenic region, the tool will map it with respect to the transcript(s) and report whether it falls upstream, downstream, in the 5 or 3 untranslated region, in a stop-codon, in a skipped exon or in a coding exon. In the last case, the mutation is mapped on all the isoforms of the gene. The variation is assigned to the synonymous, nonsense or missense category and, in the latter case, the system provides the wild-type and mutated amino acid in each of the isoforms.The user can also input one or more amino acid mutations in a given protein when the information on the corresponding nucleotide mutation is not available, as is the case for those reported in the SwissProt 'Natural variant' field, in the SwissVar portal and in a number of entries in OMIM. Given the UniProt identifier of the protein, the position of the mutation and the wild-type and mutated amino acid in the protein sequence, the system will retrieve the coordinates of the corresponding gene in the genome, identify the wild-type codon and verify whether the mutated amino acid can be unambiguously obtained by a single-nucleotide mutation. If this is the case, the identified nucleotide variation is treated as in the case of an input nucleotide variation (). The system relies on the Perl APIs provided by Ensembl. For nucleotide variations, it first verifies whether the input data are consistent with the genome sequence and, next, it maps the identified position on all the genes/isoforms spanning it. For amino acid variations, after a consistency check, it aligns the UniProt sequence to the corresponding Ensembl gene products and proceeds as in the case of nucleotide variations. As an example of the usefulness of the amino acid variation option of the tool, entry 600509.0011 of the OMIM resource reports two mutations of the ABCC8 protein associated to hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, E1506K () and E1507K (); however, the two mutations correspond to the same nucleotide variation, and the discrepancy in the numbering is due to the fact that they were originally mapped by the authors on different splicing isoforms of the protein. The question obviously arises about how often an amino acid variation can be unambiguously assigned to a single nucleotide polymorphism. We tested the PICMI server on the whole collection of polymorphisms in the SwissVar knowledgebase that provides information on about 53 000 amino acid variations (release 56.8). (Results are available at www.biocomputing.it/picmi/SwissVar). Interestingly, 85% of the amino acid variations could be unambiguously associated to single nucleotide mutations and therefore mapped on all alternative isoforms of the corresponding analyzed genes.