Simple and concise representations of protein-folding patterns provide powerful abstractions for visualizations, comparisons, classifications, searching and aligning structural data. Structures are often abstracted by replacing standard secondary structural features—that is, helices and strands of sheet—by vectors or linear segments. Relying solely on standard secondary structure may result in a significant loss of structural information. Further, traditional methods of simplification crucially depend on the consistency and accuracy of external methods to assign secondary structures to protein coordinate data. Although many methods exist automatically to identify secondary structure, the impreciseness of definitions, along with errors and inconsistencies in experimental structure data, drastically limit their applicability to generate reliable simplified representations, especially for structural comparison. This article introduces a mathematically rigorous algorithm to delineate protein structure using the elegant statistical and inductive inference framework of minimum message length (MML). Our method generates consistent and statistically robust piecewise linear explanations of protein coordinate data, resulting in a powerful and concise representation of the structure. The delineation is completely independent of the approaches of using hydrogen-bonding patterns or inspecting local substructural geometry that the current methods use. Indeed, as is common with applications of the MML criterion, this method is free of parameters and thresholds, in striking contrast to the existing programs which are often beset by them. The analysis of results over a large number of proteins suggests that the method produces consistent delineation of structures that encompasses, among others, the segments corresponding to standard secondary structure.
INTRODUCTIONWith the rapid growth in the corpus of known structures, concise representations are increasingly preferred to inspect and analyze protein folding patterns (). At the core of this simplification is the idea that proteins contain repetitive substructural elements and that the essence of a fold lies in the assembly and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. interaction of these elements (). The appearance of some of these elements arises from the periodicity in the patterns of hydrogen bonds between backbone nitrogen and carbonyl groups along the protein polypeptide chain. Among the standard secondary structure definitions are: helix (-helix, -helix and 3 10-helix) and strand of sheet (). Ideally, the spatial trace of -Carbon (C  ) atoms of standard secondary structure show a linear trend allowing them to be abstracted using vectors or line segments, without much loss of structural information about the fold. The common practice is to fit an axis to a helix and a least-square line to C  or main chain atoms of strands of sheet (). Replacement of secondary structural elements with line segments is therefore one of the common methods to abstract protein structures and construct concise representation of their folding patterns. The number of standard secondary structural elements observed in a protein is typically an order of magnitude smaller than the number of residues in a chain. Therefore methods that utilize concise representations clearly benefit from a massive space and computational saving, especially when comparing and analyzing structures on a large scale (). Methods that abstract protein structure at the level of secondary structure generally rely on external programs that can automatically assign secondary structures to coordinate data. However, accurate identification and assignment of secondary structure is an inexact process (). Although definitions based on hydrogen bonding provides some rigor in assigning secondary structure, the standard definition of what constitutes a hydrogen bond is based on the notion of bond energy whose measurement can be imprecise and acutely sensitive even to small differences in the position of nitrogen and carbonyl atoms, especially the carbonyl oxygen positions. Two popular programs that use hydrogen bonding as a basis for assignment of secondary structure are DSSP () and STRIDE (). On the other hand, secondary structure can be defined using geometric features such as distances and dihedral angles of C  atoms along the backbone in addition to other local structural features. In fact, there is a direct correlation between patterns of hydrogen bonding and the geometry that arise out of them. However, secondary structural elements can deviate substantially from ideal geometry, therefore posing severe challenges to detect such elements using geometric features alone. Among the methods that rely primarily on geometry to assign secondary structure arePage: i44 i43i51
CONCLUSIONWe have presented a novel and efficient method to delineate protein structures using the MML framework; MML is tolerant to measurement error and other inaccuracies. The model used in this work is independent of preconceived notions of what substructures are being sought to simplify the observed coordinate data. Our method maximizes the economy of representation while minimizing the loss of information, taking into account even the loop regions of proteins. Analysis of the delineations of a large number of protein structures suggests that the method is consistent in, among others, delineating standard secondary structures. The concise representations produced by this method have a potential use for rapid and accurate structure comparison and lookup. An implementation of our program is available from http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~karun/pmml/.