Motivation: The post-genome era sees urgent need for more novel approaches to extracting useful information from the huge amount of genetic data. The identification of recurrent copy number variations (CNVs) from array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) data can help understand complex diseases, such as cancer. Most of the previous computational methods focused on single-sample analysis or statistical testing based on the results of single-sample analysis. Finding recurrent CNVs from multi-sample data remains a challenging topic worth further study. Results: We present a general and robust method to identify recurrent CNVs from multi-sample aCGH profiles. We express the raw dataset as a matrix and demonstrate that recurrent CNVs will form a low-rank matrix. Hence, we formulate the problem as a matrix recovering problem, where we aim to find a piecewise-constant and low-rank approximation (PLA) to the input matrix. We propose a convex formulation for matrix recovery and an efficient algorithm to globally solve the problem. We demonstrate the advantages of PLA compared with alternative methods using synthesized datasets and two breast cancer datasets. The experimental results show that PLA can successfully reconstruct the recurrent CNV patterns from raw data and achieve better performance compared with alternative methods under a wide range of scenarios. Availability and implementation: The MATLAB code is available at http://morrislab.med.utoronto.ca/plida/.
INTRODUCTIONCopy number variations (CNVs) are genomic alterations characterized as abnormal number of copies in one or more segments of DNA. The size of segments varies from 1 kb to 3 Mb (). Studies have indicated that CNVs are associated with human diseases. For instance,found that individuals who carried fewer copies of gene CCL3L1 than average were significantly more susceptible to HIV. Each missing copy increases the susceptibility by 4.5 10.5%. Several other types of human diseases, such as cancers and autoimmune diseases, have also been linked with CNVs (). Therefore, it is important to investigate the contribution of CNV to complex diseases. Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is a high-throughput and high-resolution approach for measuring changes of copy numbers in thousands of DNA regions (). In a typical aCGH experiment, genomic DNAs are extracted from test samples and reference samples and differentially labeled with two dyes. The labeled DNAs are mixed together and hybridized to a microarray spotted with DNA probes. The ratio between the fluorescence intensity of the test DNA and that of the reference DNA at a given probe measures the ratio between the copy number in the test genome and that in the reference genome. Data extracted from an aCGH experiment are generally in the form of log 2 ratios. A value greater than zero indicates a possible gain in the copy number, while a value less than zero indicates a possible loss. Detection of CNVs from aCGH data is to locate changepoints in log 2-ratio profiles that partition each chromosome into discrete segments. Because of the high noise level in the intensity values of aCGH data, it is difficult to identify the boundaries of CNVs using the typical thresholding approach (). Many methods have been developed to analyze single-sample aCGH data, including breakpoint detection (), signal smoothing (Ben) and Hidden Markov Models (). Reviews and comparisons can be found inand Willenbrock and Fridlyand (2005). However, finding CNVs from single samples is only the initial step in the search of disease-associated genes. It has been pointed out that the recurrent CNVs (CNVs at the same genomic locations appearing frequently over multiple individuals) are more likely to encompass disease-critical genes (). Recently, an increasing number of methods have become available for finding recurrent CNV regions from aCGH data of multiple samples. A recurrent CNV region is often defined as a set of consecutive probes that are altered in a group of samples (). Some methods identify recurrent CNV regions via hypothesis testing by comparing the frequency of alternations at each probe with a null distribution. Examples include. These methods rely on the preprocessing *To whom correspondence should be addressed. of single-sample profiles, including smoothing, segmentation and CNV calling, which may miss some weak but common variations (). Some other methods attempt to detect recurrent CNV regions directly from raw profiles through multiple-chain Hidden Markov Models (), joint segmentation () and matrix factorization methods (). Most of these methods assume a generative model that describes the characteristics of recurrent variations and fit the model under the assumption of Gaussian noise. However, these methods rarely consider the influence of individual-specific variations, which typically have large intensity values and cannot be modeled as Gaussian noise. As a result, individual-specific variations will be mixed with recurrent variations and eventually corrupt the model fitting. In this article, we develop a robust and efficient method to identify recurrent CNVs from raw aCGH profiles. The main contributions are summarized as follows:We formulate the problem as a matrix decomposition problem, where the raw data matrix is decomposed into a low-rank component, a sparse component and a noise component. These three components correspond to recurrent CNVs, individual-specific variations and random noises, respectively. The recurrent CNVs can be easily identified from the low-rank component by thresholding or more sophisticated statistical analysis. The proposed formulation is convex. An efficient and scalable algorithm is developed to find the globally optimal solution based on the state-of-art convex optimization techniques.The relationship between our model and other related models is explained via simulation of six popular scenarios. The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce our model, formulation and algorithm. In Section 3, we report experimental results. Finally, we conclude our article with some discussions in Section 4.
DISCUSSIONIn this article, we propose a new method to identify recurrent CNVs via recovering a low-rank matrix from raw aCGH profiles. The proposed method models different scenarios in a single framework. With a convex formulation, our algorithm guarantees a global optimal solution. We demonstrate the ability of our method to separate recurrent CNVs from other variations in both simulated data and real data. The low-rank matrix output of our method can be used as an input to other recurrent regionfinding algorithms based on permutation test or other statistical analyses. After the decomposition, the individual-specific CNVs are mostly included in the sparse component, as shown in. However, the sparse component may also contain noise and measurement error. To precisely detect individualspecific CNVs, we may have to apply a postprocessing step to the sparse component. Another possible approach is to first use existing algorithms (e.g. fused lasso and TVSp) to remove noise in aCGH profiles and then apply our model to decompose the processed profiles into recurrent CNVs (low rank) and individual-specific CNVs (sparse).