Motivation: Small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are an abundant class of non-coding RNAs with a wide variety of cellular functions including chemical modification of RNA, telomere maintanance, pre-rRNA processing and regulatory activities in alternative splicing. The main role of box C/D snoRNAs is to determine the targets for 2-O-ribose methylation, which is important for rRNA maturation and splicing regulation of some mRNAs. The targets are still unknown, however, for many orphan snoRNAs. While a fast and efficient target predictor for box H/ACA snoRNAs is available, no comparable tool exists for box C/D snoRNAs, even though they bind to their targets in a much less complex manner. Results: PLEXY is a dynamic programming algorithm that computes thermodynamically optimal interactions of a box C/D snoRNA with a putative target RNA. Implemented as scanner for large input sequences and equipped with filters on the duplex structure, PLEXY is an efficient and reliable tool for the prediction of box C/D snoRNA target sites. Availability: The perl script PLEXY is freely available at http://www.bioinf.uni-leipzig.de/Software/PLEXY.
INTRODUCTIONBox C/D snoRNAs are mainly involved in 2-O-ribose methylation of specific nucleotides in ribosomal and spliceosomal RNAs (). They are characterized by two sequence motifs, the C-box (RTGATGA) close to the 5-end, the D-box (CTGA) close to the 3-end, and in most cases, an additional C-and D-box. The targeted position is located exactly 5 nt upstream of the 5-end of the D-and/or D-box. It is determined by sequence-specific hybridization (). The base-pairing region has a length of 720 nt and exhibits a simple structure consisting of stacked base pairs and only a few mismatches. In particular, bulges are absent (). Recently, an efficient and reliable tool for predicting the much more complex interactions of box H/ACA snoRNAs with their * To whom correspondence should be addressed. targets has become available (). It is based on the thermodynamic principles of RNA folding. No comparable approach is currently available for the simple box C/D snoRNARNA duplexes. snoTarget (), at present the only computer program devoted to box C/D snoRNA target prediction, employs pattern matching to find candidates, which are then ranked by the cofolding energy of snoRNA and target as computed by RNAcofold (). In contrast, PLEXY directly computes the interaction energies by means of dynamic programming.
DISCUSSIONRecently, it was discovered that HBII-52 is also processed into shorter RNAs, so-called psnoRNAs (for processed snoRNAs), that appear to be involded in splicing regulation. The psnoRNAs form RNPs distinct from the 'common' snoRNPs. It is not surprising, therefore, that the psnoRNAs-mediated mode of action follows somewhat different interaction rules, although they involve the same regions of the snoRNA. For instance, psnoRNAmRNA duplexes appear to have more mismatches than canonical snoRNArRNA ones (). As soon as these recognition parameters are better understood, they could be easily included in the PLEXY algorithm by simply adding new filtering rules. Finally, we remark that the specificity of PLEXY can be enhanced by considering evolutionary conservation of the target site. This can be achieved most easily by filtering the predicted putative targets by their sequence conservation or by using the ability of RNAplex to compute interactions between multiple sequence alignments. In summary, PLEXY is a computationally efficient tool to predict target sites for box C/D snoRNAs. It is specific enough to reliably identify modification sites on rRNAs and snRNAs. At the same time, it is efficient enough to perform genome-wide searches for potential mRNA targets of orphan snoRNAs.