Plant long non-coding RNA database (PLncDB) attempts to provide the following functions related to long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs): (i) Genomic information for a large number of lncRNAs collected from various resources; (ii) an online genome browser for plant lncRNAs based on a platform similar to that of the UCSC Genome Browser; (iii) Integration of transcriptome datasets derived from various samples including different tissues, developmental stages, mutants and stress treatments; and (iv) A list of epigenetic modification datasets and small RNA datasets. Currently, our PLncDB provides a comprehensive genomic view of Arabidopsis lncRNAs for the plant research community. This database will be regularly updated with new plant genome when available so as to greatly facilitate future investigations on plant lncRNAs. Availability: PLncDB is freely accessible at http://chualab.rockefeller. edu/gbrowse2/homepage.html and all results can be downloaded for free at the website.
INTRODUCTIONNon-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) are a family of RNAs that do not encode proteins. On the basis of their length and genomic locations, ncRNAs can be further classified as (i) small ncRNAs including miRNAs and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs); (ii) natural antisense transcripts (NATs) (); (iii) long intronic non-coding RNAs (incRNAs); and (iv) long intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) (). RNAs in the last three categories are at least 200 nt or longer and they are referred to as long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs). Genomes of human (), mouse () and fly () have been shown to encode lncRNAs that play important roles in cell differentiation, immune response, imprinting, tumor genesis and other important biological processes (). Besides, genetic mutations of human lncRNAs have been shown to be associated with diseases and pathophysiological conditions (). For plants, genome-wide search for ncRNAs has been previously conducted in Arabidopsis thaliana (), Medicago truncatula (), Zea mays () and Tritucum aestivum (). The recent genome-wide study based on around 200 Arabidopsis tilling array datasets and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) has identified thousands of lncRNAs in Arabidopsis (). These lncRNAs show tissue-specific expression, and a large number of them are responsive to abiotic stresses (). However, the function of these lncRNAs remains largely unexplored. Genomic loci of many lncRNAs are associated with histone modifications and DNA methylations suggesting an epigenetic regulation of these loci (). In addition, biogenesis of a subgroup of lncRNAs is co-regulated by CBP20, CBP80 and SERRATE (). Some sense and antisense double-stranded RNAs involving lncRNA partners are processed by the RNA interference machinery into siRNAs (). Although thousands of lncRNAs have been identified in Arabidopsis and other plants and their expression has been profiled on a genome-wide basis, these RNAs have not been fully recorded and annotated in public databases. As far as we know, there are only seven databases and one server related to currently available lncRNAs: TAIR (), PlantNATsDB (), lncRNAdb (), NRED (), ncRNAimprint (), NONCODE () and ncFANs (). Among them, only PlantNATsDB () is designed to query about NATs pairs; however, this database just lists all NATs pair and does not provide a genome view. The other six databases are not specifically designed for plant lncRNAs (). Therefore, a database that contains comprehensive information related to lncRNAs, such as genomic information, expression profiles, siRNA information and associated epigenetic markers is warranted. Here, we attempt to develop an online database for plant lncRNAs, named PLncDB (Plant long non-coding RNA database), with the aim to provide comprehensive information for plant lncRNAs.compares information content between our database and those of others.