Motivation: Solubility is one of the fundamental protein properties. It is of great interest because of its relevance to protein expression. Reduced solubility and protein aggregation are also associated with many diseases. Results: We collected from literature the largest experimentally verified solubility affecting amino acid substitution (AAS) dataset and used it to train a predictor called PON-Sol. The predictor can distinguish both solubility decreasing and increasing variants from those not affecting solubility. PON-Sol has normalized correct prediction ratio of 0.491 on cross-validation and 0.432 for independent test set. The performance of the method was compared both to solubility and aggregation predictors and found to be superior. PON-Sol can be used for the prediction of effects of disease-related substitutions , effects on heterologous recombinant protein expression and enhanced crystallizability. One application is to investigate effects of all possible AASs in a protein to aid protein engineering. Availability and implementation: PON-Sol is freely available at http://structure.bmc.lu.se/PON-Sol. The training and test data are available at http://www.uni-ulm.de/in/theo/research/seqana.html.
IntroductionNumerous experimental methods are used to investigate variations affecting protein function, structure and properties. In addition, computational approaches are increasingly utilized for predicting effects and mechanisms of variations. Solubility has been of great interest because of its relevance to protein (over)expression. Reduced solubility and protein aggregation are associated with many human diseases. Solubility is very important also for protein structural studies. Solubility and aggregation are related but different physical concepts. Solubility means concentration in saturated solution where the soluble protein is in equilibrium with solid phase (). Protein in solid phase may be made soluble by dilution. In case of aggregation, protein is in solid phase but this process is typically accompanied by changes to protein structure, integrity and/or modification (). Aggregation is an irreversible process occurring for example in Alzheimer's disease and systemic amyloidoses. During the last decade computational methods have been developed to predict protein solubility especially for heterologous protein overexpression. These methods utilize different approaches, typically in the field of machine learning. Much less effort has been put on predicting the effects of variations to protein solubility. It is well known that amino acid substitutions (AASs) can have profound effects on solubility and lead to diseases including severe complex V deficiency () and cataract (). Until now two tools have been released for such predictions OptSolMut () and CamSol ().