Motivation: A reconstruction of full-length transcripts observed by next-generation sequencer or tiling arrays is an essential technique to know all phenomena of transcriptomes. Several techniques of the reconstruction have been developed. However, problems of high-level noises and biases still remain and interrupt the reconstruction. A method is required that is robust against noise and bias and correctly reconstructs transcripts regardless of equipment used. Results: We propose a completely new statistical method that reconstructs full-length transcripts and can be applied on both next-generation sequencers and tiling arrays. The method called ARTADE2 analyzes positional correlation, meaning correlations of expression values for every combination on genomic positions of multiple transcriptional data. ARTADE2 then reconstructs full-length transcripts using a logistic model based on the positional correlation and the Markov model. ARTADE2 elucidated 17 591 full-length transcripts from 55 transcriptome datasets and showed notable performance compared with other recent prediction methods. Moreover, 1489 novel transcripts were discovered. We experimentally tested 16 novel transcripts, among which 14 were confirmed by reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction and sequence mapping. The method also showed notable performance for reconstructing of mRNA observed by a next-generation sequencer. Moreover, the positional correlation and factor analysis embedded in ARTADE2 successfully detected regions at which alternative isoforms may exist, and thus are expected to be applied for discovering transcript biomarkers for a wide range of disciplines including preemptive medicine.
INTRODUCTIONEvery cell of every organism has a signature set of RNA molecules with certain fractions, called the transcriptome. The transcriptome carries out specialized cell activities. To know all about the transcriptome is an essential step for understanding life. Several technologies are developed therefore to observe the transcriptome. Hybridization-based methods with genome tiling arrays have been used to approach all phenomena in the transcriptome for species such as humans, mice or Arabidiopsis thaliana whose genome sequences have been read with high quality (). On the other hand, high-throughput sequencers, typically called next-generation sequencers (NGS), are emerging as a major equipment to acquire information about transcriptomes by the method called mRNA-Seq, because they can be applied not only for well-studied organisms but also for other exotic organisms (). Using either method, a reconstruction of the shape of fulllength RNA/transcripts from observation results is still a critical step in the study, because both genome tiling array probes and NGS reads are short (100 nt) and represent partial observations of original molecules whose lengths are 1000 nt and more. There are several computational programs that address this issue. We have also developed ARTADE1, an abbreviation for 'ARabidopsis Tiling-Array-based Detection of Exons'the previous version of ARTADE, to reconstruct the shape of mRNA molecules based on genome information and mRNA expression profiles from genome tiling arrays (). Cufflinks is one of the major programs applied for mRNASeq results (). However tiling array and mRNA-Seq results often contain high levels of noise, which may come from observation machinery and biological fractions (). This makes the reconstruction of full-length transcripts more difficult if the dynamic range of expression values is low. Besides, it is known that amplification, hybridization and sequencing biases cause bad effects on observations. Almost all recent methods try to reconstruct fulllength transcripts by only using transcriptome on a single condition. We think, however, there is a theoretical limit to the extent these methods can remove noise and bias.