Background: Identifying disease genes from human genome is an important but challenging task in biomedical research. Machine learning methods can be applied to discover new disease genes based on the known ones. Existing machine learning methods typically use the known disease genes as the positive training set P and the unknown genes as the negative training set N (non-disease gene set does not exist) to build classifiers to identify new disease genes from the unknown genes. However, such kind of classifiers is actually built from a noisy negative set N as there can be unknown disease genes in N itself. As a result, the classifiers do not perform as well as they could be. Result: Instead of treating the unknown genes as negative examples in N, we treat them as an unlabeled set U. We design a novel positive-unlabeled (PU) learning algorithm PUDI (PU learning for disease gene identification) to build a classifier using P and U. We first partition U into four sets, namely, reliable negative set RN, likely positive set LP, likely negative set LN and weak negative set WN. The weighted support vector machines are then used to build a multi-level classifier based on the four training sets and positive training set P to identify disease genes. Our experimental results demonstrate that our proposed PUDI algorithm outperformed the existing methods significantly. Conclusion: The proposed PUDI algorithm is able to identify disease genes more accurately by treating the unknown data more appropriately as unlabeled set U instead of negative set N. Given that many machine learning problems in biomedical research do involve positive and unlabeled data instead of negative data, it is possible that the machine learning methods for these problems can be further improved by adopting PU learning methods, as we have done here for disease gene identification. Availability and implementation: The executable program and data are available at http://doc.aporc.org/wiki/CNetQ
INTRODUCTIONUncovering the causative genes for human diseases has significant impact to healthcare since many medical conditions are in some way influenced by human genetic variations. In recent years, an increasing number of genes have been confirmed as causative genes to diseases. This provides an invaluable resource for developing machine learning methods to identify novel disease genes from the vast number of unknown genes in the genome, using the confirmed disease genes as positive training examples. Recent studies have revealed that genes associated with similar disorders have been shown to demonstrate higher probabilities of similar gene expression profiling (), high functional similarities () and physical interactions between their gene products (). As such, those unknown genes that share similar gene expression profiles with the confirmed disease genes, have high functional similarities with disease genes and interact with disease gene products are likely to be disease genes as well.systematically integrated human mouse conserved similar expression profiles with phenotype similarity map to rank potential disease genes in large genomic regions. Kohlermade use of the observation that proteins caused by same/similar disorders are likely attached together in proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network () and applied the random walk algorithm on the PPI network for disease gene prioritization. More recently,proposed a network propagation-based method RWPCN on a novel protein complex network for prioritizing disease genes. In the above two PPI network-based approaches, those unknown genes directly interact with one or multiple confirmed disease genes are likely to be predicted as candidate disease genes. Note that the above methods only provide a gene rank list and a threshold is needed to decide whether a specific gene is disease related or not. A more biologically meaningful approach would be to build a binary classification model that can automatically classify a gene as disease or not. This requires identifying systematic differences between disease genes (positive class) and non-disease genes (negative class). LopezLopez Bigas andinvestigated the distinguishing features of protein sequences between disease and non-disease genes and found that compared to the products of non-disease genes, proteins involved in hereditary diseases tend to be long, with more homologs with distant species, but fewer paralogs within human genome.further improved on this method by employing a decision tree algorithm based on a variety of genomic and evolutionary features, such as coding sequence length, evolutionary conservation, presence, closeness of paralogs in the human genome, etc. In addition to sequence information, proteins' topological information in protein interaction networks has also been shown to be useful for evaluating the likelihood that an unknown *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/), which permits unrestricted, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. gene is disease related or not. In particular,employed the K-nearest neighbor (KNN) classifier to predict disease genes based on the topological features in PPI networks, such as proteins' degree, the percentage of disease genes in proteins' neighborhood, etc.applied support vector machines (SVMs) classifier using PPI topological features, sequence-derived features, evolutionary age features, etc.first built three individual SVM classifiers using three types of features, i.e. PPI network, protein sequence and protein functional information, respectively. It then built a final classifier by combining the predictions from three individual classifiers for candidate gene prediction. The above works employed machine learning methods to build a binary classifier by using the confirmed disease genes as positive training set P and some unknown genes as negative training set N. However, since the negative set N will contain unconfirmed disease genes (false negatives), which confuses the machine learning techniques for building accurate classifiers. As such, the classifiers built based on the positive set P and noisy negative set N do not perform as well as they could in identifying new disease genes. Recently, Mordelet et al. proposed a bagging method ProDiGe for disease gene prediction. This method iteratively chooses random subsets (RS) from U and trains multiple classifiers using bias SVM to discriminate P from each subset RS. It then aggregates all the classifiers to generate the final classifier (). However, as the random subsets RS from U could still contain unknown disease genes, individual classifiers are thus not accurate and this will affect the overall performance of the final classifier. In addition, ProDiGe method treats all the examples in RS/U homogeneously. Since we can compute the similarities between the examples in U and the positive examples in P, we can thus estimate the probabilities of the examples in U belonging to positive/negative class. As such, the examples in U can be partitioned into different subsets and subsequently be treated heterogeneously for classifier building. In this article, we design a novel positive-unlabeled (PU) learning algorithm PUDI (PU learning for disease gene identification) to build a more accurate classifier based on P and U (). First, we use a comprehensive combination of biological process, molecular function, cellular component, protein domain and PPI data to represent the genes into feature vectors. We design a novel feature selection method to reduce the dimensionality of the feature vectors. Then, we partition U into four label sets, namely, reliable negative set, likely positive set, likely negative set, and weak negative set, based on their likelihoods being positive/negative class. Finally, we build multi-level weighted SVMs using these four sets together with positive set P for identifying disease genes. To the best of our knowledge, PUDI is the first to design a novel multi-level PU learning algorithm for building a classifier for disease gene identification. We have compared PUDI with three state-of-the-art techniques, namely, Smalter's method (), Xu's method () and ProDiGe method. Our experimental results showed that PUDI outperforms the existing methods significantly for predicting general disease genes and for identifying disease genes in eight specific disease classes, such as cardiovascular diseases, endocrine diseases, psychiatric diseases, metabolic diseases and cancer, etc.