Motivation: Our knowledge of the metabolites in cells and their reactions is far from complete as revealed by metabolomic measurements that detect many more small molecules than are documented in metabolic databases. Here, we develop an approach for predicting the reactivity of small-molecule metabolites in enzyme-catalyzed reactions that combines expert knowledge, computational chemistry and machine learning. Results: We classified 4843 reactions documented in the KEGG database, from all six Enzyme Commission classes (EC 1–6), into 80 reaction classes, each of which is marked by a characteristic functional group transformation. Reaction centers and surrounding local structures in substrates and products of these reactions were represented using SMARTS. We found that each of the SMARTS-defined chemical substructures is widely distributed among metabolites, but only a fraction of the functional groups in these substructures are reactive. Using atomic properties of atoms in a putative reaction center and molecular properties as features, we trained support vector machine (SVM) classifiers to discriminate between functional groups that are reactive and non-reactive. Classifier accuracy was assessed by cross-validation analysis. A typical sensitivity [TP/(TP + FN)] or specificity [TN/(TN + FP)] is ≈ 0.8. Our results suggest that metabolic reactivity of small-molecule compounds can be predicted with reasonable accuracy based on the presence of a potentially reactive functional group and the chemical features of its local environment. Availability: The classifiers presented here can be used to predict reactions via a web site (http://cellsignaling.lanl.gov/Reactivity/). The web site is freely available.
INTRODUCTIONMetabolomics, the study of a cell's complement of small-molecule metabolites, has recently been recognized as an important part of post-genomics science (). Identification of metabolites, including their chemical structures, and reconstruction of the network of enzyme-catalyzed reactions in which metabolites * To whom correspondence should be addressed. participate are two of the important challenges for metabolomic analysis of a cell (). Large-scale metabolic network reconstructions currently available are based on literature data and genome annotation, which identifies genes encoding enzymes. Reconstructions intended to be suitable for flux analysis have been obtained in this way for a variety of organisms (). Organism-specific metabolic databases are also available [for an example, see. The sequence/knowledge-based approach to network reconstruction has a number of limitations. This approach can only account for reactions that have been characterized experimentally in some system, and large gaps in our knowledge of metabolism seem likely. More than 35% of known metabolic activities that are classified by Enzyme Commission (EC) numbers are not associated with known amino acid sequences (). In addition, even for Escherichia coli, the quintessential model organism, novel metabolic reactions continue to be discovered (). Xenobiotic metabolism, which ranges from biodegradation pathways in microorganisms () to drug metabolism in mammals (), is rarely considered in network reconstructions. An aspect that is also largely neglected is the broad substrate specificity of many enzymes, which has been exploited in synthesis of organic compounds () and in building libraries of drug candidates (). Broad substrate specificity has been stated to be the major reason why many more metabolites will be present in a metabolome than can be deduced from genome sequence (). To improve network reconstruction, we must generate and use new types of data, such as whole-cell metabolite profiles, which can be produced using techniques such as high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS) (). These techniques have been used to detect many novel metabolites, both endogenous () and xenobiotic (), but signatures of novel metabolites typically cannot be easily associated with chemical structures. As our ability to analyze complex mixtures obtained from cells grows, so does appreciation of our ignorance of the metabolic networks that produce the compounds in these mixtures (). Although current MSbased techniques enable researchers to detect a large fraction of the metabolome with relatively low per-experiment cost, methods