Motivation: Histone modifications regulate chromatin structure and gene expression. Although nucleosome formation is known to be affected by primary DNA sequence composition, no sequence signature has been identified for histone modifications. It is known that dense H3K4me3 nucleosome sites are accompanied by a low density of other nucleosomes and are associated with gene activation. This observation suggests a different sequence composition of H3K4me3 from other nucleosomes. Approach: To understand the relationship between genome sequence and chromatin structure, we studied DNA sequences at his-tone modification sites in various human cell types. We found sequence specificity for H3K4me3, but not for other histone modifications. Using the sequence specificities of H3 and H3K4me3 nucleo-somes, we developed a model that computes the probability of H3K4me3 occupation at each base pair from the genome sequence context. Results: A comparison of our predictions with experimental data suggests a high performance of our method, revealing a strong association between H3K4me3 and specific genomic DNA context. The high probability of H3K4me3 occupation occurs at transcription start and termination sites, exon boundaries and binding sites of transcription regulators involved in chromatin modification activities, including his-tone acetylases and enhancer-and insulator-associated factors. Thus, the human genome sequence contains signatures for chromatin modifications essential for gene regulation and development. Our method may be applied to find new sequence elements functioning by chro-matin modulation.
INTRODUCTIONChromatin remodeling mediated by histone modifications is an important mechanism for specific gene expression (). However, the relationship between genome sequence and chromatin remodeling is not well understood. Although DNA sequence preferences for nucleosome formation have been known since the mid 1980s (), the role of histoneDNA interaction in nucleosome formation is subjected to debate (). The interplay between transcription factors (TFs) and adenosine triphosphate-dependent chromatin modulating factors in regulating histone modifications implies that histone modifications do not follow the sequence preferences of the general H3 nucleosomes or the other nucleosomes that are not trimethylated at H3K4 (). Indeed, the H3K4me3 nucleosome is preferentially enriched in the genomic regions showing a low density of other nucleosomes and marks an open chromatin region. The advance of DNA sequencing technology with immunoprecipitated DNA segment associated with specific histone modifications allows us to examine the DNA sequence compositions specific to histone modifications in an unbiased way. Therefore, we extracted DNA sequences of nucleosomes carrying individual histone modifications from ChIP-seq data () and identified the features of sequences bound to histone modifications in ChIP-seq experiments. Using the identified sequence specificities of H3K4me3 and H3 nucleosomes, we developed a model to compute the probabilities of H3K4me3 and H3 nucleosome occupation from the genome sequence context. H3K4me3 ChIP-seq data in various human cells indicate that the loci predicted by our model to have a high probability of the H3K4me3 sequence signature are preferentially occupied by H3K4me3 nucleosome. Our study provides a method for investigating the DNA sequence features of chromatin structure. Furthermore, our analyses show that the human genome sequence contains signals for chromatin remodeling at epigenetic regulatory elements.
DISCUSSIONThe different sequence preferences of H3K4me3 and H3 nucleosomes imply distinct mechanisms in their arrangement on the genome. Although the H3 nucleosome is mainly distributed by the bending property of DNA sequences (), the H3K4me3 nucleosome is regulated by protein factors recognizing specific sequence compositions, such as non-methylated CG-rich sequence signatures. The sequence-specific protein factors interact with histone methylase complexes specific to H3K4me3, such as Setd1. In mouse, insertion of non-methylated CpG-rich sequences leads to a high density of H3K4me3 occupation. For example, Cfp1 specifically binds to non-methylated CpG rich sequences and recruits the Setd1 complex (). In mouse and human, PRDM9, a meiosis-specific H3K4me3 histone methyltransferase, recognizes the target sites by the sequence specificity and deposits H3K4me3 nucleosomes at meiosis recombination hotspots (). Therefore, the sequence context showing high probability of H3K4me3 occupation at important regulatory elements across the genome may attract chromatin modifying factors. We found consistent and distinct sequence specificity only for H3K4me3 but not for other histone modifications. It is possible that other histone modifications are associated with some sequence specificities that cannot be detected by the 6mer sequence preferences. Another possibility is that sequence-independent epigenetic factors regulate other histone modifications. Indeed, recentlyshowed that long non-coding RNAs guide the H3K27me3 enrichment, although the sequence specificity of the non-coding RNAs has not yet been identified. Previously, Yuan et al. (2005) also used HMM to estimate nucleosome occupation probabilities from microarray data of nuclease-treated DNA. Their hidden state was the occupation of nucleosome, and the observations were microarray Cy3 intensities. Their emission probabilities were Cy3 intensities compared with the input DNA signal, Cy5. They characterized nucleosome location based on the consecutive eight probe intensities. On the other hand, our purpose is to compute the occupation probabilities of different types of nucleosomes from the genomic sequence alone. We first showed that the distinctive sequence specificities of H3K4me3 and H3 nucleosomes are consistent among different cell types. We then used the observed sequence specificities of H3 and H3K4me3 to predict their occupation probabilities at each mappable base pair from the genomic sequence alone. In our HMM model, the hidden state is the occupation of H3K4me3 (or H3) nucleosome at a base pair, and the observed state is the genome sequence. The emission probabilities in our model are sequence specificities of H4K4me3 (or H3). The predicted probabilities of H3K4me3 occupation are consistent with experimental data from various human cell types. Although ChIP-seq data contain noise, the probability of H3K4me3 occupying a genome region can be estimated from the sequence reads, as long as the number of reads is large enough for the statistics to be meaningful. Our model for predicting an H3K4me3 nucleosome map from the human genome sequence is similar to Segal et al.'s model (2006) in that we assume that nucleosome formation in a genome is a dynamic process, and we calculate the nucleosome occupation probability at a locus considering all possible nucleosomes that can potentially cover the site and their forward and backward configurations in a genome. However, our model differs from theirs in at least three aspects. First, our model incorporates the specific modification status of each nucleosome and distinguishes between H3 and H3K4me3 occupations. On the other hand, Segal et al. and other studies did not distinguish between H3 and H3K4me3 nucleosomes, but considered general nucleosomes, i.e. micrococal nuclease-sensitive regions. Second, we compute the sequence compositions of DNA segments in H3 nucleosomes and in H3K4me3 nucleosomes separately, whereas Segal et al. computed the composition in extracted DNA segments in all forms of nucleosomes after treatment of micrococcal nuclease. Third, we aim to infer the probabilistic occupation level 1204 of the H3K4me3 nucleosome based on the genome sequence context, whereas Segal et al. computed the probabilistic positioning of a base pair within 147 bp nucleosomal DNAs. Our model is based on the ChIP-seq experiments. ChIP-seq enables us to infer the probable coverage of a locus but not exact positions within nucleosomes. Therefore, our model can only estimate the probabilistic occupation levels of H3K4me3 and H3 nucleosomes based on the whole-genome sequence context. In conclusion, our results underscore a relationship between genome sequence and chromatin remodeling. In addition, sequence-independent epigenetic regulation of nucleosomes also contributes to chromatin modifications. Our analyses of the H3K4me3 sequence signature will be a valuable starting point for future studies of the genome structure. Ultimately, the computational approach may help identify epigenetic and genetic factors that regulate the chromatin structure.