Motivation: The β-barrel is a ubiquitous fold that is deployed to accomplish a wide variety of biological functions including membrane-embedded pores. Key influences of β-barrel lumen diameter include the number of β-strands (n) and the degree of shear (S), the latter value measuring the extent to which the β-sheet is tilted within the β-barrel. Notably, it has previously been reported that the shear value for small antiparallel β-barrels (n ≤ 24) typically ranges between n and 2n. Conversely, it has been suggested that the β-strands in giant antiparallel β-barrels, such as those formed by pore forming cholesterol-dependent cytolysins (CDC), are parallel relative to the axis of the β-barrel, i.e. S = 0. The S = 0 arrangement, however, has never been observed in crystal structures of small β-barrels. Therefore, the structural basis for how CDCs form a β-barrel and span a membrane remains to be understood. Results: Through comparison of molecular models with experimental data, we are able to identify how giant CDC β-barrels utilize a near parallel arrangement of β-strands where S = n/2. Furthermore, we show how side-chain packing within the β-barrel lumen is an important limiting factor with respect to the possible shear values for small β-barrels (n ≤ 24 β-strands). In contrast, our models reveal no such limitation restricts the shear value of giant β-barrels (n  24 β-strands). Giant β-barrels can thus access a different architecture compared with smaller β-barrels.
INTRODUCTIONThe -barrel structure is central to a large number of functionally diverse proteins. -Barrels are deployed as enzymes [e.g. the outer membrane protease, OmpT ()], as water-soluble transport proteins [e.g. lipocalins (, as fluorescent proteins [e.g. green fluorescent protein (] and as membrane-embedded channels [e.g. porins (. The properties of small -barrels have been well-characterized. In particular, the shear value (S) of the -barrel describes the stagger of individual -strands. For a given number of -strands (n), the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. greater the shear value, the greater the slope each -strand is relative to the axis of the -barrel lumen. Conversely, the lower the S-value, the closer to parallel the -strand is relative to the axis of the barrel lumen (Supplementary). (A shear value of 0 results in -strands that lie parallel to the barrel lumen.) Most importantly, when the number of -strands and the shear value is known for a barrel, the diameter can be calculated for cylindrical -barrels with a high degree of accuracy (). For small -barrels (n  24) that are structurally characterized, the S-value of these structures lies between n and 2n (). To date, the structures of over 190 transmembrane -barrels have been determined (); analysis of these data reveal that membrane -barrels obey the same structural rules observed for their soluble counterparts. A subset of transmembrane -barrels includes structures that are formed by homo-oligomerization. Examples of such -barrels include TolC () and -pore forming toxins such as -haemolysin (). Although membrane -barrels have contributed to our understanding of small -pore forming toxins, less is known about the giant homo-oligomeric -barrel pores formed by members of the cholesterol-dependent cytolysins (CDC)/Membrane Attack Complex/Perforin (MACPF) superfamily (). This superfamily includes key bacterial virulence factors produced by Gram positive bacteria as well as the major immune effectors of mammals (). No crystal structure of a MACPF or CDC pore has been determined to date, however, the 28  resolution cryo-electron microscopy (EM) structure of pneumolysin reveals that this CDC forms a giant 240  diameter -barrel that contains 38 monomers (). To make this -barrel, each pneumolysin monomer contributes two amphipathic -hairpins, i.e. four antiparallel -strands (). Initial models presented through EM studies of the CDC, pneumolysin, suggested that the -strands are parallel to the lumen in order to reach and fully span the lipid bilayer as a -barrel (). However, such an arrangement would not be consistent with a shear value between n and 2n as observed in the known crystal structures of transmembrane -barrels (). Here, using molecular models, we show that the optimal shear value of these giant -barrel structures is S = n/2, i.e. arranged in a near parallel fashion with respect to the -barrel lumen. We further demonstrate that -barrels with 24 -strands are unable to readily access such architecture as a consequence of luminal side-chain packing constraints.
DISCUSSION