Next-generation sequencing has become a valuable tool for detecting mutations involved in Mendelian diseases. However, it is a challenge to identify the small subset of functionally important mutations from tens of thousands of rare variants in a whole exome/genome. Therefore, we developed a toolkit called PriVar, a systematic priori-tization pipeline that takes into consideration calling quality of the variants, their predicted functional impact, known connection of the gene to the disease and the number of mutations in a gene, and inference from linkage analysis. Availability: Executable jar package is available at http://paed.hku.hk/uploadarea/yannghtm
INTRODUCTIONNext-generation sequencing (NGS) has become a valuable tool for discovering potentially causal single-nucleotide variations (SNVs) as well as short insertions/deletions (indels) for Mendelian disorders. However, a large number of rare variants (SNVs and indels) exist in an individual, which poses an unprecedented challenge for pinpointing the causal mutations, not to mention a relatively high false rate in discovering rare SNVs/ indels. To aid the process in identifying causal mutations from large sets of rare variants, we designed a toolkit named PriVar that provides a comprehensive pipeline for prioritizing coding SNVs and indels for further investigation. Four functional modules are included in this pipeline: variant annotation, call quality summary, prediction of functional impact for all the variants and candidate gene identification. A quality summary was used to help filter out most of the false positive variant calls based on a number of quality control parameters. Annotation of the variants provides essential information on them based on several databases. The functional prediction module predicts potential functional impact of variants based on evaluation of results from multiple existing algorithms. The candidate gene identification module is designed to consolidate information of linkage analysis, dosage of rare mutations in a gene, known connection of a gene with the disease in question and other relevant information. Using the four modules together, PriVar can efficiently reduce the set of potential causal variants to be considered for further studies.