Motivation: Amyloids play a role in the degradation of b-cells in diabetes patients. In particular, short amyloid oligomers inject themselves into the membranes of these cells and create pores that disrupt the strictly controlled flow of ions through the membranes. This leads to cell death. Getting rid of the short oligomers either by a deconstruction process or by elongating them into longer fi-brils will reduce this toxicity and allow the b-cells to live longer. Results: We develop a computational method to probe the binding affinity of amyloid structures and produce an amylin analog that binds to oligomers and extends their length. The binding and extension lower toxicity and b-cell death. The amylin analog is designed through a parsimonious selection of mutations and is to be administered with the pramlintide drug, but not to interact with it. The mutations (T9K L12K S28H T30K) produce a stable native structure, strong binding affinity to oligomers, and long fibrils. We present an extended mathematical model for the insulin–glucose relationship and demonstrate how affecting the concentration of oligomers with such analog is strictly coupled with insulin release and b-cell fitness. Availability and implementation: SEMBA, the tool to probe the binding affinity of amyloid proteins and generate the binding affinity scoring matrices and R-scores is available at: http://amyloid.cs.
IntroductionInsulin and amylin molecules are co-secreted from b-cells in the pancreas to lower the concentration of glucose in the blood. Some of the amylin misfold into amyloids and do not continue to carry on their normal functions in the body. In type II diabetes, these amylin amyloids are observed to form in the extracellular space surrounding b-cells and build up into different sizes, some small (oligomers) and others large (fibrils;). The exact effect of the very large fibril deposits on the progression of diabetes and the inflammation of b-cells is not really known. However, amyloid oligomers have been clearly observed to be toxic, while the longer fibrils are non-toxic (). These aggregates inject themselves into cell membranes and create weakly selective pores that introduce an uncontrolled influx of ions into and out of the cell (). Their short length allows for ions to pass through them easily, unlike fibrils. The influx of ions is mainly due to the high concentration gradient of calcium molecules separating the cytoplasm and extracellular space. This influx disrupts cell coupling, impairs insulin secretion, depletes ATP, depolarizes the membrane and weakens cells inducing apoptosis (). Upon cell breakdown, the oligomers find other live cells to target ().shows an illustration of amylin oligomers permeating a cell membrane. When too many amylin molecules misfold into amyloids, due to insulin resistance and extreme pressure on the pancreas to secrete insulin, the required levels of amylin in the body to modulate gastric emptying and prevent postprandial spikes in glucose levels are not met. This further complicates the conditions of type II diabetes patients. Several injectable amylin analogs have been created in an effort to find a suitable replacement for this lack of the necessary levels of amylin. The most promising one, pramlintide, is an analog containing 3 proline substitutions at positions 25, 28 and 29, and reveals a weak tendency to aggregate (). Pramlintide is an effective amylin replacement agent that acts as a synergetic partner to insulin (). Pramlintide does not enter the cells of the pancreas; however, it moves through the circulatory system to reach necessary organs and compensates for the lack of sufficient amylin levels. Although pramlintide has a weaker tendency to aggregate, and compensates for amylin's lost functions, it does not solve the problem of amyloid oligomer toxicity. The inhibition of the amyloid production has been studied as a way to elongate cell life in diabetes. Molecules like rifampicin have been designed to prevent fibril formation (), but failed to remove the short toxic oligomers that speed up the death of cells (). Other attempts at designing inhibiting molecules include the red wine compound resveratrol (), Vanadium complexes (), Polyphenols (), selenium-containing phycocyanin molecules () and N-methylation of amylin (). Many of these molecules presented strong inhibiting results that lower the rate of oligomerization in vitro and are currently undergoing more experimentation. However, none of them are at a stage of being produced as a therapeutic agent. In this work we explore a different technique to reduce the toxicity of oligomers. Instead of inhibiting fibril extension, we promote it. At a higher rate of amyloid aggregation, longer structures are created. The higher the rate, the lower the concentration of oligomers and the higher the concentration of fibrils. We aim to achieve this high aggregation rate by constructing a molecule that when injected into the human body, binds to these short oligomers and extends their length, promoting aggregation and forcing them into long nontoxic fibrils. A circumspect approach to create such molecule that does not perform unknown and undesirable interactions in the body is to engineer the molecule as an amylin analog with a parsimonious selection of mutations to perform the task. We construct this molecule as an analog of high amyloidogenicity, to have very strong binding affinity to the amyloids, and to have an extremely low dissociation rate. The low dissociation rate is essential in preventing the emergence of more short oligomers through fibrils breaking up. This analog is designed to be administered with the pramlintide drug in a native, non-amyloid form. The analog is engineered to have a low binding affinity to pramlintide to prevent inducing pramlintide to misfold. To conserve structure, the analog is designed through a parsimonious selection of mutations. Moreover, we compare the aggregation potential and stability of our top findings with state-of-the-art tools [FoldX (), Zyggregator (), PASTA () and TANGO ()] to increase confidence in our selection.
Discussion