Motivation: The amount of sequenced genomes and proteins is growing at an unprecedented pace. Unfortunately, manual curation and functional knowledge lag behind. Homologous inference often fails at labeling proteins with diverse functions and broad classes. Thus, identifying high-level protein functionality remains challenging. We hypothesize that a universal feature engineering approach can yield classification of high-level functions and unified properties when combined with machine learning approaches, without requiring external databases or alignment. Results: In this study, we present a novel bioinformatics toolkit called ProFET (Protein Feature Engineering Toolkit). ProFET extracts hundreds of features covering the elementary biophysical and sequence derived attributes. Most features capture statistically informative patterns. In addition , different representations of sequences and the amino acids alphabet provide a compact, compressed set of features. The results from ProFET were incorporated in data analysis pipelines, implemented in python and adapted for multi-genome scale analysis. ProFET was applied on 17 established and novel protein benchmark datasets involving classification for a variety of binary and multi-class tasks. The results show state of the art performance. The extracted features show excellent biological interpretability. The success of ProFET applies to a wide range of high-level functions such as subcellular localization, structural classes and proteins with unique functional properties (e.g. neuropeptide precursors, thermophilic and nucleic acid binding). ProFET allows easy, universal discovery of new target proteins, as well as understanding the features underlying different high-level protein functions. Availability and implementation: ProFET source code and the datasets used are freely available at https://github.com/ddofer/ProFET.
IntroductionThe most used approaches in protein classification rely on distance measures between sequences based on various alignment methods (e.g. Smith-Waterman, BLAST). With the growth in the amounts and diversity of protein sequences, more sophisticated methods have been introduced (e.g. PSSM, Profile-Profile, HMM-HMM) (). These methods are based on multiple sequence alignments for improving remote homologs detection (). Incorporating 3D-structure as a seed for the statistical models further improved the quality of protein domains and families (e.g. Pfam) (). Currently, there are $27 000 such models (InterPro,) that cover 83% of all sequences in UniProtKB (2014_10). Function assignment is gained from mapping InterPro models to). The assessment of large-scale automatic protein functional annotations () and the contribution of alternative approaches toward this task have been extensively discussed (e.g.). Despite the strength of the model-based methods, in many instances the local sequence-based methods fail to reliably assign a function (). This is best demonstrated by the limitation in classifying proteins by their 3D-folds (). Notably, the classification of some biological niches is especially suited for feature representation. For example, routine annotation tools fail to confidently assign function for bioactive peptides and short proteins (). A number of previous studies focus on feature extraction from whole protein sequences () as a starting input for machine learning (ML) approaches. Structural benchmark from SCOP and CATH () are frequently used to assess the predictive ML methods. Specialized predictors have been presented for structural tasks including secondary structure, solvent accessibility, stability, disordered regions, domains and more (). ML approaches have proven suitable to classify protein properties beyond their 3D-structure. SVMProt was tested on preselected 50 functional families from Pfam (). Naive biophysical features classification outperformed simple sequence-based methods for a number of protein families (). However, the most likely advantage of the feature and pattern-based ML approach is toward high-level functionality (e.g.). Examples for such predictions include proteinprotein interactions (), discriminating outer membrane proteins (), membrane topology (), subcellular localization () and more. The strongest features learned by the ML classifiers often expose biologically important motifs (). In this study, we focus on the ability of elementary biophysical features together with a rich set of engineered representation of proteins to classify high-level protein functions. These features are suited for both supervised and unsupervised classification. Our goal is to illustrate the importance of ProFET (Protein Feature Engineering Toolkit) as a 'one size fits all' framework for representing whole protein sequence. We present a universal, modular workflow for protein function classification: (i) feature generation and extraction from primary sequences (ProFET). (ii) Application of the extracted features in a ML framework for binary or multi-class partition. (iii) Presentation of discriminative classification power. (iv) Identification of patterns and features that underlie the successful classification ('Feature Selection').
DiscussionThe main drawbacks in existing sequence-based methods are (i) some functions cannot be detected by sequence-based methods; (ii) current statistical models mostly capture local patterns rather than high-level function and (iii) rare sequences or those that have very few homologs cannot be successfully used for inference or construction of good statistical model.