Motivation: Heterogeneity is a ubiquitous property of biological systems. Even in a genetically identical population of a single cell type, cell-to-cell differences are observed. Although the functional behavior of a given population is generally robust, the consequences of hetero-geneity are fairly unpredictable. In heterogeneous populations, synchronization of events becomes a cardinal problem—particularly for phase coherence in oscillating systems. Results: The present article presents a novel strategy for construction of large-scale simulation programs of heterogeneous biological entities. The strategy is designed to be tractable, to handle heterogeneity and to handle computational cost issues simultaneously, primarily by writing a generator of the model to be simulated. We apply the strategy to model glycolytic oscillations among thousands of yeast cells coupled through the extracellular medium. The usefulness is illustrated through (i) benchmarking, showing an almost linear relationship between model size and run time, and (ii) analysis of the resulting simulations, showing that contrary to the experimental situation, synchronous oscillations are surprisingly hard to achieve, underpinning the need for tools to study heterogeneity. Thus, we present an efficient strategy to model the biological heterogeneity, neglected by ordinary mean-field models. This tool is well posed to facilitate the elucidation of the physiologically vital problem of synchronization.
INTRODUCTIONQuantitative modeling of the dynamic behavior of living systems has to be realistic in terms of both biochemistry and biophysics, and in the description of the structural complexity of living matter. Compared with equivalent problems in other parts of natural science, complexity in biological systems is increased because structural elements with similar function, e.g. the cells in a tissue, are not completely identical. Although biological function seems stable and robust, the functional consequences of various kinds of heterogeneity in cellular systems are rather difficult to predict, and are fairly unexplored in the literature. This article describes a new programming strategy aiming to model heterogeneous populations of biological entities. From a modeling perspective, cellular heterogeneity entails a huge increase in the number of parameters and variables, as (i) diversity among cells is introduced by allowing kinetic parameters to vary (even for systems with identical metabolic networks, where kinetic expressions and the species are the same for all cells), and (ii) the chemistry in each individual cells is described through unique sets of corresponding species. Most reactions of a metabolic network are composite reactions where rates may depend on several elementary rate constants and/or stationary concentrations varying from cell to cell. The programming strategy has been designed to produce code that is computationally effective and at the same time manageable for the programmer. This is accomplished by writing a code generator program, which automatically generates C code from descriptions of cell interactions, the metabolic network and the kinetic parameters. The strategy handles spatial as well as temporal models and allows for easy change of scale and of chemical composition. The strategy was developed to study the dynamics of oscillatory behavior in a population of heterogeneous cells. Notably, usual mean-field models, per definition, neglect the problem of intercellular signaling and synchronization, vital for biological function, which are at the heart of the presented strategy. The modeling is illustrated through the classical example of metabolic oscillations in a stirred suspension of yeast cells first studied by. In this system, thousands of modeled cells are coupled by exchange of chemical species through a common extracellular environment. A model of a single cell embedded in a cell solution () is used as an illustrative example. The strategy allows for the generation of a large number of cells, each with distinct properties. The overall compartments and reaction network are given in. Because the system easily can be scaled up to a very large system [4100:000 ordinary differential equations (ODEs)], we briefly discuss powerful features to speed up computations. We illustrate the usefulness of the strategy by analyzing and comparing the resulting model simulations using various methods. The yeast system is a particular simple example of an interacting cellular system. Glycolytic oscillations within individual cells give rise to oscillations in the concentrations of extracellular species. If extracellular oscillations can synchronize the individual cells, the whole system will be phase locked in an oscillatory state. This is precisely what is observed in the experimental system. Simulating systems of 1000 cells on the basis of two wellestablished kinetic models (), however, did not produce in-phase oscillations even with periodic forcing with extracellular acetaldehyde (ACA x ). The results show that realistic kinetic models of a large population of heterogeneous oscillators are sometimes surprisingly hard to synchronize. Thus, it underpins the need for this type of modeling to facilitate understanding of the physiologically vital synchronization process in populations of cellular oscillators.
CONCLUSIONA novel strategy for construction of temporal (or spatio-temporal) large-scale models of heterogeneous biological entities has been presented. The strategy was illustrated by modeling a single cell type in a stirred suspension, but coupled cells of different types could be modeled by the same principle. The strategy is particularly well suited to study synchronization processes in heterogeneous cell populations. Large models of coupled cells tend to be stiff and have off-diagonal couplings in their Jacobians. However, the present strategy is flexible enough to allow for system-specific implementations of user-defined processing to enhance run-time performance. Simulations of 1000 yeast cells in two recent models of yeast cell oscillations showed that the sensitivity of the core glycolytic oscillator onmost likely is too weak in the models to allow for globally synchronized oscillations.