Motivation: Network comparison is a computationally intractable problem with important applications in systems biology and other domains. A key challenge is to properly quantify similarity between wiring patterns of two networks in an alignment-free fashion. Also, alignment-based methods exist that aim to identify an actual node mapping between networks and as such serve a different purpose. Various alignment-free methods that use different global network properties (e.g. degree distribution) have been proposed. Methods based on small local subgraphs called graphlets perform the best in the alignment-free network comparison task, due to high level of topological detail that graphlets can capture. Among different graphlet-based methods, Graphlet Correlation Distance (GCD) was shown to be the most accurate for comparing networks. Recently, a new graphlet-based method called NetDis was proposed, which was claimed to be superior. We argue against this, as the performance of NetDis was not properly evaluated to position it correctly among the other alignment-free methods. Results: We evaluate the performance of available alignment-free network comparison methods, including GCD and NetDis. We do this by measuring accuracy of each method (in a systematic precision-recall framework) in terms of how well the method can group (cluster) topologically similar networks. By testing this on both synthetic and real-world networks from different domains, we show that GCD remains the most accurate, noise-tolerant and computationally efficient alignment-free method. That is, we show that NetDis does not outperform the other methods, as originally claimed, while it is also computationally more expensive. Furthermore, since NetDis is dependent on the choice of a network null model (unlike the other graphlet-based methods), we show that its performance is highly sensitive to the choice of this parameter. Finally, we find that its performance is not independent on network sizes and densities, as originally claimed.
IntroductionNetworks (or graphs) are widely used for representing different types of relational data in the cell, such as proteinprotein (), genetic (), metabolic () and gene regulatory () interactions. The information encoded in the wiring patterns (i.e. topology, or structure) of biological networks complements the information obtained from protein sequence and structure (). Because of this, graph-theoretic analyses of biological networks can advance our understanding of fundamental cellular functioning.When analysing biological networks, one needs to compare them. For example, evolutionary insights can be gained by identifying topological similarities between networks of different species (). The difficulty is that network comparison is computationally intractable (), so heuristic approaches that produce approximate solutions are the only feasible way to compare networks. Depending on the purpose of the network comparison, relevant approaches can be split into two major sub-categories: (i) alignmentbased network comparison and (ii) alignment-free network comparison. Alignment-based methods aim to find a mapping between the nodes of two (or more) networks that preserves many edges and a large subgraph between the networks. These methods are useful for identifying the evolutionary conserved parts of biological networks, and they enable the transfer of functional annotations between aligned network regions across species (; Saraph and Milenkovic,Milenkovic, 2014) and the identification of structural similarities between proteins (Malod). On the other hand, alignment-free network comparison methods aim to quantify the overall topological similarity between networks, irrespective of node mappings between the networks, and without intending to identify any conserved edges or subgraphs. These methods have applications in evaluating the fit of a random network model to a real-world network (), tracking the dynamics of time-series networks () or grouping (clustering) of networks based on their topological similarities (). The clustering can be used to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships of species based on similarities of their networks (). Alignment-free network comparison methods are typically computationally less expensive than alignment-based methods, and again, they do not produce a node mapping between the compared networks, but a score that quantifies the overall similarity between the two networks. As such, alignment-free and alignment-based network comparison methods have different purposes. Thus, comparing the approaches across the two groups might be misleading. Of alignment-free network comparison methods, earlier approaches use network properties such as degree distribution, clustering coefficient, diameter () and graph spectra () for quantifying the overall similarity between two networks. Currently, the best alignment-free network comparison method is based on graphlets, small subgraphs of large networks (), called Graphlet Correlation Distance (GCD;). GCD was systematically compared both with graphletbased and non-graphlet-based alignment-free predecessors, and it was shown to be the most accurate in clustering topologically similar networks, the most noise-tolerant and the most computationally efficient. Subsequently, another graphlet-based alignment-free method called NetDis was proposed (). Although the suggested methodology of NetDis is interesting (Section 2.1), the claimed superior performance of NetDis over the existing state-ofthe-art network comparison methods is questionable. This is because the performance of NetDis was not systematically evaluated, so its claimed superiority might be inaccurate. For example, NetDis was not compared against GCD. Also, its comparison against an alignment-based method, based on which almost all conclusions of its superiority were drawn, is inappropriate, as argued above.Further potential fallacies with the NetDis method itself exist, such as its dependence on the choice of a network null model, which was not taken into account in the original NetDis study (). Thus, here we systematically and fairly evaluate the performance of NetDis in comparison to other alignment-free network comparison methods, and address all issues present in the paper by).
ConclusionWe systematically, comprehensively and fairly compare available alignment-free network comparison methods, positioning NetDis correctly among other existing approaches. We observe that NetDis, the newest graphlet-based approach for comparing networks, does not perform as well as GCD in clustering networks with similar topologies and it is also computationally more expensive than previous graphlet-based approaches. Furthermore, NetDis is highly sensitive to the choice on the gold-standard network that it uses and this makes it impractical. This is because a well-fitting network null model is hard to determine and differs for most real-world networks and therefore, it is not possible to choose a theoretically wellfounded gold-standard network for NetDis comparison of realworld networks, especially because each of the compared networks might require a different gold-standard network. Hence, GCD is still the best performing alignment-free network comparison method to date, which is also highly efficient and not dependent on any network null models. These make GCD a natural choice in alignmentfree network comparison.. Performance of GCD and NetDis in terms of computational efficiency. Running times are shown when increasing: (A) the number, (B) the size (number of nodes) and (C) the density of the compared networks. Note that both axes are in logarithmic scale