Model Quality Assessment Programs (MQAPs) are used to predict the quality of modeled protein structures. These usually use two approaches: methods using consensus of many alternative models and methods requiring only a single model to do its prediction. The consensus methods are useful to improve overall accuracy; however , they frequently fail to pick out the best possible model and cannot be used to generate and score new structures. Single-model methods, on the other hand, do not have these inherent shortcomings and can be used to both sample new structures and improve existing consensus methods. Here, we present ProQM-resample, a membrane protein-specific single-model MQAP, that couples side-chain resam-pling with MQAP rescoring by ProQM to improve model selection. The side-chain resampling is able to improve side-chain packing for 96% of all models, and improve model selection by 24% as measured by the sum of the Z-score for the first-ranked model (from 25.0 to 31.1), even better than the state-of-the-art consensus method Pcons. The improved model selection can be attributed to the improved side-chain quality, which enables the MQAP to rescue good backbone models with poor side-chain packing. Availability and implementation: http://proqm.wallnerlab.org/down load/.
INTRODUCTIONProtein structure modeling represents a fundamental challenge in structural bioinformatics and is crucial for a detailed understanding of the structure and biological function of molecules. It can be used to guide and explain experiments, as well as for prediction of proteins whose structure, in particular for membrane proteins, for the most part is unknown ($0.5% membrane protein in the Protein Data Bank $25% in most genomes). A common technique in structure modeling is to generate many alternative models and use a Model Quality Assessment Program (MQAP) to select the best model. Alternatively, an MQAP can also be used to assess the absolute quality of a single model, i.e. a measure that is related to similarity to true native structure (). ProQM () is an MQAP that uses a support vector machine to predict the quality of a membrane protein model by combining structural and sequence-based features calculated from the model. In its original implementation, external programs were used to calculate features, e.g. PSI-BLAST (), PSIPRED (), Naccess (Hubbard and), Stride (), ProQres (), Zpred (), Topcons (), MPRAP (Illergard) and SVM-light (). These dependencies made it difficult to distribute the program, run large batches and use it in conformational sampling. Therefore, ProQM has only been available as a webserver for small-scale use. To overcome these issues, ProQM was incorporated as scoring function in the Rosetta modeling framework. This gives in one hand full access to the modeling machinery within Rosetta and allows for easy integration with any Rosetta protocol. In particular, ProQM-resample uses the repack protocol to sample side-chain conformations followed by rescoring using ProQM to improve model selection.