Motivation: Many analyses in modern biological research are based on comparisons between biological sequences, resulting in functional, evolutionary and structural inferences. When large numbers of sequences are compared, heuristics are often used resulting in a certain lack of accuracy. In order to improve and validate results of such comparisons, we have performed radical all-against-all comparisons of 4 million protein sequences belonging to the RefSeq database, using an implementation of the Smith–Waterman algorithm. This extremely intensive computational approach was made possible with the help of World Community Grid™, through the Genome Comparison Project. The resulting database, ProteinWorldDB, which contains coordinates of pairwise protein alignments and their respective scores, is now made available. Users can download, compare and analyze the results, filtered by genomes, protein functions or clusters. ProteinWorldDB is integrated with annotations derived from Swiss-Prot, Pfam, KEGG, NCBI Taxonomy database and gene ontology. The database is a unique and valuable asset, representing a major effort to create a reliable and consistent dataset of cross-comparisons of the whole protein content encoded in hundreds of completely sequenced genomes using a rigorous dynamic programming approach. Availability: The database can be accessed through
INTRODUCTIONThe assignment of biological function predictions and structural features to raw sequence data is typically accomplished by comparing them either to predicted protein sequences or to the corresponding genes. This information is stored in several primary public databases, such as GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ Genbank/) or EMBL-Bank (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/embl). However, annotations are often incomplete, based on non-standardized * To whom correspondence should be addressed. nomenclature or might have no value when inferred from previous incorrectly annotated sequences. Hence, secondary databases such as Swiss-Prot (http://www.expasy.ch/sprot/), PFAM (http:// pfam.sanger.ac.uk) or KEGG (http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg), to mention only a few, have been implemented to analyze specific functional aspects and to improve the annotation procedures and results. Dynamic programming algorithms, or a fast approximation, have been successfully applied to biological sequence comparison for decades, and this class of algorithms comprises the heart of many well-known sequence alignment programs (). However, because of their quadratic time complexity, rigorous dynamic programming algorithms are usually not suitable for the comparison of a large set of sequences against a database, as they demand exceptionally huge computational power and are very time consuming. For this reason, sequence comparisons are generally performed by heuristics like BLAST () and FASTA (), which have proved to be quite effective and significantly faster than the dynamic programming algorithms. However, in many instances, these comparisons might lack accuracy, as these heuristics do not guarantee to find a mathematically optimal alignment (), therefore affecting all subsequent analytical steps. The Genome Comparison Project (GCP) (http://www.dbbm.fiocruz.br/GenomeComparison) aims to compare protein information on a genomic scale to improve the quality and interpretation of biological data and our understanding of biological systems and their interactions. Stringent comparisons were obtained after the application of the SmithWaterman (SW) algorithm () in a pairwise manner to all predicted proteins encoded in both completely sequenced and unfinished genomes available in the public database RefSeq (version 21). The project represents a joint effort involving Fiocruz, PUC-Rio and IBM , and was executed through World Community Grid (WCG), a computational grid on a global scale. We present here the outcome of this joint effort, the ProteinWorldDB, which represents a major effort to create a reliable and consistent dataset of cross-comparisons of the whole protein content encoded in hundreds of completely sequenced genomes using a rigorous dynamic programming approach.