The Plant Small RNA Maker Site (P-SAMS) is a web tool for the simple and automated design of artificial miRNAs (amiRNAs) and synthetic transacting small interfering RNAs (syn-tasiRNAs) for efficient and specific targeted gene silencing in plants. P-SAMS includes two applications , P-SAMS amiRNA Designer and P-SAMS syn-tasiRNA Designer. The navigation through both applications is wizard-assisted, and the job runtime is relatively short. Both applications output the sequence of designed small RNA(s), and the sequence of the two oligonucleotides required for cloning into B/c compatible vectors. Availability and implementation: The P-SAMS website is available at http://p-sams.carringtonlab.
IntroductionArtificial miRNAs (amiRNAs) and synthetic trans-acting small interfering RNAs (syn-tasiRNAs) are two classes of designed small RNAs used to silence plant transcripts with high sequence complementarity (). AmiRNA and syn-tasiRNA differ in their biogenesis but are functionally similar. Methods to computationally design plant small RNAs are based on several criteria, including the requirement for a high degree of small RNA:target RNA base pairing (). We recently reported efficient molecular methods to generate amiRNA and syn-tasiRNA constructs by ligation of synthesized dsDNA oligonucleotides that include the amiRNA or syn-tasiRNA sequence into 'B/c' expression vectors (). B/c amiRNA vectors were tested in both monocots and eudicots and express a single amiRNA that targets one or multiple sequence-related transcripts. B/c syn-tasiRNA vectors express several syn-tasiRNAs targeting sequence-unrelated transcripts in Arabidopsis and closely related species. P-SAMS is a wizard-assisted web tool for the simple and automated design of plant amiRNAs and syn-tasiRNAs. P-SAMS includes two applications, P-SAMS amiRNA Designer and P-SAMS syn-tasiRNA Designer. Both applications output a list of recommended amiRNA or syn-tasiRNA, and the sequence of the two oligonucleotides required for cloning into compatible B/c vectors.