Genome-wide association studies are an invaluable tool for identifying genotypic loci linked with agriculturally important traits or certain diseases. The signal on which such studies rely upon can, however, be obscured by population stratification making it necessary to account for it in some way. Population stratification is dependent on when admixture happened and thus can occur at various levels. To aid in its inference at the genome level, we recently introduced PSIKO, and comparison with leading methods indicates that it has attractive properties. However, until now, it could not be used for local ancestry inference which is preferable in cases of recent admix-ture as the genome level tends to be too coarse to properly account for processes acting on small segments of a genome. To also bring the powerful ideas underpinning PSIKO to bear in such studies, we extended it to PSIKO2, which we introduce here. Availability and implementation: Source code, binaries and user manual are freely available at https://www.uea.ac.uk/computing/psiko.
IntroductionA major confounding factor in genome-wide association studies (GWAS) is population stratification, that is reproductive isolation of a sampled population. A powerful way to account for it is to assume that the genotype of each individual [generally called an accession and represented in terms of a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) sequence] in a study is an admixture of genotypes of K2 (generally unknown) founder (populations). This admixture can then be expressed in terms of a dataset's principal components (PCs) or its population stratification matrix (i.e. its Q-matrix), which indicates for each accession of a study the proportion of its genotype that came from each of the K founders. Contrary to leading tools such as EIGENSTRAT (), which only infers a dataset's PCs and STRUCTURE () (and its extension to FASTSTRUCTURE ()), ADMIXTURE () and SNMF (), which only infer a dataset's Q-matrix, PSIKO () is able to infer both. Furthermore, comparison of PSIKO against competing methods suggests that while the quality of its Q-matrices is on par with those generated by them, PSIKO has better scaling properties. However, until now, PSIKO could not be used for local ancestry inference (LAI), which is important for applications ranging from human population studies to identification of disease causative loci (). Furthermore, it could only be used on a LINUX platform, and the efficiency of its principle component analysis (PCA) step was not benchmarked. PSIKO2 addresses these shortcomings.