Motivation: PSORTb has remained the most precise bacterial protein subcellular localization (SCL) predictor since it was first made available in 2003. However, the recall needs to be improved and no accurate SCL predictors yet make predictions for archaea, nor differentiate important localization subcategories, such as proteins targeted to a host cell or bacterial hyperstructures/organelles. Such improvements should preferably be encompassed in a freely available web-based predictor that can also be used as a standalone program. Results: We developed PSORTb version 3.0 with improved recall, higher proteome-scale prediction coverage, and new refined localization subcategories. It is the first SCL predictor specifically geared for all prokaryotes, including archaea and bacteria with atypical membrane/cell wall topologies. It features an improved standalone program, with a new batch results delivery system complementing its web interface. We evaluated the most accurate SCL predictors using 5-fold cross validation plus we performed an independent proteomics analysis, showing that PSORTb 3.0 is the most accurate but can benefit from being complemented by Proteome Analyst predictions. Availability: http://www.psort.org/psortb (download open source software or use the web interface).
INTRODUCTIONComputational prediction of bacterial protein subcellular localization (SCL) provides a quick and inexpensive means for gaining insight into protein function, verifying experimental results, annotating newly sequenced bacterial genomes, detecting potential cell surface/secreted drug targets, as well as identifying biomarkers for microbes. In recent years, this area of computational research has achieved an impressive level of precision (), allowing SCL prediction tools to be reliably integrated into automated proteome annotation pipelines and to complement analyses of high-throughput proteomics experiments. PSORTb version 2.0 (), the most precise bacterial SCL prediction software (), was introduced in 2005, and has been widely used for the SCL prediction of individual proteins as well as for whole proteomes. It generates prediction results for five major localizations for Gram-negative bacteria (cytoplasmic, inner membrane, periplasmic, outer membrane and extracellular) and four localizations for Gram-positive bacteria (cytoplasmic, cytoplasmic membrane, cell wall and extracellular). Since then, numerous SCL prediction tools have been created for bacteria using a variety of machine learning algorithms: CELLO version 2.0 () uses multilayered support vector machines (SVMs); SLP-Local predicts SCLs based on local composition and distance frequencies of amino acid groups (); PSL101 makes predictions based on amino acid compositions coupled with structural feature conservations (); and PSLDoc bases its SVM features on gapped di-peptides (). Other tools such as Gpos-PLoc () and Gneg-PLoc () make predictions for bacterial proteins by clustering Swiss-Prot proteins with annotated SCLs based on their GO terms and amino acid properties using the K-nearest neighbor algorithm. Some methods, such as SubcellPredict and HensBC, combine multiple classifying algorithms in order to boost the prediction performance (). LocateP () and Augur () differentiate between different types of membrane-anchored, cell wall-anchored and secreted proteins for Gram-positive bacterial proteomes. Based on the principle that training datasets could benefit from being genus specific, TBPred () was developed specifically for the genus of Mycobacterium spp. Even though many bacterial SCL prediction methods have been published, most of them focus on optimizing prediction accuracy maximizing the number of positive predictions on the training dataset, at the expense of producing more false positive results.Page: 1609 16081615