Single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) is emerging as a promising technology for profiling cell-to-cell variability in cell populations. However, the combination of technical noise and intrinsic biological variability makes detecting technical artifacts in scRNA-seq samples particularly challenging. Proper detection of technical artifacts is critical to prevent spurious results during downstream analysis. In this study, we present Single-cell RNA-seq Quality Control (SinQC), a method and software tool to detect technical artifacts in scRNA-seq samples by integrating both gene expression patterns and data quality information. We apply SinQC to nine different scRNA-seq data-sets, and show that SinQC is a useful tool for controlling scRNA-seq data quality. Availability and Implementation: SinQC software and documents are available at http://vwvw.mor
IntroductionSingle-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) provides a relatively unbiased approach to characterize and dissect the heterogeneity of cells in complex mixtures (). However, one of the major challenges of this technology is distinguishing biological heterogeneity from technical artifacts (cells with substantial technical noise that makes their gene expression patterns distinguished from other cells) (). To detect potential technical artifacts in scRNA-seq, previous studies have used various strategies that can be generally grouped into three categories. The first category involves using housekeeping genes to perform QC. For example, cells not expressing housekeeping genes (e.g. Actb, Gapdh) or abnormally expressing them are filtered out (). The assumption of methods in this category is that housekeeping genes are highly and consistently expressed, which is not necessarily true for single cells. For example, a study using single-cell qPCR not only showed that the gene expression of housekeeping genes had high variation between individual cells but also that gene expression expression of housekeeping genes can even distinguish cell types (). Thus, a reliance on housekeeping genes to perform QC can result in removing cells with real biological variation. The second category involves using overall gene expression patterns to define technical artifacts. For example, cells are excluded from further analysis if they cluster separately from the rest of the cells () or if their median expression values fall below a certain threshold (). The major problem of the methods in this category is that they can potentially discard cells with real biological variation. The third category involves using the number of genes detected (per some defined expression threshold) and/or the reads mapping rate to define technical artifacts (). However, the number of genes detected and mapping rate vary among experiments depending on the quality of a particular library, cell type, or RNA-protocol. Hence, the cutoff settings are typically arbitrary. Thus, although single-cell approaches hold great promise in exploring heterogeneity within a cell population or complex mixture, QC still remains a major challenge (. In this study, we present 'Single-cell RNA-seq Quality Control' (SinQC), a method and software tool for detecting technical artifacts in scRNA-seq samples. SinQC assumes that if gene expression outliers are also associated with poor sequencing library quality (poor V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.