Motivation: A crucial phenomenon of our times is the diminishing marginal returns of investments in pharmaceutical research and development. A potential reason is that research into diseases is becoming increasingly complex, and thus more burdensome, for humans to handle. We sought to investigate whether we could measure research complexity by analyzing the published literature. Results: Through the text mining of the publication record of multiple diseases, we have found that the complexity and novelty of disease research has been increasing over the years. Surprisingly, we have also found that research on diseases with higher publication rate does not possess greater complexity or novelty than that on less-studied diseases. We have also shown that the research produced about a disease can be seen as a differentiated area of knowledge within the wider biomedical research. For our analysis, we have conceptualized disease research as a parallel multi-agent search in which each scientific agent (a scientist) follows a search path based on a model of a disease. We have looked at trends in facts published for diseases, measured their diversity and turnover using the entropy measure and found similar patterns across disease areas.
INTRODUCTIONDiseases are complex problems investigated by myriads of scientists working in parallel. Most of these scientists work on narrow niches to produce pieces of knowledge that contribute to our overall understanding of diseases. This understanding then enables the test of therapeutic interventions that might be better alternatives to existing treatments. To investigate this process, we have used the analogy of a multi-agent system throughout this study. We compare disease research with a search performed by a multi-agent system in which the agents (scientists) explore a space (a disease) to enable the selection of the best solutions (interventions) to a problem. This analogy has limitations, but it aids in delving into the intrinsic properties of the problem (the metaproblem). There are similar motivations in intra-human modeling that can be seen in projects such as the Virtual Physiological Human () or ApiNATOMY (). The search agents in our multi-agent system use models of reality to guide their path. These models represent the models that scientists use to guide their research. An important part of disease research involves building models that recapitulate some of the main properties of diseases. The best known of these models are in vitro and in vivo proxies that are lower-cost lower-risk alternatives to clinical studies (e.g. the unilateral ureteral obstruction mouse is an animal model for human kidney disease). There are also disease models of a mathematical nature that represent diseases at the systems or epidemiological level. Another type of model is based on the knowledge available for a disease (), such as the models used in knowledge-based clinical decision support systems. Biomedical researchers use knowledge models of diseases () based on knowledge acquired from textbooks, scientific literature and experimental and clinical experience. They are made up of multiple elements, which can be clinical, cellular, molecular and public health relatedto name a few. These models are the focus of this study. For each disease, researchers pay more attention to different sets of elements. For example, clinicians may use a patient's symptoms, demographics, clinical history and laboratory reports to evaluate disease progression. Biologists, on the other hand, may use genes, pathways, organelles and other elements to generate hypotheses about the mechanism of action of a drug or the activity of signaling pathways. In a disease such as psoriasis, a clinician may focus on the relationship between psoriasis area and severity index (PASI) scores and different immunosuppressive drugs, whereas a biologist may investigate the interplay of cutaneous and immune cells. In diabetic nephropathy, on the other hand, the interest may fall on the biology of podocytes and myofibroblast proliferation or on a patient's glomerular filtration rate and arterial blood pressure. Thus, different elements are combined by each scientist to construct a model of reality that enables reasoning about the disease. We incorporate such scientific models in our multi-agent system analogy by postulating that each scientific agent has a model of a disease built into its internal state. This model helps the agent navigate its path and is based on inputs produced by other agents, such as scientific publications, compounds or tools. These models are crucial because the agents cannot perform their search through brute-force exploration. They need to choose a path based on the likelihood of success. Thus, disease models facilitate decision making. We were interested in learning how the structure of these disease models can affect the task of the search agents. We started with the hypothesis that some disease models might be more complex than others for several reasons. One of the reasons could come from the number of articles published about a disease per year, as scientific publishing has been increasing exponentially across many areas of medical research (). Another reason could come from anatomy. For example, psoriasis is a fairly localized disease of the skin; *To whom correspondence should be addressed. however, a disease such as diabetes involves multiple organs and tissues. Yet another reason could come from the multiplicity of signaling pathways involved in a disease. Thus, a greater multiplicity of elements in a disease could mean a greater search space to investigate. A theoretical disease model can further illustrate this latter point. This theoretical model involves a non-existent animal species called bigenes, which has two genes in its genome: A and B. Bigenes suffers a species-specific disease called X, which is known to be driven by a mutation in A. Up to the year t, the literature on X comprised five articles focused on gene A. The publication record about X at time t could be represented as X t  {AAAAA}. Thus, X t is a simplified representation of what was known about X up to time t. The genes belonging to X t may not be disease genes in a traditional sense, but they represent the scientific conversation taking place about X, even in cases when negative results are reported, which may be contradicted later on. Defining 'disease genes' is in itself a complicated task as the relationship between a gene and a disease can range from strong and firmly established to tenuous, depending on the weight of the existing evidence. A breakthrough in the research of X occurred in the year t  1, when a mutation in B was newly associated with X. New articles appeared investigating this association; however, other articles still focused on A, leading to X t1  {AAAAABABBA}, where the subsequence {BABBA} corresponds to publications for the year t  1. Thus, the discovery of a mutation in B made the scientific model of the disease X more complex, and this is reflected in the publication record. This change in complexity can be quantified using the entropy measure from information theory, which is a common measure of statistical complexity () used in biomedical applications such as monitoring heart rates (PerkiomakiPerkioma) and brain electrical activity () or in evolutionary biology (). The entropy for X t is H(X t )  0, but the introduction of B in year t  1 leads to H(X t1 )  0.88 (see Section 2). H(X t1 )4H(X t ) reflects the increase in complexity over time. A number of works have been devoted to analyzing the growth and evolution of publications on gene and protein interactions outside the context of disease by analyzing the accumulated published record (). However, there is a divergence between the published record and the focus of active research, as older works fade in influence (on average). We believe that practical disease models do not involve every piece of knowledge published about a disease. Defining boundaries, nonetheless, is not straightforward. In the case of the disease X, publications were initially only about gene A, but that changed after an important discovery. Realizing this requires specific knowledge of the disease and a scientific consensus that may not be found. To generalize, we have used a time window. A model containing the state of the art in year t  1 for a 1-year time window would be X 0 t1  {BABBA}. We call this a fading memory model, and it reflects that the older a finding is, the less relevant it becomesjust like a fading memory. This decay can be observed in the evolution of citation counts of published literature over time. One shortcoming of the fading memory approach is that some diseases have much higher publication rate than others. However, memories may fade faster for diseases with higher publication rate owing to the finite memory of the scientists that study them. A finite memory approach would consider the latest n publications rather than a time window. In the case of X, this would mean a disease model X 0 t1  {BA} for a memory size of n  2. We have centered our analysis on the finite memory approach because publication rates change widely over time and between diseasesand thus comparing fixed time windows would require some type of normalization, which could introduce distortions. Nonetheless, the fading memory approach is also discussed, as will be shown later in the text. Another important aspect of disease models is their evolution in time. A rapid pace of change may signify, for example, that the principles of a disease are not properly defined. A disease model whose elements have a high turnover rate requires a greater effort at understanding and leaves less time to devote to its details. In the case of the disease X, the appearance of B in the publication record was unexpected, which in Bayesian probability terms can be expressed as p(B2X 0 t1 j X 0 t )  0. On the other hand, articles about A were fully anticipated, p(A2X 0 t1 j X 0 t )  1. Thus, conditional probabilities can be used to gauge the rate of change in a disease model and the novelty of a finding. The bigenes example is about an organism with only two genes (like some simple viruses), but a similar case could have been made about an organism with only two cell types because research emphasis on cell types also changes over time. For example, much immunological research has been focused on the T-cell subsets Th 1 and Th 2 , but, recently, there has been increased emphasis on Th 17 and T reg cells, whereas new cell types, such as Th 9 and Th 22 , are regularly proposed. In this analysis, we have considered disease models not only involving genes (as in the bigenes example) but also cell types, drugs and chemicals, and we have looked at how they influence each other.