Motivation: Graphical representations of contrasts in GC usage among codon frame positions (frame analysis) provide evidence of genes missing from the annotations of prokaryotic genomes of high GC content but the qualitative approach of visual frame analysis prevents its applicability on a genomic scale. Results: We developed two quantitative methods for the identification and statistical characterization in sequence regions of three-base periodicity (hits) associated with open reading frame structures. The methods were implemented in the N-Profile Analysis Computational Tool (NPACT), which highlights in graphical representations inconsistencies between newly identified ORFs and pre-existing annotations of coding-regions. We applied the NPACT procedures to two recently annotated strains of the deltaproteobacterium Anaeromyxobacter dehalogenans, identifying in both genomes numerous conserved ORFs not included in the published annotation of coding regions. Availability and implementation: NPACT is available as a web-based service and for download at
IntroductionAccurate genome annotations are fundamental to a great variety of sequence analyses. Annotations of prokaryotic genomes are based on computational gene prediction methods that, using information from sequence composition () and from sequence signals (e.g. ribosome binding site) (), have achieved remarkable levels of sensitivity (99%). The availability of large databases of gene sequences also facilitates identification of coding regions using information from sequence similarity. Nevertheless, a multitude of ORFs conserved across distantly related genomes and not reported in published genome annotations have been recently identified (). Despite the high sensitivity of gene prediction methods, certain genes may still be difficult to predict, for example, genes of very short length or genes encoded by heterologous DNA. True genes may also be excluded from the annotation by over-conservative criteria of robustness of prediction across methods or of evolutionary conservation. For example, although Glimmer3.0 () is often considered to have lower specificity than other predictors (e.g. GeneMark HMM or Prodigal), many genes predicted by Glimmer3.0 and not included in genome annotations have been confirmed in a recent analysis, based on evolutionary conservation and functional characterization (). Bioinformatics tools () and procedural standards () have been developed to facilitate and V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.