Motivation: We investigate and quantify the generalizability of the white blood cell (WBC) transcriptome to the general, multiorgan transcriptome. We use data from the NCBIs Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) public repository to define two datasets for comparison, WBC and OO (Other Organ) sets. Results: Comprehensive pair-wise correlation and expression level profiles are calculated for both datasets (with sizes of 81 and 1463, respectively). We have used mapping and ranking across the Gene Ontology (GO) categories to quantify similarity between the two sets. GO mappings of the most correlated and highly expressed genes from the two datasets tightly match, with the notable exceptions of components of the ribosome, cell adhesion and immune response. That is, 10 877 or 48.8% of all measured genes do not change 10% of rank range between WBC and OO; only 878 (3.9%) change rank 50%. Two trans-tissue gene lists are defined, the most changing and the least changing genes in expression rank. We also provide a general, quantitative measure of the probability of expression rank and correlation profile in the OO system given the expression rank and correlation profile in the WBC dataset.
INTRODUCTIONOne of the reasons that the classification of malignancy was one of the earliest human applications of microarray transcriptional profiling () was that the tissue to be characterized, the tumor, was extracted as a matter of a routine surgical oncological care. Other clinical domains have lagged because the tissue involved in a pathophysiology may not be reasonably obtained from a living individual (e.g. in behavioral or psychiatric disorders) or the organ specificity of a disease is unclear (e.g. type II diabetes mellitus or hypertension). Increasingly, investigators have explored the possibility of classifying, prognosticating and characterizing the mechanism of diseases using the gene expression patterns measured in white blood cells (WBCs) (). For those studies seeking to find the mechanisms/genes dysregulated in the tissue of interest, the large majority have been structured very similarly: a direct comparison is made between expression profiling of peripheral blood and the specific tissue where the disease is known to develop. An alternative method is to establish the degree of isomorphism between the peripheral blood transcriptome and the overlap in expression profiles from a fixed number of representative human tissues (e.g. brain, colon, heart, kidney, etc., altogether nine tissue types) (). To the surprise of many, these investigations have proven to show considerable shared transcriptome across these tissues. We adopt here a systematic survey approach using the ever-growing mountain of public microarray expression data of both WBC and dozens of other tissues, under a variety of conditions and pathophysiological states. Our goal is to provide a quantitative estimate of the generalizability of gene expression findings in WBC to those in other tissues. We seek to identify the most robust similarities and corresponding differences in a genome-wide expression profiles, and to quantify them appropriately. We hypothesize there will be robust correlations that survive the well-known variability of the multiply sourced gene expression database such as the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (), that allow large fractions of the peripheral blood transcriptome to be reflected in other organs and tissues. This hypothesis (heretofore referred to as the WBC relevance hypothesis) entails the following three questions: (i) to what extent do those genes with the highest levels of expression in the WBC transcriptome also have high levels of expression in other organ systems? Specifically, can we quantify how the rank of the gene in WBC informs us of the rank in non-WBC tissues? (ii) How do correlations between pairs of genes in WBC inform us of their correlation in non-WBC tissues? (iii) How does the overall correlation structure [e.g. Relevance Network ()] of WBC compare to those of other tissues? To the extent that the WBC relevance hypothesis is supported we explore whether the informativeness of WBC gene expression is broad or varies by specific functional categories. We look at both the broad categories of gene annotation (), such as apoptosis, as well as examining individual genes. We used the NCBI's GEO to find experiments measuring WBC expression and a large number of experiments on non-WBC tissues that we lump into the Other Organ (OO) category. To minimize the noise from inter-platform comparisons (), we used only those data obtained on the GEO's GPL96 platform for both the WBC and OO categories. This resulted in a total of. A diagram representing the workflow of the analysis. (i) 'Data Sets Definition' includes bulk download of the GEO archive files for the GPL96 platform, parsing out all GSM sample files with similar probeset-averaged expression matrix, detecting and removing outlier genes and constructing two sets for comparison, WBC and OO sets. (ii) 'Quantify Similarity between sets' include: use GO mapping of the most correlated (highly expressed) genes (as defined by their FDR q-value thresholds) to quantify change across sets; the null hypothesis H 0 is overlap between corresponding sets from WBC and OO by chance); use a linear model and general least squares and PCA to quantify relationships between OO and WBC across expression and correlation profiles, respectively; define two list of 'most-changing' and 'least-changing' from WBC to OO genes, across expression profiles. (iii) In 'Ad-hoc Analyses', we first construct the RelNets of the 200 most correlated WBC genes and their corresponding OO pairs ranks changes. We next looked at the TFs human homologs from the Mahoney Atlas as expressed in WBC. Another step is looking at how the most-changing and least-changing genes from step (ii) are represented in the list of human housekeeping genes. Finally, we run GO enrichment analysis of the 'least-changing' genes with respect to 'tissue-of-expression', in DAVID.for the OO and 81 samples for the WBC set. The OO set consists of about 95% solid tissue samples and about 8% are cancer-related tissues (see Section 2.2).
DISCUSSIONIf the tools of functional genomics can be applied to peripheral blood cell samples to develop biomarkers for other organs, two questions are apparent: To what extent does expression in WBCs reflect expression in other organ systems? Why should WBCs reflect expression in other organ systems? This investigation focuses on the first question and we review some possibilities with regard to the second at the end of this discussion. Before a further discussion of our findings, here we comment on the general validity of our approach. Two sets were defined and compared, the WBC and OO. The OO set is composed of a large number of different solid tissues (95% of all samples come from such tissue, see). Also, there was no discrimination between diseased or normal samples in OO or the WBC sets (i.e. 8% of the samples in OO are from malignant tissues). In a sense, we compare WBC expression to expression of an 'averaged or generalized' human tissue. A question might arise about the general validity of such a procedure. To address it, we have redone the bulk of our analyses for the case of an OO set defined as a superposition of five samples taken at random from the solid tissue distribution in. The specific differences seen do not affect the quantitative conclusions reported below (results not shown). Page: 544 538545
CONCLUSIONWe study the similarity between the WBC and OO transcriptomes using public repository expression data (GEO). The OO sets has a wide representation of solid tissues (95%) and normal (92%) tissue samples. Page: 545 538545