Phenome-wide association studies (PheWAS) have been used to replicate known genetic associations and discover new phenotype associations for genetic variants. This PheWAS implementation allows users to translate ICD-9 codes to PheWAS case and control groups, perform analyses using these and/or other phenotypes with covariate adjustments and plot the results. We demonstrate the methods by replicating a PheWAS on rs3135388 (near HLA-DRB, associated with multiple sclerosis) and performing a novel PheWAS using an individuals maximum white blood cell count (WBC) as a continuous measure. Our results for rs3135388 replicate known associations with more significant results than the original study on the same dataset. Our PheWAS of WBC found expected results, including associations with infections, myeloproliferative diseases and associated conditions, such as anemia. These results demonstrate the performance of the improved classification scheme and the flexibility of PheWAS encapsulated in this package.
INTRODUCTIONGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been an important research method for the past 10 years. These studies typically take the form of a case-control study where many genotypes are analyzed with a specific phenotype. Many software packages, such as Plink and SNPTEST, have been developed to support GWAS (). More recently, phenome-wide association studies (PheWAS) have been used to interrogate with which phenotypes a given genetic variant may be associated (). PheWAS was originally described within an electronic medical record (EMR) cohort, and EMR-based PheWAS have been recently shown to replicate 66% of sufficiently powered known associations across many disease domains as well as discover new associations (). PheWAS methods have been applied to research cohorts as well, successfully replicating many known associations and finding potential novel associations (). Visualization software has also been developed to help present and investigate PheWAS results (). Focused on evaluating many phenotypes for a given set of genotypes, PheWAS methods do not translate well to traditional GWAS software, which typically follows a one phenotype, many genotypes paradigm. Although it is possible to perform analyses using existing software packages, it requires scripting many runs of the software. To foster adoption of PheWAS, we developed an R implementation of the most common functionality needed to perform and visualize EMR-based PheWAS. This R package follows the methods detailed in, but has been designed to use either genetic or non-genetic data as the independent variable.