The R453Plus1Toolbox is an R/Bioconductor package for the analysis of 454 Sequencing data. Projects generated with Roches data analysis software can be imported into R allowing advanced and customized analyses within the R/Bioconductor environment for sequencing data. Several methods were implemented extending the current functionality of Roches software. These extensions include methods for quality assurance and annotation of detected variants. Further, a pipeline for the detection of structural variants, e.g. balanced chromosomal translocations, is provided. Availability: The R453Plus1Toolbox is implemented in R and available at http://www.bioconductor.org/. A vignette outlining typical workflows is included in the package.
INTRODUCTIONRoche 454 Sequencing technology produces hundreds of thousands of DNA sequences consisting of a few hundred nucleotides each (), thereby permitting highly sensitive detection of molecular mutations. Roche developed the GS FLX Data Analysis Software that enables researchers to handle the challenging analysis of the massively parallel sequencing data. The software implements a variety of standard analysis workflows, but so far an interface to programming languages like R is not available. Hence, a few specialized pipelines () for highly customized analyses were developed. In contrast to these software packages, we present an R package that expands Roche GS FLX software by offering access to sequencing results generated by Roche's software from within R. Based on the R/Bioconductor infrastructure for sequencing data (), several new functions expanding the scope of Roche GS FLX software were implemented and further user-defined functions can easily be added. In addition, a pipeline for the detection of structural variants such as balanced chromosomal translocations or inversions was implemented, which is a functionality with great utility in the characterization of complex cancer genomes. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
CONCLUSIONThe R453Plus1Toolbox provides an interface to access 454 Sequencing data processed with Roche GS FLX Software from within R and offers many tools for quality reports, annotation and advanced analyses. Users can add customized methods using the R/Bioconductor infrastructure. Hence, the R453Plus1Toolbox is useful for custom analyses of 454 Sequencing data and may further support a broad application of amplicon deep sequencing in a diagnostic laboratory, in particular, for the analyses of tumor specimens.