Motivation: High-throughput next-generation sequencing technologies enable increasingly fast and affordable sequencing of genomes and transcriptomes, with a broad range of applications. The quality of the sequencing data is crucial for all applications. A significant portion of the data produced contains errors, and ever more efficient error correction programs are needed. Results: We propose RACER (Rapid and Accurate Correction of Errors in Reads), a new software program for correcting errors in sequencing data. RACER has better error-correcting performance than existing programs, is faster and requires less memory. To support our claims, we performed extensive comparison with the existing leading programs on a variety of real datasets. Availability: RACER is freely available for non-commercial use at
INTRODUCTIONThe automated Sanger sequencing method () has revolutionized biological research by unveiling the sequence of the DNA molecule, most prominently that of the human genome. Limitations of the method created the need for improved sequencing technologies. Great demand caused the discovery of several so-called next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies, such as Illumina/Solexa, Roche/454, Life/APG's SOLiD, Helicos BioSciences' HeliScope, Pacific Biosciences and Life's Ion Torrent; the survey of Metzker (2010) gives detailed descriptions. These high-throughput technologies produce huge amounts of data at decreasing costs, thus enabling an ever increasing number of applications, including de novo genome assembly, genome resequencing, cancer mutation discovery, metagenomics, DNAprotein interaction discovery and so forth. The way has been opened for ambitious projects, such as the 1000 Genomes Project (), the first project to sequence the genomes of a large number of people to provide a comprehensive resource on human genetic variation, and the Genome 10K Project (), aiming at discovering the genomes of 10 000 vertebrate species. A large number of bioinformatics programs are essential in analyzing the NGS data. Although their variety is impressive, they all need high-quality data. Nearly half of the reads produced by Illumina, the currently dominant technology, contain errors. Among other problems, they make genome assembly much more difficult, and genome assemblers, such as Euler-SR (), ALLPATHS (), ABySS (), SOAPdenovo () or SGA (), include their own correcting mechanisms. The importance of the problem led to the design of many stand-alone error-correcting programs, such as Euler (), SHREC (Schroder), Reptile (), Quake (), CUDA (), HSHREC (), SOAP (), HiTEC (), Coral (Salmela and SchroderSchroder, 2011), Hammer (), ECHO (), PSAEC () and MyHybrid (); see also the survey of. The errors present in sequencing data consist of substitutions, where the correct base has been replaced by an erroneous one, and indels, where new bases have been inserted or existing ones deleted. However, due to the domination of the Illumina technology, which produces mostly substitution errors, the majority of the existing programs focus on correcting this type of errors. For the same reason, the current version of our new program focuses as well on substitution errors. The main idea of all correcting programs is essentially the same. High-throughput technologies compensate for short read length by high coverage, which implies that each position in the genome is sequenced multiple times, many of which are correct. Therefore, the correct way will prevail in a careful analysis and the errors can be corrected. It is the way in which such an analysis is done that makes the difference between various programs. Some programs count the number of k-mers and those with counts above a given threshold are deemed correct, whereas the remaining ones undergo correction; these include SHREC, HiTEC, HSHREC and PSAEC. Others consider all k-mers occurring in each read, the k-spectrum (), and try to correct the entire read with minimum edit distance such that all k-mers have counts above a threshold; CUDA, Quake, Reptile and Hammer are included here. Finally, Coral, ECHO and MyHybrid are based on multiple sequence alignments. The reader is referred to the survey offor details. We propose a new program, RACER (Rapid and Accurate Correction of Errors in Reads), that belongs to the first category. Although SHREC and HSHREC use suffix trees and HiTEC uses the more efficient suffix arrays, RACER uses completely different, more efficient data structures. This way, whereas both SHREC and, to a lesser extent, HiTEC, have high space *To whom correspondence should be addressed. consumption, RACER is space efficient. It is also faster and more effective at correcting errors than the existing programs. We have performed extensive comparison with the leading programs on a variety of real datasets. RACER is freely available for non-commercial use at www.csd.uwo.ca/$ilie/RACER/.
DISCUSSIONExtensive testing shows that RACER is superior to the existing programs in all aspects: error-correcting performance, time and space. It corrects about three-quarters of the errors in52 min for a bacterial dataset and 3040 min for a larger organism such as a worm or fly. RACER does not require any additional software to run.
CONCLUSIONWe have presented a new tool, RACER, for correcting errors in NGS data. The current version of RACER targets Illumina data, thus correcting substitution error. Future versions will be able to handle indel errors to enable correction of data from other sequencing platforms as well as mixed data.