Motivation: The recent development of high-throughput drug profiling (high content screening or HCS) provides a large amount of quantitative multidimensional data. Despite its potentials, it poses several challenges for academia and industry analysts alike. This is especially true for ranking the effectiveness of several drugs from many thousands of images directly. This paper introduces, for the first time, a new framework for automatically ordering the performance of drugs, called fractional adjusted bi-partitional score (FABS). This general strategy takes advantage of graph-based formulations and solutions and avoids many shortfalls of traditionally used methods in practice. We experimented with FABS framework by implementing it with a specific algorithm, a variant of normalized cut—normalized cut prime (FABS-NC), producing a ranking of drugs. This algorithm is known to run in polynomial time and therefore can scale well in high-throughput applications. Results: We compare the performance of FABS-NC to other methods that could be used for drugs ranking. We devise two variants of the FABS algorithm: FABS-SVM that utilizes support vector machine (SVM) as black box, and FABS-Spectral that utilizes the eigenvector technique (spectral) as black box. We compare the performance of FABS-NC also to three other methods that have been previously considered: center ranking (Center), PCA ranking (PCA), and graph transition energy method (GTEM). The conclusion is encouraging: FABS-NC consistently outperforms all these five alternatives. FABS-SVM has the second best performance among these six methods, but is far behind FABS-NC : In some cases FABS-NC produces over half correctly predicted ranking experiment trials than FABS-SVM.
INTRODUCTIONAutomated microscopy is increasingly used in drug discovery, especially predicting the toxicity of new drugs (). The so-called high-content screening (HCS) has greatly enhanced investigators' capability of discerning the response of cells treated by various drugs (). HCS * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The author wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as the joint first Authors. accomplishes this by analyzing phenotypic features of the cells from tens of thousands cell images produced by HCS. In addition, the decreasing cost of such a method means a wide-spread application (). HCS employs cell imaging assays, tagged with fluorescent dyeseach field of cells contains these tags for its different macromolecules. Automated microscopy is performed to produce a large amount of visual information. There are three steps during this process (): fluorescence-tagging, automated microscopy and identification and measurement of target phenotypic feature(s) for further analysis. The analysis step usually poses the most challenge. To extract meaning out of a gigantic image database, traditional tools usually need to be tailored to specific known phenotype's features, instead of unknown yet more informative differences. For example, it has been reported that applying an analysis method that only distinguishes phenotypic changes in cellular level misses on the detecting meaningful morphological modification on subcellular structures (). In high-throughput drug screening assays, typically a quantity, such as normalized intensity of a reporter fluorescent protein (), is assumed to be measurable. Differences between samples of two distinct cell populations (such as treated versus untreated) are estimated and tested for significance. Methods using statistics like Z-factor () to evaluate reliability of the measurements have been developed. Comparison of the difference is usually done by performing a multivariate F-test to test whether two populations are distributed differently. But F-test may introduce high errors when the distributions are not normal, which is expected to be the case in many types of cell responses. Moreover, in image-based assays, the use of a measurable quantity is no longer applicable when this quantity is not straightforward to obtain directly and the measurement itself can never be perfect. For example, to measure the composition of morphological subtypes of mitochondria requires pattern recognition algorithms to accurately detect and quantify target events (). Though many advanced algorithms have been developed for years, these pattern recognition algorithms usually require non-trivial tuning and optimization for each study because they may generalize poorly, sometimes not even generalize within a well, due to noise and systematic bias introduced during the sample preparation and imaging process steps, inducing additional overhead when attempts are made to scale up the assay to high throughput. Another challenge is when a multiplex approach is required, where multiple independent quantities are measured for each single cell. In these cases, response of each single cell will be a