Motivation: Gene silencing, also called RNA interference, requires reliable assessment of silencer impacts. A critical task is to find matches between silencer oligomers and sites in the genome, in accordance with one-to-many matching rules (G–U matching, with provision for mismatches). Fast search algorithms are required to support silencer impact assessments in procedures for designing effective silencer sequences. Results: The article presents a matching algorithm and data structures specialized for matching searches, including a kernel procedure that addresses a Boolean version of the database task called the skyline search. Besides exact matches, the algorithm is extended to allow for the location-specific mismatches applicable in plants. Computational tests show that the algorithm is significantly faster than suffix-tree alternatives.
INTRODUCTIONGene silencing involves mechanisms to suppress the expression of particular genes. These mechanisms, also called RNA interference (RNAi), contribute to the development of organisms and to protection against viral attacks; they also have important experimental and therapeutic applications. The silencing process studied in this article commences with the formation of doublestranded RNA (dsRNA) molecules, either as part of an organism's normal functions or via a synthetic pathway. The dsRNAs are processed into single-stranded RNA oligomers called microRNA (miRNA) or small interfering RNA (siRNA), depending on the origin of the dsRNA: miRNA is formed from irregular pseudohairpin miRNA-precursor molecules, whereas siRNA is formed from long double-stranded or hairpin RNA. The RNA oligomers then are inserted into RISC protein complexes, which they guide to matching sites on messenger RNA (mRNA) molecules encoded by the genome. When a match is found between a guiding oligomer and an mRNA, the RISC cleaves the mRNA, causing its destruction. In plants (the main focus of the present research), the oligomers directly involved in the silencing process are predominantly 21 bases * To whom correspondence should be addressed. in length, in both the miRNA and siRNA pathways (). In synthetic RNAi applications, the RNA oligomers are used to suppress the expression of one or more target genes. An important task here is to formulate sequences for the oligomers (and in practice their precursors), so that they will have substantial impact on the targets, while minimizing their impact on non-target genes (i.e. cross-silencing). One strand of research in this respect concerns the identification of sites in mRNA where silencing is likely to occur (). In addition, methods have been developed for assessing the silencing impact expected from any given candidate silencer, based on an identification of all matching sites in the mRNA (). These methods use classical energy-minimizing RNA-folding techniques and are evidently highly reliable, but they are extremely demanding in terms of computational time. Fast performance in identifying matching sites is important because the search for an effective design may require an assessment of large numbers of candidates. This is so especially in the case of long hairpin silencers, where the complexity of the design task is augmented by the spawning of multiple overlapping oligomers from a single hairpin RNA molecule. A matching relationship involves a pairing of the reversecomplement of a silencer candidate with an mRNA location, with allowance for GU variants and some tolerance for mismatches. A widely used technique for finding matches commences by taking the reverse-complement of the candidate silencer, for which a direct match is then sought in the mRNA, which allows the use of suffix-tree algorithms (). The suffix-tree approach has been extended in recent years in the GUUGle software, which implements a direct search for complementary matches, including built-in provision for GU matching (). Suffix-tree algorithms have been adapted also to handle a wide range of mismatches, notably in the flexible pattern-matching capabilities provided by the STAN software (). This article proposes an alternative to the suffix-tree approach.The genome is represented as an in-memory map of 21-mers, and the matching rules are incorporated in an algorithm that seeks matches within this map. The aim has been to develop a fast search procedure with modest memory requirements, for use especially in optimization procedures for constructing effective hairpin silencers.
DISCUSSIONThis article has presented techniques to enable rapid prediction of the locations where a given silencer is likely to have impact on a given genome. The techniques as implemented in the OMO software have been shown to be faster than GUUGle by a factor of at least 350 and, therefore, will be valuable where performance is critical (e.g. in optimization procedures). OMO is thus well-suited to applications notably optimizationrequiring large numbers of searches. For ad hoc queries, the overhead associated with initial input of the binary file could be eliminated through a persistent-memory implementation (e.g. providing OMO as a web service). Other notable aspects of the research include the development of a specialized coding scheme for direct testing of matches (including GU matches), the elucidation of reductions for testing of mismatches, and the identification of a fundamental search taska Boolean variant of skyline searchwhich apparently has not been addressed previously.