Purpose: The rcellminer R package provides a wide range of functionality to help R users access and explore molecular profiling and drug response data for the NCI-60. The package enables flexible programmatic access to CellMiners unparalleled breadth of NCI-60 data, including gene and protein expression, copy number, whole exome mutations, as well as activity data for 21K compounds , with information on their structure, mechanism of action and repeat screens. Functions are available to easily visualize compound structures, activity patterns and molecular feature profiles. Additionally, embedded R Shiny applications allow interactive data exploration. Availability and implementation: rcellminer is compatible with R 3.2 and above on Windows, Mac OS X and Linux. The package, documentation, tutorials and Shiny-based applications are available through Bioconductor (http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/rcellminer); ongoing updates will occur according to the Bioconductor release schedule with new CellMiner data. The package is free and open-source (LGPL 3).
ConclusionThe rcellminer R package is designed to allow R users to explore molecular profiling and drug response data on the NCI-60. rcellminer complements the online CellMiner tools with ones that can be run locally to enhance access to the CellMiner data. We anticipate that these tools will allow researchers to build powerful analyses of the NCI-60 data. We showcase some possibilities with the embedded R Shiny applications allowing quick exploration of the available data. We plan to extend this R package to include additional compound data made available by DTP, and other molecular profiling data for the NCI-60 from assays conducted by the Developmental Therapeutics Branch of the NCI and other groups. With its extensive data and flexible underlying functionality, rcellminer will make the NCI-60 accessible to a larger segment of the community, enabling development of novel analyses. It additionally provides useful guidance for organizing data from other cell line pharmacogenomic databases as R packages.