Motivation: Retrocopies are copies of mature RNAs that are usually devoid of regulatory sequences and introns. They have routinely been classified as processed pseudo-genes with little or no biological relevance. However, recent findings have revealed functional roles for ret-rocopies, as well as their high frequency in some organisms, such as primates. Despite their increasing importance, there is no user-friendly and publicly available resource for the study of retrocopies. Results: Here, we present RCPedia, an integrative and user-friendly database designed for the study of retrocopied genes. RCPedia contains a complete catalogue of the retrocopies that are known to be present in human and five other primate genomes, their genomic context, inter-species conservation and gene expression data. RCPedia also offers a streamlined data representation and an efficient query system. Availability and implementation: RCPedia is available at http://www. bioinfo.
INTRODUCTIONRetrocopies are gene copies that are generated by reverse transcription and genomic integration of transcribed mRNAs. Although retrocopies have been described since the early 1980s (), their functional roles have only recently been revealed (). Retrocopies occur frequently in many genomes, including those of primates (), and some retrocopies are transcribed and have putative functions [see () for a review]. Interestingly, retrocopies have idiosyncrasies that simplify their identification. The four main characteristics are as follows:(i) an original multi-exonic parental gene copy in the genome; (ii) a mono-exonic region, without intronic regions; (iii) a poly-A stretch located in the 3 0-most region; or (iv) direct repeats of 812 nucleotides (nt) flanking them [see () for a review]. These characteristics make retrocopy identification through computational pipelines reasonably straightforward, especially for species for which well-assembled genomes and transcriptomes are available. Despite this, there is still a lack a publicly available and easy-to-use resources dedicated to the study of retrocopies (), making it necessary either to use manual and multi-step approaches to explore retrocopies or to use non-specialized databases, such as the pseudogene databases (e.g. http://www.pseudogene.org/), that contain only basic and/ or restricted information. Here, we describe RCPedia, a publicly available database that was developed for the study of retrocopies. RCPedia contains a myriad of information on retrocopied genes from six primate genomes (human, chimp, gorilla, orangutan, rhesus and marmoset), as well as a streamlined graphical data representation and an efficient information query system.
CONCLUSIONRCPedia is a well-organized, user-friendly and streamlined graphical representation resource dedicated to the study of retrocopies in primate genomes. To the best of our knowledge, RCPedia is the most comprehensive and publicly available database in this field, although some resources providing similar information (). We strongly believe that RCPedia will significantly improve the annotation and functional characterization of retrocopies present in primate genomes.