Motivation: The advent of high-throughput sequencing technologies is revolutionizing our ability in discovering and genotyping DNA copy number variants (CNVs). Read count-based approaches are able to detect CNV regions with an unprecedented resolution. Although this computational strategy has been recently introduced in literature, much work has been already done for the preparation, normalization and analysis of this kind of data. Results: Here we face the many aspects that cover the detection of CNVs by using read count approach. We first study the characteristics and systematic biases of read count distributions, focusing on the normalization methods designed for removing these biases. Subsequently, we compare the algorithms designed to detect the boundaries of CNVs and we investigate the ability of read count data to predict the exact number of DNA copy. Finally, we review the tools publicly available for analysing read count data. To better understand the state of the art of read count approaches, we compare the performance of the three most widely used sequencing technologies (Illumina Genome Analyzer, Roche 454 and Life Technologies SOLiD) in all the analyses that we perform. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONHuman genomes are characterized by genetic variants that range from the single base pair to large chromosomal events. Recent studies have clearly shown that human genomes differ more as a consequence of structural variants than of single-base pair differences (). Structural variants (SVs) are operationally defined as genomic events 50 bp () that include copy number variants (CNVs) and balanced rearrangements such as inversions and translocations. With the sequencing of human genomes now becoming routine, the challenge is to discover the full extent of structural variations and understand its effect on human diseases, complex traits and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. evolution. The last few years have seen the emergence of several high-throughput sequencing (HTS) platforms that are based on various implementations of cyclic-array sequencing (). The commercial products that are based on this sequencing technology include the Roche's 454, the Illumina's Genome Analyzer (GA), and the Life Technologies's (LT) SOLiD. Although these platforms are quite diverse in sequencing biochemistry as well as in how the array is generated, all of them allow to sequence millions of short sequences (reads) simultaneously and are able to sequence a full human genome per week at a cost 200-fold less than previous methods. The advent of HTS platforms has opened many opportunities for the study of genomic variants. The first HTS-based approach to detect SVs was based on paired-end read mapping (PEM), which identifies insertions and deletions by comparing the distance between mapped read pairs to the average insert size of the genomic library. Although this method is able to identify deletions 1 kb with high sensitivity, it does not allow for the discovery of insertions larger than the average insert size of the library and of the exact borders of SVs in complex genomic regions rich in segmental duplication (). An altenative HTS-based approach is based on split-read (SR) methods that allows to detect deletions and small insertions on the basis of a split sequence-read signature: the alignment to the genome is broken and a continuous stretch of gaps in the read indicates a deletion or in the reference indicates an insertion. Although SRs approach can be devised to detect a wide range of SV classes with exact breakpoint resolution, it is currently reliable only in the unique regions of the genome. In this scenario, a very promising approach for the identification of SVs using HTS technologies consists in measuring the number of reads aligned to the human reference genome (). Assuming the sequencing process is uniform, the number of reads mapping to a region is expected to be proportional to the number of times the region appears in the DNA sample. Following this assumption, the copy number of any genomic region can be estimated by counting the number of reads [read counts (] aligned to that particular region.were the firsts to use this approach to detect copy number alterations between tumour and healthy samples of the same individual, whileproposed to use RC data to look for genomic regions that differ in copy number between normal individuals of the 1000 Genomes Project (). At present, few algorithms for RC analysis have been packagedPage: 471 470478