Motivation: The recently released Oxford Nanopore MinION sequencing platform presents many innovative features opening up potential for a range of applications not previously possible. Among these features, the ability to sequence in real-time provides a unique opportunity for many time-critical applications. While many software packages have been developed to analyze its data, there is still a lack of toolkits that support the streaming and real-time analysis of MinION sequencing data. Results: We developed npReader, an open-source software package to facilitate real-time analysis of MinION sequencing data. npReader can simultaneously extract sequence reads and stream them to downstream analysis pipelines while the samples are being sequenced on the MinION device. It provides a command line interface for easy integration into a bioinformatics work flow, as well as a graphical user interface which concurrently displays the statistics of the run. It also provides an application programming interface for development of streaming algorithms in order to fully utilize the extent of nanopore sequencing potential. Availability and implementation: npReader is written in Java and is freely available at http://metscape.ncibi.org.It
IntroductionThe recent introduction of the Oxford Nanopore MinION sequencing platform has added a new dimension into genomics sequencing. The platform can read ultra long DNA segments due to the ability to directly sense DNA fragments with biological nanopores without the need of amplification. Its portability also proves useful to many studies under critical conditions such as disease outbreaks and field work. A number of labs around the world have been evaluating the platform through the MinION Access Programme (MAP), and have also used the platform to develop numerous novel applications. One of the most innovative features of the Oxford Nanopore MinION platform is that it can output sequence reads in real-time, i.e. the electrical current data and the base-called sequence of a DNA fragment can be obtained as soon as it passed through the nanopore. This is attractive for many time critical applications such as rapid infection diagnosis. While several excellent software packages (e.g. Loman and Quinlan 2014;were introduced as soon as the MinION devices were released, there is still a lack of tools supporting the extraction and analysis of MinION sequence data in real-time. We developed npReader, an open-source software package to facilitate real-time analysis of Oxford Nanopore MinION sequencing data. npReader is written in Java and hence can run seamlessly on any platforms with minimal dependency. It provides a flexible and comprehensible command line interface, allowing it to be easily incorporated into an analysis pipeline. In addition, it provides a Graphical User Interface (GUI) for users to visually assess the statistics of the run. The package also provides a Java Application Programming Interface (API) allowing developers to extract both based-called sequences and native electrical current data to further develop algorithms for other analyses.
DiscussionThe npReader package provides a simple and yet powerful solution for analysis of MinION sequencing data in real-time. It provides a GUI to allow users to visually examine quality statistics of a run when a DNA sample is being sequenced. Importantly, it can extract the desired information from the run simultaneously and stream into multiple downstream analysis pipelines on high performance computing facilities or on computing clouds, thereby facilitating real-time analysis of the DNA sample. This will allow answering the biological questions at hand in a timely manner, and as soon as sufficient data are obtained.. A screen shot of npReader. User can specify options of data to be extracted and details of outputs in the left panel. The right panel displays statistics of data, including read counts, read length histogram and read quality in real-time