Motivation: Large-scale RNA expression measurements are generating enormous quantities of data. During the last two decades, many methods were developed for extracting insights regarding the interrelationships between genes from such data. The mathematical and computational perspectives that underlie these methods are usually algebraic or probabilistic. Results: Here, we introduce an unexplored geometric view point where expression levels of genes in multiple experiments are interpreted as vectors in a high-dimensional space. Specifically, we find, for the expression profile of each particular gene, its approximation as a linear combination of profiles of a few other genes. This method is inspired by recent developments in the realm of compressed sensing in the machine learning domain. To demonstrate the power of our approach in extracting valuable information from the expression data, we independently applied it to large-scale experiments carried out on the yeast and malaria parasite whole transcriptomes. The parameters extracted from the sparse reconstruction of the expression profiles, when fed to a supervised learning platform, were used to successfully predict the relationships between genes throughout the Gene Ontology hierarchy and protein–protein interaction map. Extensive assessment of the biological results shows high accuracy in both recovering known predictions and in yielding accurate predictions missing from the current databases. We suggest that the geometrical approach presented here is suitable for a broad range of high-dimensional experimental data.
INTRODUCTIONHigh-throughput technologies have come to play a central role in biological and biomedical research in the last decade. Advances in large-scale technologies on a genome-wide scale produce enormous amounts of data (). Yet, a major goal of functional genomics is the quest for a comprehensive description of the functions and interactions of all genes and proteins in a genome. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Data such as large-scale gene expression are usually represented by a matrix, where n genes are examined in d experimental conditions. Here, we view such data as a set of n points (vectors) in d-dimensional space, each of which represents the profile of a given gene over d different experimental conditions. Many known methods that have yielded meaningful biological insights in fact seek geometric or algebraic features of these vectors. For example, analyzing the angles between vectors amounts to a correlation-based analysis. Similarly, the direction in space along which these points are most 'spread out' correspond to singular value decomposition (SVD) () and its principal component analysis implementation (). These are powerful tools in providing biological inference (). In general, methods and disciplines developed toward extracting information from expression data include pairwise properties (e.g. correlation, variance, entropy-based distance) (), clustering (), Bayesian networks (), information theory, ordinary differential equations and other sophisticated distance measures. In this study, we applied a different approach to gene expression data analysis. The geometric principle that underlies it is very natural and different from existing methods, though it is close in spirit, and inspired by recent advances in compressive sensing and sparse signal recovery (). A simple probabilistic consideration implies the following geometric claim: given a set of n randomly chosen points in the d-dimensional space, it is 'very unlikely' that a linear subspace Y exists where more than dim(Y ) points of the chosen points reside 'very close' to Y (see Section 3). In this study, we present a natural, yet unexplored, approach for the seemingly exhausted problem of gene expression analysis. Adopting a sparse signals reconstruction mindset, we recover a support set of genes for each gene in a genome. Geometrically, we uncovered linear subspaces that are overpopulated with expression profiles in the multidimensional space of the experiments set. We could verify the robustness and significance of the sparse reconstructions using measures intrinsic to the method and data. Formally, we are interested in subsets S of our n-point set that (nearly) resides on a subspace of dimension strictly smaller than |S|. Having found such sets, several immediate questions suggest themselves: (i) are these findings robust? (ii) If they are robust, can we directly interpret their biological meaning? (iii) Can such representation uncover meaningful structures? (iv) Does the method generalize? In this article, we answer these questions by considering gene expression alone and testing datasets coming from the transcriptomes of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. A conceptually new method that we call SPARCLE (SPArse ReCovery of Linear combinations of Expression) is introduced. It is inspired by the plausible assumption that expression data, when considered over a broad range of experimental conditions, encodes profound layers of systematic (yet hidden) behaviors. We further confirmed the stability and robustness of SPARCLE results for entire transcriptomes under perturbations to the data. Extracting features from the geometric parameters of SPARCLE's results, and training AdaBoost, a machine learning platform, to exhaustively reveal pairwise associations between gene function [represented by Gene Ontology (GO) annotations and by the proteinprotein interaction (PPI) map] confirmed the principal information encoded by the geometric-based representation. The generality of the method is confirmed by applying it to both the knowledge-rich yeast model and the poorly annotated malaria parasite proteome.
DISCUSSIONThe value of the information retrieved by the SPARCLE approach was demonstrated by using its results as a basis for machine learning classification of gene associations. A systematic and comprehensive evaluation, ranging from PPI networks and going through all resolution levels of the GO annotation database, covering the immensely explored yeast transcriptome and the poorly annotated malaria-parasite genome, revealed the large potential of using such a poorly studied geometric approach to extract principal insights from gene expression data. Many approaches aim to develop a systematic way to unravel hidden structure in data. Most studies that looked for biologicalcoherence in gene expression data applied clustering (at different levels of sophistication), revealing the existence of some hidden 'structure' in the data. In the current research, comparisons to clustering results were not carried out, as our goal here is quite different. The high performance of SPARCLE-based AdaBoost learning should be considered as evidence for the principal information that is embedded in the geometric properties of the data. Therefore, a critical comparison was performed to evaluate the information that is embedded in correlation (a form of geometric representation, see below). We show that the correlation performed very poorly on the malaria data and somewhat better on the yeast data. In addition, by combining the AdaBoost learning protocol with the correlation (Correlation+AB), we isolated the contribution of the AdaBoost learning itself. SPARCLE+AB outperformed these other approaches for the entire range of accuracy and coverage (and 4; Supplementary Figs S3S7). Several aspects of our approach differ from common practices, and should be elaborated. Most of the activity in the machinelearning area can be viewed as a modern-day approach to the classical questions of statistics. The data at hand is considered as being sampled from some distribution and the question is to get as accurate as possible a description of that distribution. Our approach is different. When data items are (or can be naturally viewed as) points in space, it is possible to utilize any 'unexpected' geometric properties that this set of points (corresponding to data items) has. In fact, many successful existing methods in machine learning can be viewed from this perspective. Thus, if S is a generic set of N points in d-dimensional space and if N is subexponential in d, then we do not expect to see any pairs of points (even nearly) in the same direction from the origin. If the set of points that is your dataset violates this statement, you can conclude that it has a geometrically nontrivial structure. This structural property is very likely a reflection of an interesting (albeit not necessarily interpretable) property in the domain from which the dataset came. This is our interpretation of correlation analysis, one of the most reliable workhorses of bioinformatics. Likewise, a generic point set in Euclidean space is not expected to be stretched in any special directions in space. Therefore, if your dataset, viewed geometrically, is stretched in certain directions it tells you something that can often be used to discover interesting phenomena. This is our interpretation of SVD analysis. Correlations and stretch are only two of the numerous properties that one may consider in a point set in Euclidean space. Our work considers another very basic property that we know not to exist in generic sets: (nearly) linearly dependent sets of points of cardinality that is substantially smaller than the dimension of the host space. When such an unexpected property of the dataset is discovered, two questions suggest themselves: (i) is this phenomenon only coincidental? and (ii) how can this geometric property of the data help us learn something about the system which it represents? In this study, we confirm the robustness of this Page: 661 655661