Motivation: Unraveling the structure and behavior of the brain and central nervous system (CNS) has always been a major goal of neuroscience. Understanding the wiring diagrams of the neuromuscular junction connectomes (full connectivity of nervous system neuronal components) is a starting point for this, as it helps in the study of the organizational and developmental properties of the mammalian CNS. The phenomenon of synapse elimination during developmental stages of the neuronal circuitry is such an example. Due to the organizational specificity of the axons in the connectomes, it becomes important to label and extract individual axons for morphological analysis. Features such as axonal trajectories, their branching patterns, geometric information, the spatial relations of groups of axons, etc. are of great interests for neurobiologists in the study of wiring diagrams. However, due to the complexity of spatial structure of the axons, automatically tracking and reconstructing them from microscopy images in 3D is an unresolved problem. In this article, AXONTRACKER-3D, an interactive 3D axon tracking and labeling tool is built to obtain quantitative information by reconstruction of the axonal structures in the entire innervation field. The ease of use along with accuracy of results makes AXONTRACKER-3D an attractive tool to obtain valuable quantitative information from axon datasets. Availability: The software is freely available for download at http://www.cbi-tmhs.org/AxonTracker/ Contact: stwong@tmhs.org
INTRODUCTIONThe modern microscopic image acquisition techniques provide the neuroscientists the visual perception of axons in 3D space. Of particular interest is the knowledge of connectivity of the neuronal components of the nervous system, the connectome. Analyzing neuronal structures is instrumental in completely understanding the functional properties of the mammalian central nervous system (). One such phenomenon that can be studied is the developmental reorganization of connectivity in the mammalian nervous system, also known as synapse elimination (). Pruning of synaptic connections through competitive interactions during neurodevelopment and its effect on the neuronal connectivity is one such example. A study of connectomes over various time points during brain development can reveal the mysteries about how the neural circuits are established and the way it changes over the lifespan of the animal * To whom correspondence should be addressed. under study. Moreover, mapping wiring diagram mouse models can help understand how an abnormality in the neural circuits can lead to psychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia and autism (). Another potential application is in the study of the effect of new drugs on the mammalian connectomes. Analysis of the connectomes at different time points during the drug-testing could lead to valuable insights into the effectiveness of the new drugs designed to treat disorders related to brain and central nervous system. The wiring diagram of the neuromuscular circuit is believed to be a good starting point for this, as it might lead to discoveries valuable to this study. The neuromuscular circuits are well-isolated and accessible. Its connectome is well defined. Due to the large size of the adult motor neurons (210 m in diameter), which are separated from neighboring axons by Schwann cells, and the large size of neuromuscular junctions (20 m in length), the neuromuscular connectome is easier to resolve, analyze and can be easily visualized. Moreover, since the morphological features of the neuromuscular connectome can be directly linked with its functional properties; for example the morphology of individual neuromuscular junction has been found to be directly related to its synaptic strength (), it renders itself as an attractive platform to conduct connectome studies. Many questions related to synapse elimination can be answered from the study of mammalian neuromuscular connectome. As the spatial organization of the axons is very specific in nature, down to the level of individual axons, it becomes important to isolate each axon from the connectomes for extraction of morphological features for these studies. Studies in neuronal connections are believed to help unravel the functional properties of the nervous system. The manual effort needed, however, is excessive, as the neurobiologist has to manually track individual axons from a large set of data (3050 GB of volumetric data). This might amount to a few months of painstaking labor. Of note are similar researches in the mapping of neural circuits for the study of neuronal connectivity. A study of potential connectivity among neurons was done based on neuron reconstructions of the cortical circuits in cat primary visual cortex (). Probabilistic synaptic density maps were derived from the neural circuitry of the olfactory centers of drosophila to predict connectivity (). Drosophila olfactory circuits were mapped and rendered to study the mechanisms of olfactory coding in higher brain centers (). Significant research efforts have been attempted to extract the geometric structure of axons from microscopic image stacks.Page: i65 i64i70
DISCUSSIONIn this article, we presented a novel interactive tool to extract and reconstruct axons obtained from 3D confocal microscopy image stacks. Compared to the previously proposed methods, our algorithm has two major contributions: firstly, the software can successfully extract centerlines of axons with minimal user intervention. Rendering of the data in 3D along with overlay of tracking results in real-time is a useful feature offered by the software. By introducing user interaction, we can see that our algorithm can successfully extract and reconstruct touching axons and axons with dramatic orientation changes. Secondly, by using local region growing and interactive level set segmentation methods, we can get the actual boundary of each axon which can provide us valuable quantitative information such as the length, radius for axon function and connectivity analysis. As a continuation of the work presented in this article, we will discuss algorithms to detect and track branches in order to minimize user-intervention needed for AxonTracker-3D. The following are the planned improvements to the current version of the software. Axons in the connectome of neuro-muscular junctions tend to branch into complex patterns. The current version of AxonTracker3D does not have a provision to automatically detect branches. At branch points, the centerlines were joined together manually to complete the wiring circuitry of the axons. As an extension to our current work, we plan to design and implement new algorithms to detect branching points along the axons. Methods such as AdaBoost classifier () could be a potential solution to this problem. This consists of three steps: (i) re-slice the axon tubes along its orientation; (ii) extract 2D and 3D features from the slices and spheres rounding the center points; (iii) select samples to train AdaBoost classifier (manual selection of 100 samples for training). The AdaBoost method can be used to classify positive training examples from negative i68Page: i69 i64i70