Motivation: Resolving tandemly repeated genomic sequences is a necessary step in improving our understanding of the human genome. Short tandem repeats (TRs), or microsatellites, are often used as molecular markers in genetics, and clinically, variation in microsatellites can lead to genetic disorders like Huntingtons diseases. Accurately resolving repeats, and in particular TRs, remains a challenging task in genome alignment, assembly and variation calling. Though tools have been developed for detecting microsatellites in short-read sequencing data, these are limited in the size and types of events they can resolve. Single-molecule sequencing technologies may potentially resolve a broader spectrum of TRs given their increased length, but require new approaches given their significantly higher raw error profiles. However, due to inherent error profiles of the single-molecule technologies, these reads presents a unique challenge in terms of accurately identifying and estimating the TRs. Results: Here we present PACMONSTR, a reference-based probabilistic approach, to identify the TR region and estimate the number of these TR elements in long DNA reads. We present a multistep approach that requires as input, a reference region and the reference TR element. Initially, the TR region is identified from the long DNA reads via a 3-stage modified Smith–Waterman approach and then, expected number of TR elements is calculated using a pair-Hidden Markov Models–based method. Finally, TR-based genotype selection (or clustering: homozygous/heterozygous) is performed with Gaussian mixture models, using the Akaike information criteria, and coverage expectations. Availability and implementation: https://github.com/alibashir/
INTRODUCTIONTandem repeats (TRs) are contiguous regions of DNA in which the same (or highly similar) DNA sequences are repeated multiple times in order. TRs can range in size from single nucleotide repeats (homopolymers) to encompassing entire genes (). Short tandem repeats (TRs) of 16 bp, or microsatellites, are often used as molecular markers in genetics () or in forensic applications (Veselinovic,Veselinovic, 2006). Clinically, variation in microsatellites is observed in many genetic disorders. Triplicate CAG repeat expansions have been implicated in a number of neurological disorders, including exonic expansions in Huntington's disease () and spinocerebellar ataxia () and non-coding expansions in fragile X syndrome (). Microsatellite instability has also been used as a marker of cancer progression (). Additionally, microsatellites are implicated in regulatory roles; they have been shown to be highly conserved near transcription start sites () and are sometimes known to modulate gene expression (). Despite their importance, TRs are often ignored because accurate resolution of TRs in both variation and assembly settings remains a challenging task. With the availability of high-quality genomes, a number of tools were developed specifically for TR resolution (). Tools like Tandem Repeat Finder (TRF;) attempt to detect such repeats de novo. TRF has a detection phase that looks for statistically significant k-mer matches within sliding windows and an analysis phase, which determines period size, multiplicity and consensus repeats (). Other methods have used clustering-based approaches (T-Reks) and local autocorrelation (TandemSwan), respectively, to attempt to identify more divergent and complex TRs [sometimes termed Fuzzy Tandem Repeats (. This increased sensitivity comes at the cost of increased runtime and higher false-positive rates (). Other methods, such as RepeatMasker, can then be used to screen entire genomes using known databases of TRs (and other repeat elements) identified by such de novo tools (Tarailo). The advent of low-cost sequencing over the past decade has made cataloguing genomic variation cost-effective across individuals. Robust tools have been created for short-read alignment (), singlenucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and indel detection (), as well as completely integrated end-to-end pipelines (). These methods have proven highly accurate in calling SNPs in diverse populations (). Additionally, these technologies have been used to enumerate more complex copy number and copy neutral forms of structural variation (SV;). Similarly, a number of excellent tools have become available for detecting microsatellites in short-read sequencing data (). Some of these methods rely on databases of known TRs (such as those generated by TRF across a genome sequence or a curated list of known variable TR intervals) and look at spanning reads (short reads which span *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com the repeat) to call TR alleles for a given individual (). Given the length of the reads being analyzed, these methods are limited in the multiplicity and/or period size of TRs that can be resolved even when they take into account more complex mate-pairing information. More recently, methods have arisen to detect such repeats de novo using short read data (). Doi et al.'s study uses depth of coverage information on tagged TRs to estimate TR multiplicity in repeats longer than the size of a single short read. In the past few years, 'third-generation' sequencing technologies have arisen that offer substantially improved read lengths. Single-molecule real-time (SMRT) sequencing from Pacific Biosciences (PacBio) creates continuous sequence reads ranging from several kb to tens of kb in length. These reads have been shown to allow dramatic improvements in genome assembly (), haplotype phasing () and SV applications (). Although they are obvious candidates for broadening the scope of detectable TRs, the unique error profile (and higher raw error-rate) () necessitate new approaches for accurate resolution of TR multiplicities. Here, we present PACMONSTR, a tool for the detection and resolution of TRs specifically optimized for raw single-molecule sequencing data. PACMONSTR attempts to build on the ideas of previous reference-based approaches to best capture the idiosyncratic features of single-molecule sequencing data. The method provides the following:(1) Improved boundaries of spanning TRs by performing a more sensitive TR-specific dynamic programming alignment(2) Statistical estimates of TR multiplicity using a pair-hidden Markov models (pairHMM)(3) Predictions of heterozygosity and homozygosity with consensus sequences when multiple spanning reads exist(4) Predictions of boundaries for compound structural variants within or around a TR interval Using simulated and real sequencing data compared with the hg19 build of the human genome, we compare the performance of our methods and de novo approaches in terms of detecting TRs and estimating multiplicity. Clustering performance is assessed using known homozygous and synthetic heterozygous TR sequences. Lastly, we simulate the introduction of SV into TR intervals to show the ability of the tool to flag non-TR intervals, and apply the SV detection approach on real data.
DISCUSSIONWe have presented an approach for reference-based TR detection that is specifically adapted for long reads with high insertion/deletion error rates. The method substantially outperforms de novo approaches both in detection and resolution of events. Additionally, the probabilistic pairHMM not only provides an even tighter prediction of TR multiplicities on raw reads it can also be used to infer structural variants within, or immediately flanking, a TR region. Despite meeting these goals, PACMONSTR and the simulations used to evaluate it have a number of limitations and areas where further improvements can be made. Validation of clustering accuracy is an issue that may need to be addressed on a genome by genome (or repeat by repeat) level (). We attempted to model this by using real haploid genome sequences and creating synthetic heterozygous TRs from disparate genomic regions of the genome. In real diploid data, however, one does not know if a region is truly heterozygous. An alternative approach for evaluating calls is to identify SNVs, indels and SVs upstream and downstream of a called TR. Once TR multiplicities are predicted for each read, and clustering assignment has occurred, one can evaluate concordance of flanking variant alleles with the TR clustering assignment of raw reads to determine whether they form a consistent haplotype. The high-error profile of SMRT sequencing on a per-read basis could make accurate SNP assignment challenging. However, as the read lengths continue to expand, it has been shown that multiple SNPs and SVs captured within a single long read could create a stronger statistical signal to validate phasing (). Ideally, this haplotype information can be incorporated into the clustering process, in addition to the estimated TR multiplicity, to more robustly separate TR alleles with small periods or with small multiplicity differences. Given the quadratic runtime for the pairHMM, if read lengths continue to improve into the hundreds of thousands of base pairs, the runtime of the algorithm may become unwieldy in real-world scenarios. However, the pairHMM is not required to accurately resolve multiplicity for most TRs. For largeperiod TRs, the modified prefix-repeat-suffix dynamic program provides nearly identical results at substantially faster speeds. Although the DP runtime grows linearly as the period size increases (and may also become prohibitively large), faster banded heuristics become viable with large periods. Many small-period TRs can be resolved in the clustering phase without requiring the pairHMM. If two alleles are highly dissimilar, even if read-toread variation is high, it is likely that they still will form distinct clusters. Once clusters are identified and consensus sequences are generated, TRs can be identified directly from the consensus. Thus, the full pairHMM can be restricted for scenarios where accurate resolution is required on short period repeats for which clear clustering cannot be performed. The proposed and related approaches are reliant on predetermined locations of TRs in the reference as input. This limits the generalizability of the method, but can be alleviated by preprocessing the data with other de novo and structural variant tools.showed that TRF was often able to detect repeats from the raw reads. In practice, the algorithm can be run on all raw data to seed potential repetitive positions in the queries. These positions can be projected back onto the reference to identify candidate intervals for novel TR events. Reads spanning these positions of interest can then be interrogated by running the full pairHMM on the set of TRs predicted in the interval. As multiple consensus repeats will likely be identified, the one yielding highest probability can be selected for clustering analysis. Additionally, some SV tools, like Delly, allow for detection of novel TRs using reference coordinates that can similarly be passed into the method (). Just as we can inform de novo TR calling by integrating other tools, we can similarly use our approach to help inform compound structural events involving TRs. Inwe demonstrated the method's ability to reliably identify inserted sequence within a TR element. SV elements observed on chromosome 1 were often TR expansions (such as in); these sometimes existed at TR boundaries, suggesting potential refinements may be needed to the initial DP algorithm to better distinguish TR intervals from prefix and suffix sequences. Additionally, SVs may not always represent a distinct sequence block, the predicted consensus periods for a TR within an individual have been shown to diverge from the expected TR consensus, especially in the case of compound TRs where smaller repetitive units are grouped within a larger repeating unit (). Although these can be more easily seen once a consensus is generated, local fluctuations in pairHMM probabilities can inform when such slight deviations in TR consensus are occurring periodically across a TR interval. As alternative sequencing platforms become available, algorithms are needed that are able to harness the unique features of each technology. For any technology, even as the cost per base decreases, one must always make a choice between higher sequencing depth and larger numbers of samples. This decision is tied to the experimental goals of the project as well as the relative precision of a technology at different sequencing depths. In the context of TRs, our method provides informative guidelines for TR resolution given the type and size of the desired repeat. By allowing single read calls (and providing a probabilistic framework for evaluating these calls), the method is immediately applicable even at low depth, making it a useful option given the platform's comparatively higher cost, while also enabling potential applications in heterogeneous cell populations, as observed in cancer. Integrating raw read TR resolution with robust consensus calling, will continue to make the approach applicable for the type of high-depth studies that will soon be feasible as these technologies mature and become used by the broader research community.