Motivation: Recent technological advances in measuring molecular interactions have resulted in an increasing number of large-scale biological networks. Translation of these enormous network data into meaningful biological insights requires efficient computational techniques that can unearth the biological information that is encoded in the networks. One such example is network querying, which aims to identify similar subnetwork regions in a large target network that are similar to a given query network. Network querying tools can be used to identify novel biological pathways that are homologous to known pathways, thereby enabling knowledge transfer across different organisms. Results: In this article, we introduce an efficient algorithm for querying large-scale biological networks, called RESQUE. The proposed algorithm adopts a semi-Markov random walk (SMRW) model to probabilistically estimate the correspondence scores between nodes that belong to different networks. The target network is iteratively reduced based on the estimated correspondence scores, which are also iteratively re-estimated to improve accuracy until the best matching subnetwork emerges. We demonstrate that the proposed network querying scheme is computationally efficient, can handle any network query with an arbitrary topology and yields accurate querying results. Availability: The source code of RESQUE is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONBiological functions in cells are carried out through complicated interactions among various cellular constituents. For instance, proteinprotein interactions (PPI) lie at the core of various transcriptional, signaling and metabolic processes in cells (). Quantitative genome-scale description of such interactions by graphical representation of biological networks can facilitate the study of the cell as an integrated system () and help us better understand the structure and dynamics of diverse biological mechanisms. Recent technological advances have enabled high-throughput global measurement of proteinprotein interactions (; Uetz * To whom correspondence should be addressed), resulting in large-scale PPI networks. Furthermore, many text-mining tools have been developed to search the vast amount of biomedical research literature to collect known molecular interactions that have been reported before (). As a result, genome-scale biological networks are available for a number of model organisms, and biological network databases are still in rapid expansion. In order to translate these large-scale network data into meaningful biological insights, we need efficient computational techniques that can be used to unearth the important information that is buried in these networks. As comparative methods have played crucial roles in the analysis of biological sequences, comparative network analysis can also serve as an effective way of analyzing the available network data (). One such example is network querying. 'Network querying' aims to identify similar subnetwork regions in a large biological network (referred as the 'target network') that are similar to a given query network. This technique can be used to search for novel potential pathways in a given biological network that are similar to known biological pathways, thereby enabling 'knowledge transfer' across different organisms, from well-studied ones to others that have been studied less. To obtain biologically meaningful results, the network querying algorithm needs to incorporate the similarity between the individual nodes (i.e. biomolecules in the networks)in terms of their composition, structure or functionas well as the similarity between their interactions patterns (i.e. topological similarity). However, the optimal network querying problem has been shown to be NPcomplete by reduction to the graph isomorphism problem (), and until now, various approaches have been proposed to make this problem computationally feasible (). PathBLAST () is one of the pioneering network querying schemes that identify conserved linear pathways in a pair of networks using a greedy 'seed-and-extend'approach. Due to the high computational burden, this algorithm is restricted to relatively short pathways. To reduce computational complexity, QPath () and QNet () adopted a color-codingbased approach. QPath () is restricted to querying linear paths, while QNet () allows searching for trees and bounded tree-width graphs. Another recent algorithm, called PADA1 (), also used the color-coding scheme andproposed two algorithms called PathMatch, which searches for the longest weighted path, and GraphMatch, which enumerates all possible solutions to find the highest scoring subgraphs in a directed acyclic graph.proposed a hidden Markov model (HMM)-based scheme for querying linear paths. SIGMA () and RINQ () consider the problem of efficient querying in biological network databases using indexing schemes.proposed an asymmetric approach that uses a master-slave scheme to extract, via the Viterbi algorithm, matching subgraphs in the master network. Another recent algorithm, called Torque (), proposed a topology-free querying scheme that looks for a connected set of matching proteins in the target network that are sequence-similar to proteins in the query network, where the underlying motivation for taking a topology-free approach was the incompleteness of the currently available protein interaction data. Another algorithm called GraMoFoNe () also adopted this topology-free approach, based on a color-coded motif matching scheme. Currently, most network querying algorithms cannot handle queries with general network structures. Many algorithms either restrict the query to have a relatively simple structure (e.g. linear path or tree) () or simply view it as a collection of nodes by ignoring the underlying topology (). Furthermore, many algorithms strongly rely on sequence similarity to identify homologous node pairs, where candidate pairs are typically identified by thresholding the similarity scores (e.g. BLAST score) (). Besides, many network querying algorithms still suffer from high computational cost, which often increases exponentially with the query size, rendering them impractical for large queries (). In this article, we propose a novel network querying algorithm, called RESQUE (REduction-based scheme using Semi-Markov scores for network QUErying) that can effectively address the shortcomings of existing algorithms. For fast and accurate network querying, the proposed algorithm takes an efficient reduction-based approach, where the target network is iteratively reduced based on the so-called node correspondence scores that are computed using a semi-Markov random walk (SMRW) model. The node correspondence score provides a probabilistic similarity measure between nodes that belong to different networks (i.e. query and target networks), which can be efficiently computed using a closedform formula. At each iteration, the estimated scores are used to remove the nodes in the target network that have minimal correspondence to the nodes in the query network, thereby shrinking the search space. The node correspondence scores are then reestimated based on the reduced network and the aforementioned reduction process is repeated until the best matching subnetwork emerges. Based on real as well as synthetic examples, we demonstrate that RESQUE outperforms state-of-the-art network querying techniques, in terms of both computational efficiency and querying accuracy.
CONCLUSIONIn this article, we proposed RESQUE, a novel network querying algorithm that can efficiently query biological pathways and molecular complexes in large-scale biological networks. The algorithm uses a SMRW model to estimate probabilistic correspondence scores between nodes across different networks, which are used to identify the best match to the given query according to the maximum expected accuracy principle. RESQUE adopts an iterative network reduction and score re-estimation technique to improve the expected accuracy of the final querying result. As discussed in this article, RESQUE does not restrict the topology of the query network, and it can handle paths, trees and loopy graphs. The algorithm supports both connected and partially connected query networks. In the extreme case, RESQUE can also be used with a query pathway (or complex) with an unknown topology, in which case we can simply treat the query as a collection of isolated nodes. In this case, the steady-state distribution of the random walk on the query network,  Q , will be uniform over all the query nodes. Furthermore, RESQUE can effectively deal with node insertions and deletions at arbitrary locations. Despite its generality, RESQUE has very low computational complexity, which allows us to use the algorithm for querying large pathways/complexes in genome-scale networks. Experimental results based on real and synthetic examples