Motivation: The analysis of expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) data is a challenging scientific endeavor, involving the processing of very large, heterogeneous and complex data. Typical eQTL analyses involve three types of data: sequence-based data reflecting the genotypic variations, gene expression data and meta-data describing the phenotype. Based on these, certain genotypes can be connected with specific phenotypic outcomes to infer causal associations of genetic variation, expression and disease. To this end, statistical methods are used to find significant associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) or pairs of SNPs and gene expression. A major challenge lies in summarizing the large amount of data as well as statistical results and to generate informative, interactive visualizations. Results: We present REVEAL, our visual analytics approach to this challenge. We introduce a graph-based visualization of associations between SNPs and gene expression and a detailed genotype view relating summarized patient cohort genotypes with data from individual patients and statistical analyses. Availability: REVEAL is included in MAYDAY, our framework for visual exploration and analysis. It is available at http://it.inf.uni-tuebingen. de/software/reveal/.
INTRODUCTIONThe risk to come down with a complex disease such as cancer or diabetes can be influenced by genetic variations. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) help with the identification of such risk-increasing local DNA sequence variants. The ultimate goal is to generate a complete view of the variability of a genome of individuals. Modern microarray and sequencing technologies already allow for the compilation of hundreds of thousands of socalled single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). In typical GWAS studies, linkage analyses are performed, where each SNP is tested for association with a specific phenotype of a disease. Thus, one or more SNP genotypes are sought whose frequency can be correlated with a disease. However, for many thus identified SNPs, little is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying their phenotypic manifestation. Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) studies go one step further, involving three types of data: sequence-based data reflecting the genotypic variations, gene expression data and meta-data describing the phenotype, e.g. the severity of disease or speed of progression. This analysis is therefore highly challenging, since it involves the scalable processing of very large, heterogeneous and complex data. For example, the HapMap project () * To whom correspondence should be addressed. has generated genotype data for 3 million human SNPs. Such genotype data contain for each individual and each assessed SNP a pair of nucleotides, reflecting the two alleles (maternal and paternal) of the individual. Furthermore, the expression values of tens of thousands of genes from thousands of individuals are gathered. Statistical tests are used to compute for each pair of SNP and transcript whether a significant association exists between the presence of polymorphisms and a difference in gene expression. These statistical analyses often generate a large number of SNPs being either directly or indirectly associated with the expression of specific genes. The goal of eQTL data analysis is to generate a comprehensive picture that connects certain genotypes (individual genetic information) with specific phenotypic outcomes. Based on this aggregated view of the data, analysts (e.g. biologists and bioinformaticians) are enabled to infer causal associations of genetic variation, expression and disease, i.e. to identify the genetic basis for phenotypic variations. More generally, the ultimate goal is to find a network of interacting genes whose expression changes are correlated with genetic variation, allowing for a prognosis of disease based on observed patient phenotypes. A typical workflow for eQTL data analysis consists of applying either machine-learning methods or statistical tests to extract significant associations. The results, however, are often extremely difficult to interpret. Biologists or clinicians are mainly interested in the identification of correlated genes together with their associated SNPs, and the phenotype connection. Visualizations in this field are highly valuable and require views that can handle interaction, filtering and zooming with these complex data. The most important aspect of visual analytics in this context lies in data aggregation, filtering and the creation of meaningful summaries to allow researchers to extract the few important associations with clinical significance from the enormous amount of input data. Here, we present Reveal, a visual analytics approach to this challenge. A proof-of-concept implementation of Reveal was submitted to the BioVis 2011 Contest (part of the IEEE VisWeek 2011 BioVis symposium). Every year, this newly inaugurated contest focuses on a specific biological application domain and solicits submissions combining data analysis and visualization. Last year's domain was eQTL analysis and Reveal was chosen as the visualization experts' favorite solution. We have now significantly expanded our initial implementation. We included a new visualization to analyze distributions of genetic variations in more detail. Furthermore, we integrated Reveal into our visual analytics software Mayday (), allowing for combined and highly interactive analyses of genotypic and expression data as well as meta-data (e.g. disease phenotype). We apply Reveal to the
DISCUSSIONOur visual analytics approach Reveal introduces two different visualizations that allow biologists and bioinformaticians to visually analyze eQTL data. The association graph visualizes significant associations between pairs of SNPs and gene expression. Using the edge color to denote a SNP pair's target gene has the benefit of allowing us to visualize trans effects, i.e. SNPs associated with the expression of genes far away from their own genomic locations. At the same time, cis effects are also easily visible as edges which are painted in the same color as one of their respective end nodes. The example data we used here resulted in a relatively small association graph with 15 nodes and a few dozen edges. Larger datasets will result in larger graphs. Our implementation can easily display larger numbers of nodes as well as larger numbers of significant SNP pair associations. However, there is a limit to the complexity of a graph that can be meaningfully interpreted by a human user. Using the filtering based on edge weights, such overly complex graphs can be reduced to focus on the really important associations which are most promising as targets for further research. Although Reveal can handle hundreds or thousands of nodes, it becomes difficult to distinguish the different colors associated with each node, since only about 10 different colors are distinguishable when showing categorial data (). Furthermore, nodelink graphs quickly turn into 'hairballs' for large numbers of nodes. Therefore, we introduce interactive highlighting of nodes and edges with identical color in order to maintain usability for large graphs. In addition to the association network, we plan to add a matrixbased view, which does not suffer from the drawbacks of node-link visualizations. In this context, one can study for example the question, whether the gene whose expression is significantly changed by the respective SNP, is differentially expressed between the different phenotypes. To answer this question, the user can select the respective node within the graph, and a linked heatmap will show the expression of the gene. The complementary graph of the association network is a SNP graph where SNPs are represented by nodes and an edge is drawn between any two SNPs if they form a significant SNP pair. We plan to combine these two graphs such that for example the user can select edges in the association network and interactively construct a new complementary SNP graph. It would be interesting to study whether there are hubs or cliques in this complementary graph that could indicate whether a specific SNP or SNP pair is relevant for the phenotype. The connection of the association graph with the genotype view enhances the analytical process since interesting edges can be selected in the association graph and a new genotype view can be generated, visualizing the SNPs associated with these edges. While the information on the cohort genotype distribution is useful for very detailed analyses, our simplified cohort genotype summary view allows for a quick overview of a large number of SNPs.
CONCLUSIONWe present Reveal, an interactive visual tool for the analysis of eQTL data from GWASs. Reveal allows for an efficient analysis of disease-related polymorphisms through a series of different linked visualizations and enables one to study the influences of these polymorphisms on the genotypic as well as on the gene expression level. The two presented views build the basis of the analysis: the association graph summarizes the given PLINK data by generating a network of associations that can be filtered interactively to concentrate on the most important aspects. In the genotype view, SNPs of interest can be visualized in more detail, e.g. to evaluate data from a single patient in the context of the complete cohort of the samples. Being integrated into our visual analytics software Mayday, Reveal can be used for combined analyses of genotypic data, expression data and additional meta-data (e.g. disease phenotype). This makes it a powerful visual analytical tool that combines visualization and interpretation of genome-wide association data with gene expression analysis.