Motivation: Ribosome profiling provides genome-wide information about translational regulation. However, there is currently no standard tool for the qualitative analysis of Ribo-seq data. We present here RiboTools, a Galaxy toolbox for the analysis of ribosome profiling (Ribo-seq) data. It can be used to detect translational ambiguities, stop codon readthrough events and codon occupancy. It provides a large number of plots for the visualisation of these events.
IntroductionTranslation fidelity is essential for the correct decoding of genetic information. However, translation fidelity is not maximal, and several genes use alternative mechanisms to regulate their expression (). Such recoding events are difficult to identify by bioinformatics methods and their incorrect annotation in databases is still frequent. Genome-wide translational analyses, such as ribosome profiling, can identify many features affecting translational quality, such as ribosomal pauses, dual coding regions, translation start sites at AUG or non-AUG codons or unconventional translational decoding events, the translation of non-coding RNA and translational ambiguities (). Ribosome profiling has been widely adopted by the scientific community, because it has revolutionised the ways in which translation can be studied (). It can be used for both quantitative and qualitative analyses of translation. Quantitative analysis is carried out with standard RNA-seq scripts and is easy to implement (). An online genome browser is also available for the visualisation of many ribosome profiling data (). However, qualitative analysis is much more challenging, because there is no standard analysis technique available. Correct analysis requires the development of specific scripts, as most publications describe only briefly the way in which the data should be analysed. A better standardization of ribosome profiling approaches is urgently needed to limit misinterpretations (;). We describe here RiboTools, an efficient Galaxy package that can be used for primary analyses of Ribo-seq data, and to address common issues, such as the identification of translational ambiguities, or of stop codon readthrough events, and the codon occupancy of ribosomal A, P, and E-sites. RiboTools provides user-friendly publication-grade graphical results (html report). Scripts are available from the Galaxy bioinformatics platform () via ToolShed. RiboTools will be useful to the research community as it facilitates the complete qualitative analysis of ribosome profiling data.