With the increasing amount of newly discovered non-coding RNAs, the interactions between RNA molecules become an increasingly important aspect for characterizing their functionality. Many computational tools have been developed to predict the formation of duplexes between two RNAs, either based on single sequences or alignments of homologous sequences. Here, we present RILogo, a program to visualize inter-and intramolecular base pairing between two RNA molecules. The input for RILogo is a pair of structure-annotated sequences or alignments. In the latter case, RILogo displays the alignments in the form of sequence logos, including the mutual information of base paired columns. We also introduce two novel mutual information based measures that weigh the covariance information by the evolutionary distances of the aligned sequences. We show that the new measures have an increased accuracy compared with previous mutual information measures. Availability and implementation: RILogo is freely available as a stand-alone program and is accessible via a web server at http://rth .dk/resources/rilogo. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONAn increasing amount of functional non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) has been identified in recent years and computational predictions of possibly functional structured RNAs yield vast amounts of candidate RNA genes (). Typically, RNA molecules interact with proteins or with other RNA molecules (including messenger RNAs) by forming intermolecular duplexes. Computational predictions of RNARNA interactions usually follow the thermodynamic energy models for the secondary structure prediction of a single RNA sequence. Algorithms for the simultaneous prediction of intra-and intermolecular structure between two given sequences have a higher prediction accuracy, but also have a high time complexity (). Another class of algorithms only focuses on the prediction of intermolecular duplexes between two RNA sequences, while neglecting possible intramolecular base pairings, and achieves linear time complexity in the best case (). When several homologous sequences are available, consensus structure prediction methods can also be applied for predicting intermolecular base pairs. For example, PETcofold () first predicts intra-molecular pairing and afterwards intermolecular pairing in the previously unpaired regions. Another approach also based on multiple sequence alignments is ripalign (), which computes inter-and intramolecular base pairs simultaneously using a partition function algorithm. The sequence pattern of a given multiple DNA or protein alignment is easily visualized by sequence logos (). Each alignment column is represented by a stack of letters from the DNA/protein alphabets, where the overall height of the stack denotes the Shannon information content of that position and the size of a letter denotes its frequency in that column. The most frequent letter is placed on top of the stack. Several programs were developed to automatically create sequence logos from a given input alignment (). When studying RNA alignments, the secondary structure of the RNAs needs to be considered. Structure logos () include the annotation of base pairing and the mutual information (MI) of two paired alignment positions in the logo itself. Single or consensus RNA structures are usually plotted in a circular planar graph (), e.g. VARNA () or R2R (). RNALogo () combines a planar plot of the consensus secondary structure with stacks of letters for each base and displays the MI of base pairs. 3D logos are plotted by Correlogo (). However, these programs do not include RNARNA interactions. RNA structures and interactions can be visualized by arcs or lines connecting pairing bases in their primary sequences, e.g. in. Here, we introduce RILogo, which combines sequence logos with an arc representation of the secondary structure of both intra-and intermolecular base pairs of two interacting RNA genes. Additionally, the MI of base pairs is calculated and included in the logo by colouring the arcs or adding an 'M' character on top of the letter stacks, with a height corresponding to the MI. It has been suggested that measures including phylogenetic information are the most powerful (). However, the widely used measures ignore information from the phylogenetic relationships between the sequences (). Thus, we introduce two novel mutual information based measures, which use pairwise evolutionary distances between sequences in order to give different weights to the *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com. covariance information contained in individual sequences from the alignment. An early version of RILogo was previously used to display structure predictions in the PETcofold web server (). Here, we make the enhanced version of RILogo available both as a stand-alone program and via a web server. It now includes our new evolutionary mutual information measures, customization options and is freely available under the GNU LGPL.
CONCLUSIONRILogo visualizes two RNA sequence alignments by sequence logos, their intra-and intermolecular base pairing and the mutual information of base pairs. It also introduces two novel mutual information based measures: treeMI and treeMI W}P , that perform better than previous measures by including additional information from evolutionary distances. RILogo is accessible via a web server and its output can easily be customized. We publish the stand-alone version of RILogo under the GNU LGPL license, i.e. it is allowed to be explicitly integrated in other software/servers to display RNARNA interactions and sequence logos.. Intramolecular (arcs) and intermolecular (lines) base pairs are coloured by their mutual information using treeMI W}P in log-scale. The yaxes show the summed information content (in bits) of the conservation for each position (the relative entropy) and its contribution to the (approximate) mutual information