Multiparent crosses of recombinant inbred lines provide opportunity to map markers and quantitative trait loci (QTL) with much greater resolution than is possible in biparental crosses. Realizing the full potential of these crosses requires computational tools capable of handling the increased statistical complexity of the analyses. R/mpMap provides a flexible and extensible environment, which interfaces easily with other packages to satisfy this demand. Functions in the package encompass simulation, marker map construction, haplotype reconstruction and QTL mapping. We demonstrate the easy-to-use features of mpMap through a simulated data example.
INTRODUCTIONMultiparent recombinant inbred line (RIL) crosses are a new type of experimental design. Already, they are being implemented in mice (), Arabidopsis (), rice and wheat. Their growing popularity stems from their potential for increased mapping resolution and their ability to capture a wide range of genetic and phenotypic diversity from a breeding population. As yet, however, there are few computational tools for the analysis of these data. Existing analysis software for biparental crosses cannot be applied directly or extended easily to these new designs. Analysis software for biparental crosses relies on being able to unambiguously infer the parental origin of allelic information from the observed marker data. Since this does not hold for multiparent crosses, analysis software for multiparent crosses must contend with all patterns of allelic segregation, which are consistent with the observed marker data and their associated probabilities. Two software packages have been developed for the analysis of data from multiparent RIL crossesR/qtl () and R/happy (). Both packages focus primarily on quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping. In contrast, we have developed mpMap as a comprehensive suite of functions for multiparent designs in close consultation with plant breeders and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. geneticists. In addition to native functions, mpMap interfaces with both R/qtl and R/happy and is easily extensible. This versatile software helps meet the urgent need for analysis tools capable of handling the complexities associated with multiparent inbred line crosses.
DISCUSSIONIn this article, we have described an exciting new computer package for the analysis of marker and trait data from complex multiparent RIL crosses. With mpMap, users are now in a position to simulate data, construct marker maps, examine the genomic structure of individuals and perform QTL mapping on these cutting-edge experimental designs. Our package differs from existing R packages mainly in the extensive facility for map construction. In addition, mpMap unifies some of the functionality currently available in other packages and adds new approaches and visualization functions. It thus equips breeders and geneticists with a wide variety of practical tools to dissect the genetics of complex traits. We do recognize that for large 2 n-crosses, computation will be demanding. Estimating recombination fractions scales linearly with lines and founders, but quadratically with markers. We are currently working to parallelize the analysis process through the use of machines with Graphics Processing Units. Preliminary results indicate that we can reduce computation time by two orders of magnitude.