Ability to generate large RNA-Seq datasets created a demand for both de novo and reference based transcriptome assemblers. However, while many transcriptome assemblers are now available, there is still no unified quality assessment tool for RNA-Seq assemblies. We present rnaQUAST—a tool for evaluating RNA-Seq assembly quality and benchmarking transcriptome as-semblers using reference genome and gene database. rnaQUAST calculates various metrics that demonstrate completeness and correctness levels of the assembled transcripts, and outputs them in a user-friendly report. Availability and Implementation: rnaQUAST is implemented in Python and is freely available at http://evpedia.info.
IntroductionNext-generation sequencing technologies have raised a challenging problems of de novo genome and transcriptome assembly from short reads. As a result, multiple assembly tools were developed in the last decade. Even though most papers describing novel assembly approaches provide benchmarking of various tools, no unified methods for assessing assembly quality were developed until recently. While multiple tools for both reference-based and reference-free genome assembly evaluation were developed () and later used in various genomic studies (), no tool have set a standard for assessing quality of transcriptome assemblies. Although several studies provided evaluation methods () or performed independent benchmarks of RNA-Seq assemblers (), in papers describing novel transcriptome assembly software the resulting transcripts were evaluated using different in-house methods (), therefore making it difficult to compare the results across various publications. We present rnaQUASTa quality assessment tool for transcriptome assemblies, which utilizes reference genome and gene database. rnaQUAST takes assembled transcripts as an input and maps them to the reference genome using either BLAT () or GMAP (). By comparing the resulting alignments with the gene database, rnaQUAST calculates various statistics and generates a summary report. Below we describe methods implemented in rnaQUAST, present an example of summary report and compare rnaQUAST with DETONATE software ().