Motivation: Many computerized methods for RNA–RNA interaction structure prediction have been developed. Recently, O(N 6) time and O(N 4) space dynamic programming algorithms have become available that compute the partition function of RNA–RNA interaction complexes. However, few of these methods incorporate the knowledge concerning related sequences, thus relevant evolutionary information is often neglected from the structure determination. Therefore, it is of considerable practical interest to introduce a method taking into consideration both: thermodynamic stability as well as sequence/structure covariation. Results: We present the a priori folding algorithm ripalign, whose input consists of two (given) multiple sequence alignments (MSA). ripalign outputs (i) the partition function, (ii) base pairing probabilities, (iii) hybrid probabilities and (iv) a set of Boltzmann-sampled suboptimal structures consisting of canonical joint structures that are compatible to the alignments. Compared to the single sequence-pair folding algorithm rip, ripalign requires negligible additional memory resource but offers much better sensitivity and specificity, once alignments of suitable quality are given. ripalign additionally allows to incorporate structure constraints as input parameters. Availability: The algorithm described here is implemented in C as part of the rip package. The supplemental material, source code and input/output files can freely be downloaded from
INTRODUCTIONRNARNA interactions play a major role at many different levels of the cellular metabolism such as plasmid replication control, viral encapsidation, or transcriptional and translational regulation. With the discovery that a large number of transcripts in higher * To whom correspondence should be addressed. eukaryotes are non-coding RNAs, RNARNA interactions in cellular metabolism are gaining in prominence. Typical examples of interactions involving two RNA molecules are snRNAs (); snoRNAs with their targets (); microRNAs from the RNAi pathway with their mRNA target (); sRNAs from Escherichia coli (); and sRNA looploop interactions (). The common feature in many ncRNA classes, especially prokaryotic small RNAs, is the formation of RNARNA interaction structures that are much more complex than the simple senseantisense interactions. As it is the case for the general RNA folding problem with unrestricted pseudoknots (), the RNARNA interaction problem (RIP) is NP-complete in its most general form (). However, polynomial-time algorithms can be derived by restricting the space of allowed configurations in ways that are similar to pseudoknot folding algorithms (). The simplest approach concatenates the two interacting sequences and subsequently employs a slightly modified standard secondary structure folding algorithm. The algorithms RNAcofold (), pairfold () and NUPACK () subscribe to this strategy. A major shortcoming of this approach is that it cannot predict important motifs such as kissing-hairpin loops. The paradigm of concatenation has also been generalized to the pseudoknot folding algorithm of Rivas and Eddy (1999). The resulting model, however, still does not generate all relevant interaction structures (). An alternative line of thought is to neglect all internal base pairings in either strand and to compute the minimum free energy (MFE) secondary structure for their hybridization under this constraint. For instance, RNAduplex and RNAhybrid () follows this line of thought. RNAup () and intaRNA () restrict interactions to a single interval that remains unpaired in the secondary structure for each partner. These models have proved particularly useful for bacterial sRNA/mRNA interactions (). Pervouchine (2004) andindependently proposed MFE folding algorithms for predicting the joint structure of two interacting RNA molecules with polynomial time complexity. In their model, a 'joint structure' means that the intramolecular