RNA-Seq is an exciting methodology that leverages the power of high-throughput sequencing to measure RNA transcript counts at an unprecedented accuracy. However, the data generated from this process are extremely large and biologist-friendly tools with which to analyze it are sorely lacking. MultiExperiment Viewer (MeV) is a Java-based desktop application that allows advanced analysis of gene expression data through an intuitive graphical user interface. Here, we report a significant enhancement to MeV that allows analysis of RNA-Seq data with these familiar, powerful tools. We also report the addition to MeV of several RNA-Seq-specific functions, addressing the differences in analysis requirements between this data type and traditional gene expression data. These tools include automatic conversion functions from raw count data to processed RPKM or FPKM values and differential expression detection and functional annotation enrichment detection based on published methods. Availability: MeV version 4.7 is written in Java and is freely available for download under the terms of the open-source Artistic License version 2.0. The website (http://mev.tm4.org/) hosts a full user manual as well as a short quick-start guide suitable for new users.
INTRODUCTIONRNA-Seq profiles the transcriptome (the complete set of transcripts in a cell) using high-throughput deep sequencing. This technique compares favorably to previously used methods for gene expression measurement, such as DNA microarrays, because of its higher sensitivity, lower background and ability to detect previously unknown transcripts. However, the base pair level resolution of this sequencing-based method generates volumes of data that are difficult to process and analyze on desktop computers. This massive scale of data output presents a problem for biologists with little access to 'big iron' computer resources and the programming skills required to use them. The first part of this problem, already in large part addressed by the bioinformatics community, is that of processing, storing and retrieving vast amounts of raw sequencing data, quantifying it and mapping it to the genome. Applications such as Bowtiecounts per transcript are converted to RPKM values automatically and vice versa, using the RPKM method described in. The application framework makes it easy to add other data formats as the community develops new standards for RNA-Seq. Once the data have been loaded and annotated, it can be analyzed using both existing tools and new modules that address RNA-Seqspecific issues, such as transcript length and abundance biases. There are three differential expression analysis methods based on the Bioconductor packages DESeq (), DGESeq () and EdgeR () that analyze differential expression using RNA-Seq-specific statistics. For the user, the transition from array to sequence data analysis is seamless as these modules are built on the same user interface that has made MeV's methods widely accessible. Since most scientists are interested in understanding the functional differences in gene expression between experimental groups, we also created a module based on GOSeq, a Bioconductor package that tests for enrichment of gene lists (). These algorithms allow MeV to account for RNA-Seq-specific data biases, such as transcript length bias in which more reads are mapped to longer transcripts, and selection bias, the overdetection of highly expressed transcripts (). In addition, users can apply the now standard analysis functions in expression analysis, such as hierarchical clustering, k-means clustering, t-tests, analysis of variance (ANOVA), EASE (the DAVID algorithm,) and many others. Heatmap displays, gene expression graphs and tabular listings are all included in the standard MeV data displays. Gene-level annotation is linked to appropriate online databases, such as Entrez and Gene Ontology, and can be accessed with simple hyperlinks. Genes of interest can be labeled and compared with one another, and stored as basic gene identifier lists or as tab-delimited files containing expression data for analysis in other applications.