Motivation: Tumorigenesis is an evolutionary process by which tumor cells acquire sequences of mutations leading to increased growth, invasiveness and eventually metastasis. It is hoped that by identifying the common patterns of mutations underlying major cancer sub-types, we can better understand the molecular basis of tumor development and identify new diagnostics and therapeutic targets. This goal has motivated several attempts to apply evolutionary tree reconstruction methods to assays of tumor state. Inference of tumor evolution is in principle aided by the fact that tumors are heterogeneous, retaining remnant populations of different stages along their development along with contaminating healthy cell populations. In practice, though, this heterogeneity complicates interpretation of tumor data because distinct cell types are conflated by common methods for assaying the tumor state. We previously proposed a method to computationally infer cell populations from measures of tumor-wide gene expression through a geometric interpretation of mixture type separation, but this approach deals poorly with noisy and outlier data. Results: In the present work, we propose a new method to perform tumor mixture separation efficiently and robustly to an experimental error. The method builds on the prior geometric approach but uses a novel objective function allowing for robust fits that greatly reduces the sensitivity to noise and outliers. We further develop an efficient gradient optimization method to optimize this soft geometric unmixing objective for measurements of tumor DNA copy numbers assessed by array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) data. We show, on a combination of semi-synthetic and real data, that the method yields fast and accurate separation of tumor states. Conclusions: We have shown a novel objective function and optimization method for the robust separation of tumor sub-types from aCGH data and have shown that the method provides fast, accurate reconstruction of tumor states from mixed samples. Better solutions to this problem can be expected to improve our ability to accurately identify genetic abnormalities in primary tumor samples and to infer patterns of tumor evolution. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONGenomic studies have dramatically improved our understanding of the biology of tumor formation and treatment. In part, this has been accomplished by harnessing tools that profile the genes and proteins in tumor cells, revealing previously indistinguishable tumor subtypes that are likely to exhibit distinct sensitivities to treatment methods (). As these tumor sub-types are uncovered, it becomes possible to develop novel therapeutics more specifically targeted to the particular genetic defects that cause each cancer (). While recent advances have had a profound impact on our understanding of the tumor biology, the limits of our understanding of the molecular nature of cancer obstruct the burgeoning efforts in 'targeted therapeutics' development. These limitations are apparent in the high failure rate of the discovery pipeline for novel cancer therapeutics () as well as in the continuing difficulty of predicting which patients will respond to a given therapeutic. A striking example is the fact that traztuzumab, the targeted therapeutic developed to treat HER2-amplified breast cancers, is ineffective in many patients who have HER2-overexpressing tumors and yet effective in some who do not (). Furthermore, sub-types typically remain poorly definede.g. the 'basal-like' breast cancer sub-type, for which different studies have inferred very distinct genetic signatures ()and yet many patients do not fall into any known sub-type. Our belief, then, is that clinical treatment of cancer will reap considerable benefit from the identification of new cancer sub-types and genetic signatures. One promising approach for better elucidating the common mutational patterns by which tumors develop is to recognize that tumor development is an evolutionary process and apply phylogenetic methods to tumor data to reveal these evolutionary relationships. Much of the work on tumor evolution models flows from the seminal efforts ofon inferring oncogenetic trees from array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) profiles of tumor cells. The strength of this model stems from the extraction of ancestral structure from many probe sites per tumor, potentially utilizing measurements of the expression or copy number changes across the entire genome. However, this comes at the cost of overlooking the diversity of cell populations within tumors, which can provide important clues to tumor progression but are conflated with one another in tissue-wide assays such as aCGH.Page: i107 i106i114
CONCLUSIONWe have developed a novel method for unmixing aCGH data to infer copy number profiles of distinct cell states from tumor samples. The method uses 'soft geometric unmixing' to provide superior tolerance to experimental noise and outliers compared to the prior work. We have further developed an efficient gradient-based optimization algorithm for this objective function. We have shown through tests on simulated data that the soft unmixing approach dramatically i113