High-throughput sequencing of transcriptomes (RNA-Seq) has become a powerful tool to study gene expression. Here we present an R package, rSeqNP, which implements a non-parametric approach to test for differential expression and splicing from RNA-Seq data. rSeqNP uses permutation tests to access statistical significance and can be applied to a variety of experimental designs. By combining information across isoforms, rSeqNP is able to detect more differentially expressed or spliced genes from RNA-Seq data. Availability and implementation: The R package with its source code and documentation are freely available at http://www.cs.tau.ac.il/
IntroductionHigh-throughput sequencing of transcriptomes (RNA-Seq) is a widely used approach to study gene expression (). Many statistical approaches have been developed to characterize gene expression variation across RNA-Seq experiments, and many of them are designed for testing differential expression (DE) of genes without considering their alternative spliced isoforms. For a comprehensive review, see. Several recent studies have shown that directly applying the DE approach for detecting differential splicing (DS) may lead to erroneous results, because those approaches do not incorporate the complexity induced by isoform expression estimation for genes with multiple isoforms (). To this end, several approaches were recently developed to detect DE at isoform level (). However, there are two remaining issues: (i) many existing approaches only compare between two biological conditions (such as normal versus diseased) and their usages for complex experimental designs are thus limited, and (ii) most existing approaches assume parametric distributions (Poisson or negative binomial) for observed read counts which, although can achieve good performance when the distributional assumptions hold, may have severely deteriorated performance should the distributional assumptions be violated, and that is often the case especially for large sample size RNA-Seq data where outliers usually exist (). Here we present rSeqNP, a non-parametric approach for testing DE and DS from RNA-Seq data. rSeqNP extends a non-parametric approach for detecting DE () and aims at detecting both DE and DS. rSeqNP can be used with a variety of RNA-Seq experimental designs, including those with two (unpaired or paired) or multiple biological conditions, and those with quantitative or survival outcomes.