Family-based designs offer unique advantage for identifying rare risk variants in genetic association studies. There are existing tools for analyzing rare variants in families but lacking components to handle binary traits properly and survival traits. In this report, we introduce an R software package RVFam (Rare Variant association analysis with Family data) designed to analyze continuous, binary and survival traits against rare and common sequencing variants in genome-wide association studies (GWAS) involving family data. Single and multiple variant association tests were implemented while accounting for arbitrary family structures. Extensive simulation studies were performed to evaluate all the approaches implemented in RVFam. Availability and Implementation: http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/RVFam/
IntroductionIt was hypothesized that rare variants poorly represented in existing GWAS may underlie the unexplained heritability by common variants identified to date. Emerging exome sequencing and whole genome-sequencing studies are designed to capture rare variants in human genomes. The regularity condition assumed in many existing GWAS tools for common variants may become invalid when applied to rare variants (). Family-based designs are advantageous for identifying rare risk variants such as private or pedigree specific mutations that may only be enriched with family samples. Ignoring family structure could introduce bias in the results and selecting unrelated sample from family data reduces power. There are existing tools that can handle rare variant analysis with family samples, such as rareMetalWorker (http://genome.sph.umich.edu/wiki/RAREMETALWORKER), seqMeta (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/seqMeta), and EPACTS (http://genome.sph.umich.edu/wiki/EPACTS). The three packages report test based on score statistic from linear mixed effects model (LME) for continuous traits measured on family samples. For binary traits, seqMeta can only analyze unrelated sample, and RareMetalWorker and EPACTS use LME and treat binary traits as continuous, so the effect estimate is not interpretable. None of the package can handle survival traits. In this report, we introduce RVFam that is designed to provide tools for family samples for all three types of traits: continuous, binary and survival. RVFam can perform single variant and multiple variant pooled analysis for a single cohort as well as producing score statistics formatted for metaanalysis in seqMeta. We performed extensive simulation studies to assess the approaches implemented in RVFam.