Motivation: Next-generation sequencing technologies have enabled the large-scale assessment of the impact of rare and low-frequency genetic variants for complex human diseases. Gene-level association tests are often performed to analyze rare variants, where multiple rare variants in a gene region are analyzed jointly. Applying gene-level association tests to analyze sequence data often requires integrating multiple heterogeneous sources of information (e.g. annotations, functional prediction scores, allele frequencies, genotypes and phenotypes) to determine the optimal analysis unit and prioritize causal variants. Given the complexity and scale of current sequence datasets and bioinformatics databases, there is a compelling need for more efficient software tools to facilitate these analyses. To answer this challenge, we developed RVTESTS, which implements a broad set of rare variant association statistics and supports the analysis of autosomal and X-linked variants for both unrelated and related individuals. RVTESTS also provides useful companion features for annotating sequence variants, integrating bioinformatics databases, performing data quality control and sample selection. We illustrate the advantages of RVTESTS in functionality and efficiency using the 1000 Genomes Project data. Availability and implementation: RVTESTS is available on Linux, MacOS and Windows. Source code and executable files can be obtained at https://github.com/zhanxw/rvtests Contact:
IntroductionNext-generation sequencing and microarray genotyping have enabled the cost-effective interrogation of a full spectrum of sequence variants. There is considerable interest in understanding the functional role of rare and low-frequency variants in the etiology of complex diseases. Efficient software programs for sequence-based association analysis are in great demand. However, several computational challenges must first be addressed: first, to determine the optimal analysis units and prioritize causal variants in sequence
ConclusionIn summary, RVTESTS is an efficient and comprehensive tool for sequence-based association analyses. As the cost of sequencing continues to decrease (e.g. a milestone of whole-genome sequencing for $1000 has been recently attained), population-based genetic studies will soon reach another scale. The speed and scalability advantage of RVTESTS will be even more critical when applied to these ultralarge scale datasets. We envision that our program will continue to make valuable contributions to the study of rare genetic variants in complex human diseases.