The Sample avAILability system—SAIL—is a web based application for searching, browsing and annotating biological sample collections or biobank entries. By providing individual-level information on the availability of specific data types (phenotypes, genetic or genomic data) and samples within a collection, rather than the actual measurement data, resource integration can be facilitated. A flexible data structure enables the collection owners to provide descriptive information on their samples using existing or custom vocabularies. Users can query for the available samples by various parameters combining them via logical expressions. The system can be scaled to hold data from millions of samples with thousands of variables. Availability: SAIL is available under Aferro-GPL open source license: https://github.com/
INTRODUCTIONFor many years biobanks have been collecting biological samples enriching them with annotations of phenotype, familial and environmental data stored in diverse computational systems. With some notable exceptions, such as the UK DNA Banking Network (), biobank data are usually restricted to in-house use (). With an increasing need for improved statistical power in genome-wide epidemiological studies, accessibility to samples and their annotation from many collections is essential (). However, with considerable differences in how sample collections describe their content, and access to individual data restricted by ethical and legal regulations this may be a daunting task. Even when access to summary data for individual phenotypes is available, it is difficult to estimate how many samples * To whom correspondence should be addressed. have measurements for a combination of phenotypes. For instance, how many samples in a given cohort have the combination of genome-wide association results, metabolomic data and information on a given clinical phenotype? There is a need for an efficient means of finding which biobanks contain samples relevant to a particular study annotated with the necessary metadata (). By sample availability data we understand the information describing which meta-data and measurements exist for each sample in a collection without necessarily revealing the actual content. The Sample avAILability system (SAIL) is a platform that uses this paradigm to help researchers to integrate their resources and search sample availability across any number of sources. The system can either be used by individual biobanks or by consortia of sample collections to facilitate their research.
DISCUSSIONSAIL has been developed as a tool that can be installed and used independently by any biobank or research group in need for a system Page: 591 589591