Simple Sequence Repeats (SSRs) are used to address a variety of research questions in a variety of fields (e.g. population genetics, phylogenetics, forensics, etc.), due to their high mut-ability within and between species. Here, we present an innovative algorithm, SA-SSR, based on suffix and longest common prefix arrays for efficiently detecting SSRs in large sets of sequences. Existing SSR detection applications are hampered by one or more limitations (i.e. speed, accuracy, ease-of-use, etc.). Our algorithm addresses these challenges while being the most comprehensive and correct SSR detection software available. SA-SSR is 100% accurate and detected 1000 more SSRs than the second best algorithm, while offering greater control to the user than any existing software. Availability and implementation: SA-SSR is freely available at http://github.com/ridgelab/SA-SSR
IntroductionSimple Sequence Repeats (SSRs), microsatellites, or short tandem repeats (STRs), are tandem repeats of short (often 25 bp) nucleotide strings (). There are generally 10100 such repeats at each SSR locus resulting in a DNA segment that is amenable to rapid molecular characterization. Given their repetitive nature, the lengths of SSR loci tend to increase or decrease due to polymerase slippage during DNA replication (). As a consequence, SSR loci have high mutation rates and frequently generate multiple polymorphic alleles. SSR loci are common in both nuclear and organellar genomes, and when flanked by unique sequence, PCR primers can be readily designed to amplify simple sequence length polymorphisms. SSRs have proven highly useful for a variety of molecular genetic, population genetic and phylogenetic applications because it is simple to genotype them using PCR, and because they are highly polymorphic.While SSRs have been extensively characterized in many model species, the expense and effort traditionally required to develop SSRs has limited their use in non-model species. Fortunately, nextgeneration sequencing has enabled researchers to quickly produce large quantities of genomic and/or transcriptomic data for nearly any species. While a high quality genome is still difficult to assemble, there is usually adequate sequence information to identify thousands of unique SSR loci with minimal sequencing. Thus, researchers working in non-model systems need user friendly and customizable bioinformatics algorithms to identify SSR loci. A complete, accurate, characterization of SSRs in non-model systems increases the likelihood researchers are able to identify SSRs where flanking genotyping primers can be designed. SSR differences can be used to differentiate between related species or provide insights into specific phenotypes/adaptations. Finally, since the majority of researchers do not have formal computational training, a V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.