SeDuS is the first flexible and user-friendly forward-in-time simulator of patterns of molecular evolution within segmental duplications undergoing interlocus gene conversion and crossover. SeDuS introduces known features of interlocus gene conversion such as biased directionality and dependence on local sequence identity. Additionally, it includes aspects such as different selective pressures acting upon copy number and flexible crossover distributions. A graphical user interface allows fast fine-tuning of relevant parameters and straightforward real-time analysis of the evolution of duplicates. Availability and implementation: SeDuS is implemented in Cþþ and can be run via command line or through a graphical user interface developed using Qt Cþþ. Source code and binary executables for Linux, OS X and Windows are freely available at www.biologiaevolutiva.org/sedus/. A tutorial with a detailed description of implementation, parameters and output files is available online.
IntroductionThe evolution of duplicated regions of the genome has attracted the attention of evolutionary biologists since Susumuproposed that they are a fundamental source of novel genes and functions. Duplicated regions are a pervasive characteristic of eukaryotic genomes and can span up to hundreds of kilobases encompassing several genes. Such is the case of segmental duplications (1 kb, 90% similarity), which are known to originate copy number variation and chromosomal rearrangements and to underlie the susceptibility to many diseases (). Duplicated regions have a distinctive feature that crucially affects their evolution: they exchange genetic information through a type of gene conversion referred to as ectopic, non-allelic or interlocus gene conversion (IGC) (), which differs from usual allelic gene conversion in that it happens between paralog genomic regions. IGC is a major driver of the concerted evolution of duplicates, which complicates the application of conventional population-genetic interpretations, such as the molecular clock, to these regions (). Simulating duplicated sequences under the coalescent has provided important insights into their neutral molecular evolution (). However, because of computing-time limitations (), coalescent simulators can only explore a restricted range of parameters, particularly regarding recombination. Moreover, they preclude simulating IGC rate dependence on sequence similarity. Here, we present a forward-in-time simulator of the molecular evolution of segmental duplications designed to explore their patterns of concerted evolution under a wide range of parameters. We have named this software SeDuS (segmental duplication simulator). SeDuS is an improved and extended version of the in-house scripts used in previous work from our group (). On top of command-line execution, SeDuS comes with an independent, user-friendly graphical user interface (GUI) allowing control over the most important parameters and direct visualization of simulation results. Thus, SeDuS has not only research applicability but can also be a great tool for educators.To our knowledge, SeDuS is the first user-friendly, forwardin-time population genetics simulator specifically aimed at addressing the evolution of segmental duplications while giving full consideration to IGC. Our algorithm has a modular architecture allowing the user to easily modify specific functions or to incorporate new features. SeDuS is under constant development and updates will be presented accordingly.