Motivation: As the mean age of parenthood grows, the effect of parental age on genetic disease and child health becomes ever more important. A number of autosomal dominant disorders show a dramatic paternal age effect due to selfish mutations: substitutions that grant spermatogonial stem cells a selective advantage in the testes of the father, but have a deleterious effect in offspring. In this paper we present a computational technique to model the spermatogonial stem cell niche in order to examine the phenomenon and draw conclusions across different genes and disorders. Results: We used a Markov chain to model the probabilities of mutation and positive selection with cell divisions. The model was fitted to available data on disease incidence and also mutation assays of sperm donors. Strength of selective advantage is presented for a range of disorders including Aperts syndrome and achondroplasia. Incidence of the diseases was predicted closely for most disorders and was heavily influenced by the site-specific mutation rate and the number of mutable al-leles. The model also successfully predicted a stronger selective advantage for more strongly activating gain-of-function mutations within the same gene. Both positive selection and the rate of copy-error mutations are important in adequately explaining the paternal age effect.
IntroductionAs the average age of parenthood becomes more delayed, understanding the effect of parental age on child health becomes more important. (). The effect of maternal age has long been acknowledged (), but in recent years the effect of paternal age has been the subject of a great deal of study. Paternal age has been linked to a wide range of traits and diseases, such as spontaneous occurrences of mutations that cause dominant disorders and X-linked diseases (). Congenital defects, cancer predisposition disorders, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, autism and Alzheimer's disease have also been linked to father's age (reviewed in Paul and Robaire 2013). Due to the larger number of male germline cell divisions compared with the female germline, males produce 3-6 times as many mutations than females throughout evolution (). Sperm are produced by a continually-dividing population of stem cells and each division represents a chance for replication errors to happen. Penrose (1955) first proposed that replication errors provided an explanation for the observed incidence of genetic diseases with paternal age. In many cases the influence of paternal age is relatively subtle compared with the large scale chromosomal abnormalities characteristic of maternal age effect because point mutations typically have small or no effect on phenotype. However certain substitutions can have devastating effect on those who carry the allele. Diseases that show a strong paternal age effect, however, are not explained purely by Penrose's copy-error hypothesis and show an exponential increase in incidence with father's age. The mutations responsible Associate Editor: Prof. Alfonso Valencia typically display a very specific spectrum of missense substitutions, accumulating faster than the raw mutation rate can account for. Substitutions associated with these disorders present in clumps, indicating a positive selective mechanism of mutation accumulation, as opposed to a high mutation rate or " hot spot " model. Such evidence has so far presented for achondroplasia (), Apert's syndrome (), Costello syndrome () and Noonan Syndrome (). There is a parallel with the intestinal crypt where mutant cells colonize their niche through selective advantage conferred by their new phenotype (). It is also relevant to cancer etiology as paternal age effect mutations are typically found in tumors ().
DiscussionWe hypothesized that one of the two Apert's syndrome-causing mutations (C755G) has a higher incidence than the other (C758G) because the former occurs at a CpG dinucleotide, which has a higher mutability due to spontaneous deamination. Our results support this hypothesis as both of the Apert mutations have a very similar r value with 0.0124 for C755G compared with 0.0126 for C758G. These two distinct amino-acid substitutions (S252W and P253R) appear therefore to have the same selective effect on the cell and the increased incidence of S252W is purely because of increased mutability at this site. The projected incidence rate is very sensitive to the model parameters and particularly the mutation rate. For example, achondroplasia has a high incidence rate relative to the other diseases (1 in 27,000, see). The computed r value on the other hand was middle of the range, which failed to account for the high incidence rate when the baseline value for p was used. Once the value of p was increased to the level of a CT transition, the predicted incidence agreed well. So the site-specific mutation rate accounted for the relatively high incidence rate of this disease.), Costello syndrome (), Thanatophoric dysplasia (TD) adapted fromThe predicted incidence rates, after accounting for the number of alleles and the mutation rate, present close to the actual values, with the exception of fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva. This disease is anomalous as it is a very rare disease (one in 2 million births) but it is predicted to have a high incidence rate as it is caused by a transition at a single CpG site (). While the rates of substitution vary by location in the genome, including the rates at CpG sites (), it is unlikely the substitution rate could be low enough at this point, even if unmethylated. It might be explained by a very low selective advantage but the projected r value is high (0.0135), producing an O/E curve similar to achondroplasia. The low birth prevalence is also not explained by low survival to term of affected offspring as FOP does not show severe symptoms until later in life or by any variation of expression of the mutant allele as it shows complete penetrance () so the low incidence rate remains unexplained.