Motivation: Most integral membrane proteins form dimeric or oligo-meric complexes. Oligomerization is frequently supported by the non-covalent interaction of transmembrane helices. It is currently not clear how many high-affinity transmembrane domains (TMD) exist in a proteome and how specific their interactions are with respect to preferred contacting faces and their underlying residue motifs. Results: We first identify a threshold of 55% sequence similarity, which demarcates the border between meaningful alignments of TMDs and chance alignments. Clustering the human single-span membrane proteome using this threshold groups $40% of the TMDs. The homotypic interaction of the TMDs representing the 33 largest clusters was systematically investigated under standardized conditions. The results reveal a broad distribution of relative affinities. High relative affinity frequently coincides with (i) the existence of a preferred helix–helix interface and (ii) sequence specificity as indicated by reduced affinity after mutating conserved residues.
INTRODUCTIONMost integral membrane proteins assemble to non-covalent functional oligomers. This oligomerization is frequently supported by interactions of their helical transmembrane domains (TMDs) (). On the one hand, their association is favored by the constraints of the lipid bilayer, which concentrates and pre-orients the proteins (). On the other hand, TMDTMD interactions frequently depend on recurrent interfacial amino acid motifs. For example, the TMD helixhelix interface of Glycophorin A (GpA) contains a critical GxxxG motif, which also promotes close association of many other helices (). In some cases, variations of GxxxG, the G/A/SxxxG/A/S motifs (), are crucial, as in ErbB receptors () and integrins (;). These motifs can cooperate with polar or aromatic amino acids within the same TMD (), which makes them dependent on sequence context. Self-interaction of other TMDs is driven by S/T (), QxxW motifs (), aromatic residues () or by residues with carboxamide side chains (). TMDTMD interactions have been studied most intensely with single-span membrane proteins that account for a substantial fraction of membrane proteins that increases from $15% in bacteria to 440% in humans (). To date, dozens of single-span proteins are known to interact via their TMDs, and about one dozen of high-resolution structures have been published that reveal distinct helixhelix interfaces in structural detail reviewed in (). It is currently unclear which fraction of the 43000 predicted single-span membrane proteins self-assemble via TMDTMD interactions. Further, it is not known whether strongly interacting TMDs generally exhibit distinct interfaces. It is likely that some interacting helices exhibit multiple interfaces depending on the functional state of the protein. Alternative interfaces may interchange by rotation () or by interaction of N-terminal versus C-terminal parts (). In addition, many TM helices exhibit unilateral residue conservation (). To which extent these interactions are based on conserved amino acid motifs, such as G/A/SxxxG/A/S, has also been debated (). Here, we approached these issues in a systematic way by identifying TMDs that represent clusters of homologous sequences and by experimentally characterizing their self-interaction. To this end, we clustered the human single-span membrane proteome based on pairwise alignments of TMDs, using a meaningful sequence similarity threshold derived in this study. Analyzing the self-interaction of the TMDs representing each major cluster revealed a broad distribution of relative affinities. In a number of high-affinity TMDs, mutational analyses confirmed the sequence specificity of the self-interaction. Although the majority of *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
DISCUSSIONThe objective of this study was to identify TMDs representing a significant fraction of the human single-span membrane proteome and to systematically characterize their homotypic interactions. Our results have several implications. First, our comparative analysis of homotypic affinity, which was done at the same lipid composition and protein density of the host membrane, shows that the representative TMDs of top clusters exhibit a broad range of relative affinities. The interaction of most high-affinity TMDs depends on preferential helixhelix interfaces and on conserved residues. In general, therefore, high relative affinity, existence of a preferred interface and mutation sensitivity characterize efficient and specific interaction (). On the other hand, there are exceptions to this rule. Two high-affinity TMDs (C1 and C8) may have multiple, yet sequence-specific interfaces. We cannot exclude, however, that terminal regions of these TMDs unwind to allow re-orientation of ToxR domains into an orientation where they can activate transcription. In C1, C8, C12, C15 and C28, mutating various G/A/SxxxG/A/S motifs or other conserved residues strongly reduced affinity, whereas no significant effect was seen in other cases (C14 and C16). Thus, some TMDTMD interfaces appear to be rather robust, which may be a property that has been optimized through evolution. The mere presence of GxxxG or related motifs does not predict self-interaction (). Although homotypic TMDTMD interactions have been demonstrated previously for members of some high-affinity clusters, e.g. for protocadherins (C1) () and integrin chains (C5 and C16) (), a second outcome of this study is that it uncovers novel self-interacting. The relationship of relative affinity, orientation-dependence (), maximal impact of point mutations (), presence of conserved GxxxG motifs () and functional homogeneity of the respective top clusters () among most representative TMDs (). Strong self-interaction (4AZ2 reference TMD) is often accompanied by orientation dependence and mutation sensitivity. Functionally heterogeneous clusters are enriched in conserved GxxxG motifs. Not all representative TMDs have been investigated to mutational analysis TMDs. These include TMDs of sialic-acid-binding Ig (C15), armadillo repeat-containing proteins (C28), HLA class II chains (C12) and others (Supplementary). The affinity of 12 TMDs is close to that of the structurally well-characterized highaffinity GpA dimer (). These TMDs represent a total of 124 TMDs homologous to them which equals 5.6% of sequence space. As they are likely to represent a similar percentage of structure space, they may be regarded as paradigmatic targets for future structure analysis. In some cases, self-interaction may parallel functionally relevant heterotypic interaction. For example, HLA class II (C12) and b (C20) chains are known for heterotypic interaction via extramembraneous domains (), which could be supported by the TMDs. The TMDs of integrin (C5 and C16) and b (C7) chains also support heterodimerization (), whereas the functional relevance of their homotypic interactions () is unclear (). The homotypic interactions of several tested TMDs are rather inefficient, although some of them may be functionally important, as in cadherins (C3) (), integrin b chains (C7) (), syntaxin (C13) () and synaptobrevins (C26) (). It should be borne in mind that low affinity detected under our standardized conditions does not exclude efficient TMD-based self-interaction of proteins that are present at high concentration. In addition, the lipid composition of the relevant host membrane may affect affinity. Third, 90/265 pairwise TMD alignments within the top clusters suggest relationships between TMDs that belong to proteins being apparently unrelated in function. Part of these alignments might result from random homology. In other cases, TMD-based clustering of functionally unrelated proteins could reflect convergent evolution of their TMDs, despite dissimilar soluble domains. Interestingly, these TMDs are enriched in GxxxG, AxxxG and SxxxG motifs relative to the TMDs of functionally homogeneous clusters. Further, GxxxG motifs are conserved in TMDs of 6/13 functionally heterogeneous clusters but only in the TMDs of 4/20 functionally homogeneous clusters (). This might indicate that TMDs of functionally unrelated proteins tend to converge toward G/A/SxxxG/A/S-based interaction motifs. The evolution of such short interaction motifs requires fewer mutations than that of more complex helixhelix interfaces, and they could therefore develop rather rapidly by convergent evolution. In addition to homotypic TMDTMD interaction, the conservation of TMD sequences within the functionally heterogeneous clusters could reflect conserved heterotypic interaction, interaction with lipids and/or binding of co-factors. Finally, the homology threshold of 55% may be useful when aligning membrane proteins for homology-based structure modeling, especially for proteins that mainly consist of TMDs. It must be borne in mind, however, that the threshold may be different for multi-span proteins.