Motivation: Protein–protein interactions (PPIs) are critical for virtually every biological function. Recently, researchers suggested to use supervised learning for the task of classifying pairs of proteins as interacting or not. However, its performance is largely restricted by the availability of truly interacting proteins (labeled). Meanwhile, there exists a considerable amount of protein pairs where an association appears between two partners, but not enough experimental evidence to support it as a direct interaction (partially labeled). Results: We propose a semi-supervised multi-task framework for predicting PPIs from not only labeled, but also partially labeled reference sets. The basic idea is to perform multi-task learning on a supervised classification task and a semi-supervised auxiliary task. The supervised classifier trains a multi-layer perceptron network for PPI predictions from labeled examples. The semi-supervised auxiliary task shares network layers of the supervised classifier and trains with partially labeled examples. Semi-supervision could be utilized in multiple ways. We tried three approaches in this article, (i) classification (to distinguish partial positives with negatives); (ii) ranking (to rate partial positive more likely than negatives); (iii) embedding (to make data clusters get similar labels). We applied this framework to improve the identification of interacting pairs between HIV-1 and human proteins. Our method improved upon the state-of-the-art method for this task indicating the benefits of semi-supervised multi-task learning using auxiliary information.
INTRODUCTIONIdentifying proteinprotein interactions (PPIs) in a comprehensive manner is essential for understanding the molecular basis underlying biological functions. Because of their importance in development and disease, PPIs have been the subject of intense research in recent years, both computationally and experimentally. Experimental techniques for detecting PPIs have been reviewed in Shoemaker and Panchenko (2007a). Traditionally, PPIs have been studied individually through the use of genetic, biochemical and biophysical experimental techniques (also termed small-scale methods). Experiments in this paradigm are typically expensive and time-consuming (months for detecting just one PPI). In recent years, large-scale biological PPI experiments have been introduced to directly detect hundreds or thousands of protein interactions at a time. The two-hybrid (Y2H) screens () and complex * To whom correspondence should be addressed. purification detection techniques using mass spectrometry () are the two most popular approaches thus far applied successfully on a large scale. However, their resulting data sets are often incomplete and exhibit high false positive and false negative rates (von). Computational methods have been successfully applied to predict protein interactions (reviewed in). Taking into account that indirect sources may contain partial evidence about protein interations, several approaches derive their predictions on particular types of information, such as overrepresented domain pairs in interacting proteins (). An alternative attractive approach is to integrate various indirect or direct sources of evidence in a statistical learning framework. A classifier is trained to distinguish between positive examples of truly interacting protein pairs and negative examples of non-interacting pairs. Various methods have been explored in this framework, including naive Bayes classifier by, decision tree from, kernel-based methods from Ben-Hur and Noble (2005) and, random forest-based method (), logistic regression (), and the strategies of summing likelihood ratio scores (). Most of these studies have been carried out in yeast or human. They aimed to predict PPIs within a single organism (termed 'intra-species PPI prediction'). Recent work extends to predicting PPIs between organisms ('inter-species PPI prediction'), especially between host and pathogens.extended the supervised learning framework to predict PPIs between HIV-1 and human proteins. A random forest-based classifier was used to integrate multiple biological information sources and defined the state-of-art performance for this task. Additionally,studied 10 hostpathogen PPIs using structural information. Later,searched for host protein motifs along virus protein sequences to obtain a list of host proteins highly enriched with those targeted by HIV-1 proteins. While the supervised framework was shown to enrich current PPI data with additional inferred PPIs, its applicability is still limited. Supervised PPI detection requires a large number of labeled training examples (truely interacting proteins) in order for the statistical classifier to predict with proper accuracy. Except several well-studied organisms, such as yeast or human, most inter or intraspecies PPI prediction tasks do not have a large number of reliable PPIs available as training data. For instance, no reliable global set of interacting pairs exist between HIV-1 and human proteins (see Section 2.2). This limitation largely restricts the prediction ability of current computational PPI algorithms. To conquer thisproblem: predicting protein interactions between HIV-1 (organge squre) and human (gray circle). There exist weakly labeled interaction pairs from NIAID (dashed blue edges) and labeled interaction pairs from experts' annotation (solid blue edges). We aim to predict whether a given unknown human to HIV-1 protein pair (dashed green) interacts or not. limitation, recently semi-supervised approaches were proposed for computational PPI predictions. Yip andproposed to improve supervised predictions by adding pseudo examples from previous runs of predictions. However, the predictions are prone to noise using this strategy. It is sometimes possible to infer a relatively larger number of potentially interacting proteins, which may not have enough evidence to be confirmed as true positive labels. For instance, in the task of predicting PPIs between HIV-1 and human proteins, NIAID () database retrieved protein pairs between HIV-1 protein and human protein from the scientific literature (details in Section 2). The extracted pairs are not experimentally confirmed PPIs, but are very likely to have interaction relationships. From a 'machine learning' perspective, these pairs are weakly labeled positive examples (see). In this case, an interesting question to ask is how to detect and add weakly labeled pairs to improve computational PPI predictions. In this article, we present a multi-task learning framework to make use of weakly labeled examples together with conventionally labeled PPI pairs. A semi-supervised task is introduced in a network consisting of multiple layer perceptron as an auxiliary task. We train supervised PPI classification and the semi-supervised auxiliary task under the same network simultaneously. We apply our method to predict the set of interacting proteins between HIV-1 and human proteins by information integration of multiple biological sources. Our method improves upon the previous approach applied for this task. The results indicate that with the proposed semi-supervised multi-task approach, auxiliary information (weak labels) is able to improve the accuracy of the predictive models for PPIs between HIV-1 and human proteins. The rest of the article is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the task of predicting PPIs between HIV-1 and human proteins and the available interacting data set in more details. Section 3 describes the semi-supervised multi-task learning framework. Section 4 presents the experimental results, and Section 5 concludes.