Motivation: Genomic islands (GIs) are DNA fragments incorporated into a genome through horizontal gene transfer (also called lateral gene transfer), often with functions novel for a given organism. While methods for their detection are well researched in prokaryotes, the complexity of eukaryotic genomes makes direct utilization of these methods unreliable, and so labour-intensive phylogenetic searches are used instead. Results: We present a surrogate method that investigates nucleotide base composition of the DNA sequence in a eukaryotic genome and identifies putative GIs. We calculate a genomic signature as a vector of tetranucleotide (4-mer) frequencies using a sliding window approach. Extending the neighbourhood of the sliding window, we establish a local kernel density estimate of the 4-mer frequency. We score the number of 4-mer frequencies in the sliding window that deviate from the credibility interval of their local genomic density using a newly developed discrete interval accumulative score (DIAS). To further improve the effectiveness of DIAS, we select informative 4-mers in a range of organisms using the tetranucleotide quality score developed herein. We show that the SigHunt method is computationally efficient and able to detect GIs in eukaryotic genomes that represent non-ameliorated integration. Thus, it is suited to scanning for change in organisms with different DNA composition. Availability and implementation: Source code and scripts freely available for download at http://sydney.edu.au/science/biology/meep/softwarel.
INTRODUCTIONHorizontal gene transfer (HGT) occurs when a DNA sequence passes between organisms otherwise than by reproductive descent. It results in a relationship of orthologous sequences that is not tree-like and contains reticulations. Notorious examples include antibiotic resistance plasmids transferred between bacterial strains (), pathogenicity islands (), incorporation of retroviruses () and artificial HGT in the forms of genetically modified organisms (). When a horizontally transferred gene becomes fixed in a population, it is termed a genomic island (GI). Relatively frequent HGT occurs between organisms of similar complexity, such as between prokaryotes, but successful HGT between domains and kingdoms is also known. Incorporation of the alien sequence into a recipient genome must be compatible with survival of the cell; it should not, for example, knock out an essential gene. In eukaryotes, distortion of the open reading frame with HGT is less likely due to the sparseness of coding sequences; yet alien genes face molecular biological limitations relating to metabolism in the recipient organism. When genes are transferred from prokaryotes to eukaryotes, the genetic code difference might hinder correct protein translation. In cases of HGT between eukaryotes, incorrect intron splicing would render the gene product altered and potentially dysfunctional. Nevertheless, successful implementation of HGT in a suitable place within the genome could result in expression of the relevant protein. Proteins encoded in a GI that could be expressed in the recipient organism might provide a novel, highly adaptive function (). To find such a GI is to discover exciting information that is often transformative for the given research field. HGT detection is well studied in prokaryotes, having started from measuring variability of oligonucleotide frequency along the genome (). Eukaryotic genomes, however, are comparatively heterogeneous in their composition and much more extensive. That situation complicates the HGT search. Therefore, those methods developed for prokaryotes fail either due to their inability to handle the sequence heterogeneity or because their computational requirements skyrocket. Researchers studying HGT in eukaryotes use two types of methods: surrogate and comparative. Surrogate methods use nucleotide base composition of the DNA sequence. They have been applied in the form of chaos game representation clustering based on tetranucleotide composition (). Comparative methods are computationally intensive because they compute phylogenetic comparisons between large numbers of identified genes or they use local alignment comparisons against a reference sequence database. They require prior annotation of a genome, an extensive database of comparable orthologues and computationally intensive phylogenetic analyses. Despite these limitations, the results from comparative methods are considered most reliable, as they enable identification of HGT and the donor organism in the form of testable hypotheses. Therefore, methods have been developed to reduce the candidate dataset for GIs while balancing the numbers of false positives and false negatives (*To whom correspondence should be addressed.). To date, the effort in eukaryotic genomes has been demonstrated consistently to fail on these criteria due to the genome heterogeneity in eukaryotes (), thus leading to the need for an expanding reference database for comparative analyses. We show here, however, that genome complexity may be overcome by carefully examining the pattern of genomic signature along a sequence. We use both the selection of tetranucleotides with greatest interspecific variability in their frequencies and local composition shifts that take into account natural variation of tetranucleotide frequency changes along a chromosomal arm to locate regions that differ and might thus represent recent acquisitions via HGT.
DISCUSSIONWe present here a tool for identifying genomic regions as candidates for HGT assessment in eukaryotes. To our knowledge, this is the first surrogate method primarily optimized for eukaryotic genomes. It detects non-ameliorated HGT in large genomic sequences, it is computationally efficient and its implementation provides step-wise user access to results that enables data exploration and analytical optimization. We demonstrated good success in using SigHunt to find introduced GIs across kingdoms and GIs in real genomic sequences (particularly in some fungi). Considering from a biological perspective reproduction within this group, HGT might be more common in fungi than in other eukaryotes (). With HGT events being relatively common within the group, one could speculate that some of these will be non-ameliorated and thus easily detectable using surrogate methods. The further example of Galdieria, within which GIs were plentiful across the genome, seems to corroborate this.