SiGN-SSM is an open-source gene network estimation software able to run in parallel on PCs and massively parallel supercomputers. The software estimates a state space model (SSM), that is a statistical dynamic model suitable for analyzing short time and/or replicated time series gene expression profiles. SiGN-SSM implements a novel parameter constraint effective to stabilize the estimated models. Also, by using a supercomputer, it is able to determine the gene network structure by a statistical permutation test in a practical time. SiGN-SSM is applicable not only to analyzing temporal regulatory dependencies between genes, but also to extracting the differentially regulated genes from time series expression profiles. Availability: SiGN-SSM is distributed under GNU Affero General Public Licence (GNU AGPL) version 3 and can be downloaded at http://sign.hgc.jp/signssm/. The pre-compiled binaries for some architectures are available in addition to the source code. The pre-installed binaries are also available on the Human Genome Center supercomputer system. The online manual and the supplementary information of SiGN-SSM is available on our web site.
INTRODUCTIONAnalyzing the dynamical regulatory mechanisms of gene expressions in a cellular system is a challenging problem in systems biology. To this end, many computational methods have been proposed to estimate dynamical systems of regulatory dependencies between gene expressions from temporal gene expression profiles. The major difficulty of these studies comes from insufficient data time points as opposed to the number of variables (genes) in a computational model. A state space model (SSM) () is * To whom correspondence should be addressed. a statistical model that is applicable to small time-point temporal datasets because it can reduce the number of parameters to be estimated. The SSM decomposes the temporal gene expressions into a dynamical system of modules called the system model (or state space) and a mapping from the modules to the particular genes called the observation model. There are a number of gene network studies using the SSM (). SiGN-SSM is a re-implemented, new version of the previously released one called TRANS-MNET (). In addition to TRANS-MNET, SiGN-SSM has the following improvements:(i) it implements a novel constraint on the model parameters effective to stabilize the estimated models for the short time series data with irregular time intervals; (ii) runs in parallel as a multithreaded program exploiting multicore CPUs, as a bulk (array) job through a job dispatching system such as Sun (Oracle) Grid Engine (SGE) on PC cluster systems, and a multi-process MPI (Message Passing Interface) application on massively parallel supercomputers; (iii) is an open-source software so that everyone can freely access the source code and improve, modify and distribute it, and (iv) implements a statistical permutation test to determine a gene network structure as proposed inand differentially regulated gene extraction presented inon the Human Genome Center (HGC) supercomputer system.
CONCLUSIONSiGN-SSM is a highly-scalable, open-source implementation of an SSM estimation algorithm. The newly proposed constraint on the parameters can significantly stabilize the estimation of the parameters for the very short time point temporal data with irregular time intervals. Users can analyze their time series expression datasets using SiGN-SSM, and the estimated model can be applied to other data to extract differentially expressed genes.