Motivation: Measures of protein functional similarity are essential tools for function prediction, evaluation of protein–protein interactions (PPIs) and other applications. Several existing methods perform comparisons between proteins based on the semantic similarity of their GO terms; however , these measures are highly sensitive to modifications in the topological structure of GO, tend to be focused on specific analytical tasks and concentrate on the GO terms themselves rather than considering their textual definitions. Results: We introduce simDEF, an efficient method for measuring semantic similarity of GO terms using their GO definitions, which is based on the Gloss Vector measure commonly used in natural language processing. The simDEF approach builds optimized definition vectors for all relevant GO terms, and expresses the similarity of a pair of proteins as the cosine of the angle between their definition vectors. Relative to existing similarity measures, when validated on a yeast reference database, simDEF improves correlation with sequence homology by up to 50%, shows a correlation improvement 4% with gene expression in the biological process hierarchy of GO and increases PPI predictability by  2.5% in F1 score for molecular function hierarchy. Availability and implementation: Datasets, results and source code are available at https://cbcl.ics.uci.edu/public_data/DAN
IntroductionGene Ontology (GO) () describes the attributes of genes and gene products using a structured vocabulary. Many biomedical databases, such as UniProt () and SwissProt (), are annotated by GO terms to communicate semantic meanings of biomedical entities. Computing functional similarity of biomedical entities has been applied to problems such as prediction of proteinprotein interaction (PPI) (), gene expression studies () and homology analysis (). Also, in the context of text mining various studies () have aimed to enhance the literature-based GO annotation of gene products. There are two main computational models available to measure similarity of terms. Ontology-based models take advantage of lexical structures in their estimation of term similarity. Edge-based ontology measures like Wu () and RSS () consider the number of edges along the paths that link two GO terms. Node-based measures (which we designate as), GraSM () and AIC () compare the properties of the terms augmented with the properties of their ancestors or descendants. IC vectors () represent IC values in distributed forms in the computation of semantic similarity. Hybrid measures such as those of, Liu et al. (2009) and HRSS () combine node-based and edge-based measures. While these measures first compute semantic similarity of two gene products and then aggregate the results as a single functional similarity value, group-wise measures such as simUI (), simGIC () and SORA () calculate similarity by measuring two sets of GO terms annotating these genes.also proposed a similarity measure where gene functional similarity is based on vector representations of their GO terms. Ontology-based measures suffer from three important limitations: first, they depend on the constantly changing topological structure of GO; second, they use incomplete GO annotations to compute statistical information; and third, they offer no guarantee of generalization to multiple biological tasks. Distributional-based approaches derive from Firth's idea (1957) that a term is characterized by the company it keeps in its context. Measures following this notion calculate terms' specifications from relevant text data and represent them in a vector space for subsequent computation of their similarities. The Gloss Vector semantic relatedness measure () is a distributional-based approach with a wide application in natural language processing. This measure constructs definitions (glosses) of terms from a predefined thesaurus, and estimates semantic relatedness of two terms as the cosine of the angle between those terms' gloss-vectors. Interpolation of content words of a text corpus into the terms' definition was shown to outperform the direct definition comparison. Gloss vectors offer a new opportunity to exploit the information of GO term definitions and to infer gene functional similarity.successfully applied the Gloss Vector measure to the biomedical domain using MEDLINE as the text corpus and the unified medical language system and WordNet for the construction of extended definitions of medical concepts. The Gloss Vector approach requires a frequency cut-off in selecting the best features describing one term (). We have developed simDEF, an optimized version of the Gloss Vector targeted to analysis of gene functions. Here, by using MEDLINE as the text corpus, we compare the performance of simDEF with other leading approaches, and demonstrate its effectiveness using comparisons based on sequence homology, gene expression and PPI data.
DiscussionOur approach to similarity estimation based on shared context makes intuitive sense, as concepts which share closely related attributes in their representation should exhibit high levels of similarity. We have shown that implementing these ideas via the Gloss Vector representation yields improved effectiveness across the majority of ontologies and problem types. For the yeast database, simDEF increases the correlation of semantic similarity with sequence homology by 50%, yields an increase of  4% in correlation with gene expression on the BP ontology, and improves the PPI prediction F1score by 2.5% on the MF ontology. A key advantage of simDEF in comparison with IC-based measures is its reduced dependency on annotation data, and the GO structure. New GO terms typically do not have rich annotation information, which can influence the IC calculation of all GO terms as they depend on the root frequency which itself depends on all GO term frequencies. In contrast, simDEF needs to access only the direct parents and children of one GO term to expand that GO term's definition. In future work, simDEF can be evaluated against Enzyme Commission (EC) and protein family (Pfam) similarities. Gene clustering and orthologous protein distinguishing tasks present yet another opportunity for simDEF performance evaluation. simDEF needs to be tested on the other species than S.cerevisiae as well. Moreover, other statistical measures of association, such as Chisquare and log-lokelihood, can be examined in replacement of PMI for further improvement of simDEF. More in-depth studies can also find out if using larger window sizes of bigrams or even tri-grams in the word extraction of MEDLINE abstracts would improve the achieved results. Also, current advancement in deep neural networks for the low-dimensional yet more accurate representation of GO terms leaves room for further investigation of semantic similarity measures in the distributional model.