Motivation: Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification system, widely applied in almost all drug utilization studies, is currently the most widely recognized classification system for drugs. Currently, new drug entries are added into the system only on users requests, which leads to seriously incomplete drug coverage of the system, and bioinformatics prediction is helpful during this process. Results: Here we propose a novel prediction model of drug-ATC code associations, using logistic regression to integrate multiple heterogeneous data sources including chemical structures, target proteins, gene expression, side-effects and chemical–chemical associations. The model obtains good performance for the prediction not only on ATC codes of unclassified drugs but also on new ATC codes of classified drugs assessed by cross-validation and independent test sets, and its efficacy exceeds previous methods. Further to facilitate the use, the model is developed into a user-friendly web service SPACE (Similarity-based Predictor of ATC CodE), which for each submitted compound, will give candidate ATC codes (ranked according to the decreasing probability_score predicted by the model) together with corresponding supporting evidence. This work not only contributes to knowing drugs therapeutic, pharmacological and chemical properties, but also provides clues for drug repositioning and side-effect discovery. In addition, the construction of the prediction model also provides a general framework for similarity-based data integration which is suitable for other drug-related studies such as target, side-effect prediction etc. Availability and implementation: The web service SPACE is available at http://me.bprc.ac.cn/space
IntroductionThe Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification system developed and maintained by the World Health Organization Collaborating Center for Drug Statistics Methodology (WHOCC), is currently the most widely recognized classification system for drugs and has been widely used in almost all drug utilization studies (). It divides drug substances into different groups according to the organ or system on which they act and their therapeutic, pharmacological and chemical properties. The ATC classification system has five levels representing finer and finer classification for drugs, in which the first level has 14 anatomical groups, with pharmacological/therapeutic subgroups as the second level, the third and fourth levels are chemical/pharmacological/ therapeutic subgroups and the fifth level is the chemical substance (http://www.whocc.no/atc/structure_and_principles/). For example, a complete classification of acetylsalicylic acid is B (blood and blood forming organs, first level), B01 (anti-thrombotic agents, second level), B01A (anti-thrombotic agents, third level), B01AC (platelet aggregation inhibitors excl. heparin, fourth level) and B01AC06 (acetylsalicylic acid, fifth level). A drug can be assigned more than one ATC code when it has multiple different therapeutic uses. For example, besides as a platelet aggregation inhibitor (B01AC06) mentioned above, acetylsalicylic acid is also used as a drug for 'local oral treatment' (A01AD05) and used as an 'analgesic and antipyretic' (N02BA01). Currently WHOCC establishes new drug entries in the ATC classification system only on requests from the users including manufacturers, regulatory agencies and researchers, which leads to serious incompletion of the drug coverage of the system (http://www. whocc.no/atc/structure_and_principles/). Recently as the emergence and accumulation of various data sources in drug studies such as chemical structures, target proteins, side-effects and drug-induced gene expression profiles, bioinformatics prediction of ATC classification of drugs becomes feasible. The prediction of ATC classification of drugs not only contributes to the understanding of drugs' therapeutic, pharmacological and chemical properties, but also provides valuable information for drug side-effect discovery and drug repositioning. Meanwhile ATC classification prediction for chemical compounds is also helpful for new drug development, especially complementing with other virtual screening methods. Recently several computational methods have been proposed to predict ATC classification of drugs based on different data sources.presented the first one to predict ATC codes based on chemical structures, the assumption of which is that structurally similar compounds tend to have similar medical indication areas, and the method was developed into a web service called SuperPred. The iSEA (indication similarity ensemble approach) method also correlated a drug and an ATC class based on the drug's chemical fingerprint similarity with all drugs belonging to this ATC class (). Expect chemical structures,) successively introduced chemical-chemical associations and ChEBI ontology to predict ATC classification.assigned drugs to ATC classes based on text mining information. NetPredATC method used SVM (support vector machine) to integrate chemical structures and target proteins for ATC code prediction (). Although these methods obtained certain efficacy on ATC code prediction, there are still some limitations: (i) Most of these approaches were only based on a single or two data sources. Different data sources provide supporting evidence for ATC code prediction from different perspectives, which usually have some complementarity. The performance of the prediction method is supposed to be further improved if multiple heterogeneous data sources are efficiently integrated. (ii) All these jobs only assessed the efficacy of methods on a certain ATC classification level or a certain ATC category (e.g.only validated their method on the class of 'cardiovascular system', one of the 14 main ATC groups). And the prediction performance of ATC codes of unclassified drugs (whose ATC codes are unknown) and that of new ATC codes of classified drugs (whose ATC codes are partly known) were not distinguished. (iii) Except SuperPred mentioned above (), all other methods haven't provided user-friendly program package or been developed into a web service, which severely restricts the utility of these methods. To eliminate these limitations, in this article, we propose a novel prediction model for ATC classification prediction, using logistic regression (LR) framework to integrate multiple heterogeneous data sources including chemical structures, target proteins, drug-induced gene expression profiles, side-effects and chemicalchemical associations, and comprehensively assesse its efficacy and then compare it with previous methods, aiming to further improve the performance of ATC code prediction. Further, to facilitate the use, the proposed method is developed into a user-friendly web service SPACE (Similarity-based Predictor of ATC CodE).