Motivation: Misannotation in sequence databases is an important obstacle for automated tools for gene function annotation, which rely extensively on comparison with sequences with known function. To improve current annotations and prevent future propagation of errors, sequence-independent tools are, therefore, needed to assist in the identification of misannotated gene products. In the case of enzymatic functions, each functional assignment implies the existence of a reaction within the organisms metabolic network; a first approximation to a genome-scale metabolic model can be obtained directly from an automated genome annotation. Any obvious problems in the network, such as dead end or disconnected reactions, can, therefore, be strong indications of misannotation. Results: We demonstrate that a machine-learning approach using only network topological features can successfully predict the validity of enzyme annotations. The predictions are tested at three different levels. A random forest using topological features of the metabolic network and trained on curated sets of correct and incorrect enzyme assignments was found to have an accuracy of up to 86% in 5-fold cross-validation experiments. Further cross-validation against unseen enzyme superfamilies indicates that this classifier can successfully extrapolate beyond the classes of enzyme present in the training data. The random forest model was applied to several automated genome annotations, achieving an accuracy of $ 60% in most cases when validated against recent genome-scale metabolic models. We also observe that when applied to draft metabolic networks for multiple species, a clear negative correlation is observed between predicted annotation quality and phylogenetic distance to the major model organism for biochemistry (Escherichia coli for prokaryotes and Homo sapiens for eukaryotes).
INTRODUCTIONMisannotation in sequence databases has been a recognized problem for more than a decade. Early studies reported the emergence of this issue () and estimated that up to 30% of proteins were misannotated in public databases (). More recent studies have confirmed that this problem is still a reality () and some even suggest that it has been getting worse over time (), identifying overprediction and error propagation as the main sources of error. As experimental verification of gene function is expected to remain a highly time-consuming process, it is unlikely that it will be able to keep pace with the increasing amount of genome sequence data being deposited in public databases. More accurate computational methods for functional annotation and assessment of confidence in gene annotations are, therefore, increasingly necessary. In the area of automated functional annotation, several approaches moving beyond basic sequence similarity are now available (). Some recent annotation software will classify proteins based on locally conserved sequence patterns that are normally related with function (). Other approaches take into account the evolutionary relationships between proteins by integrating evidence across phylogenetic trees () or use additional information, such as proteinprotein interaction data () or genomic correlations (). However, functional annotation is still mainly based on sequence similarity. Given this fact, the accuracy of existing annotations has a crucial impact on that of future annotations (). This dependency can lead to error propagation and a consequent increase in the number of annotation errors (). Moreover, as information on the origin of annotation is often scarce, this error propagation does not have an easy solution. The problem becomes even clearer when we note that the proportion of manually annotated proteins is 55% and continues to decrease (). Any evidence that is independent of sequence may, therefore, be useful for discriminating between true and false functional annotations. The concept of gene function implies interaction with some part of the cell or the environment, and almost all functions of interest are the result of interactions among several components (). Modelling these interactions by means of networks and studying their topological properties is, therefore, one way to understand the context of these molecular functions. One easily accessible example of a well-defined molecular network derived from a set of gene annotations is a draft metabolic network, such as those available in the KEGG database (). The topological properties of these networks have been studied previously in the contexts of network evolution () and drug target discovery (). For example, the metabolic networks of parasitic species are known to be distinguishable from non-parasitic species on the basis of their topology (). Intuitively, any problems in such a network, for example, dead ends or disconnected components, could be an indication of misannotation (). However, each individual type of evidence can be relatively weak (e.g. dead ends may also *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com be due to the uptake of nutrients from the environment) and difficult to discern by manual inspection. In this work, we propose a supervised machine-learning methodology to assess the accuracy of assigned molecular functions, based on simple topological properties of an organism's draft metabolic network. We show that our approach is able to separate correct annotations from incorrect ones with accuracy of up to 86%. Being entirely independent of sequence properties, it can be used to complement existing approaches and, hence, contribute to the detection and correction of errors in functional annotation.
CONCLUSIONOur results have demonstrated that simple topological features can be used to predict incorrect functional annotations within metabolic networks. The random forest classifier has not only achieved high overall cross-validation accuracy but has also been shown to be informative when applied to enzymes belonging to superfamilies that were not used in training. This approach is entirely independent of sequence properties; hence, it could be used to support automated metabolic reconstruction pipelines, as well as helping to identify incorrectly annotated enzymes within public databases. Subsequent improvements in the accuracy of the genome-scale metabolic models obtained will be of benefit in their downstream analysis, for example, using constraint-based methods, such as flux balance analysis (). For both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, it seems that the quality of automated metabolic reconstruction decreases with phylogenetic distance to the major model organism for biochemistry, E.coli and human, respectively. However, differences in network topology between free-living organisms and obligate intracellular species may make the classifier less accurate when applied to the latter group of species. Given a larger amount of training data, it should be possible to produce separate classifiers for each of these two groups.Intracellular Obligates Others. Variation of predicted annotation quality with organism type. Box plot of the distribution of quality scores in different sets of prokaryote species: orangewell-studied species (E.coli strains and the closely related species Salmonella and Yersinia); olivespecies for which there is a GENRE () available; greenfacultative intracellular species; blueintracellular obligate species; magentaall other species. Variation of predicted annotation quality with phylogenetic distance to model organism. Left: Scatter-plot showing predicted annotation quality (precision of annotated reactions according to the classifier) for eukaryotes against phylogenetic distance to H.sapiens. Right: Scatter plot showing predicted annotation quality for prokaryotes against phylogenetic distance to E.coli ()