Motivation: A number of methods have been reported that predict protein–protein interactions (PPIs) with high accuracy using only simple sequence-based features such as amino acid 3mer content. This is surprising, given that many protein interactions have high specificity that depends on detailed atomic recognition between physiochemically complementary surfaces. Are the reported high accuracies realistic? Results: We find that the reported accuracies of the predictions are significantly overestimated , and strongly dependent on the structure of the training and testing datasets used. The choice of which protein pairs are deemed as non-interactions in the training data has a variable impact on the accuracy estimates, and the accuracies can be artificially inflated by a bias towards dominant samples in the positive data which result from the presence of hub proteins in the protein interaction network. To address this bias, we propose a positive set-specific method to create a balanced negative set maintaining the degree distribution for each protein, leading to the conclusion that simple sequence-based features contain insufficient information to be useful for predicting PPIs, but that protein domain-based features have some predictive value. Availability: Our method, named BRS-nonint, is available at
INTRODUCTIONProteinprotein interactions (PPIs) are responsible for many critical functions and processes in biology, and are highly relevant to disease states. While experimental measurements are able to discover protein interactions at high throughput, they can be biased to specific types of interaction or unlikely to discover all interactions, and cannot be applied to all relevant species. As a result, a number * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of researchers have studied how well machine learning methods are able to predict PPIs from protein sequence information alone (Ben). They have reported impressive performance using a variety of simple sequence features (such as counts of 3mers of neighbouring residues) and developed sophisticated pairwise kernels to allow classification using support vector machines (SVMs). The performance measures reported are much better than one would expect, and we have found that they are very sensitive to the content of the datasets used in training and cross-validation. In particular, the presence of 'hub' proteins that interact with many other proteins in the positive dataset leads to a strong bias that invalidates most performance estimates. Recently, Park (2009) has benchmarked four methods on yeast and human data, found significant performance differences and highlighted some effects of training and testing data on performance estimates. However, the datasets used in this benchmark still suffer from bias of dataset content reported here. In this work, we present a method to remove this bias and demonstrate the effect on predicting PPIs from simple sequence features: that simple sequence-based kernels do not predict PPIs. We now summarize some approaches taken to predict PPIs from sequence data, all of which should be reinterpreted following our findings. Benused a SVM method with a pairwise kernel and evaluated a number of sequence features, including the 'spectrum kernel' where the protein sequences are represented by the counts of 3mers of neighbouring residues (). This leads to a fixed length (n = 8000) feature vector for each protein regardless of the sequence length. The pairwise kernel allows comparison of pairs of proteins, avoiding any problems that may be introduced by concatenating feature vectors for each protein, and on a yeast dataset performance of the SVM gives a receiver operator characteristic (ROC) area under curve (AUC) score of 0.81. Similarlyused symmetric 3mers (n = 4200) and a pairwise kernel giving accuracy of 70.3% on human data (and 69.0% for yeast). Accuracy of 83.9% was reported to be achieved byon human PPI data using 3mers of residues grouped into seven categories (n = 343) and an S-kernel similar in function to the previous pairwise kernels.
DISCUSSIONThe high accuracy reported in the literature for predicting PPIs from simple sequence features appears to be an artefact of the datasets used to train and validate methods. In simple terms, if datasets are used where some proteins (hubs) appear many more times in the positive set than the negative set, then a machine learning method will learn this, predict positive interactions preferentially for these proteins and seem to be highly accurate. The sequence feature vectors used are of high dimension and allow machine learning methods to identify such specific proteins. The accuracies are unrealistic because the intended application is finding interactors for a specific protein from the entire proteome, of which even hub proteins only interact with a small fraction. It seems in fact that simple sequence features are little better than random in predicting protein interactions, when the task is to distinguish positive and negative interactions that occur in equal number for each protein in balanced positive and negative datasets. It is clear that the choice of negative data is critical in training and performance evaluation for machine learning methods; in particular, there must be no systematic differences between positive and negative datasets used in training and evaluation that are not present in the datasets of intended application. While it is clear that the Negatome () dataset will be useful in method development, it is also probable that this set will have its own biases, for instance towards well-studied proteins in the literature, and proteins that appear in the structural database. It will therefore have to be used with care in prediction method development. While simple sequence features are not strongly predictive of interactions, the presence of conserved domains does contain some predictive information. But even then, accuracy is only moderate. Given that the a priori probability of interaction of a protein and a partner chosen randomly from the entire proteome is quite low, any of these methods will be susceptible to a high rate of false positive predictions. Protein interactions depend exquisitely on the three-dimensional atomic structures of the proteins concerned, and their detailed spatial and temporal pattern of expressions in the cell. Our ability to predict these interactions from information only in the sequence is, at present, too poor to be useful.