Whole-genome sequencing has revolutionized the study of genetics. Genotyping-by-sequencing is now a viable method of genotyping, yet the bioinformatics involved can be daunting if not prohibitive for some laboratories. Here we present ArrayMaker, a user-friendly tool that extracts accurate single nucleotide polymorph-ism genotypes at pre-defined loci from whole-genome alignments and presents them in a standard genotyping format compatible with association analysis software and datasets genotyped on commercial array platforms. Using this tool, geneticists with only basic computing ability can genotype samples at any desired list of markers, facilitating genome-wide association analysis, fine mapping, candidate variant assessment, data sharing and compatibility of data sourced from multiple technologies. Availability and implementation: ArrayMaker is licensed under The MIT License and can be freely obtained at https://github.com/cw2014/ ArrayMaker/. The program is implemented in Perl and runs on Linux operating systems.
INTRODUCTIONThe rapid evolution of whole-genome sequencing (WGS) technologies and decline in sequencing costs in recent years has seen an increase in utilization of WGS in genetic experiments. Wide ranging research questions can be asked of such datasets, but for identifying genes underlying phenotypes of interest, genome wide association analysis (GWAS) remains a crucial first step in localizing candidate regions for sequence investigation. Commercially available single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays have been dedicated to this task, genotyping samples at carefully selected informative markers. From WGS data, genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS) enables us to create array-type data, yet a simple tool to extract SNP genotypes at informative sites into array format is currently lacking. In light of this, we developed ArrayMaker tool to extract SNP genotypes from mammalian WGS alignments at pre-defined loci with the resultant output in a GWAS-ready format.Producing array-type files at known informative markers enables GWAS to be carried out on WGS datasets. It also offers an interface for compatibility between WGS data and samples that have been genotyped on commercial SNP array platforms. ArrayMaker can also genotype samples at bespoke lists of SNP markers, facilitating fine mapping and providing a means of assaying candidate loci across multiple samples without the need for extensive post-alignment steps. The sequencing platform and alignment protocols used do not preclude compatibility of SNP genotypes called from various datasets, enabling a platform-independent common language amongst samples sourced from diverse studies.
CONCLUSIONArrayMaker provides a straightforward method of quickly extracting accurate SNP genotypes from BAM files at any combination of SNP loci. The tool can replicate existing and obsolete SNP array datasets, create GWAS-ready files from bespoke marker lists, and rapidly genotype candidate SNP loci in new samples without the need for complicated post-alignment bioinformatics. It requires minimal computing time and resources and is user-friendly, written in Perl to run on a Linux platform with simple command-line operation. Only an alignment, a reference genome sequence, a list of SNP markers and SAMtools are required. Additional steps such as formatting the marker list, including the conversion of legacy array datasets into current reference genome coordinates or the ascertainment of dataset-polymorphic SNPs for fine mapping or candidate variant analysis, may be required prior to the application of ArrayMaker using alternate tools such as LiftOver or SAMtools, respectively. Following its use, ArrayMaker data can be readily interrogated with PLINK () for the determination of population allele frequencies, GWAS and other useful analyses.Given the shift towards WGS in genetic research projects, GBS is increasing in popularity and there are many existing tools that return accurate genotypes from whole-genome sequence data. However, calling and filtering variants can be a daunting computational task for those inexperienced in bioinformatics. ArrayMaker simplifies the task of extracting SNP genotypes at prescribed loci by packaging a popular calling algorithm with a light resource footprint into a user-friendly tool that emits genotypes in a human-readable, GWAS-ready format.