Coarse-grained (CG) models reduce the cost of molecular dynamics simulations keeping the essence of molecular interactions. Still, the diversity of CG representations (sizes, connect-ivity, naming, etc.) hampers the handling and visualization of such models. SIRAH Tools comprises a set of utilities to convert all-atoms coordinates to arbitrary residue-based CG schemes, write GROMACS topological information at any resolution into PSF format and a VMD plugin to visualize , analyze and retrieve pseudo-atomistic information from CG trajectories performed with the SIRAH force field. These tools facilitate the use of intricate CG force fields outside the small devel-opers community. Availability and implementation: Different utilities of SIRAH Tools are written in Perl, Tcl, or R. Documentation and source codes are freely distributed at http://www.sirahff.com.
IntroductionMolecular dynamics (MD) simulations constitute a reliable approach for the study of bimolecular structures, dynamics and interactions (). However, its computational cost has prompted the development of coarse-grained (CG) models aimed to reach ever-growing size and timescales. In general, different mapping schemes are used to provide CG representations from all-atoms (AA) molecular systems (), making difficult the creation and editing of molecular topology files. Moreover, arbitrary CG schemes can be challenging for general-purposes visualization programs to yield correct rendering, molecular connectivity, beads' size, charges, etc. To overcome such difficulties we created a series of utilities named SIRAH Tools, which are distributed within the SIRAH force field package for CG and multiscale simulations (seeand references therein). SIRAH Tools is freely available along with tutorials for running and analyzing CG simulations at http://www.sirahff.com.
ConclusionCG models are considerably expanding. Yet, their visualization and analysis still suffers from limitations that restrict their use to highly skilled users. SIRAH tools aims to bridge this gap by providing easy and flexible mapping utilities, processing of topologies and data analysis.