Motivation: Prediction of transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) is crucial for promoter modeling and network inference. Quality of the predictions is spoiled by numerous false positives, which persist as the main problem for all presently available TFBS search methods. Results: We suggest a novel approach, which is alternative to widely used position weight matrices (PWMs) and Hidden Markov Models. Each motif of the input set is used as a search template to scan a query sequence. Found motifs are assigned scores depending on the non-randomness of the motifs occurrence, the number of matching searching motifs and the number of mismatches. The non-randomness is estimated by comparison of observed numbers of matching motifs with those predicted to occur by chance. The latter can be calculated given the base compositions of the motif and the query sequence. The method does not require preliminary alignment of the input motifs, hence avoiding uncertainties introduced by the alignment procedure. In comparison with PWM-based tools, our method demonstrates higher precision by the same sensitivity and specificity. It also tends to outperform methods combining pattern and PWM search. Most important, it allows reducing the number of false positive predictions significantly. Availability: The method is implemented in a tool called SiTaR (Site Tracking and Recognition) and is available at http://sbi.hki
INTRODUCTIONDespite the large number of available methods and tools for transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) prediction, the problem of the high number of false positive (FP) predictions is not solved so far. The attempts to predict putative binding sites using the information about known TFBSs have a long history, with the main stream of PWM-based methods and deviations to applications of other sequence-based methods, such as Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) (e.g.), or less widely known approaches like, for example, intuitionistic fuzzy sets (IFS) theory (). Further refinement of predictions can be done by including additional information, such as genetic and epigenetic factors in the query region, e.g. clade-specific evolutionary parameters, presence of nearby coding regions () or phylogenetic relationships (e.g.) or/and genome-wide expression data (e.g.). These ways are promising and have their field of application, and they also have a serious drawback: this additional information must be available, which is far from being always the case. To find an optimal balance between high specialization provided by pattern-based methods and high sensitivity of the PWMs, several attempts have been made to combine these two approaches. These attempts were implemented in such tools as AliBaba2 () and P-Match (). AliBaba2 method is based on the examination of a TFBS context by application of an extension of the Berg and von Hippel model (). It includes a step of aligning of known TFBSs with a query sequence with subsequent construction of a PWM matching each found motif. The P-Match algorithm uses individual TFBSs along with the corresponding PWMs. It searches for DNA subsequences matching one of the TFBSs from the set and calculates the matching score using the weight matrix. Both approaches, although they still include the obligatory step of the PWM construction, are a significant step forward in comparison with 'pure' PWM-based methods. Being methodologically interesting and promising, these tools are, unfortunately, hardly of use in practice: AliBaba2 is not maintained since 2002, and both tools are dependent on available PWM libraries, which are outdated in their public versions. At the end of the day, PWMs remain the state of the art method. Consequently, the great majority of available tools are PWM based (see, for example,) and differ mostly in the ways of calculating the cut-offs. Introduction of e-values, P-values and background modeling [e.g. in Matrix-scan of RSAT (allow to reduce the number of FP to some extent. Other tools tend to use more mathematically sophisticated methods, such as variable order Bayesian trees and variable order Markov models [e.g. VOMBAT tool ()] without breakthrough results. We think, however, that the problem of motif prediction should not be approached by generalizations. We decided to develop a straightforward method based on direct comparison of input (searching) set motifs with the query sequence (see the Section 2). We exploit the idea of non-randomness of biologically meaningful sequence motifs, which can be detected by comparison of observed motifs' occurrences with those predicted to happen by chance. This simple mathematical approach provides high sensitivity and specificity of the method, allowing significant reduction of the FP predictions.
DISCUSSIONSiTaR is a method for nucleotide composition-based detection of non-random matching motifs applied to prediction of TFBSs or other types of motifs. One of the evident advantages of the method is that it does not require equal length of the searching motifs, nor their alignment, nor a construction of a PWM nor any other modeling prior to the search. Any of those steps (aligning, trimming to equal length, etc.) leads to the loss of information (as any generalization) and hence introduces some degree of uncertainty in the final result. Thus, avoiding these steps we preserve as much information as there was in the initial set of TFBS sequences. It is notable that the demand for a high quality of the initial (searching) set of TFBS sequences is equally strong for any approach: ours or PWM based. The other, quite important, consequence of the lack of the abovementioned steps is saving of time and efforts. To use SiTaR, one needs to have just a set of known TFBS sequences; this can come directly from a publication or a database. To use any PWM-based tool, one needs to have the PWM. It either can be found in a matrix database, such as TRANSFAC or Jaspar, or has to be made de novo (from that set of known sequences, which we directly use in SiTaR). To do that, one has to (i) align the sequences; (ii) find a tool for PWM construction; and (iii) apply it. Of note, Jaspar and other prominent PWM-based tools like Matrix-scan or the public version of P-Match do not allow to construct own matrices. This means that even when SiTaR demonstrates equal performance with a PWM-based tool, this result is achieved by lower expenses. The experiment with reidentification of the TP set with three different methods showed general superiority of the tools that use aligning of individual motifs (SiTaR and P-Match). This conforms to the thesis that PWMs are too generalized. P-Match tries to overcome the PWM generalization by including the step of aligning of individual motifs of a PWM with subsets of the query sequence and applying the PWM characteristics when calculating the scores. This attempt significantly improves the prediction in terms of the number of FPs. However, P-Match remains dependent on PWMs, with all consequences discussed in the previous paragraphs. In SiTaR, we omit the generalization step completely. The positive feature of PWMs is that they reflect conservation of particular nucleotides within the motif. This kind of information is not directly considered by our method, since we allow mismatches in any position of the motif. However, the theoretically allowed mismatches in the conserved positions are in practice corrected by matching of the 'correct' (true) motifs and accumulation of the correct matches. So the conservation of a certain base is in fact taken into account in an indirect way. To reinforce this effect, we put special emphasis on the multiple matching of the motifs when calculating the score. On the other hand, one should not underestimate the fact that TFBS sets can be very divergent, and some single true sites may strongly differ from the rest of the set (in fact, they can be completely unalignable). In a PWM (and, hence, in P-Match), such sites are in a way suppressed, so that their content is not reflected neither by the consensus sequence nor by the weights assigned to each position. On the opposite, our approach allows each motif to play its role independently of the rest of the set. So finally SiTaR is balancing between multiple and individual matching, allowing each of them to be equally successful if the found motif is recognized as non-random. In terms of accuracy of predictions, by 100% of sensitivity SiTaR is superior to Jaspar when reidentifying TFBSs in random sequences (, Supplementary). The results of P-Match and SiTaR do not significantly differ, although also here there is a slight tendency of SiTaR to have lower FDR and higher F 0.5-measure (Supplementary). Ideally, all sites presented in databases like TRANSFAC should be genuine, but we cannot exclude the possibility that one or two of them are actually false, simply because of the FP rate of the wet-lab experiments. For this reason, it not always makes sense to insist on the recovering of the whole TP set; in fact, in some TFBS sets we can observe just one sequence obviously not belonging to the rest of the set, 'spoiling' the whole picture. Taking into account such chances, we also considered reidentification of 90% of the TP. For this level of sensitivity, the difference in the performance of all considered tools is not anymore significant; however, the tendency of SiTaR to outperform Jaspar and P-Match remains the same (Supplementary). In promoter sequences, the performance of SiTaR is comparable with that of Jaspar in 27 of 38 promoters (70%); in the rest 30%, however, SiTaR predicts less additional (potentially FP) sites. Since we do not know the real number of TP TFBSs in genuine promoters, we cannot estimate such characteristics as FDR, but we can judge about the sensitivity of the methods. In the considered examples, we can see that the sensitivity of Jaspar and SiTaR is equally high (100% of the real TFBSs are redetected), whereas the sensitivity of P-Match remains quastionable (we will return to this point in a few lines). Our demands to the interpretation of the predictions in promoters can be formulated as following:(i) the true TFBS has to be recovered; (ii) there should not be too many TP sites (we allowed up to 10 additional TFBSs considering them as potentially TP; an excess over 10 was considered as potential FPs). Both criteria are met by SiTaR with success. It reidentifies all true TFBSs (of note, for this analysis we tried to select those true TFBSs that have not SiTaR