High-throughput sequencing (HTS) has opened up a new era for small RNA (sRNA) exploration. Using HTS data for a global survey of sRNAs in 26 angiosperms, elevated GC contents were detected in the monocots, whereas the 5-terminal compositions were quite uniform among the angiosperms. Chromosome-wide distribution patterns of sRNAs were investigated by using scrolling-window analysis. We performed de novo natural antisense transcript (NAT) prediction, and found that the overlapping regions of trans-NATs, but not cis-NATs, were hotspots for sRNA generation. One cis-NAT generates phased natural antisense short interfering RNAs (nat-siRNAs) specifically from flowers in Arabidopsis, while one in rice produces phased nat-siRNAs from grains, suggesting their organ-specific regulatory roles.
INTRODUCTIONIn eukaryotes, small RNAs (sRNAs) are essential regulators in gene expression, heterochromatin formation and virus resistance (). The plant sRNAs are divided into two classes: microRNAs (miRNAs) and siRNAs. The 21-nt miRNAs exert post-transcriptional regulation on targets mostly through cleavage. However, the 2024-nt siRNAs are more diverse. Two subspecies, natural antisense short interfering RNAs (natsiRNAs) () and trans-acting siRNAs (), have been characterized. Besides cleavage effect on targets, numerous siRNAs were reported to mediate DNA or histone methylation (). The development of sensitive high-throughput sequencing (HTS) technology has enabled our efficient sRNAs exploration (), and there are a number of huge HTS datasets available (). A few analytical frameworks have been proposed for analyzing such data (), but it is clear that these datasets contain a wealth of information that has not been fully explored.Here we report a large-scale analysis of HTS data for plant sRNAs. We have surveyed the GC contents, 5-terminal compositions and chromosome-wide distribution patterns of sRNAs. De novo natural antisense transcript (NAT) prediction unveiled that the overlapping regions of trans-NATs were hotspots for sRNA generation. We have identified novel cis-NATs that produce phase-distributed nat-siRNAs which are likely involved in organ-specific regulation.