Snakemake is a workflow engine that provides a readable Python-based workflow definition language and a powerful execution environment that scales from single-core workstations to compute clusters without modifying the workflow. It is the first system to support the use of automatically inferred multiple named wildcards (or variables) in input and output filenames. Availability: http://snakemake.
INTRODUCTIONLarge-scale data analyses in bioinformatics involve the chained execution of many command line applications. Workflow engines help to automate these pipelines and ensure reproducibility. Systems such as Biopipe (), Taverna (), Galaxy (), GeneProf () or PegaSys () are easy to learn and use through their graphical user interface. Others such as Ruffus (), Pwrake (), GXP Make () and Bpipe () use text-based definition of workflows, which can be advantageous: workflows can be edited without a graphical environment (e.g. directly on a remote server); and developers can collaborate on them through source code management tools. Similar to Pwrake and GXP Make, Snakemake is inspired by the build system GNU Make (). They all infer the actual workflow (dependencies, parallelization) from a set of rules with input and output files. Snakemake complements these prior works with a syntax close to pseudocode, in the spirit of the Python language. Snakemake interoperates with any installed tool or available web service with well-defined input and output (file) formats. Although this approach lacks type checking of intermediate files, it does not require tight integration of tools into the workflow system, such as with PegaSys (), and thus is most flexible. Snakemake itself is fully portable, as only a Python installation is required to run Snakefiles. It provides automatic scalability because it optimizes the number of parallel processes w.r.t. provided CPU cores and needed threads and can make use of single machines as well as cluster engines without modifying the workflow. In contrast to Pwrake and GXP Make, Snakemake does not rely on any password-less SSH setup or custom server processes running on the cluster nodes. Finally, Snakemake is the first system to support file name inference with multiple named wildcards in rules.