Motivation: Large-scale cancer genomic studies, such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), have profiled multidimensional genomic data, including mutation and expression profiles on a variety of cancer cell types, to uncover the molecular mechanism of cancerogenesis. More than a hundred driver mutations have been characterized that confer the advantage of cell growth. However, how driver mutations regulate the transcriptome to affect cellular functions remains largely unex-plored. Differential analysis of gene expression relative to a driver mutation on patient samples could provide us with new insights in understanding driver mutation dysregulation in tumor genome and developing personalized treatment strategies. Results: Here, we introduce the Snowball approach as a highly sensitive statistical analysis method to identify transcriptional signatures that are affected by a recurrent driver mutation. Snowball utilizes a resampling-based approach and combines a distance-based regression framework to assign a robust ranking index of genes based on their aggregated association with the presence of the mutation, and further selects the top significant genes for downstream data analyses or experiments. In our application of the Snowball approach to both synthesized and TCGA data, we demonstrated that it outper-forms the standard methods and provides more accurate inferences to the functional effects and transcriptional dysregulation of driver mutations. Availability and implementation: R package and source code are available from CRAN at http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/DES
INTRODUCTIONRecent large-scale cancer genome studies such as those from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the International Cancer Genome Consortium (http://www.icgc.org) have led to the identification of a large number of somatic mutations in 420 cancer cell types through high-throughput sequencing technology (; Cancer Genome Atlas Network, 2012a, b). Among those somatic mutations, most are passenger mutations, which do not contribute much to carcinogenesis. However, a relatively small number of mutations have been documented as driver mutations, and they confer the advantage of cell growth. To date, more than a hundred driver mutations have been uncovered. Some well-studied examples include EGFR, BRAF, NRAS, PIK3CA, MET, CDKN2A and TP53 (). Understanding the functional consequences of those driver genes and predicting how they affect protein and cellular functions have become one of the major focuses in cancer genomic research. For example, the recurrent oncogene BRAF mutation at V600 has been well documented as an activator of the mitogene-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway that stimulates proliferation, whereas mutation in tumor suppressor TP53 can disrupt cell cycle arrest and apoptosis pathway in human cancer (). Even though much effort has been expended to explore specific pathways or biological processes dysregulated by driver mutations, the systematic de novo identification of potential targets on the transcriptome scale is still largely unexplored (). Considering that a driver mutation may affect a few or even many key signaling molecules in a cellular system and cause diseases, a supervised analysis of whole transcriptome measurements with regard to the presence of a known somatic driver mutation can amplify important biological signals involving tumorigenesis. The standard statistical methods that can be used for this purpose include gene-by-gene, differential expression analyses to rank genes based on a parametric model, typically in a regression framework, and select the top list with statistical significance (). However, a driver mutation is expected to alter the expression of its cognate genes, its interacting genes and genes in the same downstream pathways. Geneby-gene analyses assume independence among genes and may result in ineffective detection of important gene or pathway targets. In addition, the genetic background of patients and their tumor samples are highly heterogeneous: each sample may exhibit patient-specific and sample-specific variation. This differing predisposition to the driver mutation perturbation may lead to different target gene expression patterns from sample to sample and from patient to patient. Gene-by-gene analyses *To whom correspondence should be addressed. assume marginally uniform differential expression for each gene, and this may culminate in detection power loss to key functional targets. Lastly, the recurrent mutations are mostly rare events in the patient population (); thus, we typically have a limited sample size per mutation, even if the sample size of the initial patient cohort is large. This brings in another key challenge to the conventional methods for the differential analysis of gene expression with mutation data. Several multivariate statistical techniques were applied to detect differential gene expression (). However, applications of well-established multivariate statistical techniques in this case are not straightforward because of the unusual features in mutation profiling data, such as high heterogeneity and limited sample size per mutation status. A different approach used for gene selection that may serve for the same purpose is to utilize a non-parametric, ensemble method to rank genes based on their classification performance on the mutation status and select the most relevant genes. For example, Random forests based gene ranking and selection approach uses the classification and regression tree model (CART) and ranks the genes based on their variable importance (; Diaz-Uriarte and Alvarez). However, ranking and selecting genes based on the prediction of the gene expression to the presence of a mutation might lead to a gene list biased toward the classification of mutation groups, instead of the correlation with the functional consequences of the mutation. To meet the challenges of accurate inference on the functional consequences of driver mutations, we propose the Snowball approach as a highly sensitive statistical analysis method, based on the differential analyses of co-expression profiles relative to the presence of a driver mutation. Gene transcriptions and their interactions usually present in regulatory networks and/or biological pathways; therefore, a driver gene mutation will naturally trigger a differentially co-expressed gene expression pattern of a series of genes between the patients with and without a driver mutation. The Snowball approach takes advantage of networked genegene interactions and assigns a robust ranking to the gene list based on their aggregated association of co-expression patterns with the presence of a mutation in a resampling and distance-based regression framework. It then selects the top significant list as target genes for downstream functional and pathway analyses. To evaluate the performance of the Snowball method, we applied it to both synthesized and TCGA data, and demonstrated the superior performance when compared with the gene-by-gene as well as Random forestsbased variable ranking and selection approaches. We also demonstrated via functional analyses of the top gene lists that the Snowball approach gives much more informative inference to the functional effects and transcriptional dysregulation of driver mutations.
DISCUSSIONIn cancer genomics, interpreting the consequences of genetic changes, such as somatic mutations, provides unprecedented opportunity to understand the molecular processes driving tumorigenesis. Several existing approaches, such as PARADIGM (), PARADIGM-SHIFT () and network-based stratification (NBS) (), have been successfully developed to explore cancer-related pathways in individual samples. However, those approaches are primarily based on overlaying multiple data types as evidence (e.g. whole genome mutations, copy number variations, mRNA changes) on existing biological networks, such as proteinprotein interaction networks. Therefore, the identified cancer-related pathways are based on the known knowledge about the networks. In addition, all these approaches are tied to the gene-level resolution by augmenting the mutation profile information onto the gene-based networks. However, somatic point mutations occurred at different positions within a gene; approaches limited to the gene level resolution will consider them the same event regardless of their position difference. This may be reasonable to tumor suppressors as nonsynonymous mutations in different locations may disrupt the gene function in a common manner. However, for those occurring in an oncogene such as BRAF, they may differ with distinct functional consequences. This is indicated by high frequency point mutations in oncogenes that suggest a selective advantage of the specific point mutation to confer cancer cell growth. To our knowledge, our approach is among the first attempts to overcome the challenge to identify the functional consequences of a single driver mutation. In addition to helping understand the tumorigenesis, a specific investigation of the downstream gene dysregulated by a driver mutation could be very useful to the development of targeted therapy strategies. Investigators are actively hunting for drugs (especially kinase inhibitors) that can target specific driver mutations. For example, FDA-approved drug Vemurafenib specifically targets BRAF driver mutation at position V600 (BRAFV600), which occurs in $50% of melanoma tumors. This represents one of the most successful molecular therapy strategies in melanoma, providing tremendous clinical benefit in personalized cancer medicine. However, patients eventually develop resistance after treatment (). Therefore, an in-depth exploration of the functional consequences of a driver mutation like BRAFV600 is critical for better understanding the molecular profiles driven by a driver mutation, and further development of appropriate molecular therapy strategies. Most tumors have three to eight driver mutations that target on different pathways and multiple driver mutations may coexist and confound. Although the Snowball approach is designed to study the consequences associated with a single driver mutation, it can be applied to samples with multiple driver mutations to investigate their common and mutation-specific target genes and pathways. However, in this case, users need to carefully examine the mutation profiles and design meaningful comparison groups so that multiple driver mutations can be properly contrasted and compared, and confounding effects minimized. As an example, we demonstrated using TCGA melanoma metastasis samples to analyze multiple driver mutations simultaneously with Snowball. First, we examined the mutational profiles across all TCGA melanoma metastasis samples. Several high frequency mutation genes including BRAF, NRAS and CDKN2A have been observed (). BRAF and NRAS exhibited mutually exclusive pattern but partially confounded with CDKN2A (). Accordingly, we defined 4 sample groups each represent a gain-of-function, recurrent mutation in BRAF and NRAS, a loss-of-function deletion in CDKN2A, or a control group without any driver mutations. These four groups had 74 BRAF V600E, 17 NRAS Q61R, 12 CDKN2A LOSS and 80 driver mutation-free samples, respectively. Next, we applied Snowball to compare each mutation group with the controls.summarized the results. Interestingly, Snowball robustly identified a high proportion of genes that were shared among all driver mutation groups, suggesting that these genes might involve in the melanoma common pathways promoted by all those driver mutations together. IPA analysis further revealed that MITF is the most significantly enriched up-regulator of those common genes. Previous studies reported that BRAF and NRAS promote gene expression of MITF mediated via MAPK pathway (). In addition, Snowball also identified many driver mutation-specific targets for future investigation. In this study, we proposed Snowball, a new discovery approach, to identify the consequences of a driver mutation when comparing the whole genome gene expression data between the patient samples with and without a driver mutation. Snowball is a de novo method that can robustly identify the target genes dysregulated by a driver mutation. It showed high sensitivity and specificity in our simulation studies and outperformed the two commonly used methods when only a small sample size is available and conventional methods do not have sufficient detection power. Good performance should indicate a reasonable balance between type I and type II errors. As shown in Supplementary Table S4, the type I error and detection rate showed a reasonable trade-off from Snowball, but LIMMA lacked the power to detect a good number of genes for downstream analyses in this case. Furthermore, the application of Snowball approach to the TCGA data on the BRAF V600 mutation in melanoma indicated its ability to discover functional, highly relevant targets, including both novel and known genes. The higher overlap with the BRAF V600 knockdown experiment results additionally supported the conclusion that Snowball has higher accuracy in identifying functional consequences caused by this recurrent driver mutation. The functional analysis of the gene lists obtained from Snowball, Random forests and LIMMA indicates that Snowball performs substantially better in identification of functional gene and pathway targets of driver mutations. Snowball was developed to meet the specific challenges in identifying the functional consequence of a driver mutation on clinical samples. Although we believe our approach could be applied to more general comparative experiments with replicates, it has not been fully evaluated. We used the TCGA data in our discovery example; however, the Snowball approach is not specifically designed for TCGA. It can be applied to any transcriptome data in which two groups can be separated by the status of a driver mutation. Based on our simulation study, Snowball is particularly effective for cases with small sample size, and perform similarly as conventional methods when sample size is large. Snowball is a computationally intensive method; however, this becomes less of an issue, as the modern computational power has substantially increased. The implemented R package has applied the R parallel framework to simultaneously utilize multiple processes that are now commonly available in lab workstations.