Motivation: Recent studies sequenced tumor samples from the same progenitor at different development stages and showed that by taking into account the phylogeny of this development, single-nucleotide variant (SNV) calling can be improved. Accurate SNV calls can better reveal early-stage tumors, identify mechanisms of cancer progression or help in drug targeting. Results: We present SNV-PPILP, a fast and easy to use tool for refining GATKs Unified Genotyper SNV calls, for multiple samples assumed to form a phylogeny. We tested SNV-PPILP on simulated data, with a varying number of samples, SNVs, read coverage and violations of the perfect phylogeny assumption. We always match or improve the accuracy of GATK, with a significant improvement on low read coverage.
IntroductionRecent studies on cancer tissue () suggest that as the disease progresses, the original tumor progresses into several different sub-clones. These sub-clones contain not only the original mutations but also new mutations added over time; this work focuses on single-nucleotide variants (SNVs). Accurate SNV calls can better reveal early-stage tumors, identify mechanisms of cancer progression or help in drug targeting. This phylogenetic assumption has been recently taken into account in, by proposing a tool for refining the SNV calling of GATK's Unified Genotyper (), the state-of-the-art SNV multi-sample caller for next-generation sequencing data. In this note, we present SNV-PPILP (SNV calling with Perfect Phylogenies and Integer Linear Programming), a tool for refining GATK's Unified Genotyper SNV calls for multiple samples. We assume these samples form a character-based phylogeny, the characters being the SNVs reported by GATK. As in, we work with the perfect phylogeny model; however, we have a new problem formulation for fitting GATK's calls to such a phylogeny, which we solve exactly using integer linear programming (ILP). SNV-PPILP can be run especially on low-coverage samples, without big violations of the perfect phylogeny model. For a significant improvement in accuracy, six or more samples are needed.