Motivation: Quantitative experimental analyses of the nuclear interior reveal a morphologically structured yet dynamic mix of membraneless compartments. Major nuclear events depend on the functional integrity and timely assembly of these intra-nuclear compartments. Yet, unknown drivers of protein mobility ensure that they are in the right place at the time when they are needed. Results: This study investigates determinants of associations between eight intra-nuclear compartments and their proteins in heterogeneous genome-wide data. We develop a model based on a range of candidate determinants, capable of mapping the intra-nuclear organization of proteins. The model integrates protein interactions, protein domains, post-translational modification sites and protein sequence data. The predictions of our model are accurate with a mean AUC (over all compartments) of 0.71. We present a complete map of the association of 3567 mouse nuclear proteins with intra-nuclear compartments. Each decision is explained in terms of essential interactions and domains, and qualified with a false discovery assessment. Using this resource, we uncover the collective role of transcription factors in each of the compartments. We create diagrams illustrating the outcomes of a Gene Ontology enrichment analysis. Associated with an extensive range of transcription factors, the analysis suggests that PML bodies coordinate regulatory immune responses.
INTRODUCTIONThe cell nucleus has morphologically distinct sub-compartments. However, unlike cytoplasmic organelles, the sub-compartments within the nucleus are not membrane-enclosed, but rather are formed via recruitment of proteins, RNA and DNA. The translocation of proteins from the cytosol into the nucleus, and their subsequent association with its sub-compartments represent two distinct levels of cellular regulation. At the first level, nuclear import and export of proteins is largely governed by the nuclearmembrane-associated nuclear pore complex (NPC) along with a set of proteins that recognize and actively assist cargo proteins (). The import signals used by cargo proteins to bind with carrier proteins were recently extensively explored and modelled (). In contrast, at the second level of regulation, the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. mechanisms underpinning the sorting of proteins into intra-nuclear compartments are not well understood. The continuous flux of proteins into and out of the nucleus as well as among intra-nuclear compartments underpins central events such as DNA replication, mRNA processing and ribosome biogenesis (). Hence, to understand these events we need to fully appreciate the mechanisms of intra-nuclear trafficking. We are now at a stage when we have access to experimental evidence of abundance, localization and modification on a proteomic scale. However, the information offered by many high-throughput techniques does not illustrate the functional purpose of nuclear proteins and compartment structures. Computational modelling, on the other hand, may be able to elucidate functional roles not captured by any individual existing experimental technology (). When attempting to gain insight into the underlying mechanisms of translocation, the ability of a model to provide explanations for its predictions is as important as the predictions' accuracy. Several predictors have been reported that evaluate the tendency of a protein to associate with a nuclear compartment (;). However, these predictors do not provide clear information as to what factors influence these predictions. Additionally, most models are not designed to incorporate any of the constraints that are fundamental to translocation; existing predictors do not recognize that proteins can associate transiently with several compartments at different stages, or that molecular interaction is a prime means of establishing and retaining such associations. Instead, the output of these predictors may be influenced by broad sequence similarity, lacking specific detail of any underlying cause. This study explores determinants of intra-nuclear compartment association in heterogeneous genome-wide data, and develops a model capable of mapping the intra-nuclear organization of proteins. We use this model to predict the association of the mouse proteome with different intra-nuclear compartments. We also portray transcription factors in terms of how they associate with nuclear architecture to impart novel insights about their 'spatial' synergy. We assign functional roles to individual compartments via their constituent regulatory proteins, using over-represented Gene Ontology (GO) terms in shared target genes.
CONCLUSIONWe introduce a computational model that integrates evidence garnered from protein interaction, domain and post-translational modification data, to systematically address fundamental questions of nuclear compartment localization. We use a Bayesian Network, a probabilistic and transparent modelling framework, whose decisions can clearly be traced back to the influence of the provided biological features. After carefully designing and training our model, we identify and make available the determinants of intra-nuclear compartment association of the full mouse nuclear proteome. The model predicts intra-nuclear compartment associations of each protein with an accuracy substantially above chance (AUC is 0.71) and indicates the individual factors that influence its decisions. The mobility of a nuclear protein is typically determined by its interaction with other nuclear components and is often modulated by post-translational modifications, including sumoylation. We also note that specific functional domains are sometimes enriched in compartments and can be used to determine likely associations. This work presents a unique intra-nuclear protein association map involving all the main compartments for 3567 mouse proteins, and provides detailed justifications for each individual prediction. This resource will enable cell biologists to effectively investigate what compartments a protein of interest is likely to associate with, and identify the factors including interactions and domain features that modulate this sorting or at least unify proteins from the same compartment. Whether nuclear compartments in general fill a regulatory role remains an open questionbut our analyses lend significant support to the idea that PML bodies and chromatin are implicated in regulatory processes. We offer an analysis that is not simply based on individual TFs, but one that groups them according to compartment association to identify their downstream targets. We publish detailed Gene Ontology diagrams for each compartment that will allow biologists to investigate the statistical support for any regulatory function and to guide targeted experimentation.shows the prediction accuracy for different BN architectures. Supplementarylists the PPI, domain and motif variables provided to the model from biological evidence. Supplementarycontains the top-25 predictions for each compartment, the basis for the predictions and supporting evidence from the literature where available. Supplementarylists compartment predictions for all proteins. Supplementaryprovides the list of compartment-associated TFs with their TRANSFAC binding motifs. Supplementary Figures S1S7 show trees of GO terms that are over-represented in the set of target genes of TFs associated with a given intra-nuclear compartment. Terms are coloured green if they can be considered over-represented using only the known set of compartment-associated TFs. Terms coloured blue are only discovered when using both known and predicted TFs; thus, blue terms constitute novel functional predictions made on the basis of results from our model. Uncoloured terms have been included only to provide context based on the GO term hierarchy.