Motivation: Direct sequencing of microbes in human ecosystems (the human microbiome) has complemented single genome cultivation and sequencing to understand and explore the impact of commensal microbes on human health. As sequencing technologies improve and costs decline, the sophistication of data has outgrown available computational methods. While several existing machine learning methods have been adapted for analyzing microbiome data recently, there is not yet an efficient and dedicated algorithm available for multiclass classification of human microbiota. Results: By combining instance-based and model-based learning, we propose a novel sparse distance-based learning method for simultaneous class prediction and feature (variable or taxa, which is used interchangeably) selection from multiple treatment populations on the basis of 16S rRNA sequence count data. Our proposed method simultaneously minimizes the intraclass distance and maximizes the interclass distance with many fewer estimated parameters than other methods. It is very efficient for problems with small sample sizes and unbalanced classes, which are common in metagenomic studies. We implemented this method in a MATLAB toolbox called MetaDistance. We also propose several approaches for data normalization and variance stabilization transformation in MetaDistance. We validate this method on several real and simulated 16S rRNA datasets to show that it outperforms existing methods for classifying metagenomic data. This article is the first to address simultaneous multifeature selection and class prediction with metagenomic count data. Availability: The MATLAB toolbox is freely available online at
INTRODUCTIONThe human body is inhabited by on the order of 10 14 bacteria, collectively known as the human microbiota, which contains 100 times more genes (the microbiome) than in the human genome. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Since these microbes interact with our bodies and provide functions lacking in our genome, changes in the microbial community structure are thought to impact our health. Given the vast number of genes in the microbiome and our inability to sequence all of them, a marker gene is often used for comparison among samples. The 16S rRNA gene is the most common marker gene used since it is universally present and well conserved among prokaryotes. Sequencing of 16S rRNA in an environment containing a mixed population allows the surveying of community structure without biases from culture-based methods at a relatively low cost. Whole genome shotgun (WGS) sequencing of the community (a metagenome), on the other hand, can provide estimates of functional capabilities of microbiome (), but the cost is substantially higher. A main promise of metagenomics is that it will accelerate the discovery of novel genes and new drug target and provide new insights into diseases with unknown etiologies (). The first step of 16S rRNA metagenomic analysis usually involves the classification of sequences by organism to reduce the dimensionality of the dataset (from millions of sequences to thousands of organisms). In the process, the number of sequences classified to each organism is kept to provide an estimate on organism abundance. Classification of sequences are done by comparing sequences from a sample to 16S rRNA from known taxa or by clustering of similar sequences into operational taxonomic unit (OTU), which represent an unnamed taxon. The end result is a series of sequence read counts associated with taxa in the sample. A popular software package for assigning 16S rRNA to known taxa based on k-mer frequencies is called ribosomal database project (RDP) Classifier (). In addition to sequence classification, software such as Mothur () and QIIME () provides diversity metrics and sample comparison statistics allowing comparison of microbiome profiles using alpha (within-community) and beta (across-communities) diversities. For graphical comparison, MEGAN () can compare the OTU composition of frequency-normalized samples (). From these analyses, we can figure out what organisms are in each of the samples or classes of samples. While these tools can be used to compare and cluster samples based on microbiome profiles, they do not allow for the identification of differentially abundant microbes in samples. Therefore, the important question of which organisms (by virtue of their presence/absence or relative abundance) distinguish one