Motivation: Targeted data extraction methods are attractive ways to obtain quantitative peptide information from a proteomics experiment. Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Spectra (SWATH) and Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) methods increase reproducibility of acquired data because the classical precursor selection is omitted and all present precursors are fragmented. However, especially for targeted data extraction, MS coordinates (retention time information precursor and fragment masses) are required for the particular entities (peptide ions). These coordinates are usually generated in a so-called discovery experiment earlier on in the project if not available in public spectral library repositories. The quality of the assay panel is crucial to ensure appropriate downstream analysis. For that, a method is needed to create spectral libraries and to export customizable assay panels. Results: Here, we present a versatile set of functions to generate assay panels from spectral libraries for use in targeted data extraction methods (SWATH/DIA) in the area of proteomics. Availability and implementation: specL is implemented in the R language and available under an open-source license (GPL-3) in Bioconductor since BioC 3.0 (R-3.1) http://www.bioconductor.org (Trachsel et al., 2015). A vignette with a complete tutorial describing data import/export and analysis is included in the package and can also be found as supplement material of this article.
IntroductionTargeted proteomics is a fast evolving field in proteomics and was elected as method of the year in 2012 by the Nature journal (). Methods such as Selected Reaction Monitoring (SRM), Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Spectra (SWATH) MS () and DIA represent promising perspectives for the identification and quantification of peptides and proteins. In these targeted proteomics methods a predefined set of fragment ion signals (transitions) are extracted over the chromatographic time. All methods have in common: the need for precise MS coordinates composed of precursor mass, fragment masses and retention time. These coordinates are stored in spectral libraries. Spectral libraries are generated from shotgun MS/MS data. A protocol on how to build high-quality assay libraries can be found in. Starting from one spectral library, different assays can be extracted according to the requirements of different types of mass spectrometers. Here, an R/Bioconductor package is presented, which creates specific assay panels from peptide identification results, e.g. from BiblioSpec files () or Mascot result files. specL is a versatile set of functions that).