Motivation: Most computational tools for small non-coding RNAs (sRNA) sequencing data analysis focus in microRNAs (miRNAs), overlooking other types of sRNAs that show multi-mapping hits. Here, we have developed a pipeline to non-redundantly quantify all types of sRNAs, and extract patterns of expression in biologically defined groups. We have used our tool to characterize and profile sRNAs in post-mortem brain samples of control individuals and Parkinsons disease (PD) cases at early-premotor and late-symptomatic stages. Results: Clusters of co-expressed sRNAs mapping onto tRNAs significantly separated premotor and motor cases from controls. A similar result was obtained using a matrix of miRNAs slightly varying in sequence (isomiRs). The present framework revealed sRNA alterations at premotor stages of PD, which might reflect initial pathogenic perturbations. This tool may be useful to discover sRNA expression patterns linked to different biological conditions. Availability and Implementation: The full code is available at http://github.com/lpantano/seqbuster.Contact:
IntroductionRNA high-throughput sequencing strategies have revealed a plethora of small non-coding RNAs (sRNAs) with diverse functions as regulators of gene expression (). While micro RNAs (miRNAs) are the best-known class of sRNAs, for many others the biogenesis, regulation and cellular roles are largely unknown. Accumulating evidence suggests that RNA fragments derived from small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) and transfer RNA (tRNA) are not just random degradation products but rather stable elements, which may have functional activity in physiological and pathological conditions, influencing gene expression and alternative splicing events (sensitize cells to oxidative-stress-induced p53 activation and p53dependent cell death indicating that these sRNAs may participate in neurodegenerative processes (). In the central nervous system (CNS), miRNA are essential in cell-type specification and differentiation, and post-mitotic longterm neuronal maintenance. Perturbations of miRNA pathways have emerged as effectors of CNS damage, contributing to impaired cell homeostasis and neuronal death. However, the relevance of other types of sRNAs in analogous processes has been little explored, constituting an untapped source of bioactive compounds. Several miRNAs pathways are altered in neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson's disease (PD), the most common movement disorder (). We have previously shown that the expression of several miRNAs is altered in brains of patients at early/premotor and late/motor stages of PD (). These miRNAs modulate mitochondrial function and neuronal viability, suggesting a contribution of their deregulation in early pathogenic events. In addition, miRNA profiling in peripheral blood suggests specific expression signatures in PD (). Furthermore, in leukocytes of PD patients, sRNA deep sequencing reveals splicing changes that classify brain region transcriptomes (). Characterization of sRNA species alteration in PD may provide the basis to understand pathogenesis of PD and to target new non-invasive diagnosis biomarkers. However, a full characterization of the sRNA transcriptome in PD (including species other than miRNAs), is still lacking. Current bioinformatics resources for the analysis of sRNA sequencing data are mainly focused in miRNA detection and prediction. The characterization of other types of sRNA is not deeply addressed in these tools and only a few of them produce outputs for downstream analysis (). A major drawback in the analysis and quantification of the nonmiRNA sRNA is the presence of multi-mapping reads that derive from tRNAs or non-coding RNA genes with duplication events on the genome. The majority of the current bioinformatic tools apply inaccurate strategies to handle these types of sequences and: (i) directly discard them, resulting in an under-estimation of these elements or (ii) count them everywhere they map, causing an overestimation of their expression and making incorrect the use of count-based differential expression analysis, since these methods assume that reads are counted once. Here, we have developed a framework to (i) characterize the full set of sRNAs using an improved version of the SeqCluster tool () that deals with multi-mapping reads and, (ii) extract patterns of expression through data-mining analyses. We used this framework to quantify all types of sRNAs from highthroughput sequencing data of post-mortem brain samples at premotor-and motor stages of PD and age-matched controls. Subsequent data-mining analyses using the SeqCluster output uncovered sRNA signatures at premotor stages of the disease, involving several types of sRNAs. These results suggest that general sRNA perturbations occur early in PD and further indicate that our pipeline is a sensitive tool to profile all types of sRNA.