Peptide identification algorithm is a major bottleneck for mass spectrometry based chemical cross-linking experiments. Our lab recently developed an intensity-incorporated peptide identification algorithm, and here we implemented this scheme for cross-linked peptide discovery. Our program, SQID-XLink, searches all regular, dead-end, intra and inter cross-linked peptides simultaneously, and its effectiveness is validated by testing a published dataset. This new algorithm provides an alternative approach for high confidence cross-linking identification. Availability: SQID-XLink program is freely available for download from http://PRSice.infoContact:
INTRODUCTIONChemical cross-linking coupled with mass spectrometry is a powerful approach to analyze protein structures and interactions (). In such an experiment, spatially adjacent amino acid residues from one or more proteins are covalently linked by chemical reagents. The cross-linked proteins are then enzymatically digested and the resulting cross-linked peptide pairs can be detected by mass spectrometry. Identification of these cross-linked peptides enables researchers to define the interaction sites of proteins in a complex in their native states and to build or confirm structural models. Compared with traditional techniques such as NMR and X-ray crystallography, mass spectrometry-based chemical cross-linking does not require a large quantity of sample (). Moreover, recent development of high-resolution and high-throughput mass spectrometers such as the Orbitrap have offered increased efficiency and sensitivity required for the identification of cross-linked peptides. Although the chemical cross-linking approach is promising, the data analysis for chemical cross-linking forms a major limitation for this technique (). This is mainly because cross-linked sequences are non-linear, thus traditional protein database search algorithms such as Sequest () and X!Tandem () cannot be directly employed. The development of new database searching algorithms enables more and more protein identification from a single shot-gun proteomics experiment; however, these novel approaches have seldom implemented a cross-linking search function to increase the number of identified cross-linked peptides. Moreover, many current cross-linking algorithms are slow, lack graphical user interfaces and need extensive manual data interpretation before and after the search. These shortcomings motivated us to make a powerful and user-friendly tool to identify cross-linked peptides. Here we report the implementation of our recently developed peptide identification algorithm, SQID (), to cross-linked peptide identification (SQID-XLink). Our algorithm features an intensity incorporated scoring function: when a strong peak in a spectrum agrees with the statistical value, the confidence will be boosted. For example, if a CID-induced cleavage occurs N-terminal to proline or C-terminal to glutamic acid or aspartic acid, the score will be higher. This is similar to manually checking a spectrum to confirm if the strong peaks are from cleavages expected to lead to abundant peaks. Due to the low abundance of cross-linked peptides and corresponding poorer spectral quality, incorporating intensity into cross-linking search algorithms will be potentially very beneficial. In addition, SQID-XLink searches all regular, dead-end (cross-linked at only one reactive site of the cross-linker), intra-peptide (cross-linked at two locations within a single peptide) and inter-peptide cross-links simultaneously with the same scoring function, so that the probability of false identification can be minimized.
CONCLUSIONWe have introduced SQID-XLink, an open source program for cross-linked peptide identification. By testing it with a publisheddataset and comparing it with the results of existing algorithms, SQID-XLink demonstrated its ability to identify more crosslinked peptides at high confidence. In addition, SQID-XLink is fast and has an easy-to-use graphical user interface. More cross-linker support and better visualization of the results will be added in the near future.