Motivation: Genome-wide RNA interference (RNAi) experiments are becoming a widely used approach for identifying intracellular molecular pathways of specific functions. However, detecting all relevant genes involved in a biological process is challenging, because typically only few samples per gene knock-down are available and readouts tend to be very noisy. We investigate the reliability of top scoring hit lists obtained from RNAi screens, compare the performance of different ranking methods, and propose a new ranking method to improve the reproducibility of gene selection. Results: The performance of different ranking methods is assessed by the size of the stable sets they produce, i.e. the subsets of genes which are estimated to be re-selected with high probability in independent validation experiments. Using stability selection, we also define a new ranking method, called stability ranking, to improve the stability of any given base ranking method. Ranking methods based on mean, median, t-test and rank-sum test, and their stability-augmented counterparts are compared in simulation studies and on three microscopy image RNAi datasets. We find that the rank-sum test offers the most favorable trade-off between ranking stability and accuracy and that stability ranking improves the reproducibility of all and the accuracy of several ranking methods. Availability: Stability ranking is freely available as the R/Bioconductor package staRank at
INTRODUCTIONGenome-wide gene silencing experiments are important in many fields of biology and medicine as they provide a first overview of which genes might play a role for a specific experimental condition. Many screens have been performed to study signaling in model organisms like Drosophila melanogaster (). In infection biology, viruses such as Influenza and HIV () as well as bacteria, including Salmonella, Bartonella and Shigella (To whom correspondence should be addressed), have been analyzed to identify the key host genes involved in pathogen entry into the cell. In cancer research, RNA interference (RNAi) screens have been used to study dysregulated signaling pathways and to identify novel drug targets (). In such high-throughput experiments one faces the problem of detecting the typically few relevant variables from a large, highdimensional, noisy dataset. We focus here on data from microscopy image-based RNAi screens (), where genes are knocked down individually by post-transciptional gene silencing. Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) of 22 base pairs are introduced into a cell, where they induce cleavage and degradation of a target messenger RNA, complementary to the siRNA and thus to the eventual depletion of the respective protein (). A typical setup for such a microscopy image-based screen consists of several 384-well plates, where each well contains cells with exactly one gene knocked down. There are different strategies for the knock-down, two of which will be covered by different datasets we analyze in Section 4.2. The first is to take replicates of the same biological experiment, meaning that for each gene, the same siRNA knock-down is performed several times. The second strategy uses biologically different experiments per gene. Here, each well for the same gene contains a different type of siRNA targeting the gene (). A third approach is to pool these different siRNAs in one well, each of them in lower concentration (). This strategy adresses two main problems of siRNAs. The first is inefficient knock-down of a gene, for example due to inefficient siRNA binding. Secondly, an siRNA can have so called off-target effects, arising from limited binding specificity or other often unknown pharmacological effects (). After transfection with siRNAs, the cells are put in the experimental condition to be studied and subsequently they are imaged. The images are processed by an image segmentation and analysis software and the final experimental readout consists of one or more phenotypic measures retrieved from fluorescence signals of stained proteins. In most cases, the goal of a first genome-wide screen is to prioritize genes to select a set of top scoring 'hits' for which a secondary validation experiment is performed. For a 1D readout the usual procedure is to rank the genes by their mean or median readout across replicates. However, to account for the variation among replicates genes can also be ranked according to a test
CONCLUSIONWe have applied the concept of stability selection to gene rankings to generate more reproducible ordered hit lists for data generated from phenotypic RNAi experiments. We have shown that the robustness of different ranking methods can be very different and that the stable set size can be used as a measure of reproducibility. Since imagebased RNAi screening data tend to be very noisy and sparse, the use of stability ranking can improve stability, especially in the top part of the rankings which is of main interest. In the present study, the ranksum test ranking and its stability ranking version have resulted in the most reproducible hit lists. Stability ranking is very flexible and can be applied to any gene ranking method. It does not only improve ranking statistics that ignore the gene-wise variance, such as mean or median, but it also improved the reproducibility of a statistic like the rank-sum test. Thus, irrespective of the chosen ranking statistic, it appears beneficial to complement the selection of top scoring genes with stable genes to increase validation rates in secondary screens. In principle, the stable sets could also hint at a reasonable cutoffs for hit selection. Analyzing the growth curve of the stable sets for the datasets used in the present study, no such cutoff was be found, but this may be investigated further in future work on different datasets. Funding: SystemsX.ch, the Swiss initiative in systems biology, under IPhdand RTD(InfectX), evaluated by the Swiss National Science Foundation. Conflict of Interest: none declared.