Motivation: Comparative modeling of RNA is known to be important for making accurate secondary structure predictions. RNA structure prediction tools such as PPfold or RNAalifold use an aligned set of sequences in predictions. Obtaining a multiple alignment from a set of sequences is quite a challenging problem itself, and the quality of the alignment can affect the quality of a prediction. By implementing RNA secondary structure prediction in a statistical alignment framework, and predicting structures from multiple alignment samples instead of a single fixed alignment, it may be possible to improve predictions. Results: We have extended the program StatAlign to make use of RNA-specific features, which include RNA secondary structure prediction from multiple alignments using either a thermodynamic approach (RNAalifold) or a Stochastic Context-Free Grammars (SCFGs) approach (PPfold). We also provide the user with scores relating to the quality of a secondary structure prediction, such as information entropy values for the combined space of secondary structures and sampled alignments, and a reliability score that predicts the expected number of correctly predicted base pairs. Finally, we have created RNA secondary structure visualization plugins and automated the process of setting up Markov Chain Monte Carlo runs for RNA alignments in StatAlign. Availability and implementation: The software is available from
INTRODUCTIONOur recently created Statistical Alignment package, StatAlign (), performs simultaneous multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree reconstruction using a statistical alignment strategy (). This method operates in a Bayesian framework and uses the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method to sample from the joint posterior space of alignments, trees and model parameters. It works with a realistic insertiondeletion model on the gene level, TKF92 () and offers a selection of substitution models. The clear advantage of this approach is that the complete evolutionary history is modelled and estimated in a single sound statistical framework. RNA secondary structure prediction is an important problem in molecular biologythe function of the RNA molecule depends on the way it folds. Stochastic Context-Free Grammars (SCFGs) have been used to great effect in programs such as Pfold (), which has recently been reimplemented. They use the homology of RNA sequences to help make accurate predictions, as the base pair complementarity must be kept for structural conservation. Multiple sequence alignment in itself is a challenging problem, as most multiple alignment programs rely on score-based heuristics rather than attempting to model the underlying biological process of substitution, insertion and deletion. It is therefore desirable to implement RNA folding in a statistical alignment framework to gain the advantages from statistical alignment, including being able to predict from multiple alignment samples, and statistical measures associated with the probabilistic model.