Motivation: Global expression patterns within cells are used for purposes ranging from the identification of disease biomarkers to basic understanding of cellular processes. Unfortunately, tissue samples used in cancer studies are usually composed of multiple cell types and the non-cancerous portions can significantly affect expression profiles. This severely limits the conclusions that can be made about the specificity of gene expression in the cell-type of interest. However, statistical analysis can be used to identify differentially expressed genes that are related to the biological question being studied. Results: We propose a statistical approach to expression deconvolution from mixed tissue samples in which the proportion of each component cell type is unknown. Our method estimates the proportion of each component in a mixed tissue sample; this estimate can be used to provide estimates of gene expression from each component. We demonstrate our technique on xenograft samples from breast cancer research and publicly available experimental datasets found in the National Center for Biotechnology Information Gene Expression Omnibus repository. Availability: R code (http://www.r-project.org/) for estimating sample proportions is freely available to non-commercial users and available at
INTRODUCTIONIn the past decade, gene expression profiling has demonstrated an amazing potential for identifying disease biomarkers and improving our understanding of cellular processes (). An issue not often discussed is that many biological samples contain mixtures of cell or tissue types (); for example, cancer cells may only constitute part of a biopsy sample. The amount of each mRNA detected in a microarray experiment is influenced by the composition of the sample; observed changes in gene expression may simply reflect a change in the distribution of the cell types in the sample population (). In breast cancernoticed that the proportion of benign tissue of biopsy samples can significantly affect expression profiles, and taking into consideration this proportion can improve response prediction. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.Sample heterogeneity severely limits the conclusions that can be made about specificity of gene expression and may explain in part why the results of numerous gene expression experiments have failed rigorous validation (). Given a heterogeneous sample there exist laboratory approaches to separate cells of distinct types. Laser capture microdissection (LCM;) is a popular technique for isolating regions of a biological sample that are separated by distances of a few cell widths. However, the cell types of interest need to be morphologically distinct. LCM, is very time-consuming and specialized equipment, is required to obtain a sufficient quantity of biological material for profiling. If the sample of interest is in suspension, cell-sorting methods can be used to isolate cells of interest. This requires a suitable biomarker for the cell type of interest. The main drawback of cell sorting with respect to profiling is that the act of separation itself can alter gene expression (). We present a method for deconvoluting expression from a heterogeneous sample into components that reflect the contributions to the observed expression attributable to each component cell or tissue type. The key component of this method is the estimation, from a mixed tissue sample, of the proportion of mRNA from a single tissue type. Estimation is based on specific logarithmic data transformations and theory from differential geometry regarding the radius of curvature (). We demonstrate our method on several datasets from breast cancer xenograft studies, from both proprietary sources and the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/;).