Motivation: Glycosylation is one of the most important post-translational modifications of proteins and explains some aspects of the diversification of higher organisms not explained by template-driven synthesis. For glycomics to mature as much as genomics and proteomics, the necessary tools need to be developed and tested. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry is one of the gold standards for oligosaccharide analysis and leads to large amounts of data, not easily interpreted manually. We present a study on the testing and validation of statistical analysis tools to aid the structural elucidation of these analyses as well as using the results to answer biologically relevant questions. Results: We show the usefulness of data reduction and statistical analysis in the interpretation of complex glycosylation data. The reduction does not result in the loss of importance of the glycosylation information as shown by comparison of control and disease samples in two tissue types.
INTRODUCTIONGlycosylation is regarded as one of the most important co-and post-translational protein modifications. There are two main types, bonded to the nitrogen of an asparagine in the consensus sequence Asn-X-Ser/Thr (N-linked) or to the oxygen of a serine/threonine, with a favourable placed proline in the-1 or +3 position (O-linked). Oligosaccharide attachment to protein sites explains some aspects of the functional diversification of higher organisms beyond the template driven gene-encoded polypeptide synthesis. The role and impact of glycosylation is complex and not very well understood and many studies have provided profiles from glycosylated proteins (glycome and/or glyco-proteome) highlighting a number of different causative factors (), e.g. underlying proteins, tissue location, disease state, presence of pathogens, immune response system, etc. It is reasonable to assume that changes in glycosylation are viable targets for biomarker-based research projects (). Genomic and proteomic studies often make use of microarray data to explain changes in phenotype, manifestation of a disease state or * To whom correspondence should be addressed. to explain a certain biological pathway. These data are quite large, with thousands of microscopic array spots being recorded. Statistical methods have been developed to deal with the interpretation of this type of data. Mass Spectrometry is a powerful technique in the structural elucidation of glycans (), and in particular, liquid chromatographymass spectrometry (LC-MS) which allows separation of isomeric structures (). Glycome data from LC-MS can be data-rich and difficult to transform into useful 'knowledge', either analytical or biological. Unlike the proteomic domain, oligosaccharide structural databases, and the tools to interrogate them are still in their infancy (). O-linked glycosylation is a major part of the structure of mucins in the mucous and usually account for more than 50% of the mass of the protein. As mucins mainly have a protective function on epithelial surfaces as well as in secretions (e.g. stomach lining, saliva;) changes in their glycosylation can be indicative of inflammation, lessened lubrication, pathogen attack, etc. (). Blood group antigens are expressed on O-linked structures, and the presence or absence of the Sec fucosyltransferase (FUT2) determines the secretor status of individuals (). A data-set of published O-linked oligosaccharide LC-MS data from different tissue types and/or inflammatory disease states () was compiled to compare normal and inflammatory glycosylation response in different tissues. By converting LC-MS data into a mass spectrometry average composition (MSAC) metric that describes each sample, statistical analysis could be simplified and facilitate screening of large sets of sugar-data that would be difficult by manual interpretation. To achieve this for LC-MS data each sample was reduced to a monosaccharide composition that describes the normalized number of sugar residues and modifications per glycan molecule. This method could also be applied to MALDITOF data not taking isomers into consideration, or for glycopeptide data as well as other types of glycosylation (e.g. N-linked, glycosyaminoglycans etc). One advantage of reducing the data to this type of metric is the elimination of misinterpretation of structure due to re-arrangements (). Another advantage is reducing the need for full structural elucidation of samples.
DISCUSSIONGlycosylation is recognized as an important post-translational modification involved in cellcell recognition and communication (). Changes in glycosylation due to inflammatory response (), can arise in a number of different ways, i.e. biosynthetic alterations of transferases, donors, acceptors or glycosidases; changes in protein expression or cellular location (). De-coding these changes and their contribution to the glyco-profile of a sample will allow greater understanding of the inflammatory response. The MSAC metric allows the reduction of complicated data, but in contrast to traditional monosaccharide compositional analysis, there is a common baseline among the samples (Core HexNAc). An example of the difference between the two methods of normalization is given in Supplementary Table S3.