Motivation: Metabolic engineering aims at modulating the capabilities of metabolic networks by changing the activity of biochemical reactions. The existing constraint-based approaches for metabolic engineering have proven useful, but are limited only to reactions catalogued in various pathway databases. Results: We consider the alternative of designing synthetic strategies which can be used not only to characterize the maximum theoretically possible product yield but also to engineer networks with optimal conversion capability by using a suitable biochemically feasible reaction called stoichiometric capacitance. In addition, we provide a theoretical solution for decomposing a given stoichiometric capacitance over a set of known enzymatic reactions. We determine the stoichiometric capacitance for genome-scale metabolic networks of 10 organisms from different kingdoms of life and examine its implications for the alterations in flux variability patterns. Our empirical findings suggest that the theoretical capacity of metabolic networks comes at a cost of dramatic systems changes. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONMetabolic reactions play a fundamental role in sustaining cell growth through the import of nutrients from the environment and their conversion into molecules rendering a viable organism. Metabolic reactions do not operate in isolation; they are in fact related through shared metabolites and form large-scale metabolic networks (). Altering the structure of metabolic networks provides the means for modulating their capabilities. To this end, metabolic engineering aims at re-programming cellular networks by controlling the activity of biochemical reactions in order to obtain a desirable output and has already found numerous application in biotechnology and medicine (). From the early attempts of engineering bacterial strains, it had become apparent that the biosynthetic capabilities of organisms are limited not only by the input in a form of nutrients but also by * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the reaction fluxes obeying the basic physico-chemical constraints. Therefore, constraint-based approaches have gained considerable attention in the metabolic engineering community (). Based on the stoichiometry of the considered reactions, flux balance analysis (FBA) has provided the basic framework for investigating reaction fluxes in a metabolic network (). Extensions of this framework have subsequently allowed systematic investigations of network modifications directed at enhancing the production of selected targets. For instance, OptKnock (), OptStrain (), OptReg (), OptForce () and CASOP () as well as EMILiO () have facilitated prediction and in silico verification of network modifications, including insertion and deletion of reactions from other species or underand over-expression of gene products. All of these alternatives for network modifications rely on the assumption that gene expression is proportional to reaction flux. The findings of these optimization-based approaches suggest alternative pathways and/or flux redirections necessary to achieve the objective of interest. We note that the enumerated approaches, although very useful in designing strategies for metabolic engineering, are limited to the reactions already catalogued in various databases (). The performance of the suggested strategies is in turn determined by the maximum achievable yield of a desired target which is calculated with the help of various optimization techniques. Herein, we argue that quantifying the performance of metabolic engineering strategies in a given metabolic network should rely on the maximum 'theoretically' possible product yield in the network, given by the optimal inter-conversion of metabolites by using any biochemically feasible reaction. The notion of theoretical capacity refers to the estimated maximum production that can be delivered during a given period, provided a set of inputs. To emphasize the analogy, in the case of metabolic networks, the inputs are represented by the nutrients together with the set of metabolic intermediates and reactions, while the maximum production to be estimated is given by the suitably chosen objective function. Clearly, the inputs are given by the existing biochemical knowledge structured in a form of cellular networks together with the corresponding environmental constraints.