Motivation: Template-based prediction of DNA binding proteins requires not only structural similarity between target and template structures but also prediction of binding affinity between the target and DNA to ensure binding. Here, we propose to predict protein– DNA binding affinity by introducing a new volume-fraction correction to a statistical energy function based on a distance-scaled, finite, ideal-gas reference (DFIRE) state. Results: We showed that this energy function together with the structural alignment program TM-align achieves the Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) of 0.76 with an accuracy of 98%, a precision of 93% and a sensitivity of 64%, for predicting DNA binding proteins in a benchmark of 179 DNA binding proteins and 3797 non-binding proteins. The MCC value is substantially higher than the best MCC value of 0.69 given by previous methods. Application of this method to 2235 structural genomics targets uncovered 37 as DNA binding proteins, 27 (73%) of which are putatively DNA binding and only 1 protein whose annotated functions do not contain DNA binding, while the remaining proteins have unknown function. The method provides a highly accurate and sensitive technique for structure-based prediction of DNA binding proteins. Availability: The method is implemented as a part of the Structure-based function-Prediction On-line Tools (SPOT)
INTRODUCTIONDNA binding proteins are proteins that make specific binding to either single or double-stranded DNA. They play an essential role in transcription regulation, replication, packaging, repair and rearrangement. With completion of many genome projects and many more in progress, more and more proteins are discovered with unknown function (). The structures for some of those function-unknown proteins are solved because of structural genomics projects (). Functional annotations of these proteins are particularly challenging because the goal of structural genomics is to cover the sequence space of proteins so that homology modeling becomes a reliable tool for structure prediction of any proteins and, thus, many targets in structural genomics have low sequence identity to the proteins with known function. Therefore, it is necessary to develop computational tools that utilize not only sequence but also structural information for function prediction (). Many methods have been developed for structure-based prediction of DNA binding proteins. These include function prediction through homology and structural comparisons (). Others explore sequence and structural features of DNA binding and non-binding proteins with sophisticated machine learning methods such as neural network (), logistic regression () and support vector machines (). Recently,proposed a new twostep approach, called DBD-Hunter (), for structure-based prediction of DNA binding proteins. In DBD-Hunter, the structure of a target protein is first structurally aligned to known proteinDNA complexes and the aligned complex structures are used to build the complex structures between DNA and the target protein. The predicted complex structures are, then, employed for judging DNA binding or not by structural similarity scores (TM-Score) and predicted proteinDNA binding affinities. TM-align () and a contact-based statistical energy function are employed in the first and second steps of DBD-Hunter, respectively. DBD-Hunter is found to substantially improve over the methods based on sequence comparison only (PSI-BLAST), structural alignment only (TM-align) and a logistic regression technique (). In this study, we investigate if one can further improve the prediction of DNA binding proteins by employing a different statistical energy function for predicting binding affinity. Our knowledge-based energy function is distance-dependent and built on a distance-scaled, finite, ideal gas reference (DFIRE) state originallyPage: 1858 18571863
DISCUSSIONWe have developed a highly accurate method (DDNA3O) to predict DNA binding proteins. This is accomplished by developing a new statistical energy function for predicting DNA binding proteins. We found that introducing an atom-type-dependent volume fraction correction and DNA mutation in the DFIRE statistical energy function leads to a significant improvement in the performance in predicting DNA binding proteins (MCC = 0.76 for DB179/NB3797 by DDNA3O). This is a significant improvement from MCC of 0.69 given by optimized DBD-Hunter. Application of DDNA3Oto structural genome targets confirms the accuracy of the proposed method with 73% potentially correct prediction of DNA binding proteins (annotated as putative DNA binding), 3% potentially false positives (function annotated but not DNA binding) and the rest unknown. For DDNA3, the effect of DNA mutation is small for improving the MCC value of the training set (from 0.72 to 0.73) but is significant for improving the sensitivity from 46/104 (44%) to 50/104 (48%) of the APO test set. We further find that the mutation leads to no significant improvement in sequence identity between template DNA sequence and wild-type DNA sequence. The sequence identities to wild-type DNA sequences before and after mutation are both close to the random value of 25%. One possible reason is the absence of structural refinement for protein during Page: 1863 18571863