Motivation: Structured sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA) models have been used to identify imaging genetic associations. These models either use group lasso or graph-guided fused lasso to conduct feature selection and feature grouping simultaneously. The group lasso based methods require prior knowledge to define the groups, which limits the capability when prior knowledge is incomplete or unavailable. The graph-guided methods overcome this drawback by using the sample correlation to define the constraint. However, they are sensitive to the sign of the sample correlation, which could introduce undesirable bias if the sign is wrongly estimated. Results: We introduce a novel SCCA model with a new penalty, and develop an efficient optimization algorithm. Our method has a strong upper bound for the grouping effect for both positively and negatively correlated features. We show that our method performs better than or equally to three competing SCCA models on both synthetic and real data. In particular, our method identifies stronger canonical correlations and better canonical loading patterns, showing its promise for revealing interesting imaging genetic associations.
IntroductionSparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA) (), is a powerful bi-multivariate analysis technique (). It has recently become a popular method in brain imaging genetics studies to identify bi-multivariate associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and imaging quantitative traits (QTs). SCCA was initially proposed byand Witten andin the analysis of gene expression data. This first SCCA model introduced the ' 1-norm (lasso) term into the traditional CCA model to make both canonical loadings sparse. The penalized matrix decomposition (PMD) technique was used to solve this sparse learning problem. For a group of correlated features, lasso tends to randomly select only one feature from the group, and often cannot recover all the relevant and correlated features.and Witten and Tibshirani (2009) also proposed the fused lasso based SCCA, which takes into account the spatial correlation among features. Thus, neighboring features tend to be selected together to help discover regional structures. In order to accommodate other types of structures in the data, several structured SCCA methods () arise recently. We group these SCCA methods into two kinds according to their distinct regularization terms. One kind used the group lasso penalty, and the other kind used the graph/networkguided fused lasso penalty to conduct feature selection and feature grouping. The first kind, i.e. the group lasso based SCCA, required prior knowledge to define the group structure.incorporated the priori knowledge into the SCCA model with a group lasso regularizer, where the same PMD technique was used to identify non-overlapping group structure.proposed S2CCA using group lasso, and incorporated both the covariance matrix information and the priori knowledge information to discover group-level bi-multivariate associations. The KG-SCCA () was an extension of S2CCA (), which also employed the group lasso to constrain one canonical loading. This type of SCCA methods may not be useful when the biological priori knowledge is incomplete or unavailable. Of note, it is a hard task to provide precise prior knowledge in real biomedical studies. The second kind of structured SCCA methods use graph/ network-guided fused lasso penalties. These methods can perform well on any given priori knowledge. In case the prior knowledge is not available, these methods can also work via using the sample correlation to define the graph/network constraint.proposed ssCCA using a graph-guided fused ' 2-norm penalty for one canonical loading of the taxa based on their relationship on a phylogenetic tree.proposed a network-guided fused lasso based SCCA which penalized every pair of features by the ' 1-norm of u i  u j . It could be viewed as an extension to the fused lasso based SCCA without demanding the features being ordered.proposed GN-SCCA which penalizes the ' 2-norm of u i  u j . These two SCCA methods could only handle the positively correlated features.proposed an improved network-structured SCCA (NS-SCCA) by incorporating the sign of the sample correlation within features. NS-SCCA penalized the ' 1-norm of u i  signq ij u j  to tune a similar weight value for u i and u j if q ij  0, or dissimilar if q ij  0. The aforementioned KG-SCCA () employed ' 2-norm of u i  signq ij u j  on one canonical loading. Most of these SCCA methods used the data-driven correlation as the network constraint, while some incorporated prior knowledge to define the network constraint (). In the data-driven mode, they were dependent on the sign of the pairwise sample correlation to identify the hidden structure pattern. Unfortunately, this can introduce additional estimation bias since the sign of the correlations can be wrongly estimated due to possible graph/network misspecification caused by noise (). We focus on the data-driven mode in this paper. We first propose a novel structured penalty using the pairwise difference of absolute values between features, which is an improved GraphNet penalty (). Then we introduce our novel structured SCCA model coupled with an effective SCCA algorithm, i.e. SCCA using the absolute value based GraphNet (AGN-SCCA). Our contributions are summarized as follows.(i) The new regularizer penalizes the difference between the absolute values of the coefficients no matter whether their correlations are positive or negative. Thus it could tune both positively and negatively correlated features to have similar weights despite the correlation signs. (ii) AGN-SCCA could reduce estimation bias due to its independence to the signs of sample correlation, and thus has better performance and generalization ability than those methods dependent on sample correlation signs. (iii) We provide a quantitative upper bound for the grouping effect of AGN-SCCA and prove that the algorithm is guaranteed to converge fast. (iv) On both synthetic and real imaging genetic data, AGN-SCCA yields higher or comparable correlation coefficients, and generates more accurate and cleaner patterns than three competing methods, i.e. L1-SCCA (CCA with lasso) () FLSCCA (CCA with fused lasso) () and NS-SCCA ().
ConclusionWe have proposed a novel structured regularization term using the pairwise difference between absolute values of two weights, and incorporated it into a SCCA framework. This proposed structured SCCA model, named as AGN-SCCA, aims to discover any group or network structure laying behind the data. We have demonstrated that AGN-SCCA has strong upper bound of grouping effect, and have developed an iterative procedure with proven convergence. The existing structured SCCA methods either use the group lasso () or the graph/netwrok-guided fused lasso () to model the structure information. The first type of methods rely on prior knowledge to define the group structure, and the prior knowledge is sometimes unavailable in real applications. The latter type of methods can perform well on any given priori knowledge. In case the prior knowledge is not available, these methods can also work via using the sample correlation to define the graph/network constraint. However, they depend on the sign of sample correlation being defined in advance, which could be wrongly estimated due to possible graph/network misspecification caused by noise (). Our proposed SCCA is different from those previously published ones in the following aspects: (i) AGN-SCCA employs a novel absolute value based GraphNet penalty, and it does not require to estimate the sign of sample correlation. (ii) The AGN-SCCA could tune positively correlated features as well as negatively correlated ones to have similar weights despite the correlation signs. (iii) AGN-SCCA has a strong theoretical upper bound for the grouping effect, and the corresponding algorithm is guaranteed to converge fast. We have compared AGN-SCCA with three competing SCCA methods with different penalty functions, including L1-SCCA, FLSCCA and NS-SCCA, using both synthetic data and real imaging genetics data. The experimental results demonstrate the following:(i) For the estimated correlation coefficients, AGN-SCCA obtained the best or comparable results on the synthetic data, and significantly outperformed the competing methods on the real data. (ii) For the estimated canonical loadings, AGN-SCCA yielded better canonical loading pattern on both synthetic data and real data, especially on the real data where it produced much cleaner patterns than the competing methods. By discovering a strong association between the APOE SNP data and the amyloid accumulation data in an AD study, AGN-SCCA demonstrated itself as a promising structured SCCA method. The theoretical convergence and upper bound of the grouping effect further reveal that AGN-SCCA is of efficiency and effectiveness in identifying meaningful bi-multivariate associations in brain imaging genetics studies. In this work, we only tested AGNThe best value and those that are NOT significantly worse (t-test with p-value smaller than 0.05) are shown in boldface.SCCA while using data-driven covariance structure as the graph/network constraint. In the future, we will apply the AGN-SCCA model to more general cases and test its performance when priori knowledge is available.