Motivation: Knowing the subcellular location of proteins is critical for understanding their function and developing accurate networks representing eukaryotic biological processes. Many computational tools have been developed to predict proteome-wide subcellular location, and abundant experimental data from green fluorescent protein (GFP) tagging or mass spectrometry (MS) are available in the model plant, Arabidopsis. None of these approaches is error-free, and thus, results are often contradictory. Results: To help unify these multiple data sources, we have developed the SUBcellular Arabidopsis consensus (SUBAcon) algorithm, a naive Bayes classifier that integrates 22 computational prediction algorithms, experimental GFP and MS localizations, protein–protein interaction and co-expression data to derive a consensus call and probability. SUBAcon classifies protein location in Arabidopsis more accurately than single predictors. Availability: SUBAcon is a useful tool for recovering proteome-wide subcellular locations of Arabidopsis proteins and is displayed in the SUBA3 database (http://suba.plantenergy.uwa.edu.au). The source code and input data is available through the SUBA3 server (http://suba.plantenergy.uwa.edu.au//SUBAcon.html) and the Arabidopsis SUbproteome REference (ASURE) training set can be ac-cessed using the ASURE web portal (http://suba.
INTRODUCTIONOwing to the tight relationship between subcellular compartments and protein function, proteome-wide protein localization is an important goal in cell biology. Direct identification of proteins in subcellular compartments via mass spectrometry (MS) remains the most popular large-scale approach in crude and compartment-enriched samples (). However, despite significant technological progress, experimental data are not error-free contributing to overlapping or contradicting datasets (). The green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged protein approach is generally more accurate, but labor-and time-intensive, resulting in small study sizes with only a few high-throughput studies (). Though the low coverage makes GFP insufficient as a stand-alone dataset for proteome-wide localization, this methodology remains one of the most widely accepted by biologists. With the help of manual curation from the literature, previously scattered MS and GFP data for Arabidopsis can now be found aggregated in locations including SUBA3 (), UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot () and TAIR (). These aggregated data present a valuable resource for accessing large-scale protein localization datasets. Association data such as proteinprotein interaction (PPI) and transcript co-expression analyses help assess the proteome in terms of functional clusters. Given that proteins in functional pathways tend to more often co-locate than not, these data contain indirect experimental evidence for location. Both co-expression and PPI-associated protein sets are enriched for same-location protein groups (), and PPI data have been suggested previously to be resources for predicting subcellular location of proteins in multiple eukaryotic species (). Less is known about the value of co-expression data for predicting co-location, despite the widespread use of co-expression networks to infer shared function (). These voluminous expression datasets have remained a relatively untapped data resource for subcellular location prediction. Many proteome-wide subcellular location predictors have been developed based on sequence properties (). Various machine learning and pattern recognition approaches have proved popular for this purpose (), including support vector machines (SVM) (), k-nearest neighbor (KNN) (), neural networks () and hidden Markov models (). Each bears individual advantages and shortcomings in terms of the number of required features, the danger of over-fitting and the ability to handle multiple optima. Single machine learning approaches () can be stacked into dual algorithms (), which have *To whom correspondence should be addressed.shown some improvements in accuracy. The majority of predictors derive subcellular location using protein sequence features, associated properties and/or Gene Ontology () and curator annotations (). Sequence-based predictors attempt to identify sequence patterns in the primary protein sequence that target proteins to individual organelles (). Distinct machine-learning algorithms often yield different results from similar or identical inputs with surprisingly poor overlap (). The often incongruent results from predictors are probably the main reason why experimental data remain the gold standard for most biologists, despite the unresolved difficulties associated with the experimental approaches (). Given the lack of a single best method for inferring subcellular location, concepts that use all available knowledge about proteins are attractive approaches for forming a consensus view. Integrating varied data sources has been used in yeast mitochondrial studies, where this approach revealed promising new insights into genes involved in mitochondrial functions (). In Arabidopsis, various resources for interrogating aggregate location information exist (). In general, none of these plant databases addresses the challenge of unifying the data for large-scale single location calls, including confidence values. Previously, we reported on database extensions within the SUBA3 database, including the mention of an initial version of the SUBcellular Arabidopsis consensus (SUBAcon) algorithm that integrates GFP and MS data together with computational predictors (). Here, we fully describe the development of the Bayesian classifier SUBAcon that uses aggregated computational predictor outputs, direct MS, GFP localizations and now also indirect PPI and co-expression data to produce consensus calls for subcellular locations of Arabidopsis proteins. Additionally, we then analyze the SUBAcon calls to assess their usability for biologists. We found that SUBAcon increased subcellular localization classification accuracy and offers localization probability values that enable the user to interpret conflicting observations and predictions as well as extract consensus location datasets for large-scale protein sets for further use.
DISCUSSIONThe subcellular localization of proteins is a critical step toward understanding protein function and developing networks representing the biological processes within eukaryotic cells. Several tools have been developed to predict subcellular locations to help fill gaps in experimental datasets (). As experimental data resources grow and the number of predictors increases, new strategies are needed to integrate this multifaceted information. SUBAcon integrates 22 published predictors and four experimental data types to generate a probability distribution of subcellular location for each Arabidopsis protein. This objectively weighs individual predictors and experimental data to assign proteins to a location (or locations) more accurately than any of the input predictors or data can alone. SUBAcon implements a naive Bayes algorithm, which is the simplest form of a Bayesian network and assumes that all inputs are independent. Input variable independence in real life is nearly impossible to meet, but nevertheless naive Bayes classifiers often perform comparably or superior to other more complex algorithms not relying on this criterion (). Of the 22 predictors used in this study, at least half used similar protein properties to generate the location calls. However, it is the generated location calls that act as the actual naive Bayes input variables, and as these did not correlate strongly (Supplementary) and overlap surprisingly poorly (Supplementary), we considered that independence criteria were met. Based on the naive Bayes theory, redundant or weak predictors do not worsen the classification performance but can provide significant noise reduction and performance improvement when used integrated ().Benefits of selecting informative predictors but omitting redundant ones have been reported in previously developed ensemble predictors, e.g. PROlocalizer (), as well as KNN single algorithms, and voting systems () or SVM (). In contrast to the latter studies, we did not omit any predictor or data channel. This avoids overfitting data to ASURE by selecting ASUREspecific non-redundancies as well as omitting potential information benefiting classification. These strategies have been discussed as the main strength of the naive Bayes over other integration methodologies (). Furthermore, naive Bayes networks can handle many dimensions of information and are superior to other classifiers when large numbers of variables are being considered (). We integrated four independent experimental data types into SUBAcon. Similar large-scale integration of experimental localization data into algorithms as a 'prediction' has not been reported for Arabidopsis, but a recent report has indicated that experimental evidence derived by automated mining of annotations, abstracts or proteome databases similar to SUBA3 has been a valuable improvement on top of sequencebased predictions (). SUBAcon uses manually curated GFP as well as MS, PPI and co-expression data that cannot be accessed using automated text mining. All four data types contributed to improving classification accuracy. Assessment of classification improvement for each type of experimental data showed that despite the overall highest improvement achieved by MS, it was the GFP-tagging data that contributed most for the proteins where these data are available. Further, we have shown that PPI data despite being a small dataset have informative same-location properties. While such data have been shown to be effective for location prediction in yeast (), they have been underused in Arabidopsis until now. Similarly, co-expression data have been widely used for predicting function but not subcellular location in Arabidopsis (). The present study has shown that co-expression alone is highly informative of location for the plastid and endoplasmic reticulum. In addition, it has analytical value for other compartments that rivals some sequence-based predictors within coverage. We have built SUBAcon in a modular structure allowing easy integration of new datasets and predictors. SUBAcon will be retrained regularly on updating experimental localization data in SUBA3. In light of the strong influence of experimental data on classification outcome, this will be a key aspect of upto-date classification. In the context of systems biology approaches, knowledge of proteome-wide subcellular locations is an important component for defining functional neighborhoods and deducing metabolic and signaling networks within complex eukaryotic cells. We anticipate SUBAcon to be a broadly applicable and helpful tool for experimentalists and modelers requiring systematic information on Arabidopsis proteins or homologs from other plants.