Protein–protein interactions are central to almost all biological functions, and the atomic details of such interactions can yield insights into the mechanisms that underlie these functions. We present a web server that wraps and extends the SwarmDock flexible protein– protein docking algorithm. After uploading PDB files of the binding partners, the server generates low energy conformations and returns a ranked list of clustered docking poses and their corresponding structures. The user can perform full global docking, or focus on particular residues that are implicated in binding. The server is validated in the CAPRI blind docking experiment, against the most current docking benchmark, and against the ClusPro docking server, the highest performing server currently available. Availability: The server is freely available and can be accessed at: http://bmm.cancerresearchuk.org/%7ESwarmDock/.
INTRODUCTIONThe great majority of biological functions are mediated not by isolated proteins but by their interactions. Physically, any two proteins can interact. However, interactions of biological significance exist via the pairing of complementary surfaces, and modelling the three-dimensional structure of proteinprotein complexes remains a highly active research field. We recently described the SwarmDock flexible docking algorithm for docking and clustering (). This algorithm has been used in the CAPRI blind docking experiment (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/capri/), where experimentally determined proteinprotein complexes are held in confidence by the organizing committee while the prediction community are invited to predict their structure. Since the last assessment period in May 2010, SwarmDock correctly identified interfaces in seven of the nine targets, a success rate that surpasses all but one of the other participating teams. We have now automated the docking pipeline, from structure preparation to clustering. We present here the SwarmDock server, which provides the research community with a simple and easy to use interface to the methodology. This automated server has been used in CAPRI without human intervention since round 26, and has correctly identified the structure of all three targets, two of which were not found by any other server. A typical docking run using the server will take up to 36 h, depending on the size of the complex and whether the resources are shared. The server does not, at this time, support non-protein docking.