SYNCSA is an R package for the analysis of metacommunities based on functional traits and phylogeny of the community components. It offers tools to calculate several matrix correlations that express trait-convergence assembly patterns, trait-divergence assembly patterns and phylogenetic signal in functional traits at the species pool level and at the metacommunity level. Availability and implementation: SYNCSA is a package for the R environment, under a GPL-2 open-source license and freely available on CRAN official web server for R (http://cran.r-project.org).
INTRODUCTIONComprehending how biological communities are structured in both time and space is a major challenge for ecologists. It is well known that communities are not random samples from the species pool. Niche theory predicts that in order to persist in a local community, each species has to have a particular set of traits that allow it to overcome environmental filtering and to coexist with other species (). Nonetheless, considering species traits in community ecology studies may be complicated as traits are not independent among species (). In the last decades, functional traits and phylogeny information have been incorporated in ecological models in order to determine the factors responsible for creating and maintaining community structure (). Currently, information about traits and phylogeny are available for several groups of organisms (see APG, 2009;). Furthermore, recent developments made possible novel perspectives in functional and phylogenetic analyses of ecological data (). SYNCSA is an R package (R Development Core Team, http:// www.r-project.org/) released under open-source license, and freely available from CRAN (http://cran.r-project.org), that implements the methods described in Pillar and Duarte (2010) andfor the comparison of ecological communities based on functional traits and the phylogeny of the community * To whom correspondence should be addressed. components, the detection of phylogenetic signal at the species pool and metacommunity levels and the testing of phylogenetic niche conservatism. SYNCSA allows the identification of optimal trait subsets expressing trait-convergence assembly patterns or traitdivergence assembly patterns in metacommunities. The functions are based on the abovementioned methods and are complementary to other functions available in R for the analysis of communities, which take into account traits and phylogenetic information. SYNCSA for R implements the same methods available in recent versions of SYNCSA application written in C++ (http://ecoqua.ecologia.ufrgs. br/ecoqua/SYNCSA), which was developed by V. Pillar and evolved from methods described in Pillar and Orlci (1993).
DESCRIPTION