Motivation: TCS is a widely used haplotype network reconstruction software, but lacks the capability of overlapping genetic with geographic structure, which is often a first step in phylogeographic analysis. Results: tcsBU is a web-based program that extends the capabilities of TCS, by implementing haplotype classification into an arbitrary user-defined scheme, which is displayed as pie-chart like graphs embedded into the network. Taking advantage of modern graphic libraries, tcsBU also improves the speed at which the final network layout is reached. Networks can be saved as a Scalable Vector Graphics format. Availability and implementation: tcsBU is available on-line at
IntroductionConstruction of haplotype networks that represent genealogical relationships among genes at the population level is often a first step of any phylogeographic analysis. Because gene-genealogies are usually polytomous and network-like, traditional tree-building methods, which force dichotomous branching patterns, are seldom applicable (). Different methods were developed to overcome such problems (e.g.). Among these, TCS () is unique, in that it implements the probabilistic method of Statistical Parsimony (). This allows users to arbitrarily define the probability at which haplotypes connect with each other, which may yield multiple networks per analysis. This feature has been suggested as a species delimitation tool in barcoding analysis (). Although the core TCS algorithm (network computation) is fast, there are some major limitations related with its graphical output. In most phylogeographic analyses, it is often useful to combine genetic structure (network topology) with geographic structure (haplotype occurrence), but TCS has no built-in way of classifying haplotypes and displaying that information in the final network. TCS cannot use its 'spring' method to layout multiple networks, meaning that the resulting overlapped networks should to be disentangled manually using an external vector manipulation software. Moreover, the 'spring' method is extremely slow to layout large or complex networks. As a consequence, it takes a significant effort to edit the resulting TCS vector file to produce publication-ready networks.
ConclusiontcsBU extends TCS capabilities, and speeds up the production of publication-ready networks resulting from TCS analysis. Source code is freely available from GitHub and improvements/bug fixes are welcome.