Prioritization of candidate genes emanating from large-scale screens requires integrated analyses at the genomics, molecular, network and structural biology levels. We have extended the Integrated Genome Browser (IGB) to facilitate these tasks. The graphical user interface greatly simplifies building disease networks and zooming in at atomic resolution to identify variations in molecular complexes that may affect molecular interactions in the context of genomic data. All results are summarized in genome tracks and can be visualized and analyzed at the transcript level. Availability and implementation: The MI Bundle is a plugin for the IGB. The plugin, help, video and tutorial are available at http://s.tartaglialab.com/static_files/shared/tutorial_ccso
IntroductionLarge-scale genomics initiatives aim at systematically cataloguing the complete spectrum of genomic changes in diverse biological and clinical conditions and to elucidate the contribution of those changes to the pathogenesis of disease. These initiatives routinely produce long lists of candidate genes that must be prioritized before more detailed functional studies are warranted. Prioritization of candidates ideally should take advantage of the entire range of available data and produce an integrated picture that permits evaluating the contribution of individual genes to the pathogenic process on a data-driven basis. However, the heterogenic nature of data and bioinformatics tools to manipulate them places numerous hurdles on the way, in particular for biologists with limited bioinformatics skills. We have developed a plug-in for Integrated Genome Browser (IGB) () to facilitate candidate prioritization based on network and structural biology criteria in the context of diverse genomic data types that can be loaded as browser tracks. The plugin permits analyzing how genomic variations, in particular missense mutations, may affect the interaction between gene products and other molecules as well as their interference with biological pathways based on the most updated standards and resources available for network and structural biology.
DiscussionBased on their observation of the property of disease causing mutations, Mosca et al. developed dSysMap, a web server that allows mapping mutations (provided as amino acid positions) to the structures and models of human proteinprotein interactions. StructurePPI () propose a similar strategy that Mechismo () extends to proteinnucleic acid and protein ligand interactions and an assessment of the impact of the mutation on the binding properties of the molecules. The integration of our plugin into a genome browser provides genome biologists access to network and structural analysis: The analyses start from genomic regions, allowing their integration with sequencing pipelines managed by IGB, and to be independent of any preliminary mapping to the protein sequences. The possibility to select the source database extends the range of possible analyses: even when no structures are available, it helps identifying new connections and functional relationships between target genes. Moreover, each new session queries public online databases: each query can be repeated to benefit from new data released in molecular interaction and structure databases. Finally, the bundle benefits from all the features and future developments of IGB, including the many species available (e.g. Mouse, A. thaliana and E. coli).