The Global Proteome Machine and Database (GPMDB) representational state transfer (REST) service was designed to provide simplified access to the proteomics information in GPMDB using a stable set of methods and parameters. Version 1 of this interface gives access to 25 methods for retrieving experimental information about protein post-translational modifications, amino acid variants, alternate splicing variants and protein cleavage patterns. Availability and implementation: GPMDB data and database tables are freely available for commercial and non-commercial use. All software is also freely available, under the Artistic License. http://rest.thegpm.org/1 (GPMDB REST Service), http://wiki.thegpm.org/wiki/GPMDB_REST (Service description and help), and http://www.thegpm.org (GPM main project description and documentation). The code for the interface and an example REST client is available at ftp://ftp.
IntroductionThe Global Proteome Machine and Database (GPMDB, http://thegpm.org) is a project to collect and disseminate in2formation derived from raw data generated by proteomics experiments that use tandem mass spectrometry to analyze protein samples (). It currently contains the results of analyzing over 270 000 proteomics datasets and more than 1.8 billion peptide identifications. The system uses a combination of data analysis servers, an XML file storage repository and a set of MySQL database servers to generate and record the results of proteomics experiments. It has become part of a larger, informal system of data repositories and information systems widely used by proteomics investigators (). The original design of the system allowed investigators to use a conventional web browser/HTML system to select information of interest about individual peptides or proteins as well as information about particular datasets using forms and URL links. While this style of interface has proven to be very useful for individuals browsing the information, it has become increasingly cumbersome for automated information retrieval systems, where the HTML pages are being parsed to generate summary information for calculations. The REST interface described here is web service specifically designed to simplify data access and automate some common tasks in bioinformatics and computational biology research.