The FAF-Drugs2 server is a web application that prepares chemical compound libraries prior to virtual screening or that assists hit selection/lead optimization before chemical synthesis or ordering. The FAF-Drugs2 web server is an enhanced version of the FAF-Drugs2 package that now includes Pan Assay Interference Compounds detection. This online toolkit has been designed through a user-centered approach with emphasis on user-friendliness. This is a unique online tool allowing to prepare large compound libraries with in house or user-defined filtering parameters. Availability: The FAF-Drugs2 server is freely available at http://press-sulfenyla
INTRODUCTIONThe most established method for the identification of hit compounds modulating the functions of a target is experimental high-throughput screening (HTS). Alternatively or in parallel, screening can be performed in silico (virtual ligand screening or VLS) in order to prioritize compounds for in vitro screening. The screening process involves measurement/prediction of activities of sometimes millions of chemical compounds in vitro, on cells or in silico. The first two, in particular, are time consuming and costly, and as such, the preparation of the compound collections is critical. Analyses of past failures have led to a much better understanding of crucial properties that distinguish any chemical from an interesting drug-candidate or a relevant chemical probe. Thus, the concept of screening high-quality compound collections in terms of improved ADMET (absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, toxicity) properties and containing a reduced number of 'nuisance compounds' is gaining momentum. Hence, we decided to develop a user-friendly online tool dedicated to the preparation of compound collections. In fact, such a service, freely available and able to handle several thousands of compounds with either predefined filtering parameters * To whom correspondence should be addressed. or user-tuned parameters, assisting decision making has not been reported to date. Our online in silico filtering engine is based on a significantly improved version of a previously reported stand-alone package named FAF-Drugs2, standing for Free ADMET FilteringDrugs2 (), which was successfully employed for preparing compound datasets for different projects as in. While many free online services are available to compute molecular properties (), FAF-Drugs2 is the first free web-based package capable of preparing compound libraries through physicochemical rules, functional groups and Pan Assay Interference Compounds (PAINS) detection (). In the present application note, we describe the FAF-Drugs2 server highlighting the new functionalities introduced as compared with the original stand-alone package.