Motivation: Fixed nitrogen is an essential requirement for the biosynthesis of cellular nitrogenous compounds. Some cyanobacteria can fix nitrogen, contributing significantly to the nitrogen cycle, agriculture and biogeochemical history of Earth. The rate and position on the species phylogeny of gains and losses of this ability, as well as of the underlying nif genes, are controversial. Results: We use probabilistic models of trait evolution to investigate the presence and absence of cyanobacterial nitrogen-fixing ability. We estimate rates of change on the species phylogeny, pinpoint probable changes and reconstruct the state and nif gene complement of the ancestor. Our results are consistent with a nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterial ancestor, repeated loss of nitrogen fixation and vertical descent, with little horizontal transfer of the genes involved.
INTRODUCTIONThe cyanobacteria are a biochemically and morphologically diverse clade of Gram-negative bacteria with major environmental and economic roles and effects, including global primary productivity (), potential uses in biofuel production () and in presenting water-borne health hazards via toxin production (). Cyanobacteria are key biocatalysts in the N 2 cycle (). The rice paddies of Asia, which feed over half of the world's population, depend upon cyanobacterial N 2 fixation (). The cyanobacterial genus Trichodesmium is responsible for 42% of the total global nitrogen fixation of 240 Tg N 2 y 1 (). Cyanobacteria may have existed for 2.72.9 billion years or more (). A question of primary importance to our view of the biological environment of the early Earth, and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. to cyanobacterial evolution, is whether the last cyanobacterial common ancestor (LCCA) could fix N 2 (reduce N 2 to NH 3 ). Snchezconcluded that LCCA was not N 2-fixing. A study of 13 cyanobacterial genomes agreed with this conclusion (). A study of a greater number of genomes, including basal N 2-fixers Synechococcus sp. JA-3-3Ab (Cyanobacteria bacterium Yellowstone A-Prime) and Synechococcus sp. JA-2-3B'a(2-13) (Cyanobacteria bacterium Yellowstone B-Prime), reconstructed the status of LCCA as ambiguous (). But due to use of parsimonious ancestral state reconstruction, the relative support for presence versus absence of N 2 fixation could not be quantified. Where present in cyanobacteria, N 2 fixation is performed by proteins encoded by nif genes. The central enzyme is nitrogenase 1 (N 2 ase), a molybdenum-dependent ATP-hydrolyzing complex of two metalloproteins: a dinitrogenase  2  2 heterotetramer that contains the active site for the reduction of N 2 (its  and  subunits are coded by the nifD and nifK genes, respectively) and a dinitrogenase reductase  2 homodimer (coded by nifH) that transfers high-energy electrons to dinitrogenase. N 2 ase is inactivated upon oxygen binding, suggesting an origin prior to the Great Oxygenation Event () at the start of the Proterozoic eon between 2400 and 2200 million years ago. There are about 16 nif genes in cyanobacteria, of which 8 are regarded as core to the N 2 fixation pathway, or 9 including the crucial non-nif transcriptional regulator patB (included the nif genes nifEHDKUB and patB in the LCCA genome that they predicted using parsimony reconstructions, though they state that this reconstruction is ambiguous. nif genes have been highly evolutionarily conserved despite being present in a wide range of bacterial and archaeal taxa (). A vanadium-dependent system, nitrogenase 2, is found in addition to nitrogenase 1 in the cyanobacterium Anabaena variabilis. Iron-dependent nitrogenase 3 is known in other groups (). On a phylogeny of 49 cyanobacterial genomes, we perform empirical Bayes ancestral state reconstructions for the ability to fix N 2 and for the presence/absence of 27 nif orthologous groups. Empirical Bayes ancestral state reconstruction quantifies ambiguity by giving a posterior probability for each state at each ancestral node (). We address the question of whether there has been any gain of N 2 fixation within the cyanobacterial