Motivation: Syndromic surveillance is the real-time collection and interpretation of data to allow the early identification of public health threats and their impact, enabling public health action. The rising activity, multi-level mixed effects, indicator emphasis method was developed to provide a single robust method enabling detection of unusual activity across a wide range of syndromes, nationally and locally. Results: The method is shown here to have a high sensitivity (92%) and specificity (99%) compared to previous methods, whilst halving the time taken to detect increased activity to 1.3 days. Availability and implementation: The method has been applied successfully to syndromic surveillance systems in England providing realistic models for baseline activity and utilizing prioritization rules to ensure a manageable number of alarms each day.
IntroductionSyndromic surveillance is the near real-time collection and interpretation of data to allow the early identification of potential public health threats and their impact, enabling public health action (). Syndromic surveillance fulfils part of Public Health England's (PHE) role to give early warning of potential threats to public health due to infectious disease; and to quantify any impact (or reassure about the absence of impact) on public health during mass gathering or following major environmental incidents. Within PHE, syndromic surveillance is co-ordinated by the Realtime Syndromic Surveillance Team (ReSST). ReSST monitors general practitioner (GP) consultations using an in-hours syndromic system (GPIHSS), currently covering about 61% of the registered GP patient population in England, and a GP out of hours and unscheduled care system (GPOOHSS) (), covering about 76% of the provision in England. GPIHSS replaced a previous weekly system, HPA/QSurveillance in April 2013 (). A sentinel emergency department system (EDSSS) captures attendance data from 34 sites in England and Northern Ireland (). The NHS 111 syndromic system analyses all calls to the national telephone health service, and replaced the existing NHS Direct syndromic system () in September 2013. Data are anonymized and then aggregated from diagnostic/ symptom codes using code lists created by experienced epidemiologists. For most systems, the vast majority (over 80%) of patient consultations receive a useable diagnostic code; however coding rates can be very low (less than 5%) for a few GPOOHSS providers.used to capture activity associated with one or more illnesses of public health importance e.g. acute respiratory infection, severe asthma, gastroenteritis, impact of cold weather. @BULLET Baselinethe expected activity estimated using statistical methods for each signal. @BULLET Thresholdslimits estimated using statistical methods with a known probability that a daily signal be within the thresholds. @BULLET Alarman indication that a signal's value on one particular day exceeds its upper threshold e.g. 'GP In-hours asthma attendances for Birmingham have a baseline of 10 and an upper limit of 18, signal was 20, hence alarm.' Each indicator has national, regional and local signals. Regional signals use the boundaries of the 15 PHE Centres. Local signals use the 152 English upper tier local authority boundaries, except for EDSSS, which is a sentinel system and thus uses the sentinel emergency department sites. The combination of syndromes and locations means that there are over 12 000 'signals' to be reviewed daily by the team. A wide range of statistical techniques are used internationally for syndromic surveillance (D'). Previously a number of different statistical methods were used by ReSST: the NHS Direct syndromic surveillance system used a regression model utilizing the historical data dating back to January 2003 (); HPA/QSurveillance used a standardized incidence ratio that compared sub-national with national incidence rates (); the EDSSS and GPOOH systems introduced prior to the 2012 Olympics used control chart methods (). The 'rising activity, multi-level mixed effects, indicator emphasis' (RAMMIE) method was developed to provide a single robust method for all systems, including any future new data sources. Having a single method improves interpretation of signals, with RAMMIE designed to combine the strengths of the existing methods. The RAMMIE method incorporates the benefits of two types of previously used methods; using historical data and regression models to identify whether activity is unusual for the time of year, and a control chart type approach to identify significant recent rises in activity. The combination of these two types of alarm, 'historical' and 'spike' for each signal gives more information to interpret potential public health threats. In application, the RAMMIE method needed to be robust and computationally fast, able to review over 12 000 signals daily and cope with the following data quality issues: @BULLET The scale of signal counts varies greatly, a national signal may have tens of thousands of counts per day, whilst many local signals, for less common indicators like 'meningitis', will most days have a zero count. @BULLET Many syndromic indicators, e.g. influenza-like illness, have a strong seasonal pattern, but peaks can vary unpredictably year on year. @BULLET The volume of people accessing health care varies greatly by day of the week, due to the closure of GP in-hours surgeries during weekends and bank holidays.@BULLET Syndromic systems use data that are collected for other purposes and are subject to unforeseen changes in the relevant health care system which can affect the volume of data or the coding. Many syndromic systems grow over time e.g. as new emergency department sites are added. @BULLET Syndromic surveillance is required to identify a wide range of unforeseen events, varying from gradual changes in disease incidence (e.g. national pertussis outbreak in England during 2012; www.hpa.org.uk/NewsCentre) that may last over a year, to oneday 'spikes' in syndromes caused by e.g. air pollution.Whilst primarily concerned with events of a national importance it is necessary to identify regional differences during an outbreak, and increasingly help is sought in identifying the impact of regional or local incidents (e.g. flooding).This paper outlines how the RAMMIE method has been developed and applied as a robust method for analysing and interpreting syndromic surveillance data, across a range of data sources, and describing initial validation work.The formula for the three level models was expressed algebraically as follows: logl ijk   logtotal ijk   b 0  b 1 X ijk  u k  v jk For PHE Centre k, location (local authority or emergency department site) j on day i. Total is the offset (as described above) and b 1 X ijk represents a vector for all the independent variables and their coefficients, u k represents the PHE Centre level specific random effect and v jk represents the specific random error for each local area within a PHE Centre. Coverage varied by signal and where data were very sparse models failed to converge. A pragmatic approach was applied, signals were only included where they had at least 365 days of non-zero counts, therefore some indicators were only modelled at a national or regional level. All modelling and analysis described below was carried out using Stata version 13, (StataCorp LP; 2013).
ApplicationIn the seven months from September 2013 to March 2014, the RAMMIE method was used over 2 million times to assess signals, creating nearly 25 000 prioritized alarms. By April 2014 nearly 12 000 different signals were being assessed each weekday, generating on average 134 alarms a day. In October 2013 the RAMMIE method was applied to the new remote advice service, NHS 111, incorporating local signals for the first time to telephone call data in England. The alarms were used to supplement the interpretation of surveillance data published in weekly syndromic surveillance reports to highlight trends and any findings of public health significance. RAMMIE alarms have highlighted a number of increases in activity that have led to alerting a potential public health impact to colleagues within PHE, including: @BULLET A rise in asthma indicators in September 2013. @BULLET Increases in respiratory indicators at the beginning of April 2014 that coincided with national reports of poor air quality associated with pollution and dust from the Sahara.