Motivation: Biochemical modeling efforts now frequently take advantage of the possibility to automatically create reaction networks based on the specification of pairwise molecular interactions. Even though a variety of tools exist to visualize the resulting networks, defining the rules for the molecular interactions typically requires writing scripts, which impacts the non-specialist accessibility of those approaches. We introduce the Simmune Modeler that allows users to specify molecular complexes and their interactions as well as the reaction-induced modifications of the molecules through a flexible visual interface. It can take into account the positions of the components of trans-membrane complexes relative to the embedding membranes as well as symmetry aspects affecting the reactions of multimeric molecular structures. Models created with this tool can be simulated using the Simmune Simulator or be exported as SBML code or as files describing the reaction networks as systems of ODEs for import into Matlab. Availability: The Simmune Modeler and the associated simulators as well as extensive additional documentation and tutorials are freely available for Linux, Mac and Windows: http://go.usa.gov/QeH (Note shortened case-sensitive URL!). Contact: zhangfen@niaid.nih.gov or mms@niaid.nih.gov Supplementary information: Supplementary Data are available at Bioinformatics online.
INTRODUCTIONMany cellular biochemical signaling processes involve interactions among molecules with multiple binding sites and various biochemical states (such as the phosphorylation states or structural conformations of molecular domains). For example, scaffold proteins with multiple potential binding partners can give rise to very large reaction networks owing to the combinatorial possibilities of multi-molecular complexes containing those proteins (). Conventional modeling approaches rely on creating computational representations of such reaction networks manually, by explicitly listing all multi-molecular complexes and all reactions they can participate in (see Supplementary Text 1 for a comparison of Simmune with other approaches). This can be tedious or impossible, depending on the complexity of the network. To address this problem, a variety of approaches has been developed that can automatically determine all reactions and the resulting complexes based on the user-specified pairwise interactions among molecular binding sites (). Although several tools permit users to simulate or analyze such 'rule-based' networks and models (), creating them typically requires writing scripts, which may render the model definition process non-intuitive for researchers with an experimental biological background. A visual interface capturing all relevant aspects of molecular interaction rules using iconographic symbols can considerably lower the threshold for non-theorists to start working with computational models. Moreover, it can offer important advantages over script-based approaches in particular when aspects such as the position of molecular components relative to membranes or symmetry properties of multimeric complexes come into play. conditions under which a certain biochemical reaction can take place and what the consequences (state modifications) for the interacting molecular complexes are. In most use cases, the mapping from the molecules before a reaction to the result molecules is uniquely specified through the molecule types of the reaction participants. However, for molecular transformations with multiple instances of a particular molecule type, e.g the autophosphorylation of a multimeric complex consisting of identical subunits, this mapping cannot be inferred automatically. To permit a unique definition of such reactions, the user of the software can specify the mapping explicitly (see Supplementary Text 1 for details). The Simmune Modeler was designed to support models that include interactions between receptors located on the mebranes of adjacent cells. Molecules such as the important Cadherin-family adhesion receptors can form homophilic bonds whose characteristics depend on whether the molecules are located in the same membrane ('cis' interaction) or in distinct adjacent membranes ('trans' interaction). To take this into account, the Simmune Modeler permits the specification of the binding mode (cis or trans) for interactions between pairs of membrane-bound molecules (Supplementary). To facilitate model development, model properties can be inspected with the help of a flexible query interface. The models created with the software can be simulated with the Simmune Toolset () and can be exported as SBML files or mass-action Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) descriptions that can be imported into Matlab TM or other ODE solver tools (see discussion in Supplementary Text 2). Moreover, the modeler will support the emerging SBML 3 standard for encoding multi-component, multi-state molecular complexes to allow for exchange of models with other rule-based approaches such as BNGL () and Kappa ().of the extracellular domain of the receptor. The association leads to the activation of the cytoplasmic domain of the receptor, as indicated by the red square tag switching from an empty shape with a dotted outline (encoding 'any state' or 'don't care') to a filled shape (encoding 'on'). Note that the engagement of the two binding sites (at receptor and ligand) alters their display mode from empty circles (indicating 'unbound') to filled circles (indicating 'bound'). Center panel: The active receptor induces a GDPGTP exchange at the associated G-proteins. This switch is indicated as the transformation of the empty green square ('off') on the Ga subunit into a filled green square ('on'). The full complex diagram shows the state before this transformation, the partial diagram in the upper right corner the result state. Note that the transformation requires the receptor to be active (filled red tag), but does not require the ligand to be still bound (dotted outline of the extracellular binding site). Right panel: Interaction between a receptor kinase (green circle) and the cytoplasmic domain of the receptor. This interaction uses a site on the receptor that is different from the site [labeled (2)] recruiting the G-proteins. However, the interaction rule requires that the G-proteins not be bound to the receptor. This is indicated by the empty circle representing a free G-protein recruitment binding site (in this figure emphasized by a red circle around the binding site). The interaction moreover requires the receptor to be active (red filled tag) and the blue tag, representing the receptor's phosphorylation state to be in the off state. After association with the receptor, the receptor kinase can phosphorylate the receptor (switching the blue tag from empty to full, not shown). The full complex diagram shows the state before ligation, the partial diagram in the upper right corner the result state. The model is provided as Supplementary Material