Motivation: Drug repositioning is the discovery of new indications for compounds that have already been approved and used in a clinical setting. Recently, some computational approaches have been suggested to unveil new opportunities in a systematic fashion, by taking into consideration gene expression signatures or chemical features for instance. We present here a novel method based on knowledge integration using semantic technologies, to capture the functional role of approved chemical compounds. Results: In order to computationally generate repositioning hypotheses, we used the Web Ontology Language to formally define the semantics of over 20 000 terms with axioms to correctly denote various modes of action (MoA). Based on an integration of public data, we have automatically assigned over a thousand of approved drugs into these MoA categories. The resulting new resource is called the Functional Therapeutic Chemical Classification System and was further evaluated against the content of the traditional Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System. We illustrate how the new classification can be used to generate drug repurposing hypotheses, using Alzheimers disease as a use-case.
CONCLUSIONThe FTC is public resource, which should assist drug repurposing initiatives or enhance computational studies that judge drugs according to their 'mode of action'. The resource attributes biomolecular functions and processes to drugs, the same way as GO types have been assigned to gene products. The construction of FTC relies on axiomatic representations of MoA as the core means to attribute and derive the MoA for approved drugs. We shown the validity of the approach by comparing the content of the FTC to a well-established gold standard, the ATC. We further illustrate the tight relationship between the MoA and the indication of a drug and demonstrate using Alzheimer's disease as an example how the resource helps to formulate drug repositioning hypotheses. The work leverages the semantics of distinct databases, working in parallel on different thematics. The platform will be further used to generate predictions in a systematic fashion, which can then be experimentally tested in the laboratory for validation.