In recent years, the improvement of mass spectrometry-based glycomics techniques (i.e. highly sensitive, quantitative and high-throughput analytical tools) has enabled us to obtain a large dataset of glycans. Here we present a database named Xeno-glycomics database (XDB) that contains cell-or tissue-specific pig glycomes analyzed with mass spectrometry-based techniques, including a comprehensive pig glycan information on chemical structures , mass values, types and relative quantities. It was designed as a user-friendly web-based interface that allows users to query the database according to pig tissue/cell types or glycan masses. This database will contribute in providing qualitative and quantitative information on glycomes characterized from various pig cells/organs in xenotransplantation and might eventually provide new targets in the 1,3-galactosyltransferase gene-knock out pigs era. Availability: The database can be accessed on the web at
INTRODUCTIONCell surface carbohydrates can act as ligand molecules for diverse biological processes such as cellcell interaction, signal transduction, metastasis and so forth (). Especially in pig-to-human xenotransplantation, the interaction between terminal-Gal (Gal1-3Gal-R) antigens onzz pig tissues or cells' surfaces and circulating natural human antibodies lead to hyper acute immune rejection (). Despite the development of 1,3-galactosyltransferase gene-knock out pigs, unidentified non-Gal antigens remain as possible factors triggering delayed xenograft rejection (). Thus, the comprehensive identification of-Gal and non-Gal carbohydrate antigens from pig tissues and cells is essential for successful xenotransplantation. During the past decades, several databases have been developed to assist the assignment, annotation and interpretation of glycan and glycoconjugates datasets (). However, none of them systematically classify and update the pig glycans according to the specific pig tissues and cells. Qualitative and quantitative information on the glycan antigens, which play an important role in immune rejection, is also lacking. Here, we have built up a relational database [Xeno-glycomics database (XDB)] from specific pathogen-free Chicago Medical School miniature pig () glycan profiles, which have been qualitatively and quantitatively characterized by various mass spectrometry-based techniques (Supplementary Data). It includes N-glycomes from pig kidney (), endothelial cells, islets (), corneal endothelial cells, keratocytes (), heart and glycosphingolipid-derived glycans from pig endothelial cells and islets (). The O-glycomes from pig kidney, endothelial cells () and heart (accepted) are also included. This specialized pig glycome database will offer a new insight into pig-to-human xenotransplantation as well as into many different areas of biological and biomedical research.