Motivation: Business Architecture Models (BAMs) describe what a business does, who performs the activities, where and when activities are performed, how activities are accomplished and which data are present. The purpose of a BAM is to provide a common resource for understanding business functions and requirements and to guide software development. The cancer Biomedical Informatics Grid (caBIG) Life Science BAM (LS BAM) provides a shared understanding of the vocabulary, goals and processes that are common in the business of LS research. Results: LS BAM 1.1 includes 90 goals and 61 people and groups within Use Case and Activity Unified Modeling Language (UML) Diagrams. Here we report on the models current release, LS BAM 1.1, its utility and usage, and plans for future use and continuing development for future releases.
INTRODUCTIONBusiness Architecture is defined as a 'blueprint of the enterprise that provides a common understanding oforganization and is used to align strategic objectives and tactical demands' (). It provides clear, concise descriptions of what an enterprise does (its business capabilities), who performs the activities within the enterprise (organizational hierarchy and governance structures), how activities are accomplished (business processes), which data are present within the enterprise (business * To whom correspondence should be addressed. knowledge) and where activities and processes occur. These characterizations are documented within business models, such as Use Case (descriptions of goals), Activity and Class Diagrams (The Open), each of which provides a different view of the enterprise. Business models can be used to (i) identify gaps, dependencies or redundancies in personnel, procedures and software; (ii) standardize how enterprises operate and train people who lack domain expertise; (iii) define business rules and logic; and (iv) prioritize business goals and match business priorities with information technology solutions (). Due to these and other benefits, the models have been successfully used within domains as diverse as accounting (), information technology (), food service (), supply chain management () and telecommunications ().These domains have robust, mature processes supporting software requirements gathering and development efforts that can be leveraged by informatics teams within the biomedical domain. Indeed, international standards bodies such as the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium (CDISC) and HealthLevel7 () and the federal government, including the National Cancer Institute (NCI; United States Federal) have begun adopting the models to support their informatics efforts for life sciences (LSs) and clinical research (CR). The community of researchers, clinicians, vendors and patient advocates taking part in the NCI caBIG initiative is developing a standards-based informatics framework with the goal of establishing a shared and standardized infrastructure that will facilitate software interoperability. Platform-independent interoperability (i.e. software communication independent of operating system and computer language) is crucial to creating a collaborative information network driving the exchange of data regardless of who collected them or how they are stored. Such interoperability will help accelerate the discovery of new approaches for cancer diagnostics, detection and therapeutics. Biomedical data sharing is widely held as athe four most general use cases, as ovals, that represent the activities that life scientists undertake. One supporting use case, which can occur at the enterprise level of an organization or within subdivisions of the enterprise, is shown in the inset. The small icon in the bottom right corner of the use cases indicates that the use case is a composite, i.e. it has one or more child use cases. key component to accelerate scientific progress, reduce costs and decrease the time to move discoveries from the bench to the bedside (), thus paving the way to the discovery of new approaches for diagnostics, detection and therapeutics. To exchange data between independently built systems, cancer research software must utilize common semantics to combat ambiguity. Data elements must have precise meanings, conveyed by standard terminologies, and must be set in the context of well-described research processes to define how the software should function, what data should be collected and when and with whom these data can be shared. Business models can support and facilitate the goal of software interoperability by providing a standard context describing LS research goals and activities. To this end, members of the caBIG LS community have developed the LS Business Architecture Model (LS BAM). The LS research domain encompasses hypothesis and discovery-based basic and pre-CR spanning disciplines that include genetics, biochemistry, cell and molecular biology and bioinformatics. LS research is aimed at understanding biological mechanisms, processes and disease states; discovering disease biomarkers and potential drug targets; and facilitating translational research. The LS BAM documents the people, organizations, goals and processes that are part of the LS research domain enterprise through use cases () and actors. Use cases are textual descriptions of tasks that are performed to achieve specific goals, while actors are the entities that carry out or are otherwise associated with the goals defined in the use cases. Actors can be individuals (e.g. principal investigators or graduate students), groups or committees (e.g. the Institutional Review Board or Core Facilities) or entire institutions. The model is composed of a Use Case Diagram, which depicts the compositional relationship between use cases, and Activity Diagrams, which logically order use cases and actors. The LS BAM describes goals that are common to all LS research sub-domains, including how LS research is planned and performed; the organizations, resources and methodologies involved; how data and materials are controlled and analyzed; and how outputs are disseminated. The model provides a framework for understanding the business of LS research through a common set of LS use cases and vocabulary that, when used to define requirements for information systems supporting LS work, will facilitate data exchange and integration. The LS BAM may further be useful for staff training, standards development and software validation for software development efforts in the public and private sectors. Here we report on the model's current release [LS BAM 1.1; Use Case Unified Modeling Language (UML) Model, PDF and Internet Explorer Viewer (https://wiki.nci.nih.gov/x/OFNyAQ), Activity Diagram), its real world applications, and plans for its usage, continuing development and integration with other models to create a Translational Medicine BAM. The caBIG community welcomes feedback on this model (http://bit.ly/9DYSX1).
DISCUSSIONThe caBIG LS BAM 1.1 provides a blueprint of the business capabilities, business processes and business knowledge common to the LS domain. The scope of the LS BAM 1.1 Use Case Diagram was established such that it is not an exhaustive description of the details of all institutional governance structures or the business capabilities, processes and knowledge of each LS sub-domain, but rather those entities that are common across the LS domain. Indeed, if the goal of the LS BAM were to exhaustively describe all details of biomedical research, it could of course expand indefinitely. As areas of priority are identified by NCI governance teams for software development or other business needs, future LS BAM releases will be extended as required to meet these needs. Thus, the LS BAM should provide enough detail to meet the current informational needs of stakeholders by documenting goals common among all LS research with the anticipation of further use case decomposition as needed. Specific examples of how the LS BAM is currently being used for software development and requirements traceability are described below.