Motivation: Animals from worms and insects to birds and mammals show distinct body plans; however, the embryonic development of diverse body plans with tissues and organs within is controlled by a surprisingly few signaling pathways. It is well recognized that combinatorial use of and dynamic interactions among signaling pathways follow specific logic to control complex and accurate developmental signaling and patterning, but it remains elusive what such logic is, or even, what it looks like. Results: We have developed a computational model for Drosophila eye development with innovated methods to reveal how interactions among multiple pathways control the dynamically generated hexagonal array of R8 cells. We obtained two novel findings. First, the coupling between the long-range in-ductive signals produced by the proneural Hh signaling and the short-range restrictive signals produced by the antineural Notch and EGFR signaling is essential for generating accurately spaced R8s. Second, the spatiotemporal orders of key signaling events reveal a robust pattern of lateral inhibition conducted by Ato-coordinated Notch and EGFR signaling to collectively determine R8 patterning. This pattern, stipulating the orders of signaling and comparable to the protocols of communication, may help decipher the well-appreciated but poorly defined logic of developmental signaling. Availability and implementation: The model is available upon request.
IntroductionIn developing cells, cascades of signaling events are believed to follow specific logic to make several evolutionarily conserved signaling pathways control the patterning of numerous phenotypically distinct body plans. At the genomic level, the DNA sequence encodes rich logic that accurately determines the conditions each gene is turned ON and OFF (). Above this level, it is argued that 'the heart of the matter (developmental signaling) is not so much the individual molecules involved, but more the flow of information and the logic of the system they participate in' (), but this logic has never been clearly defined. Such logic is essential for ultimately deciphering morphogenesis and morphological evolution (). Integrating protein-protein interactions into complicated maps simply makes dynamic signaling deceptively complex without revealing spatiotemporal information of interactions (). Many researchers build models and compute molecular concentrations, and upon which infer signaling events and their spatiotemporal orders in cells. But such inference is difficult, error-prone and inaccurate in nature, especially when crosstalk occurs dynamically among pathways in rapidly patterning cells. Drosophila eye development, controlled by signaling among equipotential cells and producing a striking cellular pattern, has been used to uncover the logic of developmental signaling (). The patterning of about 800 hexagonally arrayed photoreceptor 8 (R8) cells is the first step of eye development controlled by signaling among proneural genes, antineural genes and conserved signaling pathways. These genes and pathways together form multiple spatiotemporally closed feedbacks, controlling the accurate and moving process of R8 patterning. Despite intensive studies of these proneural genes, antineural genes and Hh/Notch/EGFR/Dpp/Wnt pathways in R8 patterning in the past three decades (excellently reviewed in ()), the quantitative and dynamic picture of the selfsustained signaling that drives the morphogenetic furrow (MF) movement and R8 patterning remains absent. Intensive crosstalk among these genes and pathways makes it difficult to unveil the picture experimentally. Instead, to integrate experimental findings into a computational model to examine how the fine-grained and accurate organogenesis is performed is valuable for unfolding the spatiotemporally orchestrated signaling process. Recently, Lubensky et al.(2011) developed a concise model containing four equations to simulate the striped pattern of R8 specification, upon which they suggested that the dynamics of positive induction play a central role in the selection of certain cells as R8s and that R8s are defined before the appearance of the complete group of proneural cells. Their results are quite different from what experimental studies revealed, and no signaling events in R8 patterning were examined (). In fact, in conventional computational studies, the logic of signaling has never been explicitly defined and addressed. Here, we describe a model consisting of the master proneural gene ato (abbreviations of genes are in Supplementary Table S1) and key components (ligands, receptors and effectors) in the Hh, EGFR, Notch and Dpp pathways. The model combines the differential equation formulation and the handling of signaling events, aiming to define and decipher the logic of developmental signaling that controls R8 patterning in particular, and other morphogenetic events in general. We obtained two novel findings. First, the coupling between the long-range inductive signals produced by the proneural Hh signaling and the short-range restrictive signals produced by the antineural Notch and EGFR signaling is essential for generating accurately spaced R8s. Second, the spatiotemporal orders of key signaling events reveal a robust pattern of lateral inhibition conducted by Ato-coordinated Notch and EGFR signaling to collectively determine R8 patterning. These findings, unreported before, help unveil the logic of developmental signaling, and may make computational (and even experimental) researchers further examine the order and disorder of cell signaling.
Discussion