Motivation: Next-generation sequencing technologies have led to the widespread use of-omic applications. As a result, there is now a pronounced bioinformatic bottleneck. The general model organism database (GMOD) tool kit (http://gmod.org) has produced a number of resources aimed at addressing this issue. It lacks, however, a robust online solution that can deploy heterogeneous data and software within a Web content management system (CMS). Results: We present a bioinformatic framework for the Drupal CMS. It consists of three modules. First, GMOD-DBSF is an application programming interface module for the Drupal CMS that simplifies the programming of bioinformatic Drupal modules. Second, the Drupal Bioinformatic Software Bench (biosoftware_bench) allows for a rapid and secure deployment of bioinformatic software. An innovative graphical user interface (GUI) guides both use and administration of the software, including the secure provision of pre-publication datasets. Third, we present genes4all_experiment, which exemplifies how our work supports the wider research community. Conclusion: Given the infrastructure presented here, the Drupal CMS may become a powerful new tool set for bioinformaticians. The GMOD-DBSF base module is an expandable community resource that decreases development time of Drupal modules for bioinformatics. The biosoftware_bench module can already enhance biologists ability to mine their own data. The genes4all_experiment module has already been responsible for archiving of more than 150 studies of RNAi from Lepidoptera, which were previously unpublished.
INTRODUCTION
DISCUSSION
CONCLUSIONThe software presented here was built specifically for the research communities that are only now emerging into the-omics era. For example, NGS transcriptome data are widely used to address central biological questions in non-model species but many laboratories do not yet have the means to make the best use of these data. Due to funding constraints, these communities also have a paucity of bioinformaticians. Developed tools must, therefore, be general enough so that they can be used between laboratories and also straightforward to customize so that wet-lab biologists with a bit of training in programming can deploy and maintain the software. Supporting this new cadre of 'bioinformaticists' is vital in order for the communities of emerging model species to reap the rewards that NGS technologies have to offer. We have shown that our software can assist with development of bioinformatic web services. Because Drupal modules are licensed under the GNU Public license and our software was built to be generic and expandable, it would be of interest to the bioinformatic community to expand it. To assist users and developers, we have provided screencast tutorials via another Drupal project, SciVee (http://scivee.tv), which can be accessed via http://gmod.org/gmod-dbsf. We anticipate that the uptake of the Drupal CMS by the bioinformatic community will result in a powerful new set of tools.