Motivation: High-throughput sequencing platforms are increasingly used to screen patients with genetic disease for pathogenic mutations, but prediction of the effects of mutations remains challenging. Previously we developed SAAPdap (Single Amino Acid Polymorphism Data Analysis Pipeline) and SAAPpred (Single Amino Acid Polymorphism Predictor) that use a combination of rule-based structural measures to predict whether a missense genetic variant is pathogenic. Here we investigate whether the same methodology can be used to develop a differential phenotype predictor, which, once a mutation has been predicted as pathogenic, is able to distinguish between phenotypes—in this case the two major clinical phenotypes (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, HCM and dilated cardiomyopathy, DCM) associated with mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain (MYH7) gene product (Myosin-7). Results: A random forest predictor trained on rule-based structural analyses together with structural clustering data gave a Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) of 0.53 (accuracy, 75%). A post hoc removal of machine learning models that performed particularly badly, increased the performance (MCC ¼ 0.61, Acc ¼ 79%). This proof of concept suggests that methods used for pathogenicity prediction can be extended for use in differential phenotype prediction. Availability and Implementation: Analyses were implemented in Perl and C and used the Java-based Weka machine learning environment. Please contact the authors for availability. Contacts
IntroductionMutations in proteins generally result in loss of function, but in some cases can lead to a gain of function. Generally this is not gain of a novel function, but an increased activity, often through loss of some type of control mechanism. In general, predictors of pathogenicity do not try to distinguish between loss-of-function and gain-of-function mutations, but simply predict whether or not there will be some effect on function leading to a pathogenic state. In some cases however, the situation is more complex, with mutations in a single protein leading to a number of distinct phenotypes. For example, inherited heart muscle diseases, or cardiomyopathies, which are a major cause of sudden cardiac death in the young and an important cause of heart failure at all ages () are, as a group, very heterogeneous in genotype and phenotype. Radically different phenotypes can result from mutations in the same gene (). The widespread application of Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) chips and high-throughput sequencing has generated an urgent need for informatics tools that can help predict the effects of the many sequence variants that these platforms identify. More than 20 groups have devised methods to predict whether a given mutation will have a deleterious effect (Al; Gonz alez-Prez and L opez-Bigas, 2011;), the best known methods being SIFT (), an evolutionary method which calculates a sophisticated residue conservation score from multiple alignment, and PolyPhen-2 (), which uses machine learning on a set of eight sequence-and three structurebased features. A more complete list of methods is provided on our web site at http://www.bioinf.org.uk/saap/methods/. However, these tools are generally not validated for individual diseases where most available datasets are too small to train machine-learning methods and tend to be heavily unbalanced. An additional problem is that it is often very difficult to obtain reliable validated data on neutral mutations. One of the few cases where a predictor has been produced for an individual class of proteins is the work on voltage-gated potassium channels by. Attempting to distinguish between mutations in a single protein that result in different pathogenic phenotypes is a difficult problem that, unlike pathogenicity prediction, has not been widely addressed. There have been a small number of attempts to distinguish loss-offunction and gain-of-function mutations at a molecular level, but (as stated above) typically gain-of-function mutations result from loss of regulation making the protein constitutively active. For example, mutations that cause the VAB-1 tyrosine kinase to become constitutively active cause severe axon defects (). Some of the challenges in the 'Comparative Assessment of Genome Interpretation' (CAGI) experiment have required the prediction of the level of enzyme activity (e.g. genomeinterpretation.org/content/4NAGLU) and some have been related to familial combined hyperlipidemia or channelopathies (genomeinterpretation.org/content/FCH, genomeinterpretation.org/content/scn5a), but, to our knowledge, there have been no clear cases where predictions have focused on mutations in the same protein resulting in different phenotypes other than through loss of function versus loss of regulation. Initially our own focus was on trying to understand the effects that mutations have on protein structure and then to use this information to compare the effects of non-pathogenic mutations and pathogenic deviations (). Our approach has been to map mutations onto protein structure and to perform a rulebased analysis of the likely structural effects of these mutations in order to 'explain' the known functional effect (if any) of the mutation. Since we map mutations to structure, we only consider mutations in proteins for which a structure has been solved. With the recent growth in the amount of mutation data, we have moved from updating a database of analysis of mutations, to providing a server (SAAPdapSingle Amino Acid Polymorphism Data Analysis Pipeline) for analysis of the effects of mutations (http://www.bioinf. org.uk/saap/dap/) (). The approach has been used to study structural differences between disease-causing mutations and neutral polymorphisms (Al), and to analyze mutations in glucose-6phosphate dehydrogenase () and in the tumour suppressor P53 (). While SAAPdap uses a combination of rule-based structural measures to assess whether a mutation is likely to alter the local structural environment, we have also developed SAAPpred (Single Amino Acid Polymorphism Predictor) which exploits the results of the structural analysis and uses a Random Forest machine-learning method to predict whether mutations are pathogenic (Al). SAAPpred is restricted to analyzing mutations in proteins for which a native structure is available, but appears to outperform methods such as SIFT (), PolyPhen-2 () and FATHMM (). In this paper, we investigate whether having predicted a mutation as being pathogenic, the approach that we developed for SAAPdap and SAAPpred can be used for differential phenotype prediction, specifically for mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain (Myosin-7, UniProtKB/SwissProt accession P12883, http://www.uni prot.org/uniprot/P12883), encoded by the MYH7 gene (OMIM *160760). Mutations in MYH7 lead to a number of phenotypes, the most common being hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM, OMIM #192600) and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM, OMIM #613426). The numbers of mutations available for other phenotypes are very small and consequently, for this proof-of-concept paper, we have attempted to distinguish just between HCM and DCM. Myosin-7 is part of the force-generating molecular motor of the sarcomere and parts of the structure have been solved. It is divided into three main domains as shown in Supplementary: a globular 'head', which includes the ATP-binding site and the actinbinding site; the 'neck' which is composed of an a-helical domain to which the myosin light chains bind and which is further subdivided into a converter region and a lever arm involved in the amplification of mechanical energy; and the 'tail' or 'rod' region. Together with MYBPC3 (the gene encoding myosin binding protein C), mutations in MYH7 are the major cause of HCM as well as being a cause of DCM and left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC) (). In contrast to MYBPC3, where most pathogenic variants cause mRNA and protein truncation, the large majority of MYH7 variants are missense () which often makes prediction of pathogenicity problematic ().
DiscussionIt is logical to assume that the functional consequences of mutations in the same gene depend on the specific domain or region where theThe highest significance result is shown in bold. For the P-value to be reliable, there must be no more than 20% of expected counts less than five. Consequently the P-values for ! 4 clusters will be over-estimated.. Clustering Myosin-7 mutations in the N-terminal region using PDB file 4db1. For the three clusters, HCM mutations are shown in 1: red, 2: green and 3: blue, while DCM mutations are shown in 1: orange, 2: yellow and 3: cyan. DCM mutations are over-represented in cluster 3 (cyan); when they appear in clusters 1 and 2, (orange and yellow) they are mostly buried variant is localized (), but the hypothesis that the structural impact of a missense variant influences differential pathogenic phenotype or outcome has not previously been tested. In practice, a novel mutation would be tested for predicted pathogenicity before an HCM/DCM prediction was performed. We confirmed that the SAAPpred approach performs well in identifying pathogenic mutations in MYH7 and went on to test a machinelearning method that discriminated between pathogenic variants associated with an HCM or DCM phenotype (accuracy of 75% and MCC  0.531). This was achieved by averaging 11 machinelearning models using feature Set2 (Binding, RelAccess, SurfacePhobic, CorePhilic, Voids, MutantLargestVoid1, NativeLargestVoid1, Clash, Proline, CisPro and Clustering) and using 1000 trees with 5 features. These differential phenotype prediction results are surprisingly good considering the limited size of the dataset used in training. Indeed the results are as good as the overall performance of some methods used for general pathogenicity predictionfor example, our assessment (Al) of MutationAssessor showed an overall accuracy of 69.8% and MCC  0.453, while SIFT showed an overall accuracy of 76.3% and MCC  0.528. Clearly these results are comparable with what we are able to achieve for HCM/DCM differential phenotype prediction which is a more difficult problem owing to the small unbalanced dataset. By removing two machine-learning models that performed particularly badly, the performance was increased to an accuracy of 79% and MCC  0.61. Because the SAAPdap structural analysis relies on having a crystal structure of the protein in question, our predictions are limited to mutations in regions of the protein for which a structure has been solved. Consequently, we are only able to look at 190 of 290 unique mutations leading to HCM and 21 of 46 mutations leading to DCM. As structures become available for more of the protein, then this situation will improve and some new structures have become available since our dataset was built. However, for mutations that are present in disordered regions of structure, different methods of prediction will be required. It is also possible that the performance of the method may be further improved by taking into account missing parts of the structure. However, since all the structural parameters included in the prediction are the results of local interactions, this is unlikely to have a significant effect. Our analysis of the structural distribution of HCM-and DCMassociated mutations showed that there was a highly statistically significant difference in the locations of these mutations. Referring toand Supplementary, DCM is highly overrepresented in the blue/cyan cluster and largely on the surface, while DCM mutations present in the remaining clusters are mostly buried. The functional consequences of this distribution warrant further in vitro studies.