
INTRODUCTIONRepetitive elements are very widely spread in primate genomes (). Most prominent is the case of the Short Interspersed Elements, and in particular the Alu elements, which are present in more than a million copies in the human genome. Such massive presence of foreign genomic elements, which are perceived as predominantly selfish DNA, may represent a substantial potential informational load on the genome. Accordingly, the retrotransposition of Alus may contribute to human disease, including a diversity of cancers (). At the same time, the spread of genetic material may also represent an opportunity to introduce evolutionary novelty into the genome. Indeed, Alu elements may become exons () and may harbour functional transcription factor () and microRNAs (miRNA) binding sites (). In particular, Smalheiser and Torvik identified many mRNAs that contain Alus in their 3 0 untranslated regions (UTRs), within which there are targets for dozens of miRNAs (). Along with these negative and positive potential contributions to cellular and organismal fitness, it is conceivable that the spread of many of the retroelements was restricted evolutionarily so that most of the current elements are largely benign. Possibly, the insertion of retroelements into mRNAs was not random but was affected by features that minimize their impact on functional elements in the genome. Focusing here on potential miRNA binding sites within Alus in 3 0 UTRs, we provide evidence that the majority of miRNA targets within Alus are non-functional and presumably ignored by the miRNA machinery. We propose three features that allowed the insertion of Alu-hosted miRNA targets into mRNAs with minimal distortion of miRNA regulation. Still, a minority of the insertions appears not to possess any of these features and may thus represent cases in which Alu insertions contributed novel functional miRNA targets to the primates lineage.
DISCUSSIONIn the present study, we demonstrate that potential miRNA targets within Alus are largely non-functional and are not bound by the miRNA machinery. We suggest that insertions of Alus into mRNAs were tolerated largely when miRNA targets within them were likely to be less functional. Despite the strong indications that Alu-contained putative miRNA target sites do not tend to affect gene expression, there are clearly cases where such targets within Alus can be functional. In particular, Smalheiser and Torvik (2006) described many mRNAs that contain Alus in their 3 0 UTR, within which there are target sites for dozens of miRNAs. In their study, most of the miRNAs suggested to target Alus were within the C19MC cluster (), which is a primate-specific cluster that contains many Alu sequences that might have facilitated its expansion (). These miRNAs might have evolved in coordination with the Alu sequences to create an effective targeting.reported that there are a few miRNAs with41000 predicted sites per megabase within Alu sequences and proposed that such miRNAs protect against Alu transposition. We find that although the potential regulatory effect of Alus is huge, their actual contribution to regulation of gene expression by the miRNA machinery might be limited. Clearly, this does not exclude other regulatory roles of the miRNA-Alu interplay, such as a role of miRNAs in maintaining genomic stability by the repression of transposable elements (). The three features that permit Alu insertions into the 3 0 UTR of genes are inherently very different from one another. Mutually exclusive territories imply an evolutionary mechanism, as it appears that Alu insertions near 3 0 UTR ends were selected against. One intriguing hypothesis is that Alus inserted near the ends of 3 0 UTRs might have forced important miRNA targets to move towards the middle of the 3 0 UTR, where they become less effective. Another scenario, supported by our findings, is that Alus near the ends might have introduced new miRNA binding sites at locations where such targets are likely to be highly functional, grossly disrupting the conserved regulation of the gene. Additionally, it is conceivable that insertion of Alus near the ends of 3 0 UTRs may be deleterious also for reasons that are unrelated to miRNA function. The tight secondary structure presents an inherent feature of the Alu itselfAlus have high RNA secondary structure content (), a property that might have allowed insertion without a major effect on gene regulation, as miRNA targets are less functional within tight secondary structure (). The editing mechanism presents another layer, which has the potential to be regulated at a cellular level, as its impact might vary greatly among different cell types as a function of their editing capacity. This could potentially contribute to changes in the transcriptome during developmental processes, as well as in response to any internal or external signal that affects editing efficiency. Importantly, levels of ADAR enzymes, which perform the A-to-I editing, are altered in cancer (). It is thus tempting to speculate that miRNA targets within Alus escape editing in cancer cells, leading to an elevation in their functionality. Such mechanism might contribute in interesting ways to post-transcriptional deregulation of gene expression patterns in cancer. In addition, RNA editing has the potential to create new potential miRNA targets, as previously suggested by Liang and Landweber (2007). RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) can also affect the potential of the miRNA machinery to bind and act on the mRNA.showed that the presence of binding motifs for specific RBPs within mRNAs can affect the way in which these mRNAs are regulated by miRNAs for which they contain targets. Specifically, mRNAs that were downregulated on miRNA overexpression were found to be enriched for two U-rich motifs that bind the protein ELAVL4, whereas mRNAs upregulated in response to miRNA overexpression were enriched for an AU-rich element (). We therefore tested whether such RBP-binding elements may account for the reduced efficacy of Alu-contained miRNA targets. However, we could not find evidence for a selective contribution of the three RNA-binding motifs described in Jacobsen et al. to the differential efficacy of targets inside versus outside Alus. Rather, we found that these motifs are evenly distributed in mRNAs with the target inside, or outside of Alus, and thus their existence or depletion cannot explain the lack of functionality of miRNA targets within Alus. Yet, the existence of other RBP-binding motifs that are unequally present in these two types of target mRNAs cannot be ruled out and should be the subject of future analyses. We also examined the potential for combined effects of the various features on Alu-contained miRNA targets. Supplementarypresents a Venn diagram addressing the characteristics applicable to each miRNA target inside Alu for all conserved mammalian miRNAs. Most of the targets appear to use more than one feature, supporting the conjecture that an interaction between two or more features is needed to reduce dramatically the target's functionality. Importantly, consistent with the earlier suggestion of Smalheiser and Torvik (2006), there are 416 miRNA targets that might be functional as they are located in the ends of the 3 0 UTR, have a loose secondary structure and cannot be edited. When looking at all targets within Alus, which could potentially escape the location and structure criteria, we find 8000 targets. Among the top 10 targets are two with the GCACUU site, which appear in many Alus, and comprises the target of numerous miRNAs, as discussed by Smalheiser and Torvik (2006). However, in a randomized simulation, its appearances in the escaping targets were not found statistically significant. Our ability to identify at least some of these characteristics enables to single out the more relevant miRNA targets and subject them to future functional studies.