Motivation: Thanks to research spanning nearly 30 years, two major models have emerged that account for nucleosome organization in chromatin: statistical and sequence specific. The first is based on elegant, easy to compute, closed-form mathematical formulas that make no assumptions of the physical and chemical properties of the underlying DNA sequence. Moreover, they need no training on the data for their computation. The latter is based on some sequence regularities but, as opposed to the statistical model, it lacks the same type of closed-form formulas that, in this case, should be based on the DNA sequence only. Results: We contribute to close this important methodological gap between the two models by providing three very simple formulas for the sequence specific one. They are all based on well-known formulas in Computer Science and Bioinformatics, and they give different quantifications of how complex a sequence is. In view of how remarkably well they perform, it is very surprising that measures of sequence complexity have not even been considered as candidates to close the mentioned gap. We provide experimental evidence that the intrinsic level of combinatorial organization and information-theoretic content of subsequences within a genome are strongly correlated to the level of DNA encoded nucleosome organization discovered by Kaplan et al. Our results establish an important connection between the intrinsic complexity of subsequences in a genome and the intrinsic , i.e. DNA encoded, nucleosome organization of eukaryotic genomes. It is a first step towards a mathematical characterization of this latter encoding.
IntroductionKornberg (1981), in a very influential article, posed the problem of establishing whether nucleosome positioning obeys statistical laws or is dictated by sequence-specific rules. Such a problem is at the heart of studies concerned with the understanding, as well as the prediction, of nucleosome organization and positioning in genomic DNA and it has been the object of investigation in many disciplines, e.g. biology, physics, bioinformatics. An account on the state of theart for nucleosome organization, as well as novel results, can be found in two recent articles (). Among the many outstanding results, the two discussed next are, in our view, both milestones and the most relevant in order to place the contribution given in this article in the proper light.proposed a statistical model, referred to as the Barrier Model and recently generalized by M bius and Gerland (2010) that would account for nucleosome organization in genomes. Genome-wide experiments have shown its validity (). It has the great virtue of being formalized by very elegant mathematical formulas, which can be computed with no training on DNA sequences. Moreover, it had no predecessor of its kind nor has it been the object of controversies after its proposal. Consequent remarkable findings byandestablished that nucleosome organization is DNA-encoded. The authors went also one step further and showed that, via machine learning techniques, a computer program could learn those sequence rules and later be used as a predictor of nucleosome positioning. That study had been preceded by results that pointed to specific sequence features as being associated to nucleosome depletion or enrichment in genomic regions (see, for summary and relevant references). However, it was the first study that provided an answer to the sequence-specificity question in general terms and on a genomic scale, as opposed to the specifics of preceding results, e.g. regular patterns occurring in DNA or base composition. Unfortunately, although what is meant by DNA-encoded in that context is semantically clear, mathematically it is void of meaning since no code was exhibited. Moreover, large scale investigations that have tried to identify universal sequence dictated rules, a requirement less stringent than a code, for nucleosome positioning tended to exclude their existence (). Simple 'intrinsic' sequence rules are emerging, but they are very specific and very few () and there is no evidence that they are exhaustive. On the contrary, recent results indicate that the role of k-mers involved in nucleosome enrichment or depletion may be more complex than what expected (). In summary, although the lab experiments show the existence of such an encoding, in terms of rules and properties of the associated alphanumeric sequences not much progress has been made. When compared with the Barrier Model, the DNAencoded one lacks a rigorous set of mathematical formulas, easy to compute and requiring no training on the DNA sequences, that could (even in part) be used to explain the mathematical nature of that encoding. Finding such an object would be important methodologically in order not to transform sequence-specific nucleosome positioning into a potentially endless list of specific rules. Prediction of nucleosome positions based on it, it is perceived as a minor point. Here we address such a shortcoming by providing three formulas with the required characteristics. They are either well known, or variants of well known, formulas in Computer Science and Bioinformatics. They both quantify the intrinsic complexity of a sequence. In particular, we consider (i) empirical entropy, which measures information-theoretic content of a sequence (ii) two linguistic complexity measures that measure the combinatorial richness of a sequence as quantified by the number of distinct subsequences composing it. Following the same experimental set-up as in, we find a quite elegant correspondence between fundamental notions in Mathematics and Computer Science and Biology: there is indeed a relationship between the intrinsic complexity of subsequences in a genome and the intrinsic, i.e. DNA-encoded, nucleosome organization of eukaryotic genomes. This is new and unique, as far as the role of sequence specificity in nucleosome positioning is concerned.