Motivation: Eukaryotic proteins are highly modular, containing multiple interaction interfaces that mediate binding to a network of regulators and effectors. Recent advances in high-throughput proteomics have rapidly expanded the number of known protein– protein interactions (PPIs); however, the molecular basis for the majority of these interactions remains to be elucidated. There has been a growing appreciation of the importance of a subset of these PPIs, namely those mediated by short linear motifs (SLiMs), particularly the canonical and ubiquitous SH2, SH3 and PDZ domain-binding motifs. However, these motif classes represent only a small fraction of known SLiMs and outside these examples little effort has been made, either bioinformatically or experimentally, to discover the full complement of motif instances. Results: In this article, interaction data are analysed to identify and characterize an important subset of PPIs, those involving SLiMs binding to globular domains. To do this, we introduce iELM, a method to identify interactions mediated by SLiMs and add molecular details of the interaction interfaces to both interacting proteins. The method identifies SLiM-mediated interfaces from PPI data by searching for known SLiM–domain pairs. This approach was applied to the human interactome to identify a set of high-confidence putative SLiM-mediated PPIs. Availability: iELM is freely available at http://elmint.
INTRODUCTIONShort linear motifs (SLiMs) are compact domain binding interfaces ubiquitous in eukaryotic proteomes. They mediate a range of important cellular processes including protein scaffolding * To whom correspondence should be addressed.[e.g. SOS1 SH3 motifs (, cell signalling [e.g. PDZ motifs (, subcellular compartment targeting (e.g. nuclear localization signals (, post-translational modification [e.g. sumoylation ()] and cleavage [e.g. caspase 3 cleavage sites (. SLiMs consist of 310 amino acids though usually only 24 residues are strictly required for binding. As a result of the limited number of residues contacting their binding partner, SLiMs bind with low affinity [usually between 1.0 and 150 micromolar (distinguishing them from domaindomain interactions that often have an affinity in the nanomolar range (). This attribute of a weakbinding affinity renders SLiM-mediated interactions difficult to detect experimentally (). A number of resourceand time-intensive experiments are therefore required to properly validate a SLiM, ranging from mutational analysis to structural studies (). The use of bioinformatics is therefore an important technique to direct or augment the experimental elucidation of SLiMs. A number of databases have been developed to facilitate our understanding of SLiMs. The Eukaryotic Linear Motif (ELM) resource () contains over 1600 experimentally validated SLiM instances while the Minimotif Miner () database has collected over 880 consensus sequences. These datasets generate insights into the attributes of SLiMs, such as their conservation among homologues and enrichment in disorder. This enables the development of prediction servers within both the ELM and Minimotif Miner resources to filter novel instances based on the attributes of the curated regular expressions. However, both servers have issues with over-prediction. The SLiMSearch resource () expands this methodology to whole proteome searches. This method scores a SLiM instance by assessing the sequence conservation of the motif in its orthologous proteins, however, disordered regions are often poorly aligned and this can lead to an artificially low score for some motifs (). The Anchor () predictors rely on the propensity for SLiMs to undergo a disorder-to-order transition upon binding and -MORF-Pred () identifies patterns in a disorder prediction output. Other resources have focused on a subset of SLiMs (), for example,