TIBA is a tool to reconstruct phylogenetic trees from rearrangement data that consist of ordered lists of synteny blocks (or genes), where each synteny block is shared with all of its homologues in the input genomes. The evolution of these synteny blocks, through rearrangement operations, is modelled by the uniform Double-Cut-and-Join model. Using a true distance estimate under this model and simple distance-based methods, TIBA reconstructs a phylogeny of the input genomes. Unlike any previous tool for inferring phyloge-nies from rearrangement data, TIBA uses novel methods of robust-ness estimation to provide support values for the edges in the inferred tree.
INTRODUCTION'Rare genomic changes', such as rearrangements (), cause large-scale structural changes in the genome, clarify distant or problematic relationships among organisms and have been used in many phylogenetic studies. The first algorithm for phylogeny inference from rearrangement data was BPAnalysis (). The algorithm seeks to reconstruct the tree and ancestral genomes with the minimum breakpoint distance along each edge of the tree. This approach was extended in GRAPPA () by using inversion distances. These methods were restricted to unichromosomal genomes; the tool MGR () was the first to handle multichromosomal genomes. All these parsimony-based approaches must produce good approximations to the NP-hard problem of computing the rearrangement median of three genomes (summarized in) which limits their scalability. Despite using clever heuristics, MGR does not scale well, particularly for high resolution data. Yet to date, MGR [and its more recent derivative MGRA (had remained the only tool available for the analysis of multichromosomal genomic rearrangements. Distance-based methods like neighbour joining (NJ) (), in contrast with parsimony-based methods, run in time polynomial in the number and size of genomesand fast and accurate heuristics exist for those where the scoring function cannot be computed in polynomial time, such as FastME (). Pairwise distances, given as input to a distance-based method, are usually the edit distances, that is, the minimum-cost distances under the assumed model of evolution. However, an edit distance typically underestimates the true distance causing poor accuracy of trees inferred from distance-based methods. When given true evolutionary distances, NJ provably returns the true tree. The true evolutionary distancethe actual number of evolutionary events between the two genomesis impossible to measure, but it can be estimated using statistical techniques. Such distance corrections have long been used for sequence data and, more recently, for rearrangement data. For multichromosomal genomes, we have designed such an estimator () and have demonstrated the accuracy and scalability of a reconstruction method that uses NJ with this distance estimator (). A major shortcoming of phylogeny reconstruction from rearrangement data has been the lack of any way to assess the robustness of the inferred edges. In phylogenetic analysis from sequence data, such an assessment is de rigueur and is carried out by an adaptation of the standard non-parametric teststhe bootstrap and the jackknife, first proposed by Felsenstein (). Recently, we have designed several new methods for statistically assessing the robustness of trees reconstructed from rearrangement data (). Through careful and extensive experiments, we have shown that our bootstrapping approach for rearrangement data is on par with the classic phylogenetic bootstrap used in sequence-based reconstruction. Combining these methods with our distance based reconstruction method, we provide the first tool for phylogeny inference from rearrangement data that is accurate, scalable and provides bootstrap support values for the edges of the tree.
CONCLUSIONTIBA is fast, scalable, accurate and provides support values for the edges in the inferred tree. Fast and scalable distance-based methods, precise estimates of true pairwise distances and finally, for the first time in any rearrangement-based phylogeny inference method, the use of bootstrap scorestogether make TIBA unique. Conflict of Interest: none declared.