Motivation: TiQuant is a modular software tool for efficient quantification of biological tissues based on volume data obtained by biomedical image modalities. It includes a number of versatile image and volume processing chains tailored to the analysis of different tissue types which have been experimentally verified. TiQuant implements a novel method for the reconstruction of three-dimensional surfaces of biological systems, data that often cannot be obtained experimentally but which is of utmost importance for tissue modelling in systems biology. Availability and implementation: TiQuant is freely available for non-commercial use at msysbio.com/tiquant. Windows, OSX and Linux are supported.
IntroductionDuring the last decades, sophisticated techniques for imaging of cells and tissues have been established. However, the translation of this information into new knowledge is hampered by the difficulty to form consistent hypotheses on the complex interplay between components of biological systems resulting either in physiological function or a diseased state. In recent years, mathematical models became increasingly important addressing this question by formalizing the relations between and the interplay of these components in well-controlled model scenarios (). The construction and parameterization of informative models, however, crucially depends on our ability to quantify structure and dynamic behavior of tissues by image processing and analysis techniques. Moreover, modeling often requires information that cannot be obtained by available imaging methods either because the structure of interest cannot be accessed experimentally or due to technical limitations. For example, while in most cases the two-dimensional (2D) structure of surfaces in tissues can relatively easily be obtained, the reconstruction of the full three-dimensional (3D) picture usually is much more complicated. Cell margins, e.g. can easily be obtained in 2D using a beta-catenin or phalloidin staining, but in most available 3D microscopy software an automated segmentation and quantification of the corresponding individual cells is not possible. Existing methods for the reconstruction of cell surfaces () typically rely on a proper segmentation of cells. Quantification of individual cell surfaces is required in many situations. For example, in liver physiology cell shapes determine cell cell contact areas that in turn impact metabolic transmembrane fluxes and thus liver function (). Moreover, surfaces often represent a conceptual or functional boundary rather than an actual biological structure that can be explicitly stained and imaged. For example, liver is subdivided in many small functional units called lobules. Only in few species such as pig the surface of these lobules is represented explicitly by an anatomical membrane-like structure, while in most other species including human nothe borders between the functional and anatomical units experimentally very hard to determine. However, detailed knowledge of the full 3D shape of liver lobules is essential to quantify the anatomy of key vascular systems in liver as the sinusoidal or bile networks which is of utmost importance to understand the interplay of components. In this article, we present comprehensive software for the analysis and quantification of tissue that implements inter alia a novel method for the reconstruction of 3D surfaces. The technique is applicable to well-established and widely used imaging techniques even if staining of some cellular structures is incomplete.