Top-down mass spectrometry enables the observation of whole complex proteoforms in biological samples and provides crucial information complementary to bottom-up mass spec-trometry. Because of the complexity of top-down mass spectra and proteoforms, it is a challenging problem to efficiently interpret top-down tandem mass spectra in high-throughput proteome-level proteomics studies. We present TopPIC, a tool that efficiently identifies and characterizes complex proteoforms with unknown primary structure alterations, such as amino acid mutations and post-translational modifications, by searching top-down tandem mass spectra against a protein database.
IntroductionIn the past decade, top-down mass spectrometry (MS) has rapidly developed because of the advances in protein separation and mass spectrometry techniques. It has unique advantages in identifying and characterizing proteoforms with primary structure alterations, such as amino acid mutations and post-translational modifications (PTMs), because top-down tandem mass spectra cover whole proteoform sequences (). Although several software tools, such as ProSightPC () and pTop (), have been developed for top-down MS data analysis, efficient interpretation of high throughput top-down MS data is still a challenging computational problem because intact proteoforms often contain unknown primary structure alterations compared with the unmodified forms in the protein database (). We developed TopPIC (TOP-down mass spectrometry-based Proteoform Identification and Characterization), a software tool for high-throughput proteome-wide proteoform identification and characterization by top-down MS, which integrates algorithms for protein filtering, spectral alignment, E-value computation and Bayesian models for characterization of unknown amino acid mutations and PTMs. In addition, a user friendly web browser-based interface is provided. TopPIC focuses on the identification and characterization of unknown primary structure alterations and the discovery of novel proteoforms. The performances of TopPIC with various parameter settings were evaluated on a top-down tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) data set of Escherichia coli K-12 MG1655.
DiscussionTopPIC focuses on identifying proteoforms with unknown primary structure alterations and characterizing unknown modifications. It includes many useful features, such as proteoform identification by combining spectral pairs or triplets generated by the alternating fragmentation mode of mass spectrometers. It is much faster and more memory efficient compared with MS-Align. In addition, a web server based graphical user interface is provided. TopPIC is capable of identifying proteoforms with primary structure alterations, but it still has limitations in the analysis of very complex proteoforms. First, the filtering algorithms in TopPIC are based on finding protein segments without alterations that match to a part of the query spectrum with a large number of matched fragment masses. When a proteoform has many alterations, TopPIC may fail to identify it because the filtering algorithms cannot find such a segment in the target protein. Second, variable PTMs are not incorporated into database search for proteoform identification. A proteoform with several variable PTMs, such as oxidation, may not be identified by TopPIC. Third, a simple mass counting score is used as the scoring function in TopPIC. A scoring function that takes into account peak intensities can further improve the sensitivity of proteoform identification and the accuracy of modification characterization.