Motivation: Scientists and regulators are often faced with complex decisions, where use of scarce resources must be prioritized using collections of diverse information. The Toxicological Prioritization Index (ToxPi TM) was developed to enable integration of multiple sources of evidence on exposure and/or safety, transformed into transparent visual rankings to facilitate decision making. The rankings and associated graphical profiles can be used to prioritize resources in various decision contexts, such as testing chemical toxicity or assessing similarity of predicted compound bioactivity profiles. The amount and types of information available to decision makers are increasing exponentially, while the complex decisions must rely on specialized domain knowledge across multiple criteria of varying importance. Thus, the ToxPi bridges a gap, combining rigorous aggregation of evidence with ease of communication to stakeholders. Results: An interactive ToxPi graphical user interface (GUI) application has been implemented to allow straightforward decision support across a variety of decision-making contexts in environmental health. The GUI allows users to easily import and recombine data, then analyze, visualize, highlight, export and communicate ToxPi results. It also provides a statistical metric of stability for both individual ToxPi scores and relative prioritized ranks. Availability: The ToxPi GUI application, complete user manual and example data files are freely available from http://comptox.unc.edu/toxpi.php.
INTRODUCTIONPrioritization decisions must be made in any field where available time, financial and logistical resources cannot address requirements (e.g. scientific, commercial or regulatory). Proper formulation, evaluation and communication of such prioritizations require effective decision support tools. The National Research Council's report Science and Decisions () underscored the urgent need for safety testing of tens of thousands of commercial chemicals that lack information on potential hazards to human health. Effective prioritization of chemicals is needed to bridge the gap between available knowledge and information needed to meet legislative and public health mandates. Prioritization of chemicals for screening is necessary for linking downstream decisions with information from traditional toxicity studies, as well as data from new high-throughput screening (HTS) and other technologies (). The decision-making contexts typically revolve around two broad types of questions: 'In what order do we test chemicals?' and 'Which subsets of chemicals deserve specific, targeted tests?' The ToxPi () approach addresses both of these needs by yielding an explicit prioritized order of chemicals, as well as a visually interpretable and transparent weight-ofevidence analysis. This approach can be tailored to diverse sets of chemicals (or other entities of interest), evidence (data) and prioritization tasks. Its initial applications have been to aid in the prioritization and profiling of chemicals by integrating data from in vitro assays, chemical properties and inferred biological pathway activity collected for the ToxCast TM program (www.epa. gov/ncct/toxcast).