TRFolder-W is a web server capable of predicting core structures of telomerase RNA (TR) in yeast genomes. TRFolder is a command-line Python toolkit for TR-specific structure prediction. We developed a web-version built on the django web framework, lever-aging the work done previously, to include enhancements to increase flexibility of usage. To date, there are five core sub-structures commonly found in TR of fungal species, which are the template region, downstream pseudoknot, boundary element, core-closing stem and triple helix. The aim of TRFolder-W is to use the five core structures as fundamental units to predict potential TR genes for yeast, and to provide a user-friendly interface. Moreover, the application of TRFolder-W can be extended to predict the characteristic structure on species other than fungal species. Availability: The web server TRFolder-W is available at http://compbio.ddns.comp.nus.edu.sg/%7elipidgo/index.php.
INTRODUCTIONThe ability of telomerase to repair telomeres increases the cell-division cycles of a lineage, each of which otherwise shortens the telomeres. Telomerase RNA (TR) is one fundamental component of telomerase. Secondary structure prediction facilitates identifying TR genes which are highly divergent in their sequences. Compared to the sequences, the secondary structures of TR are much more conserved. There are few existing computational tools that can accurately predict TR structures; the difficulties are mainly caused by the extensive variance in TR sequences and stem-loop length, and structures such as the pseudoknot. In our previous work, TRFolder showed a high accuracy for known yeast TR structures folding, and gave predictions with high confidence for unknown yeast TR structures. The reported limitations of usage of TRFolder mainly focus on installation troubleshooting and the template position requirement. Therefore, we developed a web version of TRFolder capable of pseudoknot prediction without input of the template position.