Motivation: Although many next-generation sequencing (NGS) read preprocessing tools already existed, we could not find any tool or combination of tools that met our requirements in terms of flexibility, correct handling of paired-end data and high performance. We have developed Trimmomatic as a more flexible and efficient preprocessing tool, which could correctly handle paired-end data. Results: The value of NGS read preprocessing is demonstrated for both reference-based and reference-free tasks. Trimmomatic is shown to produce output that is at least competitive with, and in many cases superior to, that produced by other tools, in all scenarios tested. Availability and implementation: Trimmomatic is licensed under GPL V3. It is cross-platform (Java 1.5þ required) and available at
INTRODUCTIONThe presence of poor quality or technical sequences such as adapters in next-generation sequencing (NGS) data can easily result in suboptimal downstream analyses. Nonetheless, it is not trivial to precisely identify such sequences, including partial adapter sequences, while leaving valid sequence data intact (). Furthermore, given the rate with which NGS sequence data are currently being produced (), the additional burden of sequence preprocessing must be kept relatively modest so as to avoid adding undue overhead to the bioinformatics pipeline. The preprocessing approach must also not interfere with the downstream analysis of the data. For example, NGS data often come in the form of paired-end reads, and typically, the forward and reverse reads are stored in two separate FASTQ files, which contain reads from each DNA fragment in the same order. Many downstream tools use this positional relationship between pairs, so it must be maintained when preprocessing the sequence data. The wide range of available NGS library preparations combined with the range of downstream applications demand a flexible approach. It should be possible to choose a set of processing steps to be applied in a user-defined order, and ideally even allow some steps to be included more than once. In other domains, this can be achieved using a shell pipeline to combine multiple tools as required, e.g. in Newick (). However, the need for 'pair awareness' makes this approach difficult to apply, as the connection between the corresponding reads in the paired files will typically be lost. Correcting this would require an additional step to reconcile the read pairs and store the 'singleton' reads separately. Furthermore, the processing steps would not be able to assess the read pair as a unit, which is necessary or at least advantageous in some cases. The alternative approach of executing a series of tools in succession would involve the creation of intermediate files at each step, a non-trivial overhead given the data size involved, and would still require pair-awareness to be built into every tool used. These issues suggest that the typical approaches to achieve flexibility by combining multiple single-purpose tools are not optimal. Thus, although many NGS read preprocessing tools exist, none of them, alone or in combination, could offer the desired flexibility and performance, and most were not designed to work on paired-end data. As a result, we developed Trimmomatic as a more flexible, pair-aware and efficient preprocessing tool, optimized for Illumina NGS data.
DISCUSSION