Motivation: The ability to accurately read the order of nucleotides in DNA and RNA is fundamental for modern biology. Errors in next-generation sequencing can lead to many artifacts, from erroneous genome assemblies to mistaken inferences about RNA editing. Uneven coverage in datasets also contributes to false corrections. Result: We introduce Trowel, a massively parallelized and highly efficient error correction module for Illumina read data. Trowel both corrects erroneous base calls and boosts base qualities based on the k-mer spectrum. With high-quality k-mers and relevant base information , Trowel achieves high accuracy for different short read sequen-cing applications.The latency in the data path has been significantly reduced because of efficient data access and data structures. In performance evaluations, Trowel was highly competitive with other tools regardless of coverage, genome size read length and fragment size. Availability and implementation: Trowel is written in C+ + and is provided under the General Public License v3.0 (GPLv3). It is available at http://trowel
INTRODUCTIONReads produced by current next-generation sequencing technologies typically suffer from relatively high base error rates. To improve downstream analyses, it is desirable to correct sequencing errors directly after base calling. The most widely applied error correction methods rely on k-mer spectrum-based algorithms, following the spectral alignment (SA) approach (). A k-mer occurring more often than a given threshold is called solid (or 'trusted') and a less frequent k-mer is named weak. The goal of the SA approach is to maximize the number of solid calls. Quake (), a widely used error correction module, applies a mixed model of the distributions of solid and weak calls incorporating quality values. It identifies the set of corrections that maximizes the number of k-mers using a maximum likelihood approach. Another k-merbased method, Musket (), uses two-stage corrections with similarity to Trowel's two methods. Musket corrects bases depending on frequencies of k-mers and does not use base qualities. Coral (Salmela and Schr  oder, 2011) collects similar reads into groups and performs multiple alignments on them. It can correct indels by using the Needleman Wunsch algorithm. Owing to the alignment complexity, this method is not favorable for large datasets. Yet, another approach is to build a suffix array or trie. For example, Hybrid SHREC () can correct indels by detecting and replacing low-weight nodes. The weight of a node indicates the number of cohort edges in a suffix trie. Here, we introduce a new k-merbased error correction module, Trowel, suitable for Illumina datasets. The key difference to other tools is that instead of relying on the uniformity of sequencing coverage, which fluctuates stochastically or inherently, Trowel trusts in sequences with continuously high-quality values. We demonstrate the accuracy and efficiency of Trowel with several datasets and compare it with other available read correction tools.