Glycosylation is one of the most important post-translational modifications of proteins, known to be involved in pathogen recognition, innate immune response and protection of epithelial membranes. However, when compared to the tools and databases available for the processing of high-throughput proteomic data, the glycomic domain is severely lacking. While tools to assist the analysis of mass spectrometry (MS) and HPLC are continuously improving, there are few resources available to support liquid chromatography (LC)–MS/MS techniques for glycan structure profiling. Here, we present a platform for presenting oligosaccharide structures and fragment data characterized by LC–MS/MS strategies. The database is annotated with high-quality datasets and is designed to extend and reinforce those standards and ontologies developed by existing glycomics databases. Availability: http://www.unicarb
INTRODUCTIONGlycosylation is a major post-translational modification of proteins that involves the addition of sugar chains to proteins and lipids, a highly complex non-template driven process that generates a diverse glycome. For glycoproteins, the extent of microheterogeneity and macroheterogeneity makes the identification of glycosylation sites and glycan structure determination a challenging analytical problem. Diverse structural modifications can range from a few monosaccharide residues to heavily branched oligosaccharides including modification by non-carbohydrate substituents as well as different linkages and anomeric configurations. Over the past few years, analytical techniques that allow the effective characterization of glycan structures have advanced. In contrast to genomics and proteomics, glycan structures are not template derived and glycomics thus requires well-constructed sets of databases to capture glycan structure and related data that are frequently reported in literature. It is accepted that glycoinformatics is in its infancy but there has been a concerted effort to design glycoinformatic resources to support analytical technologies in the form of a variety of databases, tools and web services (reviewed by Frank and