Motivation: Information structure (IS) analysis is a text mining technique, which classifies text in biomedical articles into categories that capture different types of information, such as objectives, methods, results and conclusions of research. It is a highly useful technique that can support a range of Biomedical Text Mining tasks and can help readers of biomedical literature find information of interest faster, accelerating the highly time-consuming process of literature review. Several approaches to IS analysis have been presented in the past, with promising results in real-world bio-medical tasks. However, all existing approaches, even weakly supervised ones, require several hundreds of hand-annotated training sentences specific to the domain in question. Because bio-medicine is subject to considerable domain variation, such annotations are expensive to obtain. This makes the application of IS analysis across biomedical domains difficult. In this article, we investigate an unsupervised approach to IS analysis and evaluate the performance of several un-supervised methods on a large corpus of biomedical abstracts collected from PubMed. Results: Our best unsupervised algorithm (multilevel-weighted graph clustering algorithm) performs very well on the task, obtaining over 0.70 F scores for most IS categories when applied to well-known IS schemes. This level of performance is close to that of lightly supervised IS methods and has proven sufficient to aid a range of practical tasks. Thus, using an unsupervised approach, IS could be applied to support a wide range of tasks across sub-domains of biomedicine. We also demonstrate that unsupervised learning brings novel insights into IS of biomedical literature and discovers information categories that are not present in any of the existing IS schemes. Availability and Implementation: The annotated corpus and software are available at http://wiki.opencb.org/projects/hpg/doku.php?id
IntroductionRecent developments in the areas of natural language processing, machine learning and data mining have led to considerable progress in Biomedical Text Mining (Bio-TM) (), producing highly useful techniques that enable users to retrieve and extract information from scientific text easily and efficiently. Information structure (IS) analysis is a highly useful TM technique that has attracted increasing attention recently. It aims to classify units of text (typically sentences) into a fixed number of categories, which capture different types of information in text (). For instance, IS categories could capture the aim of the study or a type of the study (e.g. animal, human and in vitro), the design of experiments (e.g. exposure length, V C The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com dose and group size), the results obtained (e.g. end points, positive or negative results), the conclusions drawn and so forth. To date, several IS schemes have been proposed for the analysis of scientific documents. There are coarse-grained schemes that stem from typical section headings seen in academic journals (), as well as finer-grained schemes. Among the latter are those based on the rhetorical structure and scientific argumentation of a scientific paper [namely argumentative zones (AZs)] (), the qualitative dimensions or the properties of factual information (e.g. focus, polarity, certainty, evidence and directionality) (), the distinction between different types of evidence in empirical studies (e.g. explicit versus implicit claims, correlations, comparisons and observations) () and the content and conceptual framework for a scientific investigation (), among others. Automatic labeling of biomedical text according to IS has many practical applications. It has been shown to support a variety of BioTM tasks (e.g. information retrieval, information extraction and text summarization) () and manual study of biomedical literature. For example,reported a speed reading test where IS annotations significantly speeded up literature review in cancer risk assessment. However, the usefulness of IS analysis has been limited by the fact that existing approaches suffer from poor portability. Biomedicine is subject to considerable sub-domain variation at different levels of linguistic description (). Application of IS analysis to different sub-domains of biomedicine (e.g. chemistry, molecular biology and cancer research) has required the development of domain-specific training and evaluation data (). Created by hand, such data are very expensive to develop and are only available for a handful of sub-domains. Recent research has investigated reducing the need for annotations via lightly supervised learning (e.g. active learning) of IS. This research has produced useful resultsaccurate enough to support high-speed literature review (). However, such an approach still requires several hundreds of annotated sentences for optimal performance. This is unrealistic as biomedical literature is not only varied in terms of domains but also highly dynamic (). This article investigates whether unsupervised methods could be realistic for IS analysis. Such methods have the distinct advantage of removing the need for any IS annotation. Not only would this allow for easily applying the approach to the many (sub-)domains where annotated data are not readily available, but it could also lead to the discovery of novel, undefined information categories emerging from the data. We experiment with a large corpus of biomedical abstracts annotated according to two different IS schemes: section names (SN) and AZs. We apply to this corpus two canonical clustering algorithms spherical k-means () and Expectation MaximizationGaussian Mixture Model (EM-GMM) ()as well as the-state-of-the-art multilevel-weighted graph clustering algorithm (), which is an efficient approximation of the very popular spectral clustering algorithm. The latter algorithm has the added advantage that it avoids expensive eigenvector computation by exploiting weighted kernel k-means to locally optimize graph clustering objectives (). Using a selection of clustering evaluation metrics, we evaluate these algorithms on the two IS schemes, comparing them against fully supervised and weakly supervised algorithms. Our unsupervised approach performs surprisingly well, especially when multilevel-weighted graph clustering is applied to the SN scheme: we obtain over 0.70 F scores for most categoriesperformance which is close to that of lightly supervised methods and which has proven sufficient to aid practical tasks in biomedicine. We also demonstrate that unsupervised learning brings novel insights into IS of biomedical literature and discovers information categories that are not present in any of the existing IS schemes. There is only one previous study in unsupervised IS analysis, which focused on detecting SNs (). They used probabilistic graphical models and reported an F score of 35%, which is rather low and unlikely to be used in real-world tasks. Our results suggest that if we use more sophisticated unsupervised techniques and better features, IS analysis could realistically be used to benefit a much wider range of tasks in biomedicine.
Discussion
ConclusionTo summarize, in this article, we investigate canonical and stateof-the-art clustering algorithms for IS analysis of biomedical literature. This is the first study of unsupervised IS analysis that uses sophisticated unsupervised learning techniques that may beover the average control value of 0.96 6 0.51 (SD)x10(6) (P  0.004). METH We then compared Hprt mutant frequencies (MFs) among these groups. OBJ The higher levels of these two DNA-reactive metabolites in mice compared with rats probably contribute to the species differences in carcinogenic effects of BD between mice and rats. CON These results suggest that EB causes mutation primarily by base substitution and that the spectrum of these mutations closely resembles that of BD.Sentence closest to centroid 1 RES In vitro activation of p-cresol with horseradish peroxidase produced six DNA adducts with a relative adduct level of 8.03 6 0.43 x 10(7). 2 RES There was no significant effect from individual GSTM1, GSTT1 or mEH genotypes in workers exposed to 150 p.p.b. 3 OBJ 1,3-Butadiene (BD), which is used to make styrene-butadiene rubber, is a potent carcinogen in mice and a probable carcinogen, associated with leukemia, in humans. 4 CON These results suggest that the alteration of the NMPs may be involved in DENinduced hepatocarcinogenesis. 5 METH Two weeks after a single dose of DEN (200 mg/kg, intraperitoneally), rats were given annatto extract at dietary levels of 0, 0.03, 0.1 and 0.3% or phenobarbital sodium at 0.05% as a positive control for 6 weeks. 6 RES The total number of thyroid-follicular cells was not significantly increased by MEI treatment. applicable in real-world tasks. We obtain high performance especially for identifying objective, result and conclusion sentences. We further demonstrate that unsupervised learning brings new insights into IS analysis and allows for the possibility of discovering novel information categories. We have demonstrated the potential of clustering and have shown that clustering can detect valuable new information in data. In the future, we would like to pursue unsupervised learning further and learn feature representations as well, rather than pre-defining them [e.g. similar to. Other areas we want to explore are probabilistic clustering algorithms such as LDAstyle topic models () and clustering algorithms specifically designed for high-dimensional data ().