Motivation: The identification of suitable conditions for crystallization is a rate-limiting step in protein structure determination. The pH of an experiment is an important parameter and has the potential to be used in data-mining studies to help reduce the number of crystallization trials required. However, the pH is usually recorded as that of the buffer solution, which can be highly inaccurate. Results: Here, we show that a better estimate of the true pH can be predicted by considering not only the buffer pH but also any other chemicals in the crystallization solution. We use these more accurate pH values to investigate the disputed relationship between the pI of a protein and the pH at which it crystallizes. Availability and implementation: Data used to generate models are available as Supplementary
IntroductionAs the predominant method used to determine molecular structure, X-ray crystallography can provide information on the atomic level processes of proteins and, in turn, enable the development of therapeutic drugs. In order to determine the structure of a target protein by X-ray crystallography, the protein must be cloned and expressed before the soluble fraction is purified for crystallization. Only when diffraction quality crystals are obtained can the structure be determined. Although many protein structures have been solved to date, these only account for some 3% of all possible protein targets (), with membrane protein structures being particularly challenging () and underrepresented (). The use of a priori information about a protein to ascertain the optimal initial conditions before experimentation could help reduce the number of trials required which is valuable when protein sample availability is scarce. Following the advent of online repositories, such as the Protein Data Bank (PDB) () and the Biological Macrmolecule Crystallization Database () set up specifically for the development of crystallization strategies (), it has been possible to analyse the data from successful experiments and determine favourable regions of crystallization parameter space. It has been shown that protein family can indicate a region of parameter space in which a protein is likely to crystallize () and that properties such as amino acid frequency, sequence length, grand average of hydrophobicity (GRAVY) () and isoelectric point (pI) as well as other properties can determine a protein's propensity to crystallize (). Investigations have also indicated that the isoelectric point could be used to determine the pH at which a protein with an acidic isoelectric point is likely to crystallize ().