We present Vacceed, a highly configurable and scalable framework designed to automate the process of high-throughput in silico vaccine candidate discovery for eukaryotic pathogens. Given thousands of protein sequences from the target pathogen as input, the main output is a ranked list of protein candidates determined by a set of machine learning algorithms. Vacceed has the potential to save time and money by reducing the number of false candidates allocated for laboratory validation. Vacceed, if required, can also predict protein sequences from the pathogens genome. Availability and implementation: Vacceed is tested on Linux and can be freely downloaded from https://github.com/sgoodswe/vacceed/re leases (includes a worked example with sample data). Vacceed User Guide can be obtained from https://github.com/sgoodswe/vacceed.
INTRODUCTIONSeveral subunit vaccines against prokaryotic pathogens have been identified () using reverse vaccinology (). Vaxign () and NERVE () are examples of vaccine discovery tools for prokaryotes, but there is currently no equivalent tool for eukaryotes. Freely available bioinformatics tools and an unprecedented volume of omics data now present an opportunity for in silico vaccine discovery for eukaryotic pathogens. A general approach is to use several tools to predict and gather evidence for protein characteristics. From this potential evidence, the researcher makes an informed decision as to a protein's vaccine candidacy suitability. Determining which tools are appropriate, as well as how to use them, presents the first of many challenges. A further challenge, especially to a researcher with limited programming ability, is to extract and gather the pertinent evidence distributed within large-scale outputs. The subsequent and more imposing challenge is that the evidence is mainly in different formats, contradicting and inaccurate. Poor evidence reliability arises because some of the input data to the tools (e.g. protein sequences and training data) are inaccurate or missing. Moreover, tools used to predict protein characteristics are, in general, inaccurate. Vaccine candidates identified in silico can only be validated in a laboratory. Validation should provide feedback to inform and improve vaccine candidacy decision making. The repetitive nature for this ideal in silico approach is in need of automation. Furthermore, an automated process must accommodate an everincreasing choice of new or improved prediction programs that inevitably replace existing ones. We have developed Vacceed to address the challenges raised here i.e. to provide a flexible, automated process to predict worthy vaccine candidates from large volumes of superfluous, disseminated and noisy data. Vacceed is the collective name for a framework of linked bioinformatics programs, Perl scripts, R functions and Linux shell scripts. A previous published study provided guidance in development ().