Motivation: Linkage disequilibrium (LD) differences between populations can potentially result in failure to replicate primary signals of trait association in independent genome-wide association studies (GWAS). However, such inter-population LD differences can be leveraged to narrow the search for common causal variants responsible for the association signals observed. The ability to assess and quantify LD variations among populations is thus expected to contribute to both replication and fine-mapping stages of GWAS. Availability: The program varLD is available for download from http://www.theseed.org/.
INTRODUCTIONThe aim of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of common diseases and complex traits is to find statistically significant markers, usually single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which are associated with the phenotype of interest. These SNPs are seldom the genetic variants responsible for the phenotype, but are markers in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with the underlying causal variants. Thus, the findings from GWAS serve as indicators for genomic regions that are likely to possess the genetic variants directly responsible for the functional changes and differences in phenotypic expression. To reduce statistical noise, it is necessary to validate the initial findings in replication studies performed in independent cohorts, which are often from different populations. Increasingly, metaanalysis of multiple GWAS studies of the same trait, involving tens of thousands of individuals are currently being performed (). In addition to confirming the initial GWAS findings, larger effective sample sizes from these meta-analyses also increase statistical power for identifying novel associations with smaller genetic effects. The large number of individuals in these studies meant it is highly unlikely they will come from the same population but rather from multiple populations potentially possessing diverse genetic architectures. The portability of association signals in these trans-population studies is thus highly dependent on the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. similarity of LD patterns between the associated markers and the underlying causal variants in the different populations. Interpopulation heterogeneity in LD patterns can confound replication, leading to false negatives in some populations. The ability to quantify the extent of inter-population LD variation is thus the first step towards understanding whether a failure to reproduce an association signal in another population may be a result of differential LD architecture with the causal variant. The presence of LD among SNP markers has allowed commercial genotyping platforms with incomplete SNP coverage to successfully detect genotypephenotype associations. However, this becomes a liability in fine-mapping studies that aim to identify the actual causal variants, since it becomes difficult to distinguish between the causal variant and the neighbouring markers in high or perfect LD with the causal variant. Assuming there exists a common causal variant among different populations, diverse patterns of LD surrounding the SNPs that emerge from different GWAS studies can be used to refine the boundaries where the causal variant may be found, narrowing the search space and reducing the cost of genotyping and sequencing during fine-mapping studies (). Here, we introduce a java program (varLD) that quantifies the extent of LD variation between the two populations. The program allows genome-wide assessment of LD variation, as well as targeted analysis of a specific genomic region. The outcome from these analyses can be used to identify regions that display evidence of the inter-population LD variation. As these regions are likely to possess diverse haplotypic patterns across the populations (), association signals emerging from GWAS that fall within these regions will benefit from leveraging this genomic diversity in trans-population fine-mapping studies.