Motivation: Several techniques analyze gene expression data from the point of view of biological ontologies. These methods focus on statistical and numerical analyses, but there is an additional need for fast, global and interactive visualizations of gene expression data in the context of biological ontologies. Results: Voronto addresses these needs with an easy to use integration of custom gene expression data with custom or public ontologies. In order to do that, it implements Voronoi diagrams where ontologies are mapped with gene expression, providing a quick hierarchy browsing and integration with ontologys resources. Availability: The tool is available at https://www.omnifung.hki-jena.de/Rpad/Distance_Scan/index.htm
INTRODUCTIONFunction and relation-focused techniques are gaining interest as part of expression data analyses. The growing of existing biological knowledge and its consolidation into structured ontologies () make it possible to integrate such information into the analysis process. The results of these techniques are usually lists of enriched terms, which focus on statistical significance and other numerical information, disregarding non-enriched terms, hierarchical relationships and expression levels. It is therefore hard, if not impossible, to get a picture of expression data in the context of the whole ontology at hand, and to easily inspect it. Here, we present Voronto, a tool that integrates expression data and biological ontologies, allowing the analyst to explore the whole ontology and detect changes on expression patterns inside the ontology.
DISCUSSIONThe tool has been tested with several expression data, from different organisms and experimental contexts (see Supplementary Information for some use cases). Biologist's testing of the tool suggests that it is useful on a top-down approach: start by the highest levels of the ontology and narrow down the search to differentially expressed lower terms, helped by the profile bar and the gene heatmap. It has also been used with success in bottom-up approaches, starting with genes or terms known to be relevant for the experiment and searching them in the ontology to determine biological relations or expression patterns. As an example, inwe can easily identify 'Sulfur metabolism' as highly expressed, and at the same time, we can check other terms (e.g. 'RNA transport', with no significant expression, or ''Peroxisome'', slightly underexpressed) or other time points for 'Sulfur metabolism' (42 0 is a peak around C2 phase, with no significant expression earlier or later on). From there we can go up on the hierarchy to check for more generic behaviors or narrow down to identify the genes involved in 'Sulfur metabolism'.
CONCLUSIONVoronto unburdens the analyst from mapping ontologies to gene expression and offers a clean, general view of the hierarchy. It favors exploration in the context of the ontology's resources and the experimental conditions, complementing functional enrichment analysis, common in systems biology studies. These characteristics make Voronto a powerful, yet simple and fast, way to study expression data in the context of ontologies.). The term 'Sulfur metabolism', with nine mapped genes, is highlighted, and its profile bar for the whole time series shown at the bottom. (Right, top and center) First and second levels of the hierarchy, 'Sulfur metabolism' belongs to 'Metabolism' and 'Energy metabolism'. (Right, bottom) Heatmap with 'Sulfur metabolism' annotatd genes, showing the overexpression at 42 0 is mostly due to three of them.