Motivation: Functional protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks elucidate molecular pathways underlying complex phenotypes, including those of human diseases. Extrapolation of domain–do-main interactions (DDIs) from known PPIs is a major domain-based method for inferring functional PPI networks. However, the protein domain is a functional unit of the protein. Therefore, we should be able to effectively infer functional interactions between proteins based on the co-occurrence of domains. Results: Here, we present a method for inferring accurate functional PPIs based on the similarity of domain composition between proteins by weighted mutual information (MI) that assigned different weights to the domains based on their genome-wide frequencies. Weighted MI outperforms other domain-based network inference methods and is highly predictive for pathways as well as phenotypes. A genome-scale human functional network determined by our method reveals numerous communities that are significantly associated with known pathways and diseases. Domain-based functional networks may, therefore, have potential applications in mapping domain-to-pathway or domain-to-phenotype associations. Availability and Implementation: Source code for calculating weighted mutual information based on the domain profile matrix is available from www.netbiolab.org/w/WMI.
IntroductionProteins are major functional molecules that conduct cellular processes. Interactions between proteins are important for understanding the molecular mechanisms of complex traits, including diseases. For example, network-based analysis has recently gained popularity in interpreting data from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and whole exome sequencing (WES) for human diseases such as cancer (; Mutation and Pathway Analysis working group of the International Cancer). Although a large number of proteinprotein interactions (PPIs) have been mapped via experimental detection of physical interactions between proteins, in silico methods are still useful for inferring functional PPIs () because proteins may work cooperatively without physical interaction. Interactions between proteins are typically mediated by domain domain interactions (DDIs); thus, protein domains can be used to infer PPIs (). Indeed, frequently observed domain pairs between interacting proteins have been identified as powerful predictors of PPIs (). These observations have motivated the systematic extraction of DDIs from known PPIs and extrapolation to new PPIs. Many algorithms have been developed to extractPPIs, as well as to infer new PPIs based on these DDIs, which have been collected into meta-databases (). Functional PPIs can also be inferred from shared domains between proteins because protein domains are structural, functional and evolutionary units of proteins. In addition, because proteins evolved through gene duplication, recombination, fusion and fission towards specific functions, there exist limited rules for domain combination (). However, the presence of shared domains between proteins may not be a sufficient model of functional PPIs. For example, a DNA-binding domain exists in most transcription factors, which regulate many different biological processes. Thus, such a shared domain between two proteins may not be a strong indicator of their functional association with the same pathway. Therefore, we do not expect the prediction of functional PPIs based on domain sharing to be effective. There exists a need for a method to infer functional associations between proteins based on domain co-occurrence. In this study, we propose a method to infer PPIs based on domain occurrence. Any protein can be represented by a domain profile, which is a vector reflecting the presence or absence of domains. Functional associations between proteins are then measured by the similarity between their domain profiles. Unlike DDI-based inference of PPIs, this approach does not require prior knowledge of the PPIs from which the DDIs are extracted. In addition, to measure domain profile similarity with higher functional relevance, we wanted to account for unequal distribution of functional information content across profiles and domains. Mutual information (MI) differentially compares profile information based on their entropy. We hypothesized that rarer domains tended to be involved in more specific pathways. Therefore, in addition to traditional MI, we tested a weighted MI method that assigned different weights to domains based on their genome-wide frequencies. Here, we demonstrate that weighted MI outperforms traditional MI in the inference of functional PPIs based on domain profile similarity in both yeast and human. We also found that domain profile similarity by weighted MI constructs substantially improved functional networks compared to those based on DDIs. Our domain-based network inference method constructed highly predictive functional networks for complex phenotypes such as human diseases. Finally, we observed that communities of our domain-based network are significantly associated with known pathways or diseases, implicating a potential application of domain-based functional networks in mapping associations between domains and pathways/diseases.
DiscussionThe protein domain is a widely accepted functional unit of proteins. Thus, domains can be expected to convey information about the pathways and phenotypes proteins are involved in. However, the use of domains to predict these pathways and phenotypes based on domain occurrence remains limited. Many domains are associated with multiple pathways that are involved in distinct physiological processes. Therefore, domain occurrence may not be a sufficient indicator of domain involvement in specific pathways or phenotypes. Furthermore, some domains appear to be basic components of a large number of proteins. Therefore, domain-based pathway modelling has been challenging. In this study, we demonstrated the feasibility of constructing highly predictive functional PPI networks for pathways and diseases using an information theory approach with differential weights across domains. However, despite superior accuracy, PPI networks by weighted MI exhibit smaller genome coverage than those derived by simple domain sharing, which indicates that many domains are general-purpose components of proteins that do not indicate any specific pathways. These observations suggest that we may be able to use domain-based networks to distinguish domains involved in specific pathways from those that participate in general processes. This enables more reliable pathway prediction based on domain information. Although we demonstrated the utility of weighted MI to construct domain-based functional PPI for yeast and human in this study, the same method can be easily applied to other organisms and may potentially benefit relatively lesser understood organisms for which only protein sequences with electronic annotation of domains are available. We also demonstrated that human domain-based network communities tend to be associated with pathways and diseases, suggesting a potential application for domain-based functional networks in mapping domain-to-pathway and domain-to-disease associations. Although we have made vast progress in in silico models to identify associated pathways and diseases for genes, models using domainsand DO-Lite terms (B) for each community are listed along with their significance scores as indicators remain are less developed. Given that the domain is a more fundamental functional unit of proteins, pathway or disease annotation for each domain would be more relevant to the genome. Therefore, significant efforts have been invested into the manual curation of relationships between domains and pathways, such as InterPro2GO (). We anticipate that the development of an automatic mapper of domains to GOBP terms will accelerate this manual curation project. In addition, the prediction of domain-to-disease associations will provide new insights into the analysis of disease-specific genomics data, such as disease-associated SNPs and mutations, which potentially opens new routes to understanding the molecular mechanisms of human diseases in the future.