Motivation: Mutual exclusivity is a widely recognized property of many cancer drivers. Knowledge about these relationships can provide important insights into cancer drivers, cancer-driving pathways and cancer subtypes. It can also be used to predict new functional interactions between cancer driving genes and uncover novel cancer drivers. Currently, most of mutual exclusivity analyses are preformed focusing on a limited set of genes in part due to the computational cost required to rigorously compute P-values. Results: To reduce the computing cost and perform less restricted mutual exclusivity analysis, we developed an efficient method to estimate P-values while controlling the mutation rates of individual patients and genes similar to the permutation test. A comprehensive mutual exclusivity analysis allowed us to uncover mutually exclusive pairs, some of which may have relatively low mutation rates. These pairs often included likely cancer drivers that have been missed in previous analyses. More importantly, our results demonstrated that mutual exclusivity can also provide information that goes beyond the interactions between cancer drivers and can, for example, elucidate different mutagenic processes in different cancer groups. In particular, including frequently mutated, long genes such as TTN in our analysis allowed us to observe interesting patterns of APOBEC activity in breast cancer and identify a set of related driver genes that are highly predictive of patient survival. In addition, we utilized our mutual exclusivity analysis in support of a previously proposed model where APOBEC activity is the underlying process that causes TP53 mutations in a subset of breast cancer cases. Availability and Implementation: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CBBresearch/Przytycka/index.
IntroductionMutual exclusivity is a frequently observed property in two or more genes having mutations in cancer patients (). Mutually exclusive gene pairs (i.e. gene pairs of which simultaneous mutations in the same patients are less frequent than it is expected by chance) are observed within many cancer types, while some are common across multiple different cancer types (). The underlying cause of mutual exclusivity might vary depending on the context. In many cases, genes mutated in a mutually exclusive way have been found to be members of the same functional pathway. In such a case, the mutual exclusivity of their mutation pattern can be explained by the pathway centric view of cancer. Specifically, if two genes belong to the same cancer-driving pathway, then a mutation in just one of them might suffice to dysregulate the pathway and trigger cancer progression (). In contrast, in a combined analysis of multiple cancer types, mutually exclusive aberrations might represent tissue specific cancer drivers. In fact, the sets of mutually exclusive drivers obtained in Pan-Cancer analysis () predominantly included the tissue type specific genes that, typically, do not share common pathways. Yet, even within the same tissue type, mutual exclusivity between genes from different pathways is not unusual (). This type of exclusivity can be explained, for example, by synthetic lethality where simultaneous mutations in both genes are detrimental for cancer progression (). Another (not necessarily unrelated) possibility is that the mutually exclusive drivers define different cancer subtypes within the same tissue type. Finally, mutual exclusivity can also be observed between less frequently mutated cancer drivers suggesting more subtle relationships between them and their contribution to cancer progression. For example, previous research found that even if the exclusivity between ARID1B and KRAS is not significant in any of individual cancer types separately, the pair was shown to be mutually exclusive when analyzing all cancer types together as statistical power was gained (). Mutual exclusivity can potentially provide important information about cancer, including its alternative progression pathways and subtypes. It can also reveal important relationships between genes and pathways. However, most of the analyses of mutual exclusivity so far have been focused on limited subsets of genes that were selected based on mutation rate cut-off (typically 3 or 5% depending on datasets) or restricted by other criteria. One of the factors limiting the applications of mutual exclusivity analysis beyond restricted gene sets was the cost of computing rigorous P-values for all gene pairs of interest. Statistically, pairwise mutual exclusivity can be estimated by a permutation test in which the original mutational profile is permuted by swapping random pairs of mutations iteratively while preserving the mutation rates of genes and patients. A possibly faster alternative approach is to use a hypergeometric test. However, the hypergeometric test treats all patients equally, ignoring patient specific mutation frequencies, which may limit its accuracy. To provide a more in-depth understanding of mutual exclusivity in cancer data, we started by designing a new and fast heuristic for estimating statistical significance of mutual exclusivity relationships. Our method, Weighted Sampling based Mutual Exclusivity (WeSME), estimates P-values of mutual exclusivity while taking into account mutation frequencies of patients. It closely approximates the results of the permutation-based method and does so without using the costly permutations of a mutation matrix. Moreover, WeSME can compute P-values for a subset of genes independently from the rest of genome unlike the permutation method that requires whole genome permutations. By dynamically adjusting sampling depth, WeSME can provide high precision P-values without a significant increase in computational cost. Adopting the same sampling technique, we also developed a complementary test, Weighted Sampling based Co-Occurrence (WeSCO), to estimate the significance of co-occurrence in gene mutations. With WeSME at hand, we began to explore the information that a comprehensive mutual exclusivity survey can provide. We included all genes with mutations in the analysis without prefiltering. In particular, we did not exclude very long genes such as muscle protein Titin (TTN), gel forming Mucins, which often emerge as frequently mutated genes in cancer (even after correction with their lengths) but are generally assumed to be artifacts (). Interestingly, we found that some of these genes have many mutual exclusivity partners. In particular, we identified TTN as one of the hubs in the mutual exclusivity network in breast cancer and endometrial carcinoma. The high number of mutual exclusivity partners of TTN prompted us to hypothesize that mutual exclusivity of its mutations could be a reflection of an underlying mutagenic process that occurs in a specific subgroup of patients. To test this hypothesis, we reasoned that long and frequently mutated genes might harbor a recognizable signature of the mutagenic process acting on them. Specifically, it has been recently recognized that a subclass of APOBEC cytidine deaminases, which convert cytosine to uracil during RNA editing, are a source of mutagenicity in human tumors (). Several other factors such as Pol e mutation, patient ages at diagnosis, known mutagenic exposures, or defects in DNA maintenance are also associated with characteristic mutation signatures (). We found that, in the case of breast cancer, the mutation pattern of TTN is consistent with the APOBEC3B activity, while in endometrial carcinoma, it is consistent with the Pol e mutation signature. Including TTN gene in our mutual exclusivity analysis allowed us not only to observe interesting patterns of APOBEC activity in breast cancer but also to identify a set of driver genes that is highly predictive of patient survival. In addition, we showed that our mutual exclusivity analysis supports the model where APOBEC activity is the underlying process that causes TP53 mutations in highly mutated breast cancer cases. Finally, with our method, we have been able to uncover mutually exclusive cancer drivers and novel putative drivers despite their relatively low mutation rates in the breast cancer dataset. Taken together, our results demonstrated the utility of our fast statistical test for mutual exclusivity and showed that the unrestricted analysis of mutual exclusivity enabled by the method can provide valuable biological insights.