Motivation: The sequencing of over a thousand natural strains of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana is producing unparalleled information at the genetic level for plant researchers. To enable the rapid exploitation of these data for functional proteomics studies, we have created a resource for the visualization of protein information and proteomic datasets for sequenced natural strains of A. thaliana. Results: The 1001 Proteomes portal can be used to visualize amino acid substitutions or non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms in individual proteins of A. thaliana based on the reference genome Col-0. We have used the available processed sequence information to analyze the conservation of known residues subject to protein phosphorylation among these natural strains. The substitution of amino acids in A. thaliana natural strains is heavily constrained and is likely a result of the conservation of functional attributes within proteins. At a practical level, we demonstrate that this information can be used to clarify ambiguously defined phosphorylation sites from phospho proteomic studies. Protein sets of available natural variants are available for download to enable proteomic studies on these accessions. Together this information can be used to uncover the possible roles of specific amino acids in determining the structure and function of proteins in the model plant A. thaliana. An online portal to enable the community to exploit these data can be accessed at http://1001proteomes.masc-proteomics. org/ Contact: jlheazlewood@lbl.gov

introduction the genome sequence of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana was completed over 10 years ago by a consortium of international research groups and facilities (). Recently, a project to re sequence over one thousand genomes from A. thaliana accessions or natural variants using next generation sequencing platforms was initiated (). The * To whom correspondence should be addressed. 1001 Genomes project will provide unparalleled information for plant molecular geneticists, as natural variation caused by single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) can be readily mapped using genome wide association studies (). Currently, sequence information for over 450 A. thaliana natural strains are available at 1001 Genomes with a significant number of accessions in the sequencing pipeline (http://1001genomes.org/). Initial analyses of two re sequenced A. thaliana natural strains (Bur-0 and Tsu-1) indicated that SNPs in coding regions resulted in over 80 000 changes to amino acids (). More recently, with the analysis of 80 A. thaliana accessions by whole genome sequencing, over 12 000 SNPs were identified that potentially resulted in drastic effects to coding regions (). These findings prompted us to investigate whether this emerging dataset could be exploited to analyze conservation of functional aspects of protein sequences. In recent years, the large scale characterization of protein phosphorylation has become relatively straightforward due to advances in enrichment and analysis strategies (). In A. thaliana, many thousands of phosphorylation sites have been experimentally characterized using emerging phospho proteomic techniques (). We have employed these distinct datasets to examine whether it is possible to assess the conservation and corroborate post-translational modifications in proteins of A. thaliana. Finally, in order to provide additional utility to proteomic researchers, we have developed a portal to provide easy access to the proteomic sequence data resulting from this newly developed information. This portal is part of a collection of resources developed by the Proteomics Subcommittee () of the Multinational Arabidopsis Steering Committee mas cp and the 1001 Genomes consortium () and is available at http://1001proteomes. masc proteomics org
discussion the 1001 Genomes program involving the sequencing of A. thaliana natural strains has the capacity to significantly enhance our ability to identify subtleties in gene regulation. To allow proteomic researchers to more readily interface with this information, we have created a portal called 1001 Proteomes to distribute translated protein information and to provide interface to readily browse data at the protein level. As an illustrative example of the utility of such a resource to understand protein function, we demonstrated that these data can be employed to examine features such as conservation of protein modifications such as phosphorylation in the model plant A. thaliana. Experimentally determined phosphorylation sites from large scale phospho proteomics studies of the reference A. thaliana strain Col-0, were significantly less likely to be substituted by ns snps in accessions. Our initial analyses indicated that several thousand accessions would be required to obtain adequate or complete amino acid substitutions based on coding region changes in natural strains of A. thaliana. In reality, substitutions in the coding regions of these proteins is heavily constrained and likely controlled by conservation of functional attributes within a protein. Although the actual amino acid substitution space across A. thaliana accessions is constrained, it was still possible to use these data to validate the conservation of phosphorylation sites in protein sequences. It is likely that this information can also be used to tease apart important and redundant residues within functional domains of proteins. The utility of this portal for functional proteomics can be further highlighted when examining ambiguities in phosphorylation site assignments from large scale phospho proteomics. Variable phosphorylation assignments are common when multiple S, T or Y residues are present in an identified phosphopeptide. An examination of variably assigned phosphorylation sites on a handful of phosphopeptides revealed that it was possible to readily determine the likely phosphorylated residue (). These results further demonstrate the value in visually presenting ns snp data to the research community as they can address simple but diverse questions on protein structure and function. Recently a similar analysis of phosphorylation site conservation across natural strains of A. thaliana concluded that there was no association between experimental sites and ns snps (). This contrary finding was likely due to the non-uniformity of the SNP datasets which comprised data from re-sequencing arrays of 20 accession (), short the amino acid substitution is underlined in the ns snp assisted column. Site indicates the likely phosphorylation site after taking into account the substitution. Acc. (acces-sion) indicates the number of accessions with the ns snp. a Phosphorylation site also confirmed experimentally by other studies, see phos phat (http://phosphat.mpimp-golm.mpg.de/). fragment sequencing of 96 accessions () and early versions of next generation re-sequencing data for only two accessions (). Overall this dataset likely lacked the resolution to obtain adequate coverage of SNPs and specifically ns snps from A. thaliana accessions. Furthermore recent work examining ns snps associated with phosphorylation sites in humans phos snps argued that phenotypic effects may be attributable to ns snp substitutions of phosphorylated residues (). These observations further reinforce the likely conservation of ns snps that alter protein function and effect phenotype. The development of the 1001 Proteomes portal (http://1001 proteomes masc proteomics org provides a simple means to analyze the role of amino acids on protein attributes such as posttranslational modifications. We have now developed an automated pipeline that efficiently converts the processed re-sequencing data from the Arabidopsis 1001 Genomes project into visual tracks at 1001 Proteomes. New data will be made available both in the browser and as downloadable proteins sets for functional proteomics studies as they are made publicly available to the community.
