The defined secondary structure of proteins method is often considered the gold standard for assignment of secondary structure from three dimensional coordinates. However, there are alternative methods. 2Struc: The Secondary Structure Server has been created as a single point of access for eight different secondary structure assignment methods. It has been designed to enable comparisons between methods for analyzing the secondary structure content for a single protein. It also includes a second functionality, compare the protein to enable comparisons of the secondary structure features from any one method to be made within a collection of nuclear magnetic resonance models, or between the crystal structures of two different proteins. Availability: http://2struc.cryst.

introduction in 1983, kab sch and Sander (1983) developed what has become the de facto approach when defining secondary structure, the defined secondary structure of proteins (DSSP). DSSP uses a single hydrogen bond energy term to assign eight states of secondary structure elements (SSEs) to three dimensional coordinates and is arguably the golden standard for this task. Although extensively used, DSSP is not the only tool available and other approaches have been developed which incorporate different means of defining SSEs. It has been suggested that DSSP can miss the elucidation of edge strands () and has difficulties dealing with low resolution structures () and with structures where only the C trace atoms are reported (). Further methods have been developed including dssp cont (), STRIDE (), pals se (), P-SEA (), kak si (), STICK () and x tls str (), the latter created for deriving secondary structure from three dimensional coordinates to match comparable data determined from circular dichroism spectra. These other methods meet specific needs that are not optimally addressed by DSSP; all have merit, and as such broaden the means by which SSEs can be identified. The aim of the 2Struc server is to provide easy access to the information produced by a variety of these SSE assignment tools. * To whom correspondence should be addressed currently eight methods are available on the server, covering all atom approaches such as DSSP, dssp cont (an extension of DSSP using more detailed hydrogen bonding energies) and STRIDE, vector line segment methods such as STICK and pals se and distance angle methods such as P-SEA, kak si and x tls str. Citation references to each of the methods are provided on the server and we request all users to cite these original articles. The output of each method is presented numerically in the form of total secondary structure content as well as for individual residues in a protein's sequence and on a graphical display of the protein's three dimensional structure using a Jmol (http://www.jmol.org/) representation. In addition to method comparisons, differences within nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) models and between two x-ray structures are possible using the compare the protein feature.

conclusion the 2Struc server provides two functionalities; 2Struc, which generates SSE assignments for protein structures for up to eight different methods enabling easy analyses of similarities and differences between them, and compare the protein which allows comparisons and highlighting of differences between the SSEs generated within a series of NMR models or between two x-ray structures. 2Struc is unique in providing summaries of percentage secondary structure content for reduced three state data and original SSE output assignments where generated. The server is freely available to all users at http://2struc.cryst.bbk.ac.uk.
