Motivation: The 3D structure of the genome plays a critical role in regulating gene expression. Recent progress in mapping technologies for chromatin interactions has led to a rapid increase in this kind of interaction data. This trend will continue as research in this burgeoning field intensifies. Results: We describe the 4d genome database that stores chromatin interaction data compiled through comprehensive literature curation. The database currently covers both low and high throughput assays, including 3C, 4C-Seq, 5C, Hi-C, chia pet and capture c. To complement the set of interactions detected by experimental assays, we also include interactions predicted by a recently developed computational method with demonstrated high accuracy. The database currently contains 8 million records, covering 102 cell tissue types in five organisms. Records in the database are described using a standardized file format, facilitating data exchange. The vast major of the interactions were assigned a confidence score. Using the web interface, users can query and download database records via a number of annotation dimensions. Query results can be visualized along with other genomics datasets via links to the UCSC genome browser. We anticipate that 4d genome will be a valuable resource for investigating the spatial structure and function relationship of genomes. Availability and Implementation: 4d genome is freely accessible at http://4dgenome.int-med. u iowa edu. The database and web interface are implemented in MySQL, Apache and JavaScript with all major browsers supported.

introduction determining the 3D structure of the genome and its impact on gene expression and other DNA transactions has been a long-standing question in cell biology. The pioneering method of chromosome conformation capture (3C) determines the relative frequency of direct physical contact between a pair of linearly separated chromatin segments (). By coupling 3C with short read sequencing technology, chromosome conformation capture on chip (4C-Seq) () and chromosome conformation capture carbon copy (5C) () can detect genome wide interactions involving a single anchor region and interactions involving multiple genomic regions, respectively. The Hi-C protocol is a truly genome wide technology that allows detection of all interactions in the genome. The chia pet protocol () combines the principles of 3C and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) to identify chromatin interactions mediated by protein factors. Most recently, the capture c method (technology, 3C and short read sequencing and enables researchers to interrogate cis interactions at hundreds of selected loci at high resolution in a single assay. Application of these genome wide assays in recent years has led to a dramatic increase in chromatin interaction data. This rapid increase in data has spurred the development of specialized databases to document chromatin interactions. However, existing databases only store interactions detected by either Hi-C () or by 5C, chia pet and Hi-C (). As a result, they miss a large number of interactions detected by other commonly used high throughput methods, such as 4C and capture c. They also miss interactions detected by 3C, which tend to have higher quality and thus is very useful as the gold standard for a variety of purposes. Besides experimental assays, computational methods are () being continuously improved to predict chromatin interactions. In particular, the recently developed method, integrated method for predicting enhancer targets im pet has been demonstrated to have comparable accuracy as the 5C assay (). Currently, there is a lack of a comprehensive depository for chromatin interactions identified by all major technologies. This dispersion of information hinders standardization, sharing and integration of the interaction data, which are critical for gaining insights into genome structure function relationships. Towards this goal, we have developed the 4d genome database, a general repository for chromatin interactions. Records in 4d genome are compiled through comprehensive literature curation of experimentally derived interactions. The database currently covers both low and high throughput assays, including 3C, 4C-Seq, 5C, Hi-C, chia pet and capture c. The database also includes computational predictions made by the im pet algorithm () that integrates multiple types of genomic features to predict interactions between enhancers and promoters.

discussion two alternative tools have been developed before. However, they either only curate a particular data type, Hi-C () or is specialized for visualizing interactions (). To the best of our knowledge, 4d genome is the first database that comprehensively document and curate chromatin interactions generated by both experimental and computational approaches. Another unique feature of 4d genome is that it provides contact frequency and confidence measure for each interaction, whenever such a measure is possible. As a result, interactions can be prioritized in various analyses. Interactions documented in 4d genome were detected using different experimental technologies. Although these technologies rely on similar molecular biology principle, caveats need to be taken when comparing interactions involving the same loci but generated by different technologies. On the other hand, if an interaction involving the same loci is detected by multiple technologies, it increases our confidence in the interaction. In the future, integra ing interactions detected by different technologies in a statistical sound way should be an important research area. We anticipate that 4d genome will be a valuable resource for investigating the spatial structure and function relationship of genomes as research in this burgeoning area intensifies. We envision that a wide range of investigations will benefit from a carefully curated database such as 4d genome. A few examples include standardization and benchmarking of interaction data qualities by different detection technologies, relationship between genome 3D structure and epigenetic state, dynamics of chromatin interaction across cell/ tissue types and organisms, and genome 3D structure and pathogenic genetic variations. Besides continued curation effort to add new interactions, our future research will focus on two areas in order to improve the quality and utility of database records. First, we plan to improve the integration of 4d genome with other molecular interaction databases, such as bio grid and STRING. Second, we plan to conduct systematic comparisons to identify and apply the most accurate means to assign confidence measures to interaction data generated by different technologies.
