Motivation: Quantifying differences in linkage disequilibrium (LD) between subgroups can highlight genetic regions or sites under selection and or associated with disease, and may have utility in trans ethnic mapping studies. Results: We present a novel pseudo Bayes factor (PBF) approach that assess differences in covariance of genotype frequencies from single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data from a genome wide study. The magnitude of the PBF reflects the strength of evidence for a difference, while accounting for the sample size and number of SNPs, without the requirement for permutation testing to establish statistical significance. Application of the PBF to HapMap and Gambian malaria SNP data reveals regional LD differences, some known to be under selection. Availability and implementation: The PBF approach has been implemented in the BALD (Bayesian analysis of LD differences) C++ software, and is available from http://homepages.lshtm.ac uk tg clark downloads Contact:

introduction comparing linkage disequilibrium (LD) patterns between groups, such as cases and controls or sub-populations, can provide an insight into genetic regions under selection and or association with disease. In fact, comparisons between different ethnic groups may be used to calibrate the resolution of association using trans ethnic mapping (), as well as indicate the appropriateness of genotypic imputation using sequence data from a reference (HapMap) panel. A number of approaches have been suggested for quantifying LD differences. Haplotype sharing methods (Te meer man and Van der) are usually applied in a case control setting, where it is assumed that pairs of cases would tend to be more closely related than pairs of controls, while case control pairs would be even more distantly related on average. Such approaches isolate regions of interest using pairwise comparisons of lengths of haplotype sharing * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(), they can be generalized to compare different sub-populations, and use u statistics and permutations to determine statistical significance. Other methods compare the matrices of pairwise LD metrics (e.g. r 2 and D ) of different sub-populations. In particular, they calculate differences in the eigenvalues (and eigenvectors) (), and perform permutations to determine statistical significance thresholds. Here, we present an alternative approach that does not require permutations and is based on analysis of covariance of genotype frequencies. We propose a Bayes factor statistic that quantifies the degree to which covariance matrices from sub-populations are different. We compare our method with an eigenvalue difference (EVD) approach, and apply it to data from the HapMap () and a subset of controls from a genome wide association study g was of malaria in a Gambian population ().

discussion the PBF metric is a potentially robust and flexible measure to quantify differences in LD between sub-groups, which does not require time consuming permutation approaches to infer statistical significance. Moreover, being Bayesian it readily allows for the incorporation of prior information such as knowledge of candidate regions of selection. Depending on the sub-groups of interest, regional differences in LD may be indicative of selection, recombination and or phenotypic variation. The magnitude of the PBF reflects the difference in the covariances of genotype frequencies, accounting explicitly for the number of samples and SNPs contributing. The assumption of Gaussian allele counts is more likely to hold in non ascertained polymorphisms and large numbers of SNPs, but our simulation and real data results suggest that method may be robust to deviations. If another distribution is considered more suitable for allele counts or non conjugate priors adopted, then it may be possible to obtain the posterior distribution and perform inference using Markov chain Monte Carlo methods (). Bayes factors can be estimated in such settings (see, for an example), usually at greater computational expense. A number of other non bayesian approaches to compare covariance matrices could be considered as alternatives (), some robust to missing data (). evd based methods are easy to calculate, impose few assumptions, and it is possible to take advantage of known distributional properties associated with eigenvalues (). In addition, it is possible to extend EVD approaches to a Bayesian setting, facilitating full probabilistic inference. In conclusion, we present a new approach for quantifying LD differences in genome wide studies, which may have potential utility in a trans ethnic fine mapping setting.
