Motivation: Immunoassays are primary diagnostic and research tools throughout the medical and life sciences. The common approach to the processing of immunoassay data involves estimation of the calibration curve followed by inversion of the calibration function to read off the concentration estimates. This approach, however, does not lend itself easily to acceptable estimation of confidence limits on the estimated concentrations. Such estimates must account for uncertainty in the calibration curve as well as uncertainty in the target measurement. Even point estimates can be problematic: because of the non-linearity of calibration curves and error heteroscedasticity, the neglect of components of measurement error can produce significant bias. Methods: We have developed a Bayesian approach for the estimation of concentrations from immunoassay data that treats the propagation of measurement error appropriately. The method uses Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) to approximate the posterior distribution of the target concentrations and numerically compute the relevant summary statistics. Software implementing the method is freely available for public use. Results: The new method was tested on both simulated and experimental datasets with different measurement error models. The method outperformed the common inverse method on samples with large measurement errors. Even in cases with extreme measurements where the common inverse method failed, our approach always generated reasonable estimates for the target concentrations.

introduction immunoassays are measurement techniques based on the interaction between a selective antibody and its target antigen. The basic principles of immunoassays were introduced in 1945 * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(), and the first application of immunologically based technology (radioimmunoassay) was reported in the late 1950s (). Since then, immunoassays have become a primary diagnostic and research tool within the medicine and life sciences. Compared to other analytical methods, immunoassays provide a rapid, simple, economic, highly specific and sensitive analysis with high throughput and adaptability to field use [reviewed in (. Immunoassays do, however, have limitations. These include interference from matrix compounds used to stabilize the samples, cross reactivity to structural analogs and poor scalability for many multi analyte applications. Several different types of labels have been used in immunoassays, including radio labels enzymes, fluorescent, luminescent and phosphorescent labels. The most common labels for clinical and research studies are enzymes and colorimetric substrates. The approach used most frequently for the analysis of immunoassay data is performed in two steps on two sets of samples, the standards and the target samples. In the first step, standard analyte samples are prepared at known concentrations, and used to estimate a calibration curve, typically by non-linear least squares, relating concentrations to measurements in the system. In the second step, the unknown concentrations are determined by inverting the calibration curve finding the concentration on the standard curve that produces the same response as that obtained from the unknown sample (). The calibration curve itself is only estimated with error: a limited number of samples can be used in an assay, and the true curve must be inferred from a limited number of noisy responses. This task is accomplished by selecting a family of mathematical functions, parameterized by a small number of parameters that is capable of fitting the variety of calibration curves encountered. Previous work has shown that the five parameter logistic family provides a very good fit under most practical conditions (). The parameters of the function are fitted to assay data, assuming some model for the variance of the measurement error, using non-linear least squares. Contemporary computers handle such computationally intensive algorithms very easily, although issues of convergence to false minima and failure of convergence altogether can not be ignored. Most fitting algorithms will fail with injudicious initial guesses or in cases where the variance of the measurement error is large or modeled improperly. Upon reading off unknown concentrations by inverting the calibration model, however, serious challenges can arise page 708 707712 the common methods widely implemented by many commercial software products do not account for calibration uncertainty. This neglect can lead to significant underestimation of error in the estimated target concentrations, and to bias in the point estimates, particularly at concentrations at the ends of the calibration range. Response data in immunoassays are generally heteroscedastic: their variances are not constant across the range of concentrations measured. It is common for the variances of standards at the upper end of the response curve to be 3 or 4 order of magnitude larger than those at the lower end. Heteroscedasticity is typically incorporated into the statistical model by assuming that the variance is proportional to some power of the mean response. Denoting the variance by  2 and the mean by , we have
