Motivation: Spontaneous (de novo) mutations play an important role in the disease etiology of a range of complex diseases. Identifying de novo mutations dn ms in sporadic cases provides an effective strategy to find genes or genomic regions implicated in the genetics of disease. high throughput next generation sequencing enables genome or exo me wide detection of dn ms by sequencing parents proband trios. It is challenging to sift true mutations through massive amount of noise due to sequencing error and alignment artifacts. One of the critical limitations of existing methods is that for all genomic regions the same pre-specified mutation rate is assumed, which has a significant impact on the DNM calling accuracy. Results: In this study, we developed and implemented a novel Bayesian framework for DNM calling in trios trio de novo which overcomes these limitations by disentangling prior mutation rates from evaluation of the likelihood of the data so that flexible priors can be adjusted post hoc at different genomic sites. Through extensively simulations and application to real data we showed that this new method has improved sensitivity and specificity over existing methods, and provides a flexible framework to further improve the efficiency by incorporating proper priors. The accuracy is further improved using effective filtering based on sequence alignment characteristics. Availability and implementation: The Cþþ source code implementing trio de novo is freely available at https://medschool.vanderbilt.edu/cgg.

introduction traditional research in the field of genetics for human complex disease has focused largely on inherited variation. For sporadic cases without family history, it is well known that de novo copy number variants are implicated in autism () and other psychiatric disease (). cost effective next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies enable the identification of mutations at base pair resolution, and a flurry of recent studies revealed important roles of de novo point mutations in the genetic etiology of complex disease, including autism spectrum disorders (), intellectual disability (), schizophrenia (). These findings showed promise of sequencing sporadic parents proband trios for genetics studies of human disease. Since de novo mutations dn ms have not been subject to strong purifying selection, causal mutations are expected to have large effects, enabling effective identification of causal genes or pathways from a drastically reduced number of candidates. We envision that this strategy will continuously be used as an effective alternative to classical genetic studies to identify genetic factors through both exo me and whole genome sequencing. A critical step in such studies is to accurately call dn ms from sequencing. This is challenging due to sequencing error and alignment artifacts, which predominately out number true mutations. It is therefore important to develop methods that can effectively sift real mutations through massive amount of noise. Standard approaches infer genotypes for each individual separately in a trio, usually using g atk () or sam tools (), and identify putative dn ms by comparing proband's and parental genotypes. More efficient joint calling methods have been developed, including poly mutt ()  de novo gear (), and were shown to outperform standard approaches dramatically. A major limitation of these joint calling methods is the entanglement of dn ms with Mendelian inheritance in the same model such that the joint likelihood of the data depends on the pre-specified mutation rate, resulting in several unappealing consequences. First, it requires specifying a prior mutation rate, which has strong influence on the mutation calling (), and therefore can result in loss of accuracy when inappropriate mutation rates are used. Second, it is well known that mutation rates vary widely across the genome, and therefore any single pre-specified mutation rate is not optimal. Third, the estimates for complex mutations, such as short insertion and deletion in del and structural variations, are largely unknown, and an inappropriate rate may result in dramatically reduced mutation calling efficiency. Lastly, the evidence of mutations reported by these callers has a less intuitive interpretation because of the entanglement of the pre-specified mutation rate in the data likelihood calculation. To overcome these limitations, we developed a new de novo calling algorithm, trio de novo which is a Bayesian framework that evaluates evidence of DNM mainly based on the data and adjusts post hoc the effect of mutation rates on the calling through prior odds. This is achieved through a Bayesian model selection approach, in which it calculates the Bayes Factor (BF) of two models, namely M 1 that the offspring harbors at least one mutation in the two alleles, and M 0 that the offspring's genotype follows Mendelian transmission. This approach of calculating de novo evidence (i.e. BF) avoids the need for accurate specification of prior mutation rates and has a natural interpretation as the relative likelihood of data under two competing and mutually exclusive models. After evaluating BF, flexible prior mutation rates can be adjusted post hoc to get posterior odds of dn ms for different sites and different mutation types according to prior knowledge. Through extensively simulations and real datasets, we showed that the new framework improves sensitivity and specificity over existing methods in detection of dn ms especially for moderate depth of coverage (e.g. 20). Coupled with our recently developed method for effective filtering of alignment artifacts, we hope that this new framework is useful to the research community for accurate DNM calling to facilitate the identification of genetic factors for human disease.

discussion sequencing trios with sporadic affected offspring has enabled the demystification of certain rare diseases and identification of genes implicated in complex disorders. Such a strategy will continue to be employed to decipher the genetic basis of disease. In this study, we developed an efficient and flexible framework to facilitate the DNM calling in parents proband trios. The key advantage of our new method is the decoupling of mutation rates from evaluation of the data and the flexibility of adjusting the prior mutation odds post hoc irrelevant of the data. This feature is important since DNM rates vary widely across the genome, and different classes of mutations exhibit varying mutation patterns. For example, the mutation rate for CpG dinucleotides is 9.5-fold that of non cpg bases (). It is evident that mutation rates depend on multiple factors in a complex fashion, and it is not clear how contributing factors act together to influence the underlying mutations rate. With more families being sequenced, knowledge of dn ms is being accumulated quickly so that genome wide mutation patterns can be soon accurately assessed. With such knowledge of prior mutation rates, trio de novo is expected to further facilitate the DNM calling for the research community. Users have flexibility of adjusting the ranking of candidate mutations based on their knowledge without re-calling the mutations. Even in its simplest form with flat prior odds, trio de novo outperformed existing state of the art methods. Although tested on whole genome sequencing, trio de novo can be equally applicable to exo me sequencing data. The information used in trio de novo is the pile up of bases aligned to each of the positions in the genome, and the alignment of reads from whole genome and exo me data has similar accuracy in that regard. The quality scores from trio de novo have a natural interpretability as a BF. For example, a DQ value of 9 indicates that the likelihood of mutation is 10 9 times of that without mutation. If a prior mutation rate of 10 9 is assumed, the candidate shows reasonable evidence of being a true mutation, and for a mutation rate of 10 8 , a 10-fold increase of likelihood is given to this candidate. Such an interpretation is intuitive, and the adjustment does not require re-calling. On the other hand, the posteriors from other methods, e.g. de novo gear and poly mutt do not have such a natural interpretation. These algorithms calculate the likelihood of data by a mixture of distributions of both Mendelian transmissions (M 0 ) and dn ms (M 1 ) in the same model. The relative contribution of M 1 and M 0 in the model is determined by the mutation rate, making the model sensitive to the pre-specified prior. Moreover, the relative ranking of candidates of de novo gear calls could change for the same data when different priors were used, which is rather undesirable. Tools specialized for variant calling continue to improve the GL calculation and it is standard that these tools output GLs in the VCF file. By taking VCF files as input, trio de novo can continuously benefit from these improvements without changing the interface. Furthermore, trio de novo can be applied to VCF files generated by different tools, e.g. g atk sam tools free bayes and others, so that a consensus call set can be generated. The consensus approach has been shown to generate high quality calls (), and trio de novo enables the consensus calling by integrating GLs calculated from various tools through the standard VCF input. In addition, trio de novo runs very fast due to its efficient implementation so that consensus calling can be carried out efficiently. trio de novo calculates the mutation evidence based on the GLs at individual positions. Alignment artifacts are usually not well captured in the GLs and therefore can introduce false positive calls. Although VCF files contain some information about alignments, the information is insufficient to effectively distinguish real and artifactual mutations. We previously developed a machine learning approach, dnm filter for filtering by incorporating rich features in bam files. dnm filter was initially trained using exo me sequencing data and showed improved accuracy on the 1000GP whole genome sequencing. We will further exploiting a training set of whole genome dn ms when more data are available. We hope that trio de novo equipped with dnm filter provides a powerful tool for mutation detection in trios for both targeted and whole genome sequencing. The C source code implementing trio de novo and related resources are available on the authors' website (https:// med school vanderbilt educ gg
