Motivation: Fanconi anemia (FA) is a chromosomal instability syndrome originated by inherited mutations that impair the Fanconi anemia breast Cancer fab rca pathway, which is committed to the repair of DNA inter strand cross-links (ICLs). The disease displays increased spontaneous chromosomal aberrations and hypersensitivity to agents that create DNA inter strand cross-links. In spite of DNA damage, fab rca deficient cells are able to progress throughout the cell cycle, probably due to the activity of alternative DNA repair pathways, or due to defects in the checkpoints that monitor DNA integrity. Results: We propose a Boolean network model of the fab rca pathway, Checkpoint proteins and some alternative DNA repair pathways. To our knowledge, this is the largest network model incorporating a DNA repair pathway. Our model is able to simulate the ICL repair process mediated by the fab rca pathway, the activation of Checkpoint proteins observed by recurrent DNA damage, as well as the repair of DNA double strand breaks and DNA adducts. We generated a series of simulations for mutants, some of which have never been reported and thus constitute predictions about the function of the fab rca pathway. Finally, our model suggests alternative DNA repair pathways that become active whenever the fab rca pathway is defective.

introduction fanconi anemia (FA) is a chromosomal instability syndrome characterized by bone marrow failure, congenital abnormalities and an increased risk to develop cancer (D'). Cells of patients with FA display increased chromosomal aberrations, and are hypersensitive to agents that create DNA inter strand cross-links (ICLs) (). The reported prevalence of FA ranges from 1 to 5 cases per one million persons, while the heterozygous carrier frequency is about one case per 300 persons (although the true frequency is probably higher), with a median age at diagnosis of 6.58 years (D'). FA * To whom correspondence should be addressed. represents a suitable model to study human DNA repair mechanisms and it is gaining relevance because heterozygous carriers have a high risk of developing malignancies such as breast cancer (). FA is a genetically heterogeneous disease, caused by mutations in at least one of the 15 distinct genes, namely: fan ca fan cb fan cc FANCD1/BRCA2, FANCD2, fan ce fan cf fan cg FANCI, FANCJ/BRIP1/BACH1, fan cl fan cm FANCN/PALB2, FANCO/RAD51C and FANCP/SLX4. These genes are involved in the so called Fanconi anemia breast Cancer fab rca pathway, dedicated to the repair of DNA ICLs (). Currently, there is no consensus regarding the precise nature of the fab rca pathway, or the network of interactions established with other genes proteins involved in FA. We hereby propose the regulatory network established among 20 protein complexes that include the aforementioned proteins of the fab rca pathway. Moreover, this network includes nodes to describe the three types of DNA damage commonly observed in FA. We thereafter implement the fab rca network as a discrete dynamical system and study its behavior. The modeling of regulatory networks of biological interest as discrete dynamical systems is a well established methodology. Boolean networks, the simplest form of discrete dynamical systems, have been used to model a wide variety of processes such as the genetic control of floral morphogenesis in Arabidopsis thaliana (), the differentiation process of t helper lymphocytes (), the control of the mammalian cell cycle () and the surviving process of malignant cells in large granular lymphocyte leukemia (), to name a few examples. This type of approach is widely used to study the dynamical behaviour of regulatory networks because of its straightforwardness, robustness and compatibility with published qualitative data (). There are some mathematical models that describe DNA repair, see, for example, Crooke and Parl (2010). However, to our knowledge, the model presented here is the first dynamical system proposed specifically for the fab rca DNA repair pathway. This model is able to reproduce the ICLs repair process mediated by the fab rca pathway, and the repair of double strand breaks (DSBs) and DNA adducts (ADDs). In order to obtain a dynamical behavior that reproduces the experimental data, we propose the

conclusion we presented in this article the reconstruction of the fab rca network, as well as its implementation as a discrete dynamical system, and its behavior under a number of simulated mutations and DNA damages. To our knowledge, this is the first network model incorporating this DNA repair pathway. We simulated with the model the dynamical behavior leading to alternative routes of DNA repair that might help explain the phenotype of cells obtained from patients with FA. Our simulations strongly suggest that the use of alternative DNA repair pathways help to safeguard the integrity of the genome, although the choice of pathway does not warrant a proper joining of damaged DNA. While we did not present a formal robustness analysis of the fab rca network, the results shown here are suggestive of a robust system. The recovery of a small number of attractors, all of them with a clear qualitative biological interpretation, even under the systematic alteration of the network to represent loss and gain of function mutations imply that the network has a strong c analizing dynamical behavior. Moreover, 45 out of the possible 56
