cell sys is a modular software tool for efficient off lattice simulation of growth and organization processes in multi-cellular systems in 2D and 3D. It implements an agent based model that approximates cells as isotropic, elastic and adhesive objects. Cell migration is modeled by an equation of motion for each cell. The software includes many modules specifically tailored to support the simulation and analysis of virtual tissues including real time 3D visualization and VRML 2.0 support. All cell and environment parameters can be independently varied which facilitates species specific simulations and allows for detailed analyses of growth dynamics and links between cellular and multi-cellular phenotypes. Availability: cell sys is freely available for non-commercial use at http://msysbio.com/software/cellsys. The current version of cell sys permits the simulation of growing monolayer cultures and avascular tumor spheroids in liquid environment. Further functionality will be made available ongoing with published papers.

introduction based on the insight that multi-cellular systems are inherently of multi-scale nature, the focus of research in systems biology is currently shifting towards studies of whole cells or populations of cells to complement sequence analysis (), gene expression profiles (), research on signal transduction pathways () and the analysis of biochemical systems (). Realistic multi-cellular approaches should permit both, to include models of sub-cellular processes and to simulate up to biologically or clinically relevant population sizes. For many years, this was hampered by the inherent computational complexity. However, depending on the level of represented detail the steadily increasing computational power of modern processors (CPUs and GPUs) today permits the simulation of up to several millions of cells by agent based models (and refs. therein) provided an efficient implementation especially in three dimensions. Here we present an adaptable software tool (named cell sys that implements a class of lattice free agent based models permitting realistic simulations of tissue growth and organization processes of common experimental settings in vitro, as the growth dynamics in monolayer cultures and multi-cellular spheroids dr as do and * To whom correspondence should be addressed.). It has further recently been used to model liver regeneration (). Therein, the simulation results from cell sys have been directly and quantitatively compared to experimental data, using the same analysis methods for both. cell sys can be used to predict the experiments that are most informative to identify possible mechanisms on the cell and sub cell scale to explain a certain multi-cellular phenomenon. It also has proved useful to guide the development of continuous models where cells are not resolved individually but are represented by locally averaged quantities: Comparing both model types permits identification of terms and parameters ().
