Motivation: G → A hypermutation is an innate antiviral defense mechanism, mediated by host enzymes, which leads to the mutational impairment of viruses. Sensitive and specific identification of host mediated G → A hypermutation is a novel sequence analysis challenge, particularly for viral deep sequencing studies. For example, two of the most common hepatitis B virus (HBV) reverse transcriptase (RT) drug resistance mutations, A181T and M204I, arise from G → A changes and are routinely detected as low abundance variants in nearly all HBV deep sequencing samples. Results: We developed a classification model using measures of G → A excess and predicted indicators of lethal mutation and applied this model to 325 920 unique deep sequencing reads from plasma virus samples from 45 drug treatment nave hbv infected individuals. The 2.9% of sequence reads that were classified as hyper mutated by our model included most of the reads with A181T and or M204I, indicating the usefulness of this model for distinguishing viral adaptive changes from host mediated viral editing. Availability: Source code and sequence data are available at

introduction hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a double stranded DNA virus that infects more than 500 million people worldwide and is a leading cause of mortality as a result of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. In the past 12 years, five nucleoside analogs have been licensed for HBV treatment. These drugs are capable of fully suppressing HBV replication but rarely eradicate infection because HBV is converted intra-cellularly into a stable covalently closed circular DNA form. HBV replicates via an RNA intermediate, and its polymerase enzyme has a high mutation rate similar to other enzymes with reverse transcriptase activity. It thus generates a quasispecies of innumerable related virus variants from which drug resistant viruses * To whom correspondence should be addressed. can arise (). Because HBV drug resistance is one of the obstacles to successful anti hbv therapy, current treatment guidelines recommend HBV genotypic resistance testing for patients who experience primary or secondary virological failure while receiving nucleoside therapy (). Deep sequencing is increasingly performed on plasma samples from clinical trials to determine the clinical significance of low abundance human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis C virus drug resistance mutations prior to starting antiviral treatment (). We and others have recently described the use of ultra deep pyrosequencing udp s with the 454 Life sciences roche Genome Sequencer FLX platform () to detect low abundance HBV variants. We previously showed that nucleoside analog drug resistance mutations not detected by direct PCR sequencing could be detected by udp s in as few as 1.0% of sequence reads. We also observed that many samples contained sequence reads with unusually high numbers of guanine (G) to adenine (A) changes relative to the direct PCR sequence, consistent with the recently described phenomenon of G  A hypermutation. G  A hypermutation results from an innate antiviral defense mechanism mediated by the activity of host enzymes belonging to the apolipoprotein B rna editing catalytic polypeptide like 3 (APOBEC3) family of cytidine deaminase s (). These enzymes are capable of causing extensive deamination of cytidine bases to uridine in negative stranded DNA, resulting in G  A hypermutation in positive stranded DNA. Although apo be c mediated G  A hypermutation was first reported to act upon HIV (), it has also been reported to act upon HBV (), other retroviruses, and retrotransposons (). Because extensive G  A editing leads to mutational impairment of viruses, distinguishing hyper mutated sequence reads from non hyper mutated reads is necessary for accurate analysis of viral quasispecies. This is particularly important in deep sequencing studies designed to detect low levels of nucleoside analog drug resistant viruses because two of these, A181T and M204I, primarily result from G  A substitutions. Indeed, the creation of sensitive and specific methods for identifying apo be c mediated G  A hypermutation is a novel sequence analysis challenge. We previously described an ad hoc method for identifying G  A hypermutation in HBV sequences (). Now, we develop a data derived method using a probabilistic

discussion udp s provides insight into the evolutionary dynamics of the emergence of viral drug resistance and may eventually prove useful in clinical diagnostic testing. However, the biological and clinical significance of HBV udp s results can not be optimally interpreted without being able to distinguish hyper mutated from non hyper mutated sequence reads. apo be c mediated G  A hypermutation results from a host defense mechanism against viral genomes and retro elements and therefore mutations caused by this mechanism have different biological and clinical significance from mutations resulting from viral adaptation. Three groups have developed methods for identifying hyper mutated HIV-1 sequences (). To our knowledge, no such method has been developed for HBV or for deep sequencing reads. Identifying G  A hypermutation in HBV udp s reads is particularly challenging because such reads are shorter and therefore contain fewer informative sites than direct PCR sequences. Moreover, in contrast to HIV, HBV hypermutation could potentially be mediated by six of the seven enzymes in the APOBEC3 family (A3A-C and F-H) and does not occur in a consistent dinucleotide context (). In this study, we have demonstrated the use of a novel em based model in assigning probabilistic labels to udp s reads in order to
