Motivation: Ontologies are essential in biomedical research due to their ability to semantically integrate content from different scientific databases and resources. Their application improves capabilities for querying and mining biological knowledge. An increasing number of ontologies is being developed for this purpose, and considerable effort is invested into formally defining them in order to represent their semantics explicitly. However, current biomedical ontologies do not facilitate data integration and interoperability yet, since reasoning over these ontologies is very complex and can not be performed efficiently or is even impossible. We propose the use of less expressive subsets of ontology representation languages to enable efficient reasoning and achieve the goal of genuine interoperability between ontologies. Results: We present and evaluate EL Vira, a framework that transforms OWL ontologies into the OWL EL subset, thereby enabling the use of tractable reasoning. We illustrate which OWL constructs and inferences are kept and lost following the conversion and demonstrate the performance gain of reasoning indicated by the significant reduction of processing time. We applied EL Vira to the open biomedical ontologies and provide a repository of ontologies resulting from this conversion. EL Vira creates a common layer of ontological interoperability that, for the first time, enables the creation of software solutions that can employ biomedical ontologies to perform inferences and answer complex queries to support scientific analyses. Availability and implementation: The EL Vira software is available from

introduction the amount and complexity of data in the life sciences has instigated the development of a large number of biological databases. However, our ability to discover knowledge across these heterogeneous data is impaired without a common framework to semantically annotate the data so as to facilitate the archival, retrieval, integration and analysis of multiply authored knowledge. In the past decade, ontologies have filled the gap of being able to explicitly specify the meaning of terms in a vocabulary (). With over 200 ontologies listed in the bio portal (), specifying the meaning of more than 1.4 million terms, ontologies have become an important component in the integration of biomedical data. Although many biomedical ontologies are made available using the OBO flat file Format (), they are increasingly being represented in more expressive formal languages, in particular the Web Ontology Language (OWL) () or they can be converted to OWL (). OWL ontologies can be used with automated reasoners to determine whether the ontology contains contradictory assertions, whether classes in the ontology are satisfiable (i.e. is it logically possible for a class to have instances?) or for subsumption checking (i.e. is a class C a subclass of a class D?). Most major biomedical databases employ one or more of these ontologies. Yet, to successfully apply ontologies to data integration and interoperability, it is necessary to integrate the ontologies in a common model, for example by formally relating their terms to the terms in other ontologies. This problem is now being addressed as terms in biomedical ontologies are increasingly being defined using terms from multiple, often domain independent ontologies (, b, c). For example, the phenotype Abnormal bile secretion [from Human or Mammalian Phenotype Ontology (can be defined as a Secretion [from Gene Ontology (] that has Hepatocyte [from cell type Ontology (as agent, occurs in the Liver [from Foundational Model of Anatomy (FMA) () or Mouse Anatomy Ontology (and results in a movement of Bile (from FMA or Mouse Anatomy Ontology) into the Bile canali cul us (from FMA or Mouse Anatomy Ontology). Data annotated to the page 1002 10011008
