Motivation: Many studies have investigated the relationship between structural properties and dynamic behaviors in biological networks. In particular, feedback loop (FBL) and feedforward loop (FFL) structures have received a great deal of attention. One interesting and common property of FBL and FFL structures is their coherency of coupling. However, the role of coherent FFLs in relation to network robustness is not fully known, whereas that of coherent f bls has been well established. Results: To establish that coherent FFLs are abundant in biological networks, we examined gene regulatory and signaling networks and found that FFLs are ubiquitous, and are in a coherently coupled form. This result was also observed in the species based signaling networks that are integrated from KEGG database. By using a random Boolean network model, we demonstrated that these coherent FFLs can improve network robustness against update rule perturbations. In particular , we found that coherent FFLs increase robustness because these structures induce downstream nodes to be robust against update rule perturbations. Therefore, coherent FFLs can be considered as a design principle of human signaling networks that improve network robustness against update rule perturbations.

introduction cellular dynamics are largely controlled by various topological motifs included in large scale biological networks, which are represented by a huge number of interactions among biological components, such as genes, proteins, miRNAs and other small molecules (). One of these topological motifs is a feedback loop (FBL) structure, and its effects on dynamics have been widely investigated. For example, it was shown that more robust networks tend to have larger numbers of positive f bls and smaller numbers of negative f bls (), and the number of f bls involving a node is positively correlated with the functional importance of the node (). It was also shown that two diseases are more likely to be comorbid if the genes associated with each disease are connected with f bls of a relatively short length in a human signaling network (). These observations were validated as a design principle of biological networks through extensive simulations based on computational models. In addition, the role of f bls was also investigated in some specific biological processes. For example, interlinked fast and slow positive f bls drive reliable cell decisions (), interlinked positive and negative f bls sustain the robustness of biological oscillation () and f bls play important role in modulating p53 pathway in individual cells (). Another well known motif is the feedforward loop (FFL) structure that has also been investigated for its effects on network dynamics. For example, specific FFLs are needed for robust carbohydrate uptake in Escherichia coli (), as well as for adaptation to variations in the critical morphogen level where cell fate is switched (). In addition, a simple FFL motif composed of three genes was capable of processing external signals robustly (), and the degree to which an FFL consisting of three positive transcriptional regulators was sensitive to primary level perturbation was related to the robustness (). One interesting structural property common to f bls and FFLs is coherent coupling. When a pair of f bls or FFLs of the same sign is coupled, this is called a coherent coupling see for an illustrative example). Some previous studies have shown that an individual coherent structure can play an important role in the dynamic behavior of biological networks. For example showed that a coherent FFL serves as a sign sensitive delay element in transcription networks, and showed that a coherent FFL prolongs flagella expression in Escherichia coli. On the other hand showed that a coupled positive FBL enhances signal amplification and bi-stable characteristics, whereas a coupled negative FBL realize enhanced homeostasis. In particular, we note a previous study that showed that coherently coupled f bls can be a design principle in a human signaling network, as they make the network more robust (). This result led us to question about whether the coherent FFL is also an important design principle for robustness related dynamics, like the coherent f bls in biological networks. Thus, in this study, we investigate the relationship between robustness related dynamics and the coherent FFL structure through extensive simulations. A biological network such as a gene regulatory or signaling network can be represented by computational models. Among them, the Boolean network model () can be used to analyze the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. complex dynamics of biological networks because it provides the most simplified representation for the network state (; Le and Kwon, 2011a;). Thus, we used the Boolean network model for the dynamics analysis. Before examining how the dynamics are related to the coherent FFLs, we first showed that FFLs are ubiquitously found in gene regulatory and signaling networks and further, that they are more likely to form a coherent structure than randomly expected. In addition, we examined a large set of signaling networks of 1008 species integrated from the KEGG pathway database () and showed that there is a larger number of coherent FFLs than randomly expected in each of 1001 species. In other words, coherent FFLs are frequently observed motifs in biological networks. To unravel the role of these coherent FFLs, we examined the robustness against initial state or update rule perturbations through the Boolean network model. To this end, two groups of random networks were generated and classified according to the degree of coherency of the FFLs. Through extensive simulations, we observed that the networks with relatively high coherency of FFLs are more robust against update rule perturbations than those with relatively low coherency of FFLs, whereas there is little difference between them in terms of robustness against initial state perturbations. In addition, we found that coherent FFLs can make downstream nodes robust against update rule perturbations, and this induces the difference in robustness against update rule perturbations. In summary, coherent FFLs seem to be a design principle to efficiently sustain robust behavior against update rule perturbations in biological networks.
