Motivation: Gene network inference (GNI) algorithms enable the researchers to explore the interactions among the genes and gene products by revealing these interactions. The principal process of the GNI algorithms is to obtain the association scores among genes. Although there are several association estimators used in different applications, there is no commonly accepted estimator as the best one for the GNI applications. In this study, 27 different interaction estimators were reviewed and 14 most promising ones among them were evaluated by using three popular GNI algorithms with two synthetic and two real biological datasets belonging to Escherichia coli bacteria and Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast. Influences of the Copula Transform (CT) pre-processing operation on the performance of the interaction estimators are also observed. This study is expected to assist many researchers while studying with GNI applications. Results: b spline pearson based Gaussian and spearman based Gaussian association score estimators outperform the others for all datasets in terms of the performance and runtime. In addition to this, it is observed that, when the CT operation is used, inference performances of the estimators mostly increase, especially for two synthetic datasets. Detailed evaluations and discussions are given in the experimental results.

introduction gene network inference (GNI) algorithms are frequently used in the bioinformatics studies such as detecting the activator genes of the genetic diseases, determining the functions of the regulating and regulated genes, obtaining the drug targets of the medical cures, etc. The most important process of the GNI applications is to obtain the interaction scores among the cell molecules such as genes or proteins. In the GNI applications, the association score estimators generally use the gene expression datasets obtained from microarray data analysis to determine the interaction scores among each gene pair (). In this study, two synthetic and two real biological gene expression datasets are used for evaluation. Because the biological datasets involve different kinds of noise (caused by experimental processes and computational errors of microarray data analysis operation), it is difficult to obtain interaction scores among the cell molecules. If those scores can not be estimated accurately, inference performance of the application would not be good enough whichever GNI algorithm is used. In this study, several GNI algorithms are used to evaluate different association score estimators objectively. Each estimator is separately evaluated with three GNI algorithms and four datasets. In this manner, association estimators that impact the inference performance positively are presented to the researchers interested in this field. Additionally, we tried to illustrate whether the inference performance is mostly influenced by the GNI algorithms or by the association estimators. It is observed that inference performance of the GNI applications are mostly impacted from the association estimators, as given in the experimental results. Relevance Network rel net Accurate Cellular Networks ar acne and Conservative Causal Core Networks (C3NET;) are used as GNI algorithms. Because these are some of the most commonly used ones, they were selected for the comparison. Explanations of these GNI algorithms are given in the Section 4 of the Supplementary Material. The purpose of this study is not to investigate the GNI algorithms, but it is to examine the association estimators that are the most important process of the GNI algorithms. Hence, 27 estimators from several association estimator studies, which are frequently cited, are reviewed from the literature. Among them, 14 most outstanding estimators are chosen in z kurt et al., unpublished) to compare in this study. in depth explanations are given in (Z.). This study differs from the previous study in several aspects. First of all, we examined almost all available association estimators in the previous review article to decide the most promising ones for using in GNI applications rather than performing common experiments. However, current study extends the preliminary review by involving several experiments, common datasets and evaluation measures. In the review article, the estimators were evaluated only by depending on the declared comparisons in the literature. However, this study uses several GNI algorithms to evaluate the inference performances of the estimators. In addition to our unpublished review article, a small subset of the estimators was compared in a previous narrow scoped study () for only one GNI algorithm (C3NET) by using only synthetic datasets, while this study involves evaluation of *To whom correspondence should be addressed. 14 estimators for three different GNI algorithms by using also real biological datasets.

discussion in this study, 14 association estimators and three GNI algorithms were evaluated by using two synthetic and two real biological datasets. Moreover, influence of using the CT on the inference performance of the estimators is also examined. Changing the association estimator has a greater effect on the inference performances than changing the GNI algorithm. There is no single estimator that can be denoted as the best one. It is observed that the best performing estimators are common and compatible according to both the f score and precision metrics, for all datasets. Analyses are firstly performed separately for each dataset, and then discussions are made commonly for all datasets. In this sense, for two synthetic datasets, with respect to both f score and precision metrics by using CT, the most promising methods are the BS2, BS3, KDE, PBG and SBG. Precision score is used to evaluate the estimators when the real biological datasets are used. The BS2, BS3, CS, KDE, MM, PBG and SBG among mi based approaches and PCC and SCC among correlation based ones exhibit the best precision scores. The BS, CS and MM become slightly more prominent than the others for the first real biological dataset, while the BS, CS, KDE, PCC, PBG, SCC and SBG are the most promising ones for the second real biological dataset. When the estimators are commonly evaluated with respect to all datasets, the BS2, BS3, KDE, PBG and SBG are observed as the best performing estimators. However, the runtime of the KDE is large. In the applications in which the runtime is more important than the precision of the estimators, the BS, PBG and SBG estimators should be preferred. The ppc n is commonly the worst one because it eliminates much of the TP edges incorrectly. The KNN is another commonly worst performing estimator. Moreover, the HHG surprisingly exhibits significantly less performance with increasing sample size. It can perform well for only the smallest dataset, but its performance become worse with other datasets. Other observations obtained from the experiments are that inference performance gets better when the number of the samples in the dataset becomes larger. Furthermore, using the CT generally increases the inference performance of the estimators. Generally, the EF discretization technique results in better inference performances than the EW technique when the CT is not used. When the CT is used, EF and EW show similar performances, as expected. Readers should keep in mind that the aim of this study is to compare and evaluate the association estimators, not to compare the GNI algorithms. However, some results about the GNI algorithms can be clearly seen from the figures in the experimental results. For example, the rel net is the worst performing algorithm because it can not eliminate the indirect interactions. Moreover, the ar acne and the C3NET perform similar, while the C3NET gives significantly better precision scores than the ar acne. Furthermore, optimal average sample number in each bin during the discretization process is also examined. ffi ffi ffi ffi N p is observed as a proper choice, where N is the sample size. Details are given in Section 5 of Supplementary Material. Lastly, implementing estimators in C results in less runtimes. Because the PCC, SCC, PBG, SBG and ppc n were implemented by using R's custom functions, they were not implemented in C. Parallelized C codes make the HHG, KDE and KNN methods almost twice faster than their serial C codes. The parallel C code runtimes of BS, CS and MM are greater than their serial counterparts. Parallel runtimes could be reduced by using a dataset with more samples or a computer with more cores. Finally, we expect this comprehensive study is expected to assist many researchers studying in this field.
