Motivation: Genotype imputation has become an indispensible step in genome wide association studies g was. Imputation accuracy, directly influencing downstream analysis, has shown to be improved using resequencing based reference panels; however, this comes at the cost of high computational burden due to the huge number of potentially imputable markers (tens of millions) discovered through sequencing a large number of individuals. Therefore, there is an increasing need for access to imputation quality information without actually conducting imputation. To facilitate this process, we have established a publicly available SNP and in del imput ability database, aiming to provide direct access to imputation accuracy information for markers identified by the 1000 Genomes Project across four major populations and covering multiple g was genotyping platforms. Results: SNP and in del imput ability information can be retrieved through a user friendly interface by providing the ID(s) of the desired variant(s) or by specifying the desired genomic region. The query results can be refined by selecting relevant g was genotyping plat-form(s). This is the first database providing variant imput ability information specific to each continental group and to each genotyping platform. In Filipino individuals from the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey, our database can achieve an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of 0.97, 0.91, 0.88 and 0.79 for markers with minor allele frequency 45%, 3–5%, 1–3% and 0.5– 1%, respectively. Specifically, by filtering out 48.6% of markers (cor-responding to a reduction of up to 48.6% in computational costs for actual imputation) based on the imput ability information in our database , we can remove 77%, 58%, 51% and 42% of the poorly imputed markers at the cost of only 0.3%, 0.8%, 1.5% and 4.6% of the well imputed markers with minor allele frequency 45%, 3–5%, 1–3% and 0.5–1%, respectively.

introduction genotype imputation has proven to be a powerful tool in genome wide association studies g was by facilitating fine mapping and the merging of datasets from different genotyping platforms (). It is a way to predict genotypes computationally based on linkage disequilibrium patterns instead of obtaining genotypes by laboratory based procedure (). As it has been shown to directly affect downstream analysis, imputation accuracy needs to be taken into consideration when designing and performing g was (). For instance, at the study design stage, a question of interest would be which commercially available genotyping platform can provide the optimal imputation quality genome wide or in certain genomic region(s) of interest. Such a question can be answered by assessing the imputation accuracy of relevant variants. However, there has been no resource available to provide variant imput ability information without actually performing imputation. A commonly used evaluation method is to mask a subset of markers, impute their dosages and compare those dosages with the true (masked) genotypes for those markers (). This method, however, can only be used after genotypes have already been obtained and therefore can not help guide study design decisions. In addition, the evaluation procedure can be computationally costly because of the requirement of conducting imputation, particularly with the emergence of reference panels built through re-sequencing efforts (). To facilitate genetic studies in the era of genomic re-sequencing, we have built a database containing imputation accuracy information for SNPs and indels identified from the 1000 Genomes Project (), a sequencing based reference resource, which has demonstrated its potential for enhancing the power of genetic association studies in the post g was era (). The assessment of marker imput ability was carried out through a leave one out imputation procedure: a single individual serves as the imputation target, and imputation is performed using haplotypes from all the other individuals as reference. Imputation accuracy was quantified within each of the four major continental groups surveyed by the 1000 Genomes Project. We anticipate this database containing imputation accuracy information searchable by continental group and by g was genotyping platform will be a useful resource for geneticists in this sequencing era.
