Motivation: Modeling and analysis of complex systems are important aspects of understanding systemic behavior. In the lack of detailed knowledge about a system, we often choose modeling equations out of convenience and search the high dimensional parameter space randomly to learn about model properties. Qualitative modeling side-steps the issue of choosing specific modeling equations and frees the inference from specific properties of the equations. We consider classes of ordinary differential equation (ODE) models arising from interactions of species entities such as (bio)chemical reaction networks or ecosystems. A class is defined by imposing mild assumptions on the interaction rates. In this framework, we investigate whether there can be multiple positive steady states in some ODE models in a given class. Results: We have developed and implemented a method to decide whether any ODE model in a given class can not have multiple steady states. The method runs efficiently on models of moderate size. We tested the method on a large set of models for gene silencing by sRNA interference and on two publicly available databases of biological models, KEGG and bio models. We recommend that this method is used as (i) a pre-screening step for selecting an appropriate model and (ii) for investigating the robustness of non-existence of multiple steady state for a given ODE model with respect to variation in interaction rates.

introduction systems of interacting species are ubiquitous in many areas of science, from biology and ecology to epidemiology and sociology (). The dynamics of a system are typically specified by a system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs), potentially depending on many (unknown) parameters. The variables of the system are the concentrations (or abundances) of species, such as chemical or molecular species in systems biology, animal species in ecology or infected and susceptible individuals in epidemiology. Specifying the modeling equations is rarely trivial. For example, in systems biology, the species concentrations change according to the molecular reactions that take place, but the precise reaction mechanisms and rates are typically unknown. For example, choosing between mass action power law or hill type kinetics might be a matter of tradition or convenience rather than biological knowledge. mass action kinetics has a simpler functional form than the other two kinetics and only one parameter. These, on the other hand, are more adaptable to systems in biologically constrained environments, such as cellular systems. The choice of kinetics might thus affect the biological validity of a conclusion derived from the ODEs. This remains true even if we are comfortable with a particular system of ODEs: the parameter space is generally high dimensional and it is standard to explore it numerically or by choosing parameters randomly. However, this is difficult to do efficiently when the number of parameters is large. Consequently, we can only investigate a small part of the parameter space. These concerns have lead to an increased interest in qualitative properties (). In the context of this article, qualitative properties refer to properties of dynamical systems with a common underlying structure. We focus on a particular qualitative property, namely the capacity for multiple steady states, or multi stationarity. The common structure is defined by an interaction network (defined in Section 2.1). multi stationarity underlies the emergence of hysteresis and switch like behavior, that is, the transformation of a gradual input into a steep change in the response. It plays an important role in understanding systemic behavior (). We have developed and implemented a computationally simple and efficient criterion to determine if a class of dynamical systems, compatible with the same underlying interaction network, can not have multiple steady states. The reaction (interaction) rates are constrained by how they vary with the species concentrations. The criterion can be refined to preclude multi stationarity for particular classes of kinetics such as mass action kinetics and, more generally, power law kinetics. Both of these are used widely outside systems biology and biochemistry, but without the biochemical labeling, e.g.. The method is well suited to screen large sets of networks for the possible emergence of switch behavior. The applicability of our approach is demonstrated by studying a series of small motifs in gene silencing by RNA interference and by analysis of 408 models from the KEGG () and bio models databases (). In the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. discussion we relate our method to other methods to preclude multi stationarity
discussion we have developed and implemented a computationally efficient and simple method to qualitatively assert whether a network. The number of reactions is plotted against the number of species for the analyzed models in KEGG and analyzed models in bio models log log scale). 'ma' refers to mass action kinetics and 'q' to the qualitative influence (see main text for details). One hundred three models were used from KEGG in both analyses. Three hundred sixty five (323) models were used from bio models for the 'ma' analysis ('q' analysis). Blue: Injective, Orange: non injective with identically zero determinant, Green: non injective with non identically zero determinant, Gray: Analysis failed. The data used in the figure is provided in the Supplementary Data S3 can not exhibit multi stationarity. The approach embraces a broad class of dynamical systems by allowing for conservation laws and arbitrary influences. Our method decides whether an interaction network is injective or not. If it is injective, it can at most have one positive steady state within each stoichiometric class. Qualitative inference relies solely on the structure of the interaction network. This approach to inference has the particular strength of freeing the analysis from any specific ODE system and to highlight the generality of a conclusion (or property). In our context, it is surprising that the exclusion of multi stationarity can be so strongly encoded in the network structure (reactions and influences) alone and be independent of the specific form of the rate functions, even if these involve complicated and nonlinear terms. An overview of different methods to preclude and or assert multi stationarity is provided in. Our algorithm is in the class of injectivity based criteria to preclude multi stationarity. In the context of chemical reaction network theory, these criteria generally fall in two groups, jacobian based methods () and graphical methods (; soule soule 2003). These apply to different specializations of networks and rate functions, such as mass action kinetics or specific influences, and can be seen as specializations of our method (). The graphical conditions are derived from conditions on the Jacobian and would therefore preclude multi stationarity in fewer cases than a corresponding jacobian based method. A different criterion (a sign condition) to characterize injective networks is given in Shinar and Feinberg (2012) for some specific influences. Their definition of a compatible rate function is less restrictive than ours and corresponds, in our setting, to treat classes of influences together (). If the kinetics is restricted to mass action there exist methods that complement injectivity based methods in that multi stationarity not only can be precluded, but also asserted. The main methods in this class are given in. Other methods include an injectivity based method applicable to weakly reversible networks () and a study of embedded networks (). We applied our method to a large class of models of gene silencing by RNA interference. The method ran efficiently on this set. Further, we observed that the non-existence of multi stationarity reported for some of the motifs for specific choices of rate functions () has a qualitative origin. Subsequently, we applied our method to two databases of biological models and showed that the method could decide on injectivity for a large fraction of the models. It is remarkable that a large proportion of the networks is injective and hence can not exhibit multi stationarity. Existence of multi stationarity is often asserted from random parameter search, assuming the rate functions take a generic form. However, exclusion of multi stationarity can not be decided from a finite number of sampled parameter values alone. Further, the result might depend strongly on how the parameters are sampled. Our method provides an automatized procedure to assert that multi stationarity can not occur. It provides an additional tool to various other available softwares to address multi stationarity ().Most methods are developed in several references or apply to certain specializations. Only the most general or a representative one is given in the table in total, there are 103, 103, 365 and 323 networks in each category, respectively. BioM refers to bio models 'ma' refers to mass action kinetics and 'q' to the qualitative influence (see main text for details). non injectivity is a necessary condition for an interaction network to exhibit multiple positive steady states. Hence, it is possible that a network is non injective without being multi stationary. In practice, however, we have observed that a non injective interaction network generally enables a choice of rate functions and parameters for which multi stationarity occurs. Prospective work will focus on investigating under what conditions this is true and, if it is the case, how the rate functions and parameters can be constructed. Typical ODE models, such as SIR models and the Lotka Volterra model, can be put in the framework of an interaction network, even though the model is derived from a different perspective. Interpretation of ODE models as interaction networks with potential non realistic (hypothetical) reactions might seem artificial. However, it highlights an important aspect, namely that of freeing the system from a specific choice of ODEs. Bearing in mind the difficulties in choosing the 'correct' system of ODEs, we see this aspect as a strong advantage of our method and encourage the modeling community to consider qualitative inference broadly with the aim of separating model specificities from structural properties.
