Accurate tertiary structures are very important for the functional study of non-coding RNA molecules. However, predicting RNA tertiary structures is extremely challenging, because of a large conformation space to be explored and lack of an accurate scoring function differentiating the native structure from decoys. The fragment based conformation sampling method (e.g. far na bears shortcomings that the limited size of a fragment library makes it infeasible to represent all possible conformations well. A recent dynamic Bayesian network method, BARNACLE, overcomes the issue of fragment assembly. In addition, neither of these methods makes use of sequence information in sampling conformations. Here, we present a new probabilistic graphical model, conditional random fields (CRFs), to model RNA sequence structure relationship, which enables us to accurately estimate the probability of an RNA conformation from sequence. Coupled with a novel tree guided sampling scheme, our CRF model is then applied to RNA conformation sampling. Experimental results show that our CRF method can model RNA sequence structure relationship well and sequence information is important for conformation sampling. Our method, named as tree folder generates a much higher percentage of native like decoys than far na and BARNACLE, although we use the same simple energy function as BARNACLE.

introduction rna has become an important research subject in recent years, and there is an increasing study of non-coding RNA in biology and health. Its growing important role appears in various life domains and processes, including regulating gene expression (), interaction with other ligands () and stabilizing itself (). To elucidate the function of an RNA molecule, it is essential to determine its 3D structure. However, there are a great number of RNA sequences without solved structures. Experimental methods for RNA 3D structure determination are time consuming expensive and sometimes technically challenging. By far, there are 29 million RNA molecules with (predicted) secondary structure in the rf am database (), but only 4816 of them have tertiary structures in the nucleotide database (). Therefore, we have to fill this large gap by predicting the 3D structure of an RNA using computational methods. * To whom correspondence should be addressed rna tertiary structure prediction does not gain as much attention as secondary structure prediction (; Eddy and). Both molecular dynamic methods () and knowledge based statistical methods () have been proposed to fold RNA molecules. The knowledge based statistical methods for RNA tertiary structure prediction consist of two major components: an algorithm for conformation sampling and an energy function for differentiating the native structure from decoys. Fragment assembly, a knowledge based method widely used for protein structure prediction (), has been implemented in far na () for RNA 3D structure prediction. However, this method has a couple of limitations: (i) there is no guarantee that any region of an RNA structure can be accurately covered by structure fragments in the RNA solved structure database, which currently contains only a limited number of non-redundant solved RNA structures; and (ii) sequence information is not employed in far na for conformation sampling. mc sym () is a motif assembly method for RNA 3D structure prediction, which uses a library of nucleotides cyclic motifs (NCM) to construct an RNA structure. mc sym has a time complexity exponential with respect to RNA length (i.e. the number of nucleotides), so mc sym may not be used to predict the tertiary structure for a very large RNA. As reported in, mc sym also fails in the case when the secondary structure of RNA lacks cyclic motifs. recently have proposed a probabilistic model (BARNACLE) of RNA conformation space. BARNACLE uses a dynamic Bayesian network (DBN) to model RNA structures, but this DBN method does not take into consideration any sequence information. In addition, BARNACLE models the interdependency between the local conformations of only two adjacent nucleotides, but not of more nucleotides. Other RNA three dimensional structure prediction methods can be found in; Das and Baker (2007);;;;;. This article presents a novel probabilistic method conditional random fields (CRFs) () to model RNA sequence structure relationship. Different from BARNACLE
