Motivation: Gene regulatory networks serve as models from which to derive therapeutic intervention strategies, in particular, stationary control policies over time that shift the probability mass of the steady state distribution (SSD) away from states associated with undesirable phenotypes. Derivation of control policies is hindered by the high dimensional state spaces associated with gene regulatory networks. Hence, network reduction is a fundamental issue for intervention. Results: The network model that has been most used for the study of intervention in gene regulatory networks is the probabilistic Boolean network (PBN), which is a collection of constituent Boolean networks (BNs) with perturbation. In this article, we propose an algorithm that reduces a BN with perturbation, designs a control policy on the reduced network and then induces that policy to the original network. The coefficient of determination (CoD) is used to choose a gene for deletion, and a reduction mapping is used to rewire the remaining genes. This cod reduction procedure is used to construct a reduced network, then either the previously proposed mean first passage time mfp t or SSD stationary control policy is designed on the reduced network, and these policies are induced to the original network. The efficacy of the overall algorithm is demonstrated on networks of 10 genes or less, where it is possible to compare the steady state shifts of the induced and original policies (because the latter can be derived), and by applying it to a 17-gene gastrointestinal network where it is shown that there is substantial beneficial steady state shift.

introduction a key objective for modeling gene regulatory networks is to derive intervention strategies for beneficially altering cell * To whom correspondence should be addressed. dynamics (). To address the issue of changing the long run behavior, stochastic control has been employed to find stationary control policies that affect a network's steady state distribution (SSD;); however, owing to the inherent computational complexity of optimal control methods (), it is often infeasible to design optimal control policies for large networks. A possible approach to complexity reduction in the finite horizon model is to use a discrete linear model (); however, we do not wish to be constrained to a finite horizon or a linear model. We proceed in the nonlinear case with network dynamics described by a Markov chain. Even restricting ourselves to the Boolean model, where gene states are binary, 0 and 1, if there are n genes in the network, then there are 2 n states and the transition probability matrix is of size 2 n 2 n. Given this level of complexity, even approximation via re-inforcement learning () and greedy control methods () are quite restricted in the size of networks they can handle. For instance, rather than doing a full optimization relative to some objective function and facing the 'curse of dimensionality' associated with dynamic programming, greedy methods utilize statistical characteristics of the network, including mean first passage times mfp t and the SSD (). But these still require manipulating the transition probability matrix, which effectively limits their use to not more that 13-gene networks using our current workstation computing environment. This article takes the approach of reducing the size of the network, designing a control policy on the reduced network, and from this inducing a control policy on the full network. It is motivated by a previously proposed network reduction algorithm that removes genes in such a way that the deleted gene induces a specific collapsing of pairs of states from the state space of the original network (). A more detailed discussion about the reduction mapping from that article and its comparison to the current proposed algorithm for designing stationary control policies is provided in the Supplementary Material. While other reduction algorithms have been developed to obtain reduced models for Boolean or probabilistic Boolean networks pb ns to maintain either the structural consistency () or the dynamical behavior of the original network (), the specific intent in this article is to find a reduction strategyPage: 1557 15561563

discussion we have carried out several simulations to study the performance of the cod reduce algorithm.
