To reveal how the polycomb repressive de ubiquitin ase pr dub complex controls substrate selection specificity, we undertook a detailed computational sequence analysis of its components: additional sex combs like 1 (ASXL1) and brca1 associated protein 1 (BAP1) proteins. This led to the discovery of two previously unrecognized domains in ASXL1: a forkhead winged helix dna binding domain and a de ubiquitin ase adaptor domain shared with two regulators of ubiquitin carboxyl terminal hydrolase 37 (Uch37), namely adhesion regulating molecule 1 (ADRM1) and nuclear factor related to kappaB nfr kb. Our analysis demonstrates a common ancestry for BAP1 and Uch37 regulators in pr dub INO80 chromatin remodelling and proteo some complexes.

introduction brca1 associated protein 1 (BAP1) and ubiquitin carboxyl terminal hydrolase 37 (Uch37) (also known as UCHL5) are two de ubiquitin ating proteases (DUBs) from the same peptidase family that share a high degree of sequence similarity not only in their catalytic ubiquitin carboxy terminal hydrolase (UCH) domain but also in an additional conserved carboxy terminal region, previously called the uch37 like domain (ULD) (). The controlled removal of ubiquitin or ubiquitin like proteins by DUBs is required in diverse cellular processes. The catalytic domains of DUBs often require adapter domains to control the specificity of substrate selection and thus to avoid cleavage of inappropriate substrates (). The human pr dub complex contains BAP1 and additional sex combs like 1 (ASXL1). The pr dub complex represses polycomb group target genes by removing mono ubiquitin from histone H2A in nucleosomes. Recently, it was found that the ASXL1 n terminal region (residues 2365) is essential for its interaction with BAP1, although the domains responsible for this interaction have been determined in neither ASXL1 nor BAP1 protein sequences (). The pr dub complex has increasingly attracted medical interest as somatic mutations in ASXL1 frequently occur in different * To whom correspondence should be addressed. myelodysplastic syndromes (). ASXL1 mutations have been also associated with glioblastoma, ovarian serous cyst adenocarcinoma cervical and colon cancer (). De novo nonsense mutations in human ASXL1 have also been recently associated with boh ring opitz syndrome (also known as o berk laid danks or c like syndromes), characterized by severe intellectual disability, distinctive facial features and multiple congenital malformations (). Human ASXL1 belongs to a family of three vertebrate paralogues () and it is orthologous to Drosophila Asx (additional sex combs), whose product is required for long term repression of HOX genes during development and whose mutants enhance homeotic phenotypes of both polycomb and tri thorax mutations (). Mouse ASXL1 is required for normal hematopoiesis and its knockout results in simultaneous anterior and posterior transformations of the axial skeleton (). In addition, several lines of evidence suggest that ASXL1 has a genuine transcription factor role by regulating retinoic acid receptors and peroxisome proliferator activated receptors (). ASX proteins have been previously reported to contain two evolutionarily conserved regions in metazoa, from fly to humans: a region termed the ASX homology as xh domain and a c terminal plant home o domain (PHD) zinc finger (). However, with the exception of its c terminal PHD domain, significant sequence similarity was not detected with any other known protein domain. In order to trace its evolutionary history and to identify functional domains, we embarked on a computational protein sequence analysis of the ASX protein family.

conclusion in summary, the computational identification of the deu bad and forkhead domains in the human ASXL1 protein should now greatly assist in experimentally delineating its critical function in regulating the histone code under non pathological and pathological conditions.
