Motivation: Vaccines represent the most effective and cost efficient weapons against a wide range of diseases. Nowadays new generation vaccines based on subunit antigens reduce adverse effects in high risk individuals. However, vaccine antigens are often poor immunogens when administered alone. Adjuvants represent a good strategy to overcome such hurdles, indeed they are able to: enhance the immune response; allow antigens sparing; accelerate the specific immune response; and increase vaccine efficacy in vulnerable groups such as newborns, elderly or immuno-compromised people. However, due to safety concerns and adverse reactions, there are only a few adjuvants approved for use in humans. Moreover, in practice current adjuvants sometimes fail to confer adequate stimulation. Hence, there is an imperative need to develop novel adjuvants that overcome the limitations of the currently available licensed adjuvants. Results: We developed a computational framework that provides a complete pipeline capable of predicting the best citrus derived adjuvants for enhancing the immune system response using, as a target disease model, influenza A infection. In silico simulations suggested a good immune efficacy of specific citrus derived adjuvant (Beta Sitosterol) that was then confirmed in vivo.

introduction vaccines are the most effective and cost efficient means to prevent infectious diseases. Nowadays the approaches to develop novel and safer vaccines require the use of well characterized antigens, such as purified proteins, peptides or carbohydrates. Unfortunately, often, these so called subunit antigens are poor immunogens when administered alone. Therefore, additional adjuvants are required to potentiate the immune response. Adjuvants can be used for various purposes: (i) to enhance, accelerate or prolong the immunogenicity of highly purified or recombinant antigens; (ii) to reduce the antigen dose or the number of immunizations needed for protective immunity; (iii) to improve the efficacy of vaccines in high risk population such as newborns, elderly or immuno-compromised people; (iv) as antigen delivery systems for the uptake of antigens by the mucosa; and or (v) to protect the antigens from degradation (depot effect). Adjuvants may also have significant effects on the nature of the immune responses, and can tilt the immune system in favor of T helper 1 (Th1) or T helper 2 (Th2) type response. Adjuvants can be generally classified into two groups. The first group is composed of delivery vehicles that are used to manage the storage, releasing and presentation of vaccine antigens to the immune system. This group includes mineral salts, emulsions, liposomes and viro some s. The second group is composed of immuno stimulants. immuno stimulants are compounds that aim to improve the immune responses to specific vaccine antigens by stimulating the releasing of cytokines through various mechanisms (i.e. MHC molecules, costimulatory signals or intracellular signaling pathways). In this group, it is possible to find toll like receptor (TLR) agonists, cytokines and saponins (). The first adjuvant activity was discovered empirically in 1926 with diphtheria toxoid absorbed to alum (). Since then, despite several decades of research, aluminium based mineral salts (alum) remains the most used and approved adjuvant for human vaccines (). Alum has a good track record of safety and it has been considered the adjuvant of choice for vaccination against infections that can be prevented by antibody responses, and as such it has been widely and successfully used in many licensed vaccines. However, some limitations of alum are also well known. Alum fails to confer adequate increase of antibody response to small peptides as well as certain vaccines, such as typhoid fever and influenza vaccines. Notably, alum is known to be a poor adjuvant for induction of cytotoxic T cell immunity and Th1 responses, which are required to combat several life threatening infections (). There is, then, an urgent need to develop novel adjuvants to support the development of vaccines against pathogens that have been so far refractory to the traditional vaccination strategies, to address effective vaccines against unmet medical need. In particular, the need of new adjuvants capable of boosting the immune responses of individuals with a lower or compromised immune system response, such as the elderly and immuno-compromised populations, represents a major challenge of our times. Although a lot of effort has focused on the development of new adjuvants, which include mineral salts, detoxified toxins, lipo peptides emulsions, cytokines, polysaccharides and nucleic acids, very few are presently approved for human use. There are in fact many issues that hinder the development of new adjuvants, including the development of local or systemic side effects. If the most common local reactions to adjuvants include pain, injection site necrosis, swelling, granulomas, lymphadenopathy, ulcers and abscesses, the most common systemic side effects are represented by nausea, arthritis, fever, eosinophilia, uveitis, anaphylaxis, immunosuppression or autoimmune diseases (). Even alum is not free from side effects such as fever and muscle soreness. Moreover, difficulty of manufacture, poor stability and high production costs represent other unresolved issues of the adjuvant development pipeline. A deep scientific understanding of novel adjuvants is indeed compulsory to set up the required nonclinical safety testing programs, and even more testing programs are in general required for synthetic, nonhuman, derivatives of toxic compounds and protein based adjuvants. Accumulating evidence suggests that selected naturally derived components (such as, e.g. flavonoids and vitamins) collectively referred to as nutritive adjuvants have immunomodulating properties (). Consequently, a good starting point for the development of new and potentially effective adjuvants may to adopt naturally derived products, and their use may also lead to reduced toxicity and faster development. There are many biotechnological methodologies for evaluating the efficacy of potential adjuvants, ranging from in vitro to in vivo techniques. Such techniques have often been coupled with the use of in silico techniques to speed up the identification of novel candidate adjuvants. However, a complete pipeline encompassing initial selection (based on literature searches or in vitro studies), in silico evaluations at the molecular and cellular level, and in vivo trials, has yet to be developed. The combination of in silico, in vitro and in vivo studies organized in a rationale manner at both molecular, cellular and systemic scales may represent major advance in the identification of potential novel adjuvants. In this article, we present a computational framework that connects and integrates an in silico molecular evaluation, based on the virtual screening technique, with an ad hoc agent based simulator to search and predict the best citrus derived adjuvants able to enhance the immune system response. As a target disease model, we chose influenza A, using, as a candidate vaccine, the influenza A viro some. Finally, the predictions made by the simulation framework were validated in vivo.
