Motivation: New sequencing technologies have accelerated research on prokaryotic genomes and have made genome sequencing operations outside major genome sequencing centers routine. However, no off the shelf solution exists for the combined assembly, gene prediction, genome annotation and data presentation necessary to interpret sequencing data. The resulting requirement to invest significant resources into custom informatics support for genome sequencing projects remains a major impediment to the accessibility of high throughput sequence data. Results: We present a self contained automated high throughput open source genome sequencing and computational genomics pipeline suitable for prokaryotic sequencing projects. The pipeline has been used at the Georgia Institute of Technology and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for the analysis of Neisseria meningitidis and Bordetella bronchiseptica genomes. The pipeline is capable of enhanced or manually assisted reference based assembly using multiple assemblers and modes; gene predictor combining; and functional annotation of genes and gene products. Because every component of the pipeline is executed on a local machine with no need to access resources over the Internet, the pipeline is suitable for projects of a sensitive nature. Annotation of virulence related features makes the pipeline particularly useful for projects working with pathogenic prokaryotes.

introduction genome sequencing projects, pioneered in the 1990s (), require large scale computational support in * To whom correspondence should be addressed. order to make their data accessible for use and interpretation by biologists. Large sequencing centers have traditionally employed or collaborated with teams of software engineers and computational biologists to develop the software and algorithms for sequencing hardware interfaces, enterprise data storage, sequence assembly and finishing, genome feature prediction and annotation, database mining, comparative analysis and database user interface development. While many of the components developed by these teams are now available online under open access terms, the development of new, high throughput sequencing technologies has necessitated updates to these tools and development of even more sophisticated algorithms to address the challenges raised by the new data. These new technologies 454 pyrosequencing (), ABI SOLiD () and Illumina ()are now collectively referred to as second generation sequencing technologies. Similar updates will be needed as the third generation of sequencing technologies, such as Pacific Biosciences' SMRT sequencing (), enter production use. New and improved tools released for these technologies on a monthly basis include assemblers, mapping algorithms, base calling and error correction tools, and a multitude of other programs. Because of this fast pace of development, few experts are able to keep up with the state of the art in the field of computational genomics. Accordingly, the rate limiting step in genome sequencing projects is no longer the experimental characterization of the data but rather the availability of experts and resources for computational analysis. At the same time, the increased affordability of these new sequencing machines has spawned a new generation of users who were previously unable to perform their own genome sequencing, and thus collaborated with large sequencing centers for genome sequencing and subsequent computational analysis. While these users are now able to experimentally characterize genomes in house, they often find themselves struggling to take full advantage of the resulting data and to make it useful to the scientific community since the informatics support for their genome projects is not sufficient. Several large sequencing consortia () have produced comprehensive, centralized web based portals for the analysis of genomic and meta genomic data. While extremely useful for many types of projects and collaborations, these solutions inherently result in a page 1820 18191826

DISCUSSION
