Motivation: A growing number of studies have explored the process of pre-implantation embry-onic development of multiple mammalian species. However, the conservation and variation among different species in their developmental programming are poorly defined due to the lack of effective computational methods for detecting co regularized genes that are conserved across species. The most sophisticated method to date for identifying conserved co regulated genes is a two step approach. This approach first identifies gene clusters for each species by a cluster analysis of gene expression data, and subsequently computes the overlaps of clusters identified from different species to reveal common subgroups. This approach is ineffective to deal with the noise in the expression data introduced by the complicated procedures in quantifying gene expression. Furthermore, due to the sequential nature of the approach, the gene clusters identified in the first step may have little overlap among different species in the second step, thus difficult to detect conserved co regulated genes. Results: We propose a cross species bi clustering approach which first de noises the gene expression data of each species into a data matrix. The rows of the data matrices of different species represent the same set of genes that are characterized by their expression patterns over the developmental stages of each species as columns. A novel bi clustering method is then developed to cluster genes into subgroups by a joint sparse rank one factorization of all the data matrices. This method decomposes a data matrix into a product of a column vector and a row vector where the column vector is a consistent indicator across the matrices (species) to identify the same gene cluster and the row vector specifies for each species the developmental stages that the clustered genes co regulate. Efficient optimization algorithm has been developed with convergence analysis. This approach was first validated on synthetic data and compared to the two step method and several recent joint clustering methods. We then applied this approach to two real world datasets of gene expression during the pre-implantation embryonic development of the human and mouse. co regulated genes consistent between the human and mouse were identified, offering insights into conserved functions, as well as similarities and differences in genome activation timing between the human and mouse embryos. Availability and Implementation: The R package containing the implementation of the proposed method in C þþ is available at: https://github.com/JavonSun/mvbc.git and also at the R platform https://www.r-project.org/. Contact: jinbo@engr.uconn.edu

introduction the process of mammalian pre-implantation embryonic development is characterized by the degradation of maternal RNA stored in the oocytes and the gradual activation of the embryonic genome. Rapid advances in the whole genome RNA sequencing techniques has led to a growing number of studies exploring gene regulation during preimplantation embryonic development in different species (). Several studies have shown that the timing of embryonic genome activation varies by species (). The understanding of this variation may bring insights into embryonic developmental programming and species differences. Identifying the co regulated gene clusters that are conserved across species is a key component in the understanding of this variation (). Such conserved gene clusters are likely involved in common biological processes that are fundamental to the embryonic development of mammals. However, due to the lack of effective computational methods, there has been limited understanding of the conservation of gene co regulation during embryonic development. In a typical study of mammalian embryonic development, expression levels of all genes are collected at multiple developmental milestones (stages), such as oocytes, 2 cell and 8 cell embryos. Gene expression data of different species are analyzed and compared to understand the similarities and variations in the embryonic development of the species. The most sophisticated method available so far for identifying conserved co regulated genes consists of two steps in sequence (). First, co regulated gene clusters are identified in each individual species by performing a cluster analysis of their gene expression data, usually by a hierarchical clustering method. Second, by computing overlaps among identified clusters in different species, co regulated gene clusters that are conserved among species may be found. This two step approach can be ineffective in two ways. There are in negligible noises in the expression data resulted from the complicated procedures in quantifying gene expression. The noises may prevent the detection of biologically meaningful and important gene clusters for each species (). Moreover, the clusters identified in the first step may have no overlaps in the second step, thus unable to identify conserved gene clusters. In this paper, we address these two issues by proposing a novel cross species bi clustering approach. A variety of methods have been proposed to reduce noise from a dataset, such as those for smoothing out noise, or identifying and removing outliers (). However, a proper and effective noise reduction method is problem specific. To identify co regulated gene clusters, we search for genes that exhibit similar expression patterns over the embryonic developmental stages. We define that an expression pattern (or simply a pattern) is a specific series of high and low expression levels over a set of developmental stages. For example, in a study with three stages: oocytes, 2 cell and 4 cell embryos, the sequence of is a pattern that a gene may follow, indicating that the gene has high expression level in oocytes, but low levels in the 2 cell and 4 cell stages. In order to reduce noise and focus on the biologically confirmed gene expression patterns, we propose to transform the raw gene expression data to reflect how closely the expression levels follow known patterns. In the new data matrix, rows represent genes and each column corresponds to a pattern in a pre-compiled list of patterns. Each gene is measured by the similarity between its gene expression path and each of the patterns in the list. Instead of a separate cluster analysis for each species, we propose to integrate gene expression data of multiple species to search for confirmatory co regulated gene clusters directly. This integrative way of data analysis allows the searching process to target at the gene clusters that show similar patterns across species. The multi-species joint cluster analysis corresponds to a machine learning principle: multi-view cluster analysis (), where the same set of subjects (i.e. genes here) is viewed in different input spaces, particularly here, in the developmental stages of different species. Further, we need to determine the expression patterns in each view (i.e. the columns in each data matrix) that are responsible for the grouping of subjects. Multiview cluster analysis aims to group subjects into clusters in the same way no matter which view of data is used. However, most of the existing multi-view clustering methods assume that all columns in the data contribute equally in determining the clusters (). These methods can not identify the specific patterns that the clustered genes actually follow. Even though a gene may follow multiple known patterns, the number of these patterns is much smaller than the total amount of pre-compiled biological patterns. Hence, these existing multi-view clustering methods are not suitable for solving our problem. We recently proposed two new multi-view bi clustering methods () that can identify consistent clusters across views and simultaneously specify a subset of variables in each view on which the genes in a cluster show high similarity. However, the algorithm developed in, although is efficient, has not obtained a theoretical guarantee for convergence so far. The method in requires to predetermine the cluster size (i.e. the number of genes in a cluster) before the algorithm can be applied, which is obviously difficult to estimate for the gene co regulation problem. In this paper, we thus propose another new multi-view bi clustering method that identifies both the gene clusters consistent across multiple species (views) and the expression patterns of the clustered genes for each species. By a sparse rank one matrix factorization, this method decomposes a data matrix into a product of a sparse column vector and a sparse row vector. The non-zero entries of these vectors indicate the gene clusters and the selected expression patterns, respectively. We propose to use another sparse column vector to link the different data matrices. This column vector is used to enforce that the decomposed column vectors from every view correspond to the same subset of genes. The resultant optimization problem can be solved efficiently by developing an alternating optimization algorithm. Compared to the methods in, the proposed method is guaranteed to converge to a stationary point and does not require any prior knowledge of cluster size. We compared the proposed method in simulations to the traditional two step approach, and several latest multi-view clustering methods developed by others, which demonstrated the superiority of our method. We then used the proposed approach to analyze the pre-implantation embryonic development datasets of the human and mouse. Across the two species, 22 co regulated gene clusters were identified to be conserved. A gene ontology analysis of the identified genes showed that they are involved in many fundamental biological networks. The expression patterns associated with these clusters were compared between the human and mouse embryos, showing that there are both similarities and variations between the human and mouse in the gene activation timing during the early development. We briefly introduce the notation used throughout this paper. We use a bold font upper case letter such as X to represent a matrix, a bold font lower case letter such as v to denote a column vector, i138 j sun et al. and a lower case letter such as a to represent a scalar. We denote the component of X at the ith row and jth column by Xi; j or x ij , and the ith row and jth column of M, respectively, by Xi; , and X; j. Similarly, we use vi to denote the ith component of v. The Frobenius norm of a matrix X is denoted by jj x jj F which is calculated as ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi P i P j jx ij j 2 q . Further, the ' 1-norm of a vector v is denoted by jj v jj 1 and calculated as P i jv i j, where v i is its ith component. The operator z u is the element wise product of z and u. We use an italic upper case letter as S to represent a set of elements.

discussion we have developed a new approach that can be used to identify co regulated gene clusters that are conserved among multiple species using samples collected at a series of different time points such as during pre-implantation embryonic development. The proposed approach consists of two components: pattern preserving noise reduction and multi-view bi clustering via sparse rank one matrix factorization. We have developed an efficient algorithm that is guaranteed to converge for solving the optimization problem in the proposed multi-view bi clustering. Compared to the commonly used two step approach (), our approach is less vulnerable to noise in the gene expression data and has the advantage of identifying conserved co regulated gene clusters among species. In this study, we did not attempt to normalize data between species because in real world situations, direct comparisons in gene expression levels among species may not be necessary. However, such normalization is intriguing and new strategies should be developed when a need is presented. We have succeeded in identifying conserved co regulated gene clusters between the human and mouse in their pre-implantation embryos by applying the proposed approach. The clusters not only represent functional gene networks that conserved in embryogenesis between the two species, but reveal similarities and differences in progression of developmental programming of embryos across species. The identification of these orchestrated functional changes is among the first step to unveil the little known embryonic programming, and provide directions of future research in embryogenesis. Even though the development of the proposed method is motivated by studying the pre-implantation embryonic development of multiple mammalian species, it can certainly be applied to many other similar situations. The approach that we have proposed for cleaning the data can be employed to de noise other similar datasets when gene expression patterns are the focus of the study. The proposed multi-view bi clustering method is a general clustering approach and can be used in any multi-view setting, especially in situations where consistent gene clusters across views only exist in the subspaces of the variables in the views. Because expression patterns used here in noise reduction are essentially variables that groups genes in the subsequent cluster analysis. The success of the method can be limited by the expression patterns that are used. We suggest using all patterns that potentially make biologic sense. The method is flexible in that the patterns can be modified when new biological questions arise. When combined with the traditional two step clustering approach, our method is a great tool to obtain more information from the same dataset.
