Motivation: Modern experimental methods provide substantial information on protein dna recognition. Studying arrangements of transcription factor binding sites tfbs s of interacting transcription factors (TFs) advances understanding of the transcription regulatory code. Results: We constructed binding motifs for TFs forming a complex with HIF-1α at the erythropoietin 3 enhancer. Corresponding tfbs s were predicted in the segments around transcription start sites tss s of all human genes. Using the genome wide set of regulatory regions, we observed several strongly preferred distances between hypoxia responsive element (HRE) and binding sites of a particular cofactor protein. The set of preferred distances was called as a preferred pair distance template p pdt. p pdt dramatically depended on the TF and orientation of its binding sites relative to HRE. p pdt evaluated from the genome wide set of regulatory sequences was used to detect significant p pdt consistent binding site pairs in regulatory regions of hypoxia responsive genes. We believe p pdt can help to reveal the layout of eukaryotic regulatory segments. Contact:

introduction the regulatory code controlling gene expression in higher eukaryotes still remains elusive. It is challenging to understand how a 1D DNA text directs formation of the protein complex that controls gene expression in a particular cell type in specific conditions. Some insight is gained by using the well known concept of 'composite elements' consisting of binding sites for different regulatory proteins separated by specific distances (). Despite more than 15 years of study, information about the scale and specificity of possible distances between binding sites remains insufficient. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  Present address: Computational Bioscience Research Center, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology k aust thu wal Saudi Arabia. New technologies like chips eq have dramatically increased the quality of identification of tfbs s both in vitro and in vivo. Recently, it was shown () that in some cases there are several preferred distances between binding sites of some TFs. Here, we illustrate that distance preferences themselves are extremely well exhibited and that this phenomenon appears to be much more common, at least in the case of Homo sapiens TFs involved in regulating responses for hypoxic conditions. We studied distributions of distances between tfbs s identified in silico for TFs involved in known protein protein interactions. As a case study, we took TFs participating in the regulation of the erith ro poet in (EPO) gene expression in hypoxia response in human cells.

discussion in our previous work (), we reported the observation that a large genome wide set of long segments exhibits some peaks in the distribution of distances between tfbs s of interacting TFs. In this study, we introduce the concept of p pdt a set of selected preferred distances between tfbs s which, as we demonstrate, are expected to be found in the regulatory regions of genes, regulated by the corresponding TFs. Preferred distances between TFBS for different TF pairs form substantially different sets, but in all cases a general pattern of a peak comb over a background of more or less random distances is observed. It is tempting to believe that binding sites found at p pdt inconsistent distances are likely to form complexes with TFs other than HIF-1 or simply are false positives of PWM scanning. Yet, p pdt found in the low transcribed regions allows the conclusion that there might be some yet unknown factor controlling possible TFBS positioning in DNA. Obviously, pp ddts provide additional information on the specificity of TF binding, especially when the total number of putative tfbs s in the regulatory regions is small. However, the difficulties of using pp ddts for identification of functional binding sites should not be underestimated. Binding site arrangements in regulatory DNA segments are complex, with sites often overlapping each other. Most of the sequences in the hypoxia regulated dataset contain homotypic clusters of HRE. So when one calculates all pairwise distances between binding sites of two transcription factors, the number of observed intersite distances becomes large. Paradoxically, the worst display of preferred distances is in the hypoxia regulated dataset (Supplementary). This happens because this dataset is rather small, containing only 158 sequences, 25 of which do not contain any HRE elements. Many sequences contain only one or two pairs of binding sites of the specified type. In the hypoxia regulated dataset, each distance is rarely found more often than five times. Thus, most numbers of preferred distance occurrences are statistically insignificant, and the pp ddt pattern is unclear. This makes it difficult to conclude whether the hypoxia regulated set really has some major characteristic differences in pp dds when compared with the genome wide set. Another paradox is that pp dts for HRESp1 and hr ehre homotypic site pairs estimated on the genome wide gene set can be efficiently used to distinguish the hypoxia regulated set (). This Page: 2624 26212624
