Motivation: Microtubules are dynamic polymers of tubulin dimers that undergo continuous assembly and disassembly. A mounting number of microtubule associated proteins (MAPs) regulate the dynamic behavior of microtubules and hence the assembly and disassembly of disparate microtubule structures within the cell. Despite recent advances in identification and functional characterization of MAPs, a substantial number of microtubule accessory factors have not been functionally annotated. Here, using profile to profile comparisons and structure modeling, we show that the yeast outer kinetochore components NDC80 and NUF2 share evolutionary ancestry with a novel protein family in mammals comprising, besides NDC80/HEC1 and NUF2, three intra flagellar Transport (IFT) complex B subunits (IFT81, IFT57, CLUAP1) as well as six proteins with poorly defined function (FAM98A-C, CCDC22, CCDC93 and C14orf166). We show that these proteins consist of a divergent n terminal calponin homology ch like domain adjoined to an array of c terminal heptad repeats predicted to form a coiled coil arrangement. We have named the divergent ch like domain nn ch after the founding members NDC80 and NUF2.

introduction microtubules are dynamic polymers that form a variety of cytoskeletal constellations in the eukaryotic cell. Common to all microtubule arrangements, ranging from the short centrioles of the centrosome to the elaborate structures of the mitotic spindle in mitosis or the axone me of cilia, are a set of microtubule associated proteins (MAPs) that influence the dynamics, stability and function of the tubulin polymer (). Many putative MAPs and accessory components of the mitotic spindle, centrosome and cilia have not been functionally annotated. This is due in part to the high abundance of coiled coil propensity proteins populating these subcellular compartments (e.g.). coiled coil containing proteins are notoriously difficult to functionally annotate because of the high degree of sequence redundancy of coiled coils, which renders coiled coil segments unsuitable for phylogenetic analysis. Some MAPs associated with e.g. kinetochores or centrosomes, however, adopt a bipartite structure comprising, besides their coiled coil hub, a globular head domain. The presence of such a conserved domain can greatly facilitate the identification of remote homologs in other species. For instance, in NDC80 (HEC1 in humans; hereafter referred to as NDC80) and NUF2 of the NDC80 kinetochore complex, or the microtubule plus end tracking proteins EB1-3, the coiled coil region is preceded by a conserved n terminal calponin homology (CH) domain, which has aided in the identification of orthologs (). In the NDC80 kinetochore complex, formed by heterodimerization of NDC80 and NUF2, the interaction between the c terminal coiled coil regions produces a microtubule binding interface consisting of two tightly interacting CH domains (). Structural analysis has indicated that the NDC80 CH domain resembles that of the first CH domain of human fim brin which itself adopts a divergent CH domain fold (). Despite this structural similarity, previous sequence based analyses have not identified NDC80 as a member the proposed major groups of CH domain containing proteins (). Here we show by means of sequence profile to profile analysis that NDC80 and NUF2, three intra flagellar Transport (IFT) complex B subunits, as well as six other poorly defined proteins constitute a novel family of bi modular proteins containing a divergent n terminal ch like domain followed by a c terminal region of heptad repeats predicted to form a coiled coil arrangement. We have named the divergent ch like domain nn ch after the founding members NDC80 and NUF2.
