Motivation: Current methods for identification of potential triplex forming sequences in genomes and similar sequence sets rely primarily on detecting homo purine and homo pyrimidine tracts. Procedures capable of detecting sequences supporting imperfect, but structurally feasible intramolecular triplex structures are needed for better sequence analysis. Results: We modified an algorithm for detection of approximate palindromes, so as to account for the special nature of triplex DNA structures. From available literature, we conclude that approximate triplexes tolerate two classes of errors. One, analogical to mismatches in duplex DNA, involves nucleotides in triplets that do not readily form hoogste en bonds. The other class involves geometrically incompatible neighboring triplets hindering proper alignment of strands for optimal hydrogen bonding and stacking. We tested the statistical properties of the algorithm, as well as its correctness when confronted with known triplex sequences. The proposed algorithm satisfactorily detects sequences with intramolecular triplex forming potential. Its complexity is directly comparable to palindrome searching. Availability: Our implementation of the algorithm is available at http://www.fi.muni.cz/ lex atriplex as source code and a web based search tool. The source code compiles into a library providing searching capability to other programs, as well as into a stand-alone command line application based on this library.

introduction triplexes are local structural variants of DNA, wherein the molecule adopts a specific secondary structure differing from a canonical duplex by the recruitment of a third DNA strand. The third strand binds to the duplex by hoogste en or reverse hoogste en bonds with stringency of the same order of magnitude as duplex forming strands for the most stable nucleotide combinations (reviewed by * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Frank). Depending on the source of the third strand, triplex DNA can be intra strand and inter strand or intramolecular and intermolecular. The third strand may just come from the other strand of the same DNA duplex or from a completely different DNA molecule, as is the case with triplex forming oligonucleotides (). Nucleotides in the middle strand of a triplex have watson crick base pairing to one nucleotide and hoogste en or reverse hoogste en pairing to another nucleotide. Together they form a triplex forming triplet (also called triad) (). Depending on the orientation of the third strand, we distinguish parallel and antiparallel triplexes, named according to the orientation of the third strand in respect to the central strand shows eight types of intramolecular triplex structures considered in this article. A given sequence on the (+) strand of a DNA molecule can possibly support all eight types, but necessarily, only one of the types will be formed at any particular moment. In DNA triplexes, there is a requirement for neighboring triplets to be isomorphic, otherwise the potential triplet would be under strain, hindering the binding of the third strand (;). Regardless of orientation and geometry, the middle nucleotide is generally a purine containing one, to support the extra hydrogen bonds needed to bind the third nucleotide. Because the middle nucleotide is almost invariably one with a purine base, attempts to correlate sequence with triplex forming properties usually involve detection of homo purine and homo pyrimidine tracts in the analyzed sequence. For example created a web based program that identifies target sequences for triplex forming oligonucleotides. The program identifies homo purine stretches that are allowed to be occasionally interrupted by a pyrimidine. While this is an appropriate method for detection of strong triplex forming signals, we consider this to be an oversimplification. Numerous papers have reported the existence of imperfect triplexes (), including cases where the authors deliberately changed individual nucleotides to observe the effects of such change. Changes resulting in the formation of non-canonical triplets did not necessarily disrupt the entire triplex. It is conceivable that many of the imperfect triplexes may still have similar biological activity to their ideal counterparts. One possible explanation for the existence of imperfect triplexes is that they may allow an overlap between the structural signal and some other sequence feature,. Eight types of triplexes that are detected in separate runs of the algorithm for a given region. Numbering of types is shown as used in the accompanying software (Supplementary Material). watson crick base pairing is shown by vertical bars. X and Y are two nucleotides on the same strand that will form a triplet. The eight possible triplets are: Y.X X, Y .XX , Y .X X, y xx , X.Y Y, X .YY , X .Y Y and X.YY (N , a nucleotide complementary to N; '.', hoogste en or reverse hoogste en bond). such as nucleosome positioning pattern or a regulatory protein binding sequence proposed a triplex structure containing a single deletion to explain his experimental results. Additionally, analyzed sequences may contain errors, including occasional deletions and insertions. The existence of triplex DNA has been repeatedly associated with important biological processes at the molecular level, making them an attractive target in sequence analysis. Most of the observed associations suggest roles in mutagenesis, recombination and gene regulation. non b DNA structures, including DNA triplexes, have been shown to cause deletions, expansions and translocations in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes (). Their distribution is not random and often colocalizes with sites of chromosomal breakage (). Triplex structures can block the replication fork and result in double stranded breaks (). Unlike other non-canonical structures, triplex forming sequences are found frequently in promoters and exons and have been found to be involved in regulating the expression of several disease linked genes (). In some cases, the mutagenesis induced by such sequences is enhanced by their transcription (), possibly via transcriptional arrest. sequence structure relationships of triplexes were brought into a small number of computational tools for identifying relevant sequences in genome sequences analyzed the occurrence of inverted and mirror repeats in three genomes analyzed the Escherichia coli genome for intra strand triplex sequences. Another recent work () created a web based catalog of non b DNA sequences in major mammalian genomes. Their definition of triplex covers the most stable canonical triplexes made of gg ca at and cgc tat triplets, but leaves little room for possible errors. jen jaro en pun and Kuznetsov (2009) created a web based analysis tool for triplex target sequences. Intramolecular triplex DNA (also called h dna has been shown to exist both in vivo and in vitro (). Its formation also depends on the topological state of the given DNA molecule. While sequences supporting canonical triplets, such as (CT (T )) n and (GA(A)) n tracts, form triplexes readily, imperfect triplexes may require special conditions, such as low superhelical density or certain pH to form. In vitro, superhelical density and pH can be easily controlled. In vivo, pH is tightly controlled by the cell, while the topological state of any stretch of genomic DNA is generally unknown, but presumed to be under regulatory control as well. This uncertainty is the main reason for using the term triplex forming sequence' or triplex forming potential', which hints that while the sequence should be capable of forming a triplex, it may only be formed under special circumstances.

conclusion we present a novel approach to identifying triplex forming sequences in genomes and other DNA sequence data. The approach is presented in the form of an algorithm based on previously published algorithms for detection of palindromes. The novelty stems from the adaptation of DP for use with triplexes instead of relying on simpler identification of homo purine and homo pyrimidine tracts, which are most appropriate for detection of perfect triplexes. We implemented our algorithm as a program written in C, using a reasonable set of parameters based on published data. The test runs of this program are encouraging, suggesting that the algorithm can provide high speed searches with increased sensitivity for approximate triplex forming sequences.
