Motivation: state of the art experimental data for determining binding specificities of peptide recognition modules (PRMs) is obtained by high throughput approaches like peptide arrays. Most prediction tools applicable to this kind of data are based on an initial multiple alignment of the peptide ligands. Building an initial alignment can be error prone especially in the case of the proline rich peptides bound by the SH3 domains. Results: Here, we present a machine learning approach based on an efficient graph kernel technique to predict the specificity of a large set of 70 human SH3 domains, which are an important class of PRMs. The graph kernel strategy allows us to (i) integrate several types of phy-sico-chemical information for each amino acid, (ii) consider high order correlations between these features and (iii) eliminate the need for an initial peptide alignment. We build specialized models for each human SH3 domain and achieve competitive predictive performance of 0.73 area under precision recall curve, compared with 0.27 area under precision recall curve for state of the art methods based on position weight matrices. We show that better models can be obtained when we use information on the noninteracting peptides (negative examples), which is currently not used by the state of the art approaches based on position weight matrices. To this end, we analyze two strategies to identify subsets of high confidence negative data. The techniques introduced here are more general and hence can also be used for any other protein domains, which interact with short pep-tides (i.e. other PRMs). Availability: The program with the predictive models can be found at http://www.bioinf.uni-freiburg.de/Software/SH3PepInt/SH3PepInt.tar. gz. We also provide a genome wide prediction for all 70 human SH3 domains, which can be found under

introduction sh3 domains are an important class of peptide recognition module and probably the most widespread protein domain found in protein databases (). Thus, SH3 domains are involved in many cellular processes such as signaling, cell communication growth and differentiation. Furthermore, the SH3 complexity corresponds with the complexity of the genome (). These domains specifically recognize short linear proline rich peptide sequences (). SH3 domains have a conserved barrel fold, which is formed by five or six strands arranged in two anti-parallel sheets. SH3 domains are $60 amino acids in length and mainly found in intra-cellular proteins. Approximately 300 SH3 domains are known in the human proteome (). As 25% of human proteins contain proline rich regions (), and SH3 domains recognize proline rich peptides, it is an open challenge to understand how the hundreds of SH3 domains achieve a high specificity in selecting their physiological partners to regulate specific biological functions. The canonical proline rich peptide motifs recognized by most of the human SH3 domains have a px xp core and are classified in two major groups: class I and class II. The consensus sequences for these two groups are denoted as xp xp (class I) and pxp x (class II), where x represents any naturally occurring amino acid,  represents a hydrophobic amino acid and  represents as a positively charged amino acid (normally arginine and lysine). Structural studies of the sh3 peptide complexes with class I and class II motif suggest that these two types of peptide ligands bind to an SH3 domains in opposite orientations (). Previous studies reveled that the positively charged residues in the peptide sequence, such as arginine and lysine, play an important role in the binding with the respective SH3 domain (). Based on the characteristics of the binding site, the SH3 domains prefer either one or the other pep it de motif. Peptide motifs can be further classified into subgroups depending on the tolerance for the substitution of the lysine residue with the arginine residue (). Although most human SH3 domains bind with class I and or class II motifs, a subset of SH3 domains have the ability to recognize noncanonical or a typical peptide motifs. For example, NCK1 SH3 domains and the SH3 domains from EPS8 family are able to bind with a p xx dy motif (). EPS8 and its SH3 domain have an important role in mi to genetic signaling. Overexpression of EPS8 increased epidermal growth factor dependent transformation and mitogenic responsiveness to epidermal growth factor *To whom correspondence should be addressed.

discussions h3 domain is probably the most widespread class of protein recognition modules. The interactions mediated by SH3 domains. precision recall curves and AUC ROC curves for the Multi-Domain Gaussian Graph Kernel mdg gk the Single Domain Gaussian Graph Kernel sdg gk the Single Domain Linear Graph kernel (GK) and the MUSI tool for six related SH3 domains. The error bars represent respective standard deviation alignment free domain peptide interaction prediction i341 constitute an important class of protein interactions, involved in many cellular process. We presented a computational approach to predict domain peptide interactions, using available high throughput data. The method is an alignment free approach based on an efficient graph kernel. Although, here, we present an application to SH3 domains, the method is general and can thus be trained to predict any protein peptide interaction for which high throughput data exists. Current methods for protein peptide interaction require often an initial multiple alignment of the bound peptides. As this is an error prone process (especially in the case of sh3 domains where peptides are proline rich one risks to introduce a significant amount of noise and obtain under performing models. In addition, current methods are often linear models (e.g. pwm s and are therefore not able to represent high order correlations between amino acid residues. Nonlinear method exist but have to deal with the high model complexity resulting from exponential number of high order correlations achievable even for relatively short peptide sequences. If one uses the full alphabet of 20 amino acids, it becomes hard to gain sufficient data for a correct estimation of these complex models. One common solution is to use a reduced alphabet where each letter represents an entire amino acid class. This strategy, however, leads to inferior performance, especially when specific amino acids are preferred at specific positions. An alternative approach is to determine important interaction first by using resolved 3D domain peptide structures. The major obstacle for the widespread application of this approach, however, is the limited availability of such structural data. In this article, we use a different approach. We consider an alignment free approach based on a graph representation of the peptide sequence where different abstraction levels are available in a unified way. By applying an efficient graph kernel method, we were able to model high order correlations that span different abstraction levels (e.g. a feature could represent a specific residue that has to be three positions to the right of a hydrophobic residue). The regularization provided by the SVM optimization scheme finally ensures that the model complexity is appropriately controlled and that only the features relevant for the task at hand are selected. Discarding the abstraction information (experiments not shown), i.e. using only the amino acid code information, leads to statistically significantly lower sensitivity. This confirms the intuition that using physico-chemical properties in the feature definition can adequately model cases that would otherwise be poorly covered by a sufficient number of sequences. It was also important to optimize the encoding order; therefore, we performed an experiment with different encoding order and proposed the best order to represent our graph (see Supplementary). Interestingly, the experimentally cross validated optimal parameters value (R  6, D  8) suggests that high order amino acid correlations are required to obtain the best predictive performance, and that therefore linear models are inadequate. Although we have previously used the nsp dk graph kernel approach for clustering RNA structures (), here, differently from the RNA or molecular case, we do not have an obvious and natural way to encode information as a graph. The guiding principle, behind the choice of the proposed feature encoding, is to add 'abstract information' (like charge or hydrophobicity) in a somewhat 'soft' and incremental way rather than using an extended alphabet and maintaining a sequence encoding, the proposed graph encoding allows us to obtain features that are increasingly specialized. We have experimental evidence (see Supplementary) that a different choice in the ordering of the abstract information would yield suboptimal results, which become evident in the presence of imbalanced data. Additionally, we have investigated the performance of a string kernel (the km er kernel) along with other types of kernels, applied to the pure amino acid sequences (i.e. without any additional information). Also, in this case, there is an evident drop in performance (see Section 'Comparison with other predictive methods' and supplementary in the Supplementary Information). This confirms the intuition that using physico-chemical properties in the feature definition can adequately model cases that would otherwise be poorly covered by a sufficient number of sequences. Interestingly, we experimentally observed that high order amino acid correlations are required to obtain the best predictive performance, suggesting that linear models are inadequate for this application. Another common practice is to use generative models, i.e. models that try to capture the density distribution of the interacting peptides only. We showed that using one class approaches is sub-optimal, even when considering models more expressive than the commonly used linear pwm s. The average predictive performance of a graph kernel based domain specific model that is trained in a discriminative fashion is 0.35 AUC PR compared with 0.06 AUC PR when trained in a one class way. We tried to address the problem of selecting high quality negative data. The issue is known in literature (see Ben). In the application domain of protein peptide interaction, it has been shown () that the common practice of generating negative instances by randomly shuffling peptide sequences simply leads to decreased predicted performance, as these instances do not resemble real biological sequences and are not therefore useful to determine useful class boundaries. We note, however, decreasing performance proportional to the level of class imbalance. When the ratio of negative instances versus positive ones is within 10-fold, we maintain an AUC PR 0.8, but for ratios greater than 100, performance drops to AUC PR 0.4 and lower (see Supplementary Figs S8 and S9). We showed how the flexible graph kernel approach allows the induction of multi-domain models. These models can leverage experimentally verified binding interactions on related domains and achieve high predictive performance even on domains for which no training material was available. Finally, we performed a genome wide prediction of human sh3 peptide interactions. All the learned models as well as all the genome wide prediction interactions are available in http:// www bio in fun i freiburg de software sh3pepint. Our approach is general enough and can easily be applicable to other similar domains like SH2, PDZ and so forth. As for future work, given the computational efficiency of these models (a single domain model can be trained on 100 K sequences in 52 h), we plan to provide a comprehensive set of predictors for all protein domains for which high throughput data are available.
