Motivation: The typical workflow for NMR structure determination involves collecting thousands of conformational restraints, calculating a bundle of 20–40 conformers in agreement with them and refining the energetics of these conformers. The structure calculation step employs simulated annealing based on molecular dynamics (MD) simulations with very simplified force fields. The value of refining the calculated conformers using restrained MD (rMD) simulations with state of art force fields is documented. This refinement however presents various subtleties, from the proper formatting of conformational restraints to the definition of suitable protocols. Results: We describe a web interface to set up and run calculations with the AMBER package, which we called amps nmr amber based Portal Server for NMR structures). The interface allows the refinement of NMR structures through rMD. Some predefined protocols are provided for this purpose, which can be personalized; it is also possible to create an entirely new protocol. amps nmr can handle various restraint types. Standard rMD refinement in explicit water of the structures of three different proteins are shown as examples. amps nmr additionally includes a workspace for the user to store different calculations. As an ancillary service, a web interface to AnteChamber is available, enabling the calculation of force field parameters for organic molecules such as ligands in protein ligand adducts. Availability and Implementation: amps nmr is embedded within the NMR services of the we nmr project and is available at http://py-enmr.cerm.unifi.it/access/index/amps-nmr; its use requires registration with a digital certificate.

introduction since the 1980's NMR spectroscopy has been used as a technique complementary to X-ray to determine the solution structure of proteins (). Indeed, NMR has * To whom correspondence should be addressed. contributed 12% of the total content of protein structures in the PDB (), a share that has remained relatively steady in the last few years. The usefulness of applying NMR as a tool complementary to X-ray in protein structure determination efforts has been extensively documented in the context of Structural Genomics initiatives (). A unique aspect of NMR data is their capability to provide a view of protein structural features that includes unfolded proteins and the residue specific characterization of disordered protein segments, including functionally important flexible surface loops (). Standard protocols to determine protein structures by NMR involve three basic steps: (i) determining the chemical shift assignments of the target protein; (ii) measuring as many as possible intra and particularly (), inter residue NOEs (nuclear Overhauser enhancements) among 1 H nuclei to generate proton proton distance restraints (typically in the form of upper distance bounds); and (iii) using the noe derived restraints to perform simulated annealing calculations providing the 3D structure of the protein. Additional restraints can be used, such as dihedral angle restraints [which often are derived from j couplings () or from chemical shifts (, residual dipolar couplings (rdc's) (), and para magnetism based restraints (). More recently, alternative protocols that are based on the use of chemical shift data () or chemical shift and rdc's () without any NOE information have been described. However, the adoption of these innovative protocols by the NMR community is still limited. Within standard protocols, an additional step that may have a dramatic impact on the quality of the final NMR structure is structure refinement, which typically involves the application of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations using a force field more accurate than that employed to generate the structural models to be refined. Indeed, it has long been realized that, due to the sparseness of NMR restraints, the force field used for refinement can have a large impact on the quality, and possibly the accuracy, of NMR structures (). Refinement of protein structures using state of the art force fields in MD calculations with explicit solvent molecules can afford a significant improvement of various stereochemical parameters that are often used as indicators of structural quality and can also have a positive impact on the accuracy of the structure, as measured from the agreement with the NMR constraints ([
