Motivation: RNA expression signals detected by high density genomic tiling microarrays contain comprehensive transcript omic information of the target organism. Current methods for determining the RNA transcription units are still computation intense and lack the discriminative power. This article describes an efficient and accurate methodology to reveal complicated transcriptional architecture, including small regulatory RNAs, in microbial transcriptome profiles. Results: Normalized microarray data were first subject to support vector regression to estimate the profile tendency by reducing noise interruption. A hybrid supervised machine learning algorithm, hidden Markov support vector machines, was then used to classify the underlying state of each probe to expression or silence with the assumption that the consecutive state sequence was a heterogeneous Markov chain. For model construction, we introduced a profile geometry learning method to construct the feature vectors, which considered both intensity profiles and changes of intensities over the probe spacing. Also, a robust strategy was used to dynamically evaluate and select the training set based only on prior computer gene annotation. The algorithm performed better than other methods in accuracy on simulated data, especially for small expressed regions with lower (1) SNR signal to noise ratio), hence more sensitive for detecting small RNAs. Availability and implementation: Detail implementation steps of the algorithm and the complete result of the transcriptome analysis for a microbial genome Porphyromonas gingivalis W83 can be viewed at

introduction current microarray manufacturing technology can synthesize millions of oligonucleotide probes in situ on a single microscopic glass slide. This great capacity of probes allows the design of genomic tiling microarrays containing probes covering both sense and antisense strands with a great frequency for most microbial genomes (; * To whom correspondence should be addressed.) as well as many eukaryotic genomes (). These high density genomic tiling arrays can be used to detect the expression for all RNA species including protein coding RNAs and non-coding RNAs nc rnas. Although becoming popular, the data analysis for expression data obtained from the high density tiling microarrays remains to be challenging. A fundamental task is how to precisely identify expression from noisy background. One common approach has been to segment the probe signals along the genomic coordinates. The assumption of this approach is that intensities within a transcript distribute as Gaussian noise. Thus, the breakpoints detected by the abrupt changes between two adjacent segments may represent the boundaries of the RNA transcripts. A segmentation algorithm () was developed to model the signal distribution that fitted Gaussian noise. Finding an optimal set of breakpoint locations that minimized the sum of squared residuals was accomplished by the dynamic programming algorithm with a fixed number of segments. However, it is not robust to estimate the total number of segments. Also, long computation time O(n 2 S) was required, where S is the number of segments and n is the genome size. For this attempted to simplify the complexity of the algorithm with fixed maximum length l of segment and reduced the computation time to on ls. The determination of expression status for each segment relied, however, on a fixed cut off value (), which may overlook RNA with low expression level. A supervised learning algorithm using Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) has been introduced to directly distinguish transcribed and non transcribed regions (). This approach successfully incorporated validated biological knowledge into the model, instead of only considering the signal distribution that might be biased by noises or system errors. By given a training set, HMMs constructs a probabilistic model that connects the hidden states to the observables as well as to the adjacent states. Viterbi algorithm is then used to compute the most likely hidden state sequence. However, higher order HMMs are known to be a better model to describe the dependency between neighbors than typical first order HMMs, although it has not been applied widely due to the complexity and computational demands. In addition, several limitations of the conventional HMMs have page 1424 14231430
