Motivation: Proteins execute and coordinate cellular functions by interacting with other biomolecules. Among these interactions, protein protein (including peptide mediated protein dna and protein rna interactions cover a wide range of critical processes and cellular functions. The functional characterization of proteins requires the description and mapping of functional biomolecular interactions and the identification and characterization of functional sites is an important step towards this end. Results: We have developed a novel computational method, multi v orff ip (MV), a tool to predicts protein-, peptide-, dna and rna binding sites in proteins. MV utilizes a wide range of structural, evolutionary, experimental and energy based information that is integrated into a common probabilistic framework by means of a Random Forest ensemble classifier. While remaining competitive when compared with current methods, MV is a centralized resource for the prediction of functional sites and is interfaced by a powerful web application tailored to facilitate the use of the method and analysis of predictions to non expert end users
introduction in order to fulfill their cellular functions, proteins interact with other proteins and biomolecules. protein protein interactions, including peptide mediated interactions, are the basis of the formation of macromolecular complexes required to coordinate and perform complex cellular functions, as well as the regulation and coordination of signaling pathways (). protein dna interactions mediate a wide range of cellular functions including gene expression and regulation, DNA replication, DNA repair and DNA recombination (). Likewise, protein rna interactions are central to a number of crucial cellular processes such * To whom correspondence should be addressed. as post-translational gene regulation, protein synthesis, alternative splicing and RNA processing and metabolism (). Thus, deciphering and dissecting biomolecular interactions are central to fully understand the function of proteins and their role in cells. Furthermore, the prediction of functional sites can be used to improve the selection of structural models (). Residues located in functional sites present a number of unique structural and physicochemical properties that vary across the different types of interfaces; e.g. protein binding interfaces are different from dna binding ones (). These distinctive features are used by a number of computational tools to predict binding sites. A common denominator for most of recent computational methods is the use of machine learning algorithms to combine heterogeneous information. This is mainly because simple or composite scoring functions are either not suitable or can not be fully optimized due to the incomplete understanding of the biophysical events underpinning interactions between biomolecules. Thus, statistical models are better to combine and unify data of diverse nature and a number of methods have been proposed to predict protein-(), peptide-(), DNA-(), rna binding site () and more generally functional sites (). In this work, we present multi v orff ip (MV), a structure based machine learning, computational method developed to predict four different types of interactions or functional sites in proteins: protein protein protein peptide protein dna and protein rna binding sites. MV integrates a wide range of structural, evolutionary, energy based and experimental data (i.e. crystallographic B factors) into a common probabilistic framework. The different functional sites (e.g. peptide binding sites) are predicted using statistical models developed and tailored to that end. The method compares favorably with recently described methods. Moreover, the mapping of functional sites (e.g. protein and dna binding sites) within the same protein is highly accurate and selective. MV is accessible through a user friendly web application available at http://www.bioinsilico.org/MVORFFIP. The web application features a powerful and convenient graphic interface that allows the visualization and analysis of the different predictions simultaneously the algorithm has been trained using four different types of interactions: protein protein peptide protein, dna protein rna protein interactions. BS: binding site

conclusion a novel computational method, MV, has been developed to predict protein-, peptide-, dna and rna binding sites. MV has been compared with recently published methods that predict individual types of interactions with a positive outcome. The structural mapping of functional sites is highly selective, allowing multiple sites to be predicted with high accuracy and reliability. A user friendly web application has been developed to easily access to the method. Prediction results are readily available for download or can be analyzed within the same web browser by using a web application and a special graphic visualization viewer.
