Motivation: Both single marker and simultaneous analysis face challenges in g was due to the large number of markers genotyped for a small number of subjects. This large p small n problem is particularly challenging when the trait under investigation has low heritability. Method: In this article, we propose a two stage approach that is a hybrid method of single and simultaneous analysis designed to improve genomic prediction of complex traits. In the first stage, we use a Bayesian independent screening method to select the most promising SNPs. In the second stage, we rely on a hierarchical model to analyze the joint impact of the selected markers. The model is designed to take into account familial dependence in the different subjects, while using local global shrinkage priors on the marker effects. Results: We evaluate the performance in simulation studies, and consider an application to animal breeding data. The illustrative data analysis reveals an encouraging result in terms of prediction performance and computational cost.

introduction genome wide association studies g was have been widely conducted in humans with the goal of identifying genetic factors predictive of disease. g was chips collect data on single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across the genome, focusing on common variants in which the minor allele frequency is at least 5%. The dominant focus in g was has been on independent screening methods, which consider the association between disease and each SNP separately while adjusting for false discoveries. This strategy tends to produce a small number of SNPs having modest effect sizes, failing to explain a substantial proportion of the known heritability in disease. Given the size of the multiple testing problems in which the number of SNPs (p) is dramatically larger than the number of individuals under study (n), it is not surprising that independent screening has failed to identify much signal in the data. As the identified SNPs typically explain a small proportion of the variability in the phenotype, g was has been unsuccessful at producing accurate predictive models in humans (see, e.g.; Diabetes Genetics Initiative of Broad Institute of). Dramatic reduction in cost has driven the increased use of g was beyond humans to animal breeding studies. In animal breeding a major focus is on prediction of genetic merit (breeding value) when the pedigree structure is taken into account. Based on predictions early in life, animals having a high probability of developing desired traits will be differentially selected. When the focus is on prediction of traits instead of identification of the top individual variants, it has been suggested that all markers should be included instead of attempting variable selection (). Because in g was the number of SNPs exceeds the number of samples, simultaneous analysis requires using penalized or shrinkage approaches. The most popular approach is the Lasso (Tibshirani,, which includes an L 1 penalty on the coefficients to induce simultaneous variable selection and shrinkage. However, a rich variety of alternative penalties have been proposed (selection, such methods have computational advantages (avoid an intractable search over all possible subsets) and better accommodate lots of small but non-zero coefficients. In Bayesian analyses of animal breeding, it has been common to rely on mixture priors that include a mass at zero for zero coefficients (see, e.g.). Such priors are tabulated in Supplementary Appendix A,. Although the aforementioned simultaneous approaches have been applied to p ) n problems, there are some clear limitations in scaling computation to very large p, as well as issues in obtaining reliable results when n is too small relative to p. In sparse signal processing problems involving large p small n linear regression, it has been discovered that there is often a phase transition that depends on the relative values of n and p and the true sparsity level. When n is too small, so that one is on the wrong side of the phase transition, results are very unreliable. Such transitions have been characterized only in idealized cases, making assumptions on the design matrix that are not appropriate in genomic studies due to strong correlations that arise given the linkage disequilibrium (LD) structure. We hope to push back the phase transition by using a carefully structured Bayesian approach. To combat the computational intractability of variable selection in massive dimensions, multistage approaches are recommended (see, e.g.). For family based studies proposed two stage screening based on a Bayesian non-parametric regression model. Here, we instead propose a two stage approach for a polygenic mixed model to predict phenotypic variation in the trait of interest from genomic information for data collected on genetically related individuals. In the first stage, we apply a Bayesian independent screening method, which takes into account familial dependence while examining SNPs one at a time. This Bayesian screening method has better performance than competitors in our experience, and is expected to select a superset of the important predictors (). In the second stage, we implement a Bayesian hierarchical model to control the level of sparsity and amount of shrinkage relative to the size of signals. We use the generalized double Pareto (GDP) prior () within a polygenic mixed model, extending previous implementations of the GDP to problems in which the samples are related. We evaluate the predictive performance and computational efficiency of the proposed approach called two stage gdp by conducting a simulation and real data analysis.

discussion in p ) n problems, current variable selection and mixture priors face problems in scaling to very large p when n in small relative to p these problems include computational bottlenecks and insufficient flexibility. To solve these problems, multistage approaches have been proposed, but not yet in the case in which the subjects under study are related. We address this gap via new two stage Bayesian approaches that account for familial dependence. The method is a hybrid of single marker and simultaneous analyses. In the first stage we select a superset of the most promising SNPs by evaluating the impact of each SNP individually while accounting for related samples. In the second stage, we simultaneously select and estimate the parameters of the model by placing a GDP prior on the SNP coefficients, again accounting for relatedness. Our simulation analyses revealed that two stage gdp improves predictive performance in comparison to one stage analysis when n is too small relative to p. The computational cost of this proposed approach also makes it feasible for large scale problems like g was. In the real data analysis, we made a comparison among different prior specifications in the second stage of analysis. This comparison represented that two stage gdp performs better than two stage t priors and two stage bl. We then estimated breeding value for protein yield based on two stage gdp. Although the prediction accuracy was sufficient for the small sample size that we had, a small proportion of phenotypic variation is explained by SNPs. In problems that the sample size is not severely limited, splitting the data in two subsets and applying each stage on a subset of data 00010001 0:698 0:018 0:539 0:012 0:526 0:013 0:529 0:010 (0.01, 0.01) 0:686 0:019 0:528 0:011 0:519 0:011 0:523 0:015 (0.1,0.1) 0:736 :028 0:564 0:018 0:551 :022 0:557 0:023 (0.3,0.3) 0:845 0:028 0:576 0:018 0:572 0:058 0:569 0:023(see for e.g.) may better recover this missing heritability, which may also arise from interactions.
