Motivation: Identifying piwi interacting RNAs pirn as of non model organisms is a difficult and unsolved problem because pirn as lack conservative secondary structure motifs and sequence homology in different species. Results: In this article, a km er scheme is proposed to identify pirn a sequences, relying on the training sets from non pirn a and pirn a sequences of five model species sequenced: rat, mouse, human, fruit fly and nematode. Compared with the existing static scheme based on the position specific base usage, our novel dynamic algorithm performs much better with a precision of over 90% and a sensitivity of over 60%, and the precision is verified by 5-fold cross validation in these species. To test its validity, we use the algorithm to identify pirn as of the migratory locust based on 603 607 deep sequenced small RNA sequences. Totally, 87 536 pirn as of the locust are predicted, and 4426 of them matched with existing locust transposons. The transcriptional difference between solitary and gregarious locusts was described. We also revisit the position specific base usage of pirn as and find the conservation in the end of pirn as. Therefore, the method we developed can be used to identify pirn as of non model organisms without complete genome sequences. Availability: The web server for implementing the algorithm and the software code are freely available to the academic community at

introduction noncoding RNAs nc rnas are functional RNA molecules that are not translated into proteins, including highly abundant and functionally important RNAs such as transfer RNA (tRNA) and ribosomal RNA (rRNA), as well as other RNAs such as snoRNAs, microRNAs, siRNAs and pirn as and the long nc rnas. Among them, the ones of typically 20 30 nt in length are called small RNA. piwi interacting RNA pirn a is the largest class of small * To whom correspondence should be addressed rna molecules expressed in animal cells, especially in germ cells, and 2532 nt long in general (). pirn as form rna protein complexes through interactions with PIWI proteins, and has no clear secondary structure motifs (), and its length is slightly longer than miRNA. Compared with miRNAs, pirn a is lack of primary sequence conservation, and the presence of a 5 uridine is common in both vertebrates and invertebrates. pirn as in the nematode have a 5 monophosphate and a 3 modification that block either 2 or 3 oxygen (), and are confirmed to exist in fruit fly (), zebrafish (), mice () and rats (). piwi argonaut e (also known as paz piwi domain or PPD) protein family is evolutionarily conserved owing to its functional significance in stem cell self renewal and germline development (). pirn a derives from the post-transcriptional amplification ping pong Model', and it may be involved in germ cell formation, germline stem cell maintenance, sperm io genesis and oogenesis (). Therefore, available pirn a data mainly come from model species with complete genome sequences. A general approach to detecting pirn a is based on the combination of immunoprecipitation and deep sequencing in model and sequenced organisms (). However, the lowly expressed or issue specific pirn as might be missed using this method. In addition, some of pirn as are not produced by ping pong Model' (). Thus, computational methods may provide an alternative approach to detect pirn as which can summarize general properties from known pirn as and then train them to predict novel pirn as first use the position specific usage of 10 upstream bases and 10 downstream bases of 5 U to construct a vector with 214 components, by which they characterized and identified mouse pirn as with a precision of 6172%. They also found that mouse pirn as have some position special properties, such as G or A at +1 position, A at +4 position and a slight underrepresentation of G at 1 position. However, their method has limitations in predicting pirn as from the organism without genome information (). Meanwhile, this method can not efficiently detect those pirn as derived from 3 UTR of mRNA, which are not produced by ping pong Model' (). Furthermore, pirn a sequences are quite divergent among different species (Lakshmi and agrawal page 772 771776). Most general methods, such as BLAST and MEME, are inappropriate for pirn a prediction. For example, we can not find any homologous pirn as between fruit fly and other species with BLAST; and not any conserved motifs are found in pirn as with MEME. Therefore, more efficient computational methods are urgently demanded. The km er scheme is widely used to characterize bio sequences (), because patterns using km ers have been found to be species or tax on special (). It is important to note that, the Solexa small RNA data may also include miRNA, pirn a as well as some short fractions of snoRNA, snRNA, long ncRNA and un-annotated mRNAs, which have similar lengths to pirn a. In fact, non code version 2.0 () has 9257/20 7765 = 4.46% nc rnas shorter than 25 nt, suggesting that most ncRNA may produce a sequence fraction with similar length to pirn a. Moreover, possible background noise also exists, including the background information introduced by Solexa, the degraded RNA fragments in sample preparation and the noise caused by the random match of data with genome. Studies of demonstrated that there are about 3040% short sequences in 603 607 possible candidates of locust small RNAs are unannotated. On the other words, there are about 200 000 un an noted small RNAs in which there would be a huge number of pirn as and other short sequences. Obviously, these remaining sequences could cover real pirn as the fractions of long nc rnas unannotated mRNAs and noise produced by Solexa. Therefore, pirn as in Solexa small RNA data can not be identified merely based on their lengths. In order to predict pirn as an efficient algorithm is required to distinguish the real pirn a from the sequences within similar range of length. Here, we used all the 1364 15 nt strings and an improved Fisher Discriminant algorithm to characterize pirn a sequences in five model species: rat, mouse, human, fruit fly and nematode. The novel algorithm reached a prediction precision of over 90% and a sensitivity of over 60% in these species. We applied this algorithm to the deep sequenced small RNA data () of the migratory locust (Locusta migratoria), which is an important agricultural pest and model species for physiology, neuroscience and behavior. This method successfully identified 87 536 pirn as of the locust with the same precision and sensitivity as the five model species. Therefore, the method proposed in this study can be used to predict pirn as for both model and non model organisms.

conclusion in this article, we implemented a km er algorithm to predict pirn as. Compared with previous approaches, the new method does not require a reference genome and gives a much better performance on pirn a prediction. We also improved the Fisher algorithm by setting different cutoffs and elevating the precision rate. The basic work is to obtain the Fisher vector w, the mean value m 2 and the SD N std of the negative samples. Then, a sequence represented by a 1364 D vector x can be regarded as a pirn a if its w  x is larger than m 2 +2N std. Using this new scheme, we obtained 87 536 putative pirn as from the locust, which would be very helpful in studying the phase transition mechanism of insects, especially hemi metamorphosis insects. Moreover, the 84 locust pirn as which have the largest ratio of solitary to gregarious reads, and the 4426 locust pirn as matched with existing transposons may provide excellent candidates Page: 776 771776 for studying phase transition via locust transcriptome and RNAi experiments. On the other hand, the results provided important cues understanding the molecular mechanism of fecundity difference between solitary and gregarious locusts. Most notably different from other methods in literatures, the novel prediction approach is based on the general property of string usage in pirn as which is extracted from all available pirn as. We believe that this method can be widely used to predict pirn as from both model and non model organisms.
