Motivation: Recent advances of next generation sequence technologies have made it possible to rapidly and inexpensively identify gene variations. Knowing the disease association of these gene variations is important for early intervention to treat deadly diseases and provide possible targets to cure these diseases. genome wide association studies g was have identified many individual genes associated with common diseases. To exploit the large amount of data obtained from g was studies and leverage our understanding of common as well as rare diseases, we have developed a knowledge based approach to predict gene disease associations. We first derive gene gene mutual information by utilizing the co occurrence of genes in known gene disease association data. Subsequently, the mutual information is combined with known protein protein interaction networks by a boosted tree regression method. Results: The method called know gene is compared with the method of random walking on the heterogeneous network using the same input data. For a set of 960 diseases, using the same training data in testing in 3-fold cross validation the average recall rate within the top ranked 100 genes by know gene is 65.0% compared with 37.9% by the state of the art random walking on heterogeneous network. This significant improvement is mostly due to the inclusion of knowledge based mutual information. Availability and Implementation: Predictions for genes associated with the 960 diseases are available at

introduction complex diseases such as Parkinson's Disease (PD) are attributed to both genetic and or environmental causes (). Environmental toxins cause disease through their effects on genes (). Knowing the genes associated with a disease is useful for preventing and curing the disease. It is also fundamentally important for understanding the biological functions of genes. genome wide association studies g was posit that multiple, common small risk variants interact to cause common diseases (). g was relies on testing several hundred thousand common genetic variants found throughout the human genome in large control cohorts. Over the past few years, many gene loci have been implicated as associated with various human diseases by g was www genome gov gwa studies as well as linkage studies (). Despite the fruitful insights provided by g was heritability estimates have shown that large proportions of genetic risk underlying complex disease have not yet been explained (). This is due to lack of the ability to detect 'common disease by rare variants' using a g was approach. The introduction of next generation sequencing technologies allows cost effective sequencing of entire genomes and has led to the discovery of numerous rare variants in the human genome. The disease associations of these rare variants can not be inferred by g was for further experimental verification. Thus, alternative computational methods that predict the association of gene with a given disease have been developed V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com (). The general idea of prediction methods is the 'guilt by association' principle () with respect to a set of known genes related to the given disease. The most frequently used types of evidence for inference of association are (): (i) text mining of the biomedical literature; (ii) phenotype relationships such as disease disease similarity; (iii) protein protein interactions; (iv) regulatory information and (v) gene expression information. For example, van used a text mining approach to associate genes with human phenotypes found in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database (). K hl er et al. found gene disease associations by using a global network distance measure a random walk analysis for the definition of similarities in protein protein interaction networks (the 'interactome'). Encouragingly, they find that this approach significantly outperforms previous methods based on local distance measures in the interactome (). A slightly modified approach called 'network propagation' that differs from a random walk only in the normalization of the adjacency matrix W representing the interactome () has also been developed. The random walk method normalizes the adjacency matrix W by columns (the summation of each column equals to one), whereas the network propagation normalizes W by the diagonal matrix: W ij  W ij = ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffi ffi ffi ffi D i; i  D j; j   p , where D i; k    P k W ik. An extension of the random walk approach is walking on a heterogeneous network that includes protein protein interaction, disease disease and gene disease networks (). singh have developed a truncated version of the random walking on a heterogeneous network by using a limited steps for the walks but it also includes phenotypes from multiple species. The method uses simple dampening coefficients for longer walks and learns the coefficients for longer walks using a support vector machine (SVM) (). Natarajan and Dhillon 2014 developed an inductive method that uses a machine learning approach to incorporate different biological sources of evidence such as microarray expression data, gene functional interaction data and disease related textual data from human as well as other species. The best performing of the aforementioned methods for prioritizing genes associated with a given disease is the inductive matrix completion developed by Natarajan and Dhillon (2014). It has an average recall rate of 25% within the top 100 ranked genes. There are also many disease specific methods that focus on a single or group of diseases to prioritize genes for further experimental validation. For a survey of methods for predicting gene disease association, please see Piro and Di c unto (2012). Here, we develop a new type of approach for prioritizing candidate genes associated with a given disease. Our approach applies the idea of word association in the context of texts () to gene gene association in the context of diseases and then employs gene gene association to infer gene disease association. This is a knowledge based approach that learns gene gene association propensity in diseases from known gene disease association. It is also analogous to methods of knowledge based statistical potentials for protein structure prediction that learn residue residue or atom atom pairwise interaction potentials from experimental protein structures (). Mutual information () is used to measure the strength of gene gene association in a given disease. Owing to the increasing amount of data for known gene disease associations, the mutual information of gene gene pairs can be derived from these known associations. Subsequently, mutual information is combined with the properties of the protein protein physical interaction network by means of boosted tree regression (). The resulting method called know gene is then benchmarked in 3-fold cross validation (training on 2/3 of the known gene disease associations and testing on the remaining 1/3) and compared with network propagation, random walking on the interactome as well as on the heterogeneous network based methods. For 960 diseases defined by the medical subject headings mesh s ontology with at least two known seed genes associated with a given disease [as provided by the OMIM and g was databases (, using the same input evidence (known gene disease association and interactome), know gene achieves a significantly better recall rate (65.0%) within the top 100 ranked of 15 948 total screened genes compared with the network propagation (19.2%), the random walk on interactome (18.1%) and the random walk on heterogeneous network (37.9%) methods. Thus, know gene is a promising method for prioritizing candidate genes associated with a given disease. Then, we apply know gene in prediction mode (training on all known gene disease associations) to predict and rank genes in the human exo me for each of the 960 diseases. Likewise, our predictions can rank diseases for a given gene, a useful feature for diagnosing diseases in a given mutated gene. It is also useful for predicting and understanding possible side effects of drug targets. Predictions are available for academic users at http:// cssb2biologygatechedu know gene
discussion we have developed a knowledge based approach know gene for prioritizing genes associated with given disease. Likewise, it can also prioritize diseases associated with a given gene. The novelty of know gene is in the derivation of gene gene mutual information from the co occurrence frequency of pairs of genes in a large number of diseases with a known set of gene disease associations. With this novel technique, know gene performs much better than the best existing method of walking on the heterogeneous network using exactly the same input information (recall rate within top 100 ranked genes: 65.0 versus 37.9%). Both know gene and walking on the heterogeneous network utilize information from the known gene disease associations and perform much better than methods without using this information. For example, the network propagation method has a recall rate of 19.2%, which is about half that by the method of random walk on the heterogeneous network. All tested methods perform better for diseases having core genes than) thap1 human 0.890 Support: THAP1 gene is part of a family of THAP proteins that bind specific DNA sequences and regulate cell proliferation through the pRB/E2F cell cycle target genes, a pathway recently proposed to be involved in cell death in PD (for those lacking core genes. When used for prioritizing diseases for a given gene, know gene has an average recall rate of 77.1%. A disadvantage of know gene as well as the method of walking on the heterogeneous network is that it does not perform well for genes that are not present in any of the diseases used in deriving the mutual information (test on singletons). In practice, for such genes, we can choose an alternative method such as know gene without using mutual information or the network propagation method. Possible further improvement of know gene could come from enriching more genes with more verified disease associations and including them in deriving mutual information. These could be fulfilled by literature searches for associations with high know gene prediction scores and then using the supported associations in training. This process could be iterated. For those genes without any known disease associations, other sources for deriving their mutual information are sought. For example, one possibility is the covariation of gene expression data in individuals with a given disease. co occurrence of gene pairs in pathways is another possible source. These and other alternatives will be explored in future work.
