Motivation: Kinesin is a smart motor protein that steps process ively forward and backward along microtubules (MTs). The mechanical kinetics of kinesin affecting its stepping behavior is not fully understood. Here, we propose a mathematical model to study the mechanical kinetics of forward and backward stepping of kinesin motor based on the four state discrete stochastic model of the motor. Results: Results show that the probabilities of forward and backward stepping can be modeled using the mean probabilities of forward and backward kinetic transitions, respectively. We show that the backward stepping of kinesin motor starts when the probability of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) binding to the motor is much higher than that of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) binding. Furthermore, our results indicate that the backward stepping is related to both ATP hydrolysis and synthesis with rate limiting factor being ATP synthesis. Low rate of ATP synthesis under high backward loads above 10 pN is also suggested as a reason for the detachment of kinesin motor from MT in the kinetic state mt kinesin a dpp i .

introduction kinesin 1 which will be referred to as kinesin hereafter, is a two headed motor protein that advances unidirectionally along a microtubule (MT) in discrete 8.2 nm steps () by walking in an asymmetric hand over hand fashion (). Kinesin can process ively step forward and backward along an MT (), taking approximately 100 steps before detaching from the MT (). Experimental investigation of kinesin processivity has revealed that kinesin can undergo discrete steps in the presence of fuel, i.e. adenosine triphosphate (ATP), or in the absence of ATP, if external load is applied to the motor (). The significance of studying the mechanical kinetics underlying stepping of kinesin motor becomes apparent when considering the important roles the motor plays ranging from human diseases to synthetic nano technological applications and the development of novel active nanodevices. Molecular biology have revealed critical roles of kinesin motor in brain wiring and formation, neuronal survival, higher brain function and control of central nervous system (). It is also evident that the impairment of these functions of kinesin motor would contribute to neuronal disease pathogenesis, such as Alzheimer () and hereditary spastic paraplegia (), and other diseases such as cancer (). Kinesin stepping can also exert localized forces on nanostructures. This force can be exploited in nano robotics (). Thus, engineers have commenced to invent synthetic nanodevices powered by kinesin motor that have unique potentials for use in medical diagnostics as well as engineering applications (). However, precise temporal and spatial control of such nanodevices is a challenging problem because of the stochastic motion, high complexity and small size of kinesin (). Even though the biophysical properties of kinesin motor have been widely studied, yet little is known about how the mechanical kinetics of kinesin affect its stepping behavior in the complex cellular environment (). Better understanding of the mechanical kinetics of kinesin stepping may translate into the development of molecular targeted therapy for various human diseases () and precise motion control for artificial nano motors with a wide variety of missions (). Mathematical modeling can be used to not only conceptualize and characterize kinesin behavior under different experimental settings, but also to make predictions for novel applications. One major theoretical approach for the modeling of kinesin motor motion is based on a multistate discrete stochastic model and the assumption that a single stepping of the motor involves passing through a sequence of discrete kinetic states connected by reversible transition rates (). Here, we mathematically model and analyze the mechanical kinetics of atp driven stepping behavior of kinesin motor over a discrete stochastic model at various forward (negative) and backward (positive) loads and ATP concentrations () at room temperature (forward and backward steps are taken toward the plus and minus ends of MT, respectively). We show that our mathematical model can be used to analyze, conceptualize and predict forward and backward stepping of kinesin motor in different situations.
