Motivation: Recurrent DNA breakpoints in cancer genomes indicate the presence of critical functional elements for tumor development. Identifying them can help determine new therapeutic targets. high dimensional DNA microarray experiments like array cgh afford the identification of DNA copy number breakpoints with high precision, offering a solid basis for computational estimation of recurrent break-point locations. Results: We introduce a method for identification of recurrent break-points (consensus breakpoints) from copy number aberration data-sets. The method is based on weighted kernel counting of breakpoints around genomic locations. Counts larger than expected by chance are considered significant. We show that the consensus breakpoints facilitate consensus segmentation of the samples. We apply our method to three array cgh datasets and show that by using consensus segmentation we achieve significant dimension reduction, which is useful for the task of prediction of tumor phenotype based on copy number data. We use our approach for classification of neuroblastoma tumors from different age groups and confirm the recent recommendation for the choice of age cut off for differential treatment of 18 months. We also investigate the (epi)genetic properties at consensus breakpoint locations for seven datasets and show enrichment in overlap with important functional genomic regions. Availability: Implementation in R of our approach can be found at

introduction dna breaks occur often during cell replication and are especially dangerous if the DNA repair mechanisms do not succeed in restoring the damaged locus correctly. Erroneous DNA repair events can disrupt essential mechanisms that maintain the integrity of the cell and, on rare occasions, can cause the cell to become cancerous. Insertions, deletions, amplifications, translocations and inversions are types of DNA structural damage frequently observed in cancer genomes that occur as a consequence of unrepaired DNA breaks. Tumor genomes exhibit hundreds of DNA breakpoints. Some of them promote tumor development by disrupting crucial functional elements, and thus survive the selective pressure that acts on cancer cells. These breakpoints tend to recur in tumors of the same type, suggesting common progression mechanisms. Other breakpoints may have no or less effect on tumor progression, e.g. the contribution of non recurrent breakpoints that appear at arbitrary locations in the genome is difficult to evaluate. Identifying relevant breakpoint hotspots and characterizing their influence on tumor phenotype can help to identify molecular factors responsible for tumor progression and thus to develop new therapeutic strategies. Very high resolution microarray technologies for genome wide measurement of copy number alterations, such as array cgh () or SNP arrays () can reveal DNA breakpoints related to copy number changes in cancer genomes. The resolution of microarray based technologies can be very high, with the distance between probes being as little as 23 kb, facilitating sufficiently accurate estimation of the location of a DNA breakpoint. The estimation is carried out by performant segmentation algorithms, such as CBS (). Presently, large collections of high resolution array cgh data are publicly available at the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/), The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, http://cancergenome.nih.gov/) and other repositories, for many types of cancer. In this article, we introduce an algorithm for identifying recurrent breakpoints (or consensus breakpoints) in tumor cohorts, based on DNA copy number aberration data. The approach is called Consensus breakpoints by Kernel Smoothing (C-KS, pronounce as 'seeks'). C-KS identifies genomic locations around which breakpoints tend to accumulate more frequently than expected by chance and assigns to each a significance Z-score. The input of our algorithm consists of the locations of breakpoints of all tumors in the cohort; therefore, the computational running time is independent of the resolution of the experimental assays that produced the data. In, a competing approach for identifying breakpoint hotspots called Neighborhood Breakpoint Conservation (NBC) is presented. NBC is applied directly to *To whom correspondence should be addressed. the raw log ratios of array cgh experiments. The authors devise a special single array segmentation algorithm, which assigns to each pair of adjacent probes a probability of a breakpoint occurring between them. Then, locations of recurrent breakpoints are analytically estimated and sorted by significance p value. NBC has two main shortcomings. First, the segmentation models are based on parametric assumptions that are specific to array cgh data and, therefore, not applicable to next generation sequencing. Second, the complexity of the NBC algorithm is high, the segmentation step using a dynamic program that requires quadratic runtime in the number of array probes. Therefore, NBC does not scale well to the most recent microarray platforms, such as Agilent 1M or Affymetrix SNP 6.0. By identifying consensus breakpoints, our approach can afford consensus segmentation of a set of cancer genomes, which is a generalization of the single sample segmentation procedure. We assume that between two consecutive consensus breakpoints, each tumor has constant copy number, given, for example, by the average log ratio (in the case of microarrays). We call these regions consensus regions. To validate the C-KS algorithm, we use the consensus regions as super features in classification tasks that predict some binary indicator of tumor phenotype. We applied our method to seven array cgh datasets from five cancer types with various phenotypic al annotations. We show that in comparison with models trained on probe data, the accuracy of the classification models using the consensus regions is comparable and sometimes higher. Hence, disregarding all breakpoints that are not consensus breakpoints does not adversely impact the predictive power of the model. We also show that consensus segmentation affords substantial dimension reduction of the sample data without significant loss of information. Moreover, we present an important biological finding that arose from our classification models using C-KS segmentation. Specifically, the tumor genomes of neuroblastoma patients of different age groups are most distinct when the age grouping is defined as ' 518 months' against ' 418 months'. Our finding has potential impact on differential therapy of neuroblastoma patients, which are currently divided into two prognostic groups: 512 months at diagnosis (good prognosis) and older (poor prognosis). Our result is also supported by other studies (). For a qualitative validation of the C-KS algorithm, we investigate genomic and epi genomic properties of the genomic locations corresponding to consensus breakpoints and show that they tend to be enriched in functional elements and certain DNA sequence patterns. These associations are interesting and deserve further biological investigation.

discussion we have introduced the algorithm C-KS for identifying consensus breakpoints from DNA copy number alteration data. The algorithm takes as input the list of breakpoints occurring in the tumor cohort. C-KS uses a weighted kernel counting for evaluating the abundance of breakpoints around genomic locations.. Prediction of age group based copy number data from the neuroblastoma dataset. The input features were the consensus regions resulting from segmentation with C-KS. (a) class weighted accuracy as a function of the age cut off. (b) Feature weights (in absolute value) for all models. Dark red corresponds to weights close to zero (irrelevant features) and shades of yellow to white mark increasingly relevant features for prediction. The features are ordered according to the genome position. On the right side, the weighted class accuracy is shown A significance Z-score is associated to each consensus breakpoint, resulting from a comparison with null scores obtained via random permutation. We also introduced the concept of consensus segmentation, which is a generalization of the single sample segmentation procedure. We used the consensus segmentation for representing the data into a space of lower dimensionality and carried out classification tasks with tumor phenotype as outcome variable. We applied the C-KS algorithm to seven array cgh datasets. We showed that despite the significant dimension reduction, the consensus segmentation driven by the consensus breakpoints results in comparable accuracy of prediction of the tumor phenotype. Often, the prediction accuracy increases after segmentation, especially in cases in which the number of samples is small. Based on our classification models, the copy number aberration profiles of neuroblastoma tumors are most distinct between age groups defined using a cut off of 18 months. Our finding confirms recent recommendations from the research community, based on arguments not incorporating copy number alteration profiles. We believe that our result is important, as it provides with a biologically founded explanation to the impact of age at diagnosis on outcome. We also showed that the genomic regions identified as tightly aligned consensus breakpoints are enriched in overlap with functional elements, such as gene promoters, CpG islands, several histone modifications and insulators, which constitute interesting biological findings that deserve further investigation. To conclude, we describe an algorithm for identifying consensus breakpoints and a method for consensus segmentation of copy number aberration data. The substantial dimension reduction achieved by consensus segmentation with no loss of essential predictive information can constitute the basis of efficient downstream analysis and data integration.. Properties of consensus breakpoint regions given by epi explorer. On the y-axis, various genomic and epi genomic properties are listed. On the x axis we show the percentage of consensus breakpoint regions overlapping with each of the properties. In gray, the consensus breakpoints from each dataset are represented. In red, the random reference is shown, with standard deviation bars. In white, summary on the overlap of individual breakpoints with epi genomic properties
