Motivation: The compound identification in gas chromatography– mass spectrometry (GC–MS) is achieved by matching the experimental mass spectrum to the mass spectra in a spectral library. It is known that the intensities with higher m/z value in the GC– MS mass spectrum are the most diagnostic. Therefore, to increase the relative significance of peak intensities of higher m/z value, the intensities and m/z values are usually transformed with a set of weight factors. A poor quality of weight factors can significantly decrease the accuracy of compound identification. With the significant enrichment of the mass spectral database and the broad application of GC–MS, it is important to re-visit the methods of discovering the optimal weight factors for high confident compound identification. Results: We developed a novel approach to finding the optimal weight factors only through a reference library for high accuracy compound identification. The developed approach first calculates the ratio of skewness to kurtosis of the mass spectral similarity scores among spectra (compounds) in a reference library and then considers a weight factor with the maximum ratio as the optimal weight factor. We examined our approach by comparing the accuracy of compound identification using the mass spectral library maintained by the National Institute of Standards and Technology. The results demonstrate that the optimal weight factors for fragment ion peak intensity and m/z value found by the developed approach outperform the current weight factors for compound identification. Availability: The results and R package are available at

introduction gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GCMS) is one of the most widely used analytical techniques for unraveling a large number of compounds present in either chemical or biological samples. One of the most important analyses of GCMS data is compound identification, which is currently achieved by matching the experimental mass spectra to the mass spectra recorded in a * To whom correspondence should be addressed. spectrum database. The mass spectrum of an unknown compound is assigned to a database compound based on their mass spectral similarity score. Various spectral similarity scores have been developed for the spectrum matching based compound identification including composite similarity (), probability based matching system (), cosine correlation (); (); (); (), Hertz similarity index (), normalized Euclidean distance (L 2-norm) (); (); (), absolute value distance (L 1-norm) (); (), wavelet and Fourier transforms based composite measure (). The peak intensities of fragment ions with large mass to charge (m/z) values in a GCMS mass spectrum tend to be smaller although they are the most informative ions for compound identification. The performance of compound identification can be improved by increasing the relative significance of the large fragment ions via weighing more on their peak intensities. Nearly 5% of improvement in identification accuracy has been observed if an appropriate set of weight factors is used (). Several studies have been performed to discover the optimal weight factors for fragment ion peak intensity as well as m/z value suggested the squared root of an intensity times its m/z value as an optimal scaling of the intensities, while recommended an intensity to the power of 0.6 times its m/z value cubed in case of the cosine correlation. recently reported that optimal weight factor is the squared root of intensity and the square of its m/z value. Even though various methods have been developed to improve mass spectral similarity measures for high accuracy compound identification, there has been much less development in finding the optimal weight factors to improve the performance of compound identification. The main objective of this study is to develop a method to discover the optimal weight factors for high accuracy compound identification in GCMS. It is noteworthy that the literature reported methods require a training data set, whereas the proposed method can discover optimal weight factors based on only a reference library. The proposed approach focuses on the statistical characteristics of the distribution of mass spectral similarity scores among compounds in a reference library. The ratio of skewness to kurtosis is used to search for an optimal weight factor, considering the optimal weight factor having the maximum of the average ratios of skewness to kurtosis. All the statistical analysis and simulations were performed using the R statistical software version 2.13.1 (R Development Core team with the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) mass spectral library. For the ease of description, we use the terms spectrum and compound interchangeably throughout this article.

conclusion the weight factors for intensities and m/z values are optimized at 0.53 and 1.3, respectively. The optimal weight factor discovered in this work is different from the literature reported weight factors, such as w = (0.5,1) (), w = (0.6,3) (), and w = (0.5,2) (), although these discovered weight factors also were optimized for a mass spectral library in terms of compound identification accuracy. It suggests that the optimal weight factors highly depend on a mass spectral library. All literature reported optimal weight factors were found based on supervised learning, in the sense that a training data set (query library) is required during the discovery phase. The proposed approach can, however, find optimal weight factors only using a reference library without any query library, meaning that the proposed algorithm can be considered as unsupervised learning. The accuracy of compound identification using the optimal weight factors discovered in this work reaches 82.83%, demonstrating that the newly discovered weight factors outperform the literature reported weight factors for high accuracy compound identification.
