Motivation: Proteins of all kinds can self assemble into highly ordered β-sheet aggregates known as amyloid fibrils, important both biologically and clinically. However, the specific molecular structure of a fibril can vary dramatically depending on sequence and environmental conditions, and mutations can drastically alter amyloid function and pathogenicity. Experimental structure determination has proven extremely difficult with only a handful of nmr based models proposed, suggesting a need for computational methods. Results: We present amyloid mutants a statistical mechanics approach for de novo prediction and analysis of wild type and mutant amyloid structures. Based on the premise of protein mutational landscapes, amyloid mutants energetically quantifies the effects of sequence mutation on fibril conformation and stability. Tested on non mutant full length amyloid structures with known chemical shift data, amyloid mutants offers roughly 2-fold improvement in prediction accuracy over existing tools. Moreover, amyloid mutants is the only method to predict complete super secondary structures, enabling accurate discrimination of topologically dissimilar amyloid conformations that correspond to the same sequence locations. Applied to mutant prediction, amyloid mutants identifies a global conformational switch between Aβ and its highly toxic Iowa mutant in agreement with a recent experimental model based on partial chemical shift data. Predictions on mutant, yeast toxic strains of he ts suggest similar alternate folds. When applied to he ts and a he ts mutant with core asparagine s replaced by glutamine s (both highly amyloid o genic chemically similar residues abundant in many amyloid s amyloid mutants surprisingly predicts a greatly reduced capacity of the glutamine mutant to form amyloid. We confirm this finding by conducting mutagenesis experiments. Availability: Our tool is publically available on the web at

introduction under optimum conditions, proteins with diverse primary sequence exhibit the ability to self assemble into structurally varied, but highly * To whom correspondence should be addressed. ordered -sheet aggregates known as amyloid fibrils (). Those forming amyloid under normal physiological conditions can have profound effects on biological systems deleterious and beneficial. On the one hand, amyloid s play a role in diseases such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Huntington's, as well as systemic amyloidosis. On the other, they serve vital functions in normal biology such as in human peptide hormone storage, biofilm formation and a mechanism of protein only inheritance by yeast prions (). However, the generic nature of the fold, the observation that most proteins do not form amyloid under normal conditions and the ability of many amyloid s to adopt multiple amyloid structures from the same peptide sequence (structural strains) confounds standard sequence specific models of protein folding (). Moreover, sequences with only a small likelihood of forming amyloid can remain so given many mutations, or become abundantly amyloid o genic after only a single point change (). Therefore, to better understand the sequence structure relationship of amyloid fibrils, a meaningful predictive model is required that describes the relationship between a given sequence and its mutational neighborhood. Countless experimental studies have been performed to probe the molecular mechanism of these enigmatic structures. However, most methods (developed primarily for globular proteins) are difficult to apply to amyloid s due to their large size and insolubility. Techniques such as solid state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and hydrogen deuterium exchange hd exchange have brought us the most information about fibril structure, but only through exhaustive work and complex experimental design (). The high cost of such studies has prevented the kinds of large scale investigations that can reveal the underlying sequence structure relationships in functional and pathogenic amyloid folds. Seminal work has shown that computational prediction of sequence amyloid ogen i city can help guide and speed investigations of amyloid structure (). These advances enabled new possibilities for genome wide studies, such as the discovery of 19 new functioning amyloid proteins in yeast (). More specialized tools () have been further developed that detail the structure page i35 i34i42

discussion amyloid mutants provides the highest accuracy prediction to date of the full fibril structure of amyloid sequences, but its greater value is its unique ability to discover which mutations effect a change in amyloid structure(s), to predict what that structure is and to assign meaningful energetic weights comparing mutant conformations. This accuracy is due, in part, to the ability to model coarse, higher dimension spatial interactions, beyond simpler 1D sequence motifs. This is an important distinction from amyloid ogen i city predictors that identify structurally homogeneous peptide sequences (). While the latter can be helpful during an initial screen (searching for amyloid steric zippers in particular), amyloid mutants can predict and provide insight into the full length structure () and residue residue interactions of both -solenoidal and serpentine steric zipper fibrils (), putatively identifying interactions critical to function or pathogenicity. Further, through the use of Boltzmann ensembles, our model of sequence structure space is the only amyloid modeling tool that captures fibril structure variation and -contact structural topology changes that may arise in in vivo. The exploration of mutational landscapes is an important step in understanding differences between amyloid topologies, how mutational variants arise in the wild, and to elucidate evolutionary relationships between related amyloid proteins. This capability depends on amyloid mutants novel thermodynamic characterization of all points within a mutational landscape, and is necessary for the discovery of non additive functional relationships between sequences and conformational epistasis (). Further, we note that our tool provides additional features for experimentalists (not used in this article) that allows extra sequential experimental data to be incorporated into the predictor (Supplementary Text Section 1)as much or as little a priori knowledge as desired, enabling a new tactic for iterative tool re-use. At face value, the ability of most proteins to form a characteristic cross sheet amyloid structure in vitro () seems at odds with the relatively small number of amyloid forming proteins that have been identified in vivo, and the apparently high sequence dependence some amyloid s show when compared against sequence homologs. Moreover, the existence of both beneficial functional amyloid sequences, and putatively pathogenic 'misfolded' amyloid proteins suggests a more complicated sequence structure relationship than is found in standard protein folding models. The power to accurately predict amyloid structure from sequence, and to fully characterize the amyloid ogen i city of an entire mutational landscape provides insight into this problem by identifying recurring sequence motifs, coarse 3D residue arrangements and putative mutational pathways linking the sequences of known amyloid structures. The immediate impact of this could improve our ability to identify amyloid structures from genomic data alone, to better understand familial mutations that intensify pathogenesis in diseases such as Alzheimer's, to predict the interaction strength of fibril regions that may be involved in nucleation and to enable targeted peptide design to alter fibril structure or inhibit fibril formation.
