Motivation: The two dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) pattern of proteins is thought to be specifically related to the physiological or pathological condition at the moment of sample preparation. On this ground, most proteomic studies move to identify specific hallmarks for a number of different conditions. However, the information arising from these investigations is often incomplete due to inherent limitations of the technique, to extensive protein post-translational modifications and sometimes to the paucity of available samples. The meta analysis of proteomic data can provide valuable information pertinent to various biological processes that otherwise remains hidden. Results: Here, we show a meta analysis of the PD protein DJ-1 in heterogeneous 2-DE experiments. The protein was shown to segregate into specific clusters associated with defined conditions. Interestingly, the DJ-1 pool from neural tissues displayed a specific and characteristic molecular weight and isoelectric point pattern. Moreover, changes in this pattern have been related to neurodegenerative processes and aging. These results were experimentally validated on human brain specimens from control subjects and PD patients. Availability: image j is a public domain image processing program developed by the National Institutes of Health and is freely available at http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij. All the image j macros used in this study are available as supplementary material and upon request at info bio digital valley com. xl stat can be purchased online at

introduction dj1park7 is an ubiquitous, highly conserved protein that was originally identified because of its ability to transform NIH3T3 mouse cells in cooperation with Ras (). Starting from the association between loss of function mutations in * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the DJ-1 gene and park 7 a monogenic, autosomal recessive form of Parkinson's disease (PD) (), an accumulating body of evidence pinpointed the important role of DJ-1 in this neurodegenerative condition. Very recently, it has been shown that oxidized dopamine can covalently modify DJ-1 (); however, whether this can affect dopamine cell degeneration is unknown. Some hints may come from the involvement of DJ-1 into many cellular functions, including evidence linking this protein to oxidative stress response a fact well known even before the association of DJ-1 with PD () mitochondrial function () and transcription (), nuclear transcription (), mRNA binding and protein interaction () and protein degradation (). Mirroring the involvement of DJ-1 in multiple cellular activities, this protein has been found in complex with multiple molecular partners, including DJ-1 itself (), PINK-1 and park in (), alpha synuclein (), HSP70 (), dj bp (), pias x alpha (), ASK1 (), histone deacetylase 6 (), androgen receptor (), DAXX () and Abstrakt (). DJ-1 has been shown to modulate dopamine toxicity in cellular models of oxidative stress with reference to PD (). Dopamine exposure leads to upregulation of DJ-1 that in turn increases cell resistance to dopamine itself and reduces intracellular oxidants (). On the other hand, -synuclein overexpression leads to upregulation of DJ-1, and DJ-1 overexpression protects cells from -synuclein toxicity (). Besides being in complex with a number of different partners, DJ-1 is often post translationally modified. DJ-1 modifications mainly include oxidations at different sites, which is related to its antioxidant role (), but there are also evidences of ubiquitination () and sumo y lation (small ubiquitin like modifier) (). Not unexpectedly, DJ-1 binding to its molecular counterparts, and thus its pleiotropic effects, are affected by DJ-1 post-translational modification. For example, oxidation regulates homo dimerization () and affects DJ-1 binding to mRNA (van der), ASK1 (), HSP70 (),Page: 947 946952
