Motivation: Molecular chaperones prevent the aggregation of their substrate proteins and thereby ensure that they reach their functional native state. The bacterial groel es chaperonin system is understood in great detail on a structural, mechanistic and functional level; its interactors in Escherichia coli have been identified and characterized. However, a long-standing question in the field is: What makes a protein a chaperone substrate? Results: Here we identify, using a bioinformatics based approach a simple set of quantities, which characterize the groel substrate proteome. We define three novel parameters differentiating GroEL interactors from other cellular proteins: lower rate of evolution, hydrophobicity and aggregation propensity. Combining them with other known features to a simple Bayesian predictor allows us to identify known homologous and heterologous GroEL substrate proteins. We discuss our findings in relation to established mechanisms of protein folding and evolutionary buffering by chaperones.

introduction molecular chaperone systems and their interaction with substrate proteins are a fascinating paradigm in molecular biology. Chaperones assist newly synthesized polypeptide chains to fold and mature to functional proteins: they are able to rescue substrates trapped in energetically unfavorable states (), and are markedly over-expressed under cellular stress to prevent the aggregation of unfolded proteins. In fact, one could say chaperone substrates are proteins on the edge, often carrying out important cellular functions but relying on helper proteins to reach their native state. Arguably, the best studied chaperone system are the bacterial Hsp60/Hsp10 groel es heat shock proteins (). GroES functions as a lid like structure, allowing for the full encapsulation of substrate proteins inside the GroEL cavity, thereby providing a secluded folding environment; productive folding can involve various rounds of binding to and release from the chaperonin (). The in vivo substrate proteins of Escherichia coli GroEL have recently been identified and characterized experimentally (); between 250 and 320 proteins interact with the chaperone in the cell under regular growth conditions with different interaction propensities. In spite of these sophisticated experimental studies, a few specific features of chaperonin substrates have been described so far. Due to the limited size of the GroEL cavity, their molecular weights range predominantly between 20 and 60 kDa (); they show a specific enrichment in certain fold types, such as the TIM barrel (); they show lower average folding propensities and higher translation efficiencies (). In addition, an attempt has been made to identify specific chaperone binding motives in the substrate proteins, after the idea that they would resemble the GroES binding loop (); however, the picture is still far from being complete. In this article, we establish novel parameters differentiating them from other cellular proteins, such as lower rate of evolution, lower hydrophobicity and aggregation propensity; furthermore, we reanalyze some known factors and examine their relation to our newly determined ones. As a final consistency test, we show that the quantities delineated by this study can be combined into prediction algorithms, allowing at least some degree of quantitative discrimination of GroEL substrates from chaperonin independent folders.
