Motivation: We propose the third order model equation of the Jeffreys type for concentrations of gap gene proteins in order to take into account particle inertia. Gap genes are responsible for formation of body segments in Drosophila melanogaster embryo during its early development. Usually the expression of the genes is described by the model of protein transport based on conventional diffusion equation. However, the model is known to govern the Brownian non inertial motion of particles; hence, it is hardly applicable to the description of protein transport. Results: Analysis of the jeffreys type equation results in the necessary condition for the problem to be well posed. Application of the jeffreys type equation with non-linear terms to description of the dynamics of gap gene network demonstrates better fitting to experimental data than the conventional model. Availability and implementation: Implementation of solver algorithms and the software are freely available from: https://github.com/wswgG/solver-for-the-Jeffreys-type-equations-system Contact:

introduction segmentation genes play crucial role in early development of Drosophila melanogaster, being responsible for formation and positioning of body segments nussle in. The segmentation genes are divided into four classes: maternal genes, gap genes, pair rule genes and segment polarity genes according to their mutant phenotype (for details, see nussle in. At present, gap genes have become popular investigation object, in particular, for system biologists due to the following reasons (). First, the gap gene system is the most upstream regulatory layer among zygotic genes, controlling D. melanogaster embryogenesis and determining both the position and the identities of body segments. Second, availability of big amount of experimental data on gene expression enable to model mathematically and reconstruct the gap gene network in silico (). Usually the gene expression is described by means of conventional model based on the parabolic reaction diffusion equation, written for an unknown protein concentration function u(x, t) as: u t  D u xx  Rx; t; ux; t where x is space coordinate, t is time, D is the diffusion coefficient and Rx; t; ux; t is a reaction term representing protein production and its degradation. Equation (1.1) was proposed in () for description of the dynamics of internal state of nuclei in blastoderm of D. melanogaster embryo and originally contained the diffusion term in discrete form. The model took into account three major processes essential for embryo development: synthesis of proteins, their) to explain the dynamics of the Bicoid maternal protein in D. melanogaster embryo. It is known as the synthesis diffusion degradation model (). The model equation (1.1) with diffusion term in continuous or in discrete form have been widely used in the last two decades for description of diffusive transport of proteins, e.g., synthesized by maternal gene bicoid or gap genes in D. melanogaster embryo blastoderm during early embryogenesis (). However, (1.1) has a crucial drawback: it is based on the phenomenological Fick law for mass flux, which was formulated for Brownian motion of non inertial particles, and, therefore, it is applicable only for description of light particles motion, for example, in an ideal gas. Proteins are heavy complex organic molecules, and for this reason, the classical approach is hardly applicable for modelling of protein transfer. Mathematically, non inertial description of inertial particle transport leads to an infinite velocity of disturbances propagation defined by (1.1). For example, when Rx; t 0 and with initial condition ux; 0  dx, where dx is the Dirac delta function, the fundamental solution to (1.1) has the form and it is positive for any finite values of x, therefore a sudden change of a substance concentration somewhere will immediately transfer to any arbitrary point. The profile of (1.2) at certain time moment is shown in see e.g.), and we call this phenomenon of an infinite velocity as 'the diffusion paradox' for brevity. Immediate disturbances propagation contradicts with experiments, in which proteins move in an embryo very slow, with the velocities about 15 mm/s (see). In 1948, Cattaneo proposed the telegraph equation, containing additional 'relaxation time' and, therefore, free from the diffusion paradox, to model mass (heat) transfer. The fundamental solution to the equation describes propagation of disturbances with finite velocity, but due to the wave-like behaviour it may reach negative values inappropriate from biological viewpoint. Furthermore, the fundamental solution to the telegraph equation with the Dirac delta function as an initial condition contains two discontinuous wave fronts, propagating in opposite directions. In 1989, Joseph and Preziosi proposed the description of heat transfer based on the refined model for flux of rheological fluid in the Earth crust introduced in 1929 by H. Jeffreys. Similarly, one can obtain an equation for determination of mass transfer via elimination of the flux function from the mass balance equation: u t x; t  J x x; t  Rx; t; ux; t and the Jeffreys refined formula for flux jx t  s J t x; t  D  D 1  u x x; t  s D 1 u xt x; t the resulting jeffreys type equation: s u tt  u t  sD 1 u xxt  D  D 1  u xx  Rx; t  s R t x; t; (1.5) contains two additional parameters, as compared with (1.1), namely, the relaxation time s and the second diffusion coefficient D 1 , thus taking into account the particle inertia. The particular solution to (1.5) at certain time moment under the assumptions Rx; t  0; ux; 0  dx; u t x; 0  0 is shown in. It can be seen that a small amount of particles occurs at infinity, and the diffusion paradox for the Dirac delta function as an initial condition is not completely eliminated by the proposed model. However, even in this case the jeffreys type equation describes formation of a smooth wave front from an initial sharp discontinuity, that is always positive, and its propagation with finite velocity. Applications of the jeffreys type equation to different physical problems can be found in (Joseph and Preziosi 1989a,b;). Due to similarity between heat and mass transfer both the telegraph equation and the jeffreys type equation are of interest for description of protein transport in biological systems. Nevertheless, the maternal and gap genes expression in D. melanogaster embryo is often modelled by means of the parabolic reaction diffusion equation, which limited applicability has been widely discussed (see). The conventional model is still popular due to simplicity and similarity at large time scales of the fundamental solutions to all parabolic, the telegraph and the jeffreys type equations, as shown in. In this article, we apply the mathematical model consisting of the coupled jeffreys type equations with non-linear reaction terms to study the dynamics of protein concentrations in gene network of four gap genes. The equations are solved numerically, and the results will be compared with experimental data and with numerical solution to the model based on the conventional diffusion Equation (1.1).
