Motivation: Haplotype models enjoy a wide range of applications in population inference and disease gene discovery. The hidden Markov models traditionally used for haplotypes are hindered by the dubious assumption that dependencies occur only between consecutive pairs of variants. In this article, we apply the multivariate Bernoulli (MVB) distribution to model haplotype data. The MVB distribution relies on interactions among all sets of variants, thus allowing for the detection and exploitation of long range and higher order interactions. We discuss penalized estimation and present an efficient algorithm for fitting sparse versions of the MVB distribution to haplotype data. Finally, we showcase the benefits of the MVB model in predicting DNaseI hypersensitivity (DH) status an epigenetic mark describing chromatin accessibility from population scale haplotype data. Results: We fit the MVB model to real data from 59 individuals on whom both haplotypes and DH status in lymphoblastoid cell lines are publicly available. The model allows prediction of DH status from genetic data (prediction R 2 ¼ 0:12 in cross validations. Comparisons of prediction under the MVB model with prediction under linear regression (best linear unbiased prediction) and logistic regression demonstrate that the MVB model achieves about 10% higher prediction R 2 than the two competing methods in empirical data. Availability and implementation: Software implementing the method described can be down-loaded at

introduction accidents of history and variable recombination rates have divided the human genome into blocks of shared recent ancestry (1000). Ancestry sharing manifests itself in complex haplotype patterns and strong dependencies among variants. [Recall that a haplotype summarizes the sequence of alleles displayed by the sampled markers in a narrow genomic region of a particular chromosome (Therefore, modeling haplotype data is of paramount importance for a wide range of problems in population genetics and disease gene discovery (). Haplotypes have been traditionally analyzed by hidden Markov models (HMMs) (), with emissions corresponding to observed genotypes and transitions to recombination events. Although HMMs for haplotypes undergird many efficient and accurate algorithms for haplotype phasing (), genotype imputation (Browning and Browning,) and identity by descent detection (), they suffer from the drawback of modeling only dependencies between consecutive variants. This assumption leads to the unrealistic conclusion that the previous variant and the next variant are independent given the current variant. Ignoring dependencies among non consecutive markers makes it difficult to detect and exploit long range correlations and higher order interactions among variants. These complex dependencies definitely exist in the human genome and are important factors in genetic studies (). This article applies the multivariate Bernoulli (MVB) distribution to haplotype data. The MVB distribution captures the entire spectrum of dependencies among the entries of random binary vectors of length N (). The observed haplotypes at N nearby single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) can be thought of as realizations of such a process. Since there are 2 N possible haplotypes for N SNPs, the MVB distribution requires an unsustainable exponential number of parameters. Vast amounts of training data or clever algorithms can not compensate for this combinatorial explosion. Here, we investigate a Poisson re parameterization of the MVB distribution and impose an '1-norm penalty to enforce sparsity in parameter estimation. These steps allow us to devise an efficient coordinate ascent algorithm for learning the MVB parameters from haplotype data while restricting the number of parameters to a manageable level. We showcase the utility of the MVB model by predicting an individual's DNaseI hypersensitivity (DH) status from haplotypes observed near known DH sites. DH status is a mark of open chromatin and flags genomic regions where the DNA is accessible to the DNaseI enzyme. These regions, such as transcription start sites, correlate with active DNA regulation. DH status is usually assayed through dnase seq a genome wide high throughput technology that sequences genomic regions sensitive to DNaseI (). Recent research () suggests that genetic variants control this epigenetic mark. Since DH status can be naturally encoded as a binary variable, the MVB model offers a natural way to integrate DH status and local haplotype data. In predicting DH status from haplotypes, the MVB model allows all allelic sets to contribute regardless of the order of the participating SNPs and the physical distances separating them. Our analysis of data from the 1000 Genomes project (1000 Genomes) demonstrates the superiority of the sparse MVB distribution in model fitting. In practice, interactions beyond order three play little role in determining haplotype frequencies in these data. Our new cyclic coordinate descent algorithm for estimating the MVB interaction parameters converges quickly and reliably. The MVB model also turns out to be pertinent to predicting DH status from haplotype data at known DH sites (). On a sample of just 59 subjects, cross validation under the MVB yields a prediction R 2 of 0.12 for dichotomized DH levels. As expected, the accuracy of DH prediction decreases as extraneous predictors are added. Finally, prediction under the MVB achieves about 10% better accuracy than prediction by linear regression (best unbiased linear predictor or bl up and logistic regression. Thus, the MVB model is recommended for prediction of binary epigenetic status from local haplotype data.

discussion this article presents the MVB distribution as a vehicle for modeling haplotype data. Because the number of distinct haplotypes observed in a narrow genomic region tends to be small, the MVB model is typically wildly over parameterized. To achieve parsimony, we propose a lasso penalty within a Poisson sampling framework. The penalized MVB model encourages the detection and exploitation of higher order interactions among the underlying SNPs. In contrast to Markovian models, interactions extend beyond nearest neighbor and pairwise interactions. The interaction parameterization adopted here is more natural than the naive MVB parameterization implicitly seen in bl up and log it. Empirically, the interaction parameterization extracts more haplotype information and predicts with better accuracy. Our application of the MVB model to predict DH status from observed haplotypes supports the utility of the model. We show that the MVB model achieves better accuracy than bl up and log it in predicting simulated DH status. The overall prediction R 2 achieved by MVB, bl up and log it on real DH status suggests substantial heritability of this epigenetic signal.. Prediction R 2 across 100 validation individuals averaged over 200 regions for MVB, bl up log it and HMM as a function of h 2 int when h 2 is fixed at 0
