Motivation: Given a protein sequence and a number of potential domains matching it, what are the domain content and the most likely domain architecture for the sequence? This problem is of fundamental importance in protein annotation, constituting one of the main steps of all predictive annotation strategies. On the other hand, when potential domains are several and in conflict because of overlapping domain boundaries, finding a solution for the problem might become difficult. An accurate prediction of the domain architecture of a multi-domain protein provides important information for function prediction, comparative genomics and molecular evolution. Results: We developed DAMA (Domain Annotation by a Multi-objective Approach), a novel approach that identifies architectures through a multi-objective optimization algorithm combining scores of domain matches, previously observed multi-domain co occurrence and domain overlapping. DAMA has been validated on a known benchmark dataset based on CATH structural domain assignments and on the set of Plasmodium falciparum proteins. When compared with existing tools on both datasets, it outperforms all of them. Availability and implementation: DAMA software is implemented in Cþþ and the source code can be found at

introduction sequence based domain recognition represents one of the most convenient and practical approaches to understand evolution and function of proteins. Domains are sequence fragments that can be independently stable and folded, they have a shape and a function, they occur alone or in groups and are the building blocks of all proteins. To account for the great diversity of domain contexts, several efforts were made in categorizing coding regions into protein domains and domain families. Some resources, like SCOP () and CATH (), organize domains according to their structural classes, while others, such as Pfam () and PROSITE (), are purely sequence based. These databases are the starting point of annotation pipelines that are commonly organized into three steps: (i) a probabilistic model or a set of models is built to represent each functional domain; (ii) the model library representing all domains in the database is used to scan query sequences identifying potential domains and (iii) conflicting predictions are resolved to propose a domain architecture (domain arrangement) for each protein to be annotated. Domain architecture prediction (step iii) can be used to improve the V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

discussion accurate prediction of md as is extremely useful for function and network prediction, including phylogenetic profiling, gene fusion detection, protein protein interaction inheritance and annotation by homology transfert (). Moreover, the amount of accurate information that can be generated by tools like DAMA on new genomes and meta genomes will be useful to answer evolutionary questions on the dynamics of architecture formation across species. The way protein architectures form is an important factor to understand protein evolution. A quantification of the elementary events affecting protein architectures, such as domain(s) insertion/ deletion, duplication and exchange, was done () but, yet, little is known about the relationships between these elementary events () and the molecular mechanisms they originate from. Finer domain mapping on entire sets of proteins for completely sequenced genomes will contribute precise information on the evolution of these architectures. This means, for instance, a more precise estimation of the rate of insertion, deletion, duplication and exchange of domains within proteins in a given species. In general, it would be interesting (i) to establish whether the process of generation of an architecture follows constraints or not, (ii) to pinpoint such constraints, if they exist and (iii) to verify whether they are species specific or not. Along a phylogenetic tree, domains might have been lost, permuted, combined with other domains, they might be integrated within an architecture and lost again. On the other hand, architectures might have been duplicated, recombined, broke up again. In summary, the process of architectures formation appears to follow evolutionary rules that need yet to be unraveled. To test the performance of DAMA and other tools in architecture reconstruction, we looked for a realistic dataset of sequences that could represent well the difficulties encountered in genome and meta genome annotation. We decided to consider the set of P. falciparum protein sequences, knowing that these sequences diverged sufficiently from those that were used to construct probabilistic models employed for domain identification. This set of sequences represent in a fine way the protein world, compared with the benchmark based on CATH domains used in the first evaluation. Other genomes could be used instead. On comparable f drs computed from the two artificial datasets (1-mer and 4-mer) constructed by reshuffling sequences of the P. falciparum genome, MDA showed to be have very well despite the fact that it was not explicitly tested over the P. falciparum genome before, while CODD and dPUC were. DAMA over performs all tools and its excellent performance is due to several reasons. First, in DAMA, domain overlapping is considered by combining the strategies introduced in MDA () and in dPUC (). Second, DAMA exploits knowledge on multi-domain co occurrence by combining individual domain scores with co occurrence information in five different optimization functions. This multi-objective optimization strategy is a refinement of the simplified function proposed in dPUC, while domain co occurrence was not considered at all in MDA. We also considered the likeliness to find co occurring domains by chance on randomly shuffled domain architectures. The artificial dataset that we constructed from P. falciparum sequences, allowed to verify again that DAMA performs the best followed by MDA. The difference between MDA and DAMA with CODD and dPUC is striking, especially when considering the high number of domains certified by the tools. New improvements, leading to a higher accuracy, might be envisage able by looking at specific failures of DAMA, by replacing some of the optimization functions F i with some alternative definition, by redefining tolerance parameters d i as functions of specific architecture characteristics (as the number of domains) or by integrating other architecture characteristics like the high frequency of certain pairs of domains that was ignored in this version of the tool.
