Motivation: Cancer genomes exhibit a large number of different alterations that affect many genes in a diverse manner. An improved understanding of the generative mechanisms behind the mutation rules and their influence on gene community behavior is of great importance for the study of cancer. Results: To expand our capability to analyze combinatorial patterns of cancer alterations, we developed a rigorous methodology for cancer mutation pattern discovery based on a new, constrained form of correlation clustering. Our new algorithm, named C 3 (Cancer Correlation Clustering), leverages mutual exclusivity of mutations, patient coverage, and driver network concentration principles. To test C 3 , we performed a detailed analysis on TCGA breast cancer and glioblastoma data and showed that our algorithm outperforms the state of the art CoMEt method in terms of discovering mutually exclusive gene modules and identifying biologically relevant driver genes. The proposed agnostic clustering method represents a unique tool for efficient and reliable identification of mutation patterns and driver pathways in large scale cancer genomics studies, and it may also be used for other clustering problems on biological graphs. Availability: The source code for the C 3 method can be found at https://github.com/jackhou2/C3

introduction rapid advances in high throughput sequencing technologies have provided unique opportunities for analyzing large numbers of cancer genomes. However, the complexity of genomic alterations in cancer causes significant analytical and computational challenges that have to be overcome in order to fully characterize the functional roles of various mutations. In particular, as cancer genomes tend to contain a large number of diverse mutations (e.g., point mutations or copy number changes) most of which are neutral, one problem of significant importance is to identify a small set of mutations that perturb key biological pathways and have significant impact on tumorigenesis (). Hence, a central question in cancer genomics is how to distinguish " driver " mutations, which contribute to tumorigenesis, from functionally neutral " passenger " mutations. Many computational methods have been developed to facilitate the discovery of driver genes (), most of which rely on mutation counts. Due to the high level of inter tumor heterogeneity, two patients with the same cancer may have vastly different drivers and as a result many cancer mutations occur with low frequency in the patient population. Therefore, approaches relying on simple estimates of recurrence or frequency of mutations usually do not work well in practice. To mitigate this problem, several recent approaches have integrated frequency analysis with pathway based and network based models in order to ensure high accuracy of common driver mutation discovery (). Such methods have an advantage in so far that in addition to mutation analysis, they take into account gene interactions as an added source of prior knowledge. In parallel, methods have been proposed to identify driver pathways, i.e., groups of genes that may interact together in combinatorial patterns to promote tumorigenesis it to show that mutually exclusive modules based on known networks can aid in determining groups of genes that contribute to tumorigenesis. These gene groups, or modules, are jointly highly recurrent, have similar pathway impact in terms of biological processes, and their corresponding mutations tend to be mutually exclusive, meaning that very often only one gene in each gene group is mutated at a given time in any given patient. This mutual exclusivity rule in cancer pathways is supported by the observations that, in general, one mutated gene suffices to perturb the function of its corresponding pathway. Multiple mutations would require significantly higher energy investments on the part of cancer cells, and are hence selected against expanded the ideas behind the concept of MEMo with i mcmc and provided a framework to integrate mutation data, copy number, and expression information into cancer network weights which they used to identify modules; they also performed multiple types of integrative cancer perturbation data analysis. d end rix () was developed to identify driver pathways de novo using mutual exclusivity and coverage (patient coverage) principles, without relying on known network information that has the potential to improve the discovery process of new modules. mdp finder from () expanded on the overall framework of d end rix by incorporating gene expression information to ensure that genes in discovered mutually exclusive pathways were also co-expressed. multi d end rix () and com dp () improved on the limitations of d end rix and mdp finder respectively, by allowing their algorithms to find multiple co occuring modules. More recently, CoMEt () was proposed to address an inherent bias in d end rix and multi d end rix that resulted in high frequency mutations being significantly more likely to be included in mutually exclusive modules. However, while methods such as d end rix multi d end rix and CoMEt all have the ability to identify mutually exclusive modules de novo, they still have significant limitations. The aforementioned methods are typically inefficient when applied to large scale datasets with large values of their relevant parameters. Also, some of these methods are randomized in nature and no guarantees exist that multiple runs of the methods will produce compatible results. Furthermore, almost all methods are able to identify only a small number of modules of limited size, as cluster sizes are critical algorithmic parameters from the perspective of computational tractability. Most importantly, they have to be redesigned or restructured whenever new biological information is included in the discovery process. To overcome these and other shortcomings of existing methods, we introduce a novel method called Cancer Correlation Clustering (C 3 ) to directly tackle the problems of integrating diverse sources of evidence regarding driver pattern behavior and eliminating computational bottlenecks associated with large cluster sizes or cluster numbers. The C 3 method uses a new agnostic optimization framework specifically developed and rigorously analyzed for the driver discovery task, in which patient data is converted into a simple set of weights used in the objective function that do not require the algorithm to change upon incorporation of new data sources. In addition to this flexibility, C 3 has low computational cost, and it allows for adding relevant problem constraints while retaining good theoretical performance guarantees. Furthermore, the algorithm outperforms CoMEt in three out of four evaluation criteria, where the three criteria depend on which weights are " emphasized " in the optimization problem: tuning the weights allows one to select which features to improve or emphasize. What the relevant constraints features are may be chosen by the user, although our analysis included coverage, mutual exclusivity, expression data and network pathway information. We also point out that the weights may be chosen so as to cater to the need of many other computational biology problems that involve optimization on graphs. To test C 3 , we ran extensive simulations for severn cancer types (including breast cancer, kidney cancer, ovarian cancer, glioblastoma, etc). Unfortunately, the patient sample set sizes for all except two cancers  breast cancer and glioblastoma  did not allow for accurate and statistically significant driver identifications for any of the used methods. We hence report results for these two cancers only, although a pan cancer study is easy to conduct once sufficiently many samples become available. The paper is organized as follows. A basic introduction of the principles of correlation clustering is provided in section Approach. Section Methods contains a description of how to transform patient data into clustering weights used for the computations, the algorithmic clustering approach based on the computed weights, and the evaluation criteria used to compare C 3 and CoMEt. Section Results contains the main results of our analysis, a comparison of the performance of C 3 and CoMEt on breast cancer and glioblastoma data. A discussion of our findings and concluding remarks are given in Discussions. A rigorous mathematical performance analysis of C 3 may be found in the Supplementary Materials, along with more extensive software evaluations and explanations of relevant concepts.
