Motivation: ribo switches are short sequences of messenger RNA that can change their structural conformation to regulate the expression of adjacent genes. Computational prediction of putative ribo switches can provide direction to molecular biologists studying ribo switch mediated gene expression. Results: The Denison ribo switch Detector (DRD) is a new computational tool with a Web interface that can quickly identify putative ribo switches in DNA sequences on the scale of bacterial genomes. ribo switch descriptions are easily modifiable and new ones are easily created. The underlying algorithm converts the problem to a heaviest path problem on a multipartite graph, which is then solved using efficient dynamic programming. We show that DRD can achieve $88–99% sensitivity and 499.99% specificity on 13 ribo switch families.

introduction the regulation of gene expression is a critical process that dictates the ability of cells to function properly, to establish cellular identity, and to respond to changes in environmental conditions. Gene regulation is manifested in a variety of ways, ranging from the action of transcriptional activators and repressors through cis acting regulatory binding sites, DNA accessibility via chromatin structure, and localization of DNA within the cellular/ nuclear confines. In addition to these mechanisms, RNA has surfaced as a player in gene regulation (). Specific forms of RNA, such as microRNAs, small interfering RNAs and many others, have been identified and characterized as important components of gene regulation. One specific manner by which RNA molecules serve as regulators of gene expression is in the form of ribo switches. ribo switches are short sequences ($50250 nt in length) located in the non-coding portions of specific messenger RNAs (mRNAs) that regulate the expression of the coding sequences contained within the mRNA (). They function via their ability to fold into distinct secondary structures that influence the ability of the mRNA to be transcribed, processed or translated. ribo switches consist of two specific components: an aptamer region that binds to a specific organic molecule, often some type of metabolite; and an expression platform that produces a change in structural conformation as a result of binding to the aptamer (). The aptamer region is generally a highly conserved sequence, capable of binding to a number of organic molecules with high specificity (). Binding to the aptamer triggers changes in the intramolecular base pairing within the expression platform, leading to changes in secondary and tertiary structure of the RNA. The change in conformation in turn influences the ability of the mRNA to be expressed in a variety of different ways, depending on the specific ribo switch. The activation of some ribo switches results in premature termination of transcription, ending synthesis of the mRNA before the coding region. Others act by directly blocking translation of the mRNA by restricting access to the ribosomal binding site (). In eukaryotes, ribo switch folding may also influence expression via regulation of mRNA splicing. There are currently about 20 known families of ribo switches that bind to a variety of nucleobase s amino acids, metal ions and other organic compounds (). Many of the more extensively studied ribo switches serve as part of a feedback regulatory system for genes that participate in cellular metabolism (). The metabolites that bind to the aptamer serve as indicators of the relative activity of specific metabolic pathways, and upon binding, influence expression of genes that participate in the pathway. For example, certain genes involved in the synthesis of vitamin B 1 (thiamin) are regulated by a ribo switch that binds thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP), the biologically active form of thiamin. TPP binds to a conserved RNA sequence known as a thi box which represses transcription of genes possessing this sequence in the 5 0 untranslated region. The thi box is a particularly intriguing example of a ribo switch as it is found in a wide range of bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes and functions in a variety of contexts. The TPP ribo switch is the only known eukaryotic ribo switch identified to date (). Given the importance of ribo switches in gene regulation in the context of whole genome regulation, methods to identify such sequences are needed. A variety of efforts have been previously *To whom correspondence should be addressed. undertaken to develop bioinformatics tools to predict the presence of ribo switches in RNA sequences (). Most programs that have been developed operate on the principle of sequence alignment to identify conserved sequences in previously identified ribo switches coupled with RNA structural folding algorithms. Programs that are currently available are generally limited to the identification of a specific subset of known ribo switch types, and are only able to search modest sized sequence inputs. To date, few programs have been developed to take advantage of the abundance of completed full genome sequences. To address the need for ribo switch prediction on the whole genome scale, we have developed a new computational tool with a Web interface that can identify putative ribo switches in DNA sequences, called the Denison ribo switch Detector (DRD). DRD can quickly (typically 51 min) process complete bacterial genomes and achieve $90% sensitivity and almost 100% specificity. dr ds description of a ribo switch is simple and easily modifiable, based on the highly conserved motifs found in all known ribo switches. To identify an optimal sequence of short motifs, DRD transforms the search into a path-finding problem on a directed multipartite graph, which is then solved by an efficient dynamic programming algorithm. DRD can be accessed at http://drd.denison.edu. Researchers interested in using the program as a stand-alone tool may also contact the first author.
