Motivation: It is well known that microRNAs (miRNAs) and genes work cooperatively to form the key part of gene regulatory networks. However, the specific functional roles of most miRNAs and their combinatorial effects in cellular processes are still unclear. The availability of multiple types of functional genomic data provides unprecedented opportunities to study the mirna gene regulation. A major challenge is how to integrate the diverse genomic data to identify the regulatory modules of miRNAs and genes. Results: Here we propose an effective data integration framework to identify the mirna gene regulatory co modules. The miRNA and gene expression profiles are jointly analyzed in a multiple non-negative matrix factorization framework, and additional network data are simultaneously integrated in a regularized manner. Meanwhile, we employ the sparsity penalties to the variables to achieve modular solutions. The mathematical formulation can be effectively solved by an iterative multiplicative updating algorithm. We apply the proposed method to integrate a set of heterogeneous data sources including the expression profiles of miRNAs and genes on 385 human ovarian cancer samples, computationally predicted mirna gene interactions, and gene gene interactions. We demonstrate that the miRNAs and genes in 69% of the regulatory co modules are significantly associated. Moreover, the co modules are significantly enriched in known functional sets such as miRNA clusters, GO biological processes and KEGG pathways, respectively. Furthermore, many miRNAs and genes in the co modules are related with various cancers including ovarian cancer. Finally, we show that co modules can stratify patients (samples) into groups with significant clinical characteristics.

introduction micrornas (miRNAs) play crucial regulatory roles in repressing mRNA translation or mediating mRNA degradation by targeting mRNAs in a sequence specific manner (). MiRNAs, transcriptional factors, and mRNAs combine to form complex regulatory systems, cooperatively determining the progression * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of many cellular behaviors and diseases (). Great experimental and computational progress has been made on the problems of identifying which genes encode miRNAs (), predicting the target genes of miRNAs within multiple genomes (), and characterizing miRNA expression patterns based on microarray data (). In addition, more and more labs are simultaneously producing expression profiles of miRNA and mRNA on the same set of samples, providing a global view on the dynamics of mirna mrna regulatory relationships (). However, the vast majority of miRNAs still have unknown functions, and the mechanisms driving cooperative regulation between miRNA and genes are not yet well understood. Several exploratory studies have attempted to decipher how miRNAs, genes and proteins interact on a systems level, e.g. global miRNA regulation in cellular networks () or combinatorial miRNA regulation in cellular pathways (). Other researchers have studied coordination between the transcriptional and miRNA layers based on their combined regulatory networks (). All these studies have provided insights into mirna gene regulation, for example by showing that miRNAs tend to target highly connected genes or proteins in cellular networks (). However, we are still far from understanding the underlying mechanisms of miRNA regulation, and full scale studies of the regulatory networks spanned by miRNAs are only now getting under way. Recognizing the modular organization of biological networks has greatly advanced our understanding of complex cellular systems (). However, little is known about the modules that exist in mirna gene regulation systems, and even less is known about these modules' role in specific biological processes and key regulation assemblies. Identifying functional mirna gene regulatory modules is a challenging task for several reasons. (i) One gene can be regulated by multiple miRNAs (), and one miRNA can regulate a large number of genes (). Given this multiplicity, the target of our search has to be a mirna gene co module a set of miRNAs and their co regulated genes. (ii) The mirna mrna target relationships differ among tissues and conditions. (iii) Although miRNAs physically interact with mRNAs,

conclusion mirnas play crucial roles in gene regulation. However, little is known about the combinatorial regulations and cooperative mechanisms that occur between miRNAs and genes. The availability of miRNA and gene expression profiles from the same patients, mirna gene networks, and gene interaction networks provides an unprecedented opportunity to discover and accurately characterize mirna gene regulatory co modules. In this study, we developed a flexible and effective framework that integrates these three data sources to identify mirna gene regulatory co modules. We tested the method on human data, specifically ovarian cancer samples from the TCGA database. The co modules reveal cooperation between miRNAs and genes in several functions and phenotypes of cellular systems, and provide new insights into the transcript and post transcript regulatory organization of ovarian cancer. As genomic data sources increase in volume and diversity, our framework could provide new avenues for the systematic interpretation of combinatorial regulatory mechanisms. In this article, we applied our snm nmf method to the specific problem of mirna gene co module identification. However, the method is equally useful for many biological problems requiring the integration of several types of inputs. In particular, it is suitable for problems involving multi-dimensional genomic data (profiling multiple variables on the same set of samples) and independent priors identifying known relationships between the variables (e.g. mirna gene and gene gene relationships). For example explored gene drug co modules based on gene expression and drug response data from 60 cancer samples. However, the quality of the modules obtained in that study suffered from the small number of samples and noisy input data. Using our framework, one could incorporate known gene gene interactions, known gene drug relationships and even drug drug similarities to improve the module discovery. Currently, we observe an increasing trend toward generating multi-dimensional genomic data including copy number variation, DNA methylation, histone modification, miRNA expression and gene expression data, all profiled on the same set of samples. At the same time, we are gaining more and more knowledge regarding the associations between different genomic variables. The new method described in this article can serve as a powerful framework for the simultaneous integration of diverse data to discover complex regulatory patterns.
