Motivation: Recent progress in high throughput sequencing technologies has largely contributed to reveal a highly complex landscape of small non-coding RNAs srn as including novel non-canonical srn as derived from long non-coding RNA, repeated elements, transcription start sites and splicing site regions among others. The published frameworks for sRNA data analysis are focused on miRNA detection and prediction, ignoring further information in the dataset. As a consequence, tools for the identification and classification of the srn as not belonging to miRNA family are currently lacking. Results: Here, we present, seq cluster an extension of the currently available seq buster tool to identify and analyze at different levels the srn as not annotated or predicted as miRNAs. This new module deals with sequences mapping onto multiple locations and permits a highly versatile and user friendly interaction with the data in order to easily classify sRNA sequences with a putative functional importance. We were able to detect all known classes of srn as described to date using seq cluster with different sRNA datasets. Availability: tool and video tutorials are available at

introduction small silencing RNAs are the best known class of non-coding RNAs nc rnas of 1830 nt in length, involved in gene silencing by association to the argonaut e family of proteins (). Recent progress in high throughput sequencing technologies has largely contributed to elucidate the remarkable landscape of srn as revealing new species of srn as with unknown functions. These novel srn as are classified according to their position in the genome and putative functions. Nowadays, five major groups of srn as have been detected: (i) ti rnas located at the transcription initiation site of coding genes (); (ii) spl i rnas detected at splicing site of transcripts (); (iii) ta sirnas associated to gene termini; (iv) srn as derived from tRNA () and v srn as from non-coding RNA regions ().In the first process the adapter is trimmed from the raw sequences, and subsequently sequences are mapped onto miRNA and miRNA precursor databases. After that, all sequences not annotated as miRNAs or miRNA precursors are clustered in clustering step. This step is performed according to two filters: (i) sequence similarity and (ii) genome location. In the classification step, us rnas are classified according to the genome context that will cover as many classes and subclasses as the users define. Once us rnas are defined and located on the genome, all of them are classified according to the genome context that will cover as many classes as the users define, being the more common types: non-coding RNAs, transposable elements (TEs), and genes (see us rna classification in Supplementary Material).
