Motivation: The precise prediction of protein secondary structure is of key importance for the prediction of 3D structure and biological function. Although the development of many excellent methods over the last few decades has allowed the achievement of prediction accuracies of up to 80%, progress seems to have reached a bottleneck, and further improvements in accuracy have proven difficult. Results: We propose for the first time a structural position specific scoring matrix spss m and establish an unprecedented database of 9 million sequences and their spss ms. This database, when combined with a purpose designed BLAST tool, provides a novel prediction tool: spss mp red. When the spss mp red was validated on a large dataset (10 814 entries), the Q3 accuracy of the protein secondary structure prediction was 93.4%. Our approach was tested on the two latest EVA sets; accuracies of 82.7 and 82.0% were achieved, far higher than can be achieved using other predictors. For further evaluation, we tested our approach on newly determined sequences (141 entries), and obtained an accuracy of 89.6%. For a set of low homology proteins (40 entries), the spss mp red still achieved a Q3 value of 84.6%. Availability: The spss mp red server is available at

introduction even prior to the determination of the protein structures of hemoglobin and myoglobin by X-ray diffraction analysis (), activity in the field of protein structure study had been increasing steadily; after this point and for some decades, the field attracted intense interest. It is known that the structure of a protein determines its function, and understanding the functions of proteins (such as catalysis, transport, immunity, body defense and so on) is of fundamental importance in the discovery of drugs to treat various diseases. Knowledge of protein structures is therefore highly desirable. In the protein structure hierarchy, there are four distinct levels the primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary. Among these, the protein secondary structure occupies an important position, as it * To whom correspondence should be addressed. is the basis for the spatial structure of a protein. The secondary structure is formed at an early stage of protein folding, so the study of protein secondary structures is indispensable as the first and the most important step in 3D structure studies. The protein secondary structure has also been found to be instrumental in affecting the performance in predicting the tertiary structure (), subcellular localization () and so on. Unfortunately, experimental methods for the detection of protein secondary structure are time consuming and labor intensive. The great disparity between the known protein sequences stored in the UniProt () and detected protein structures deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) () continues to grow larger. To fill this void, the identification of protein secondary structures in terms of the three states of -helix, -sheet and random coil has been carried out using their amino acid sequences; this technique has become increasingly prominent. In spite of the many efforts made by researchers over the last few decades, the prediction of protein secondary structures from their amino acid sequences is still difficult. Looking back on some 40 years of protein secondary structure prediction work, it might be possible to discern two categories that encompass the majority of the research template based methods and machine learning methods. template based methods focused on connections between a query sequence and template pool sequences with known structures. The two most successful template based methods were nn ssp () and PREDATOR (). By comparison, machine learning methods generated a learning model via the use of a series of proteins with known structures for prediction. In this category, Artificial Neural Networks (), Support Vector Machines () and Hidden Markov Models () were the most widely used algorithms. machine learning methods have been deemed to be the most effective and robust, and have been demonstrated in numerous successful examples that often led to near perfect predictions. The development of the now widely adopted machine learning methods underwent three stages. During the initial stage, simple methods were used for the prediction of structures, and these methods suffered from a lack of data. Predictions were based on sequence compositions and physical and chemical properties; probably, the most famous early methods from that exploratory stage were those proposed by Chou and Fasman (1974a, b), Garnier, osg uthor be and Robson g or () and page 33 3239
