Motivation: Recent advances in technology have dramatically increased the availability of protein protein interaction (PPI) data and stimulated the development of many methods for improving the systems level understanding the cell. However, those efforts have been significantly hindered by the high level of noise, sparseness and highly skewed degree distribution of PPI networks. Here, we present a novel algorithm to reduce the noise present in PPI networks. The key idea of our algorithm is that two proteins sharing some higher order topo-logical similarities, measured by a novel random walk based procedure , are likely interacting with each other and may belong to the same protein complex. Results: Applying our algorithm to a yeast PPI network, we found that the edges in the reconstructed network have higher biological relevance than in the original network, assessed by multiple types of information , including gene ontology, gene expression, essentiality, conservation between species and known protein complexes. Comparison with existing methods shows that the network reconstructed by our method has the highest quality. Using two independent graph clustering algorithms, we found that the reconstructed network has resulted in significantly improved prediction accuracy of protein complexes. Furthermore, our method is applicable to PPI networks obtained with different experimental systems, such as affinity purification, yeast two hybrid (Y2H) and protein fragment complemen-tation assay pc a and evidence shows that the predicted edges are likely bona fide physical interactions. Finally, an application to a human PPI network increased the coverage of the network by at least 100%.

introduction recent advances in high throughput techniques, such as yeast two hybrid (Y2H) and tandem affinity purification, have enabled the production of a large amount of protein protein interaction (PPI) data (). These PPI data can be modelled by networks, where nodes in networks represent proteins and edges between the nodes represent physical interactions between proteins. These networks, together with other high throughput functional genomics data, are offering unprecedented opportunities for both biological and computational scientists to understand the cell at a systems level (). For example, global analysis of PPI networks has revealed important connections between topology and function (). PPI networks have also been used for predicting gene functions, functional pathways or protein complexes, with both supervised and unsupervised methods (). Furthermore, much effort has been devoted recently towards incorporating PPI networks to obtain a better mechanistic understanding of complex diseases and to improve the diagnosis and treatment of diseases (). However, the growing size and complexity of PPI networks poses multiple challenges to biologists. First, PPI networks often have a high false positive rate and an even higher false negative rate (). Second, PPI networks are typically sparse, partially because of the high false negative rate, which places a hurdle for algorithms that rely on neighbour information, for example, in gene function prediction (). Third, PPI networks are known to have skewed degree distribution, meaning that they have more than expected quantity of hub genes. Such hub nodes can often reduce the performance of existing graph theoretic algorithms (e.g. for predicting protein complexes) that were often designed for networks with relatively uniform degree distributions. In this article, we present a novel method to improve the quality of a given PPI network by computationally predicting some new interactions and removing spurious edges. It is worth noting that our idea is purely based on the topology of the network, with no additional biological information involved. This ensures that our algorithm can be easily combined with other algorithms that have already been developed for predicting protein complexes or performing ppi based studies. There are also several studies that attempt to combine additional biological information, such as gene ontology and gene expression, with PPI network for protein complex prediction (). It should be straightforward to use our method in these approaches, by replacing the PPI network with our reconstructed PPI network. To assess the performance of our algorithm, we tested it on three yeast PPI networks obtained with different experimental systems, and we examined the biological relevance of the results *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com using multiple information sources, including gene ontology annotations, gene expression data, protein complexes, list of essential genes, conservation between species and a large collection of known physical interactions in the bio grid database. Results show that the predicted pp is have much higher functional relevance than the removed ones, and they are likely bona fide physical interactions. Comparison with several existing methods shows that the network reconstructed by our method has the highest overall quality. Furthermore, applying two independent graph clustering algorithms, we found that the reconstructed network has resulted in significantly improved prediction accuracy of protein complexes. Finally, an application to a human PPI network shows encouraging results.
