Motivation: As improved DNA sequencing techniques have increased enormously the speed of producing new eukaryotic genome assemblies, the further development of automated gene prediction methods continues to be essential. While the classification of proteins into families is a task heavily relying on correct gene predictions, it can at the same time provide a source of additional information for the prediction, complementary to those presently used. Results: We extended the gene prediction software AUGUSTUS by a method that employs block profiles generated from multiple sequence alignments as a protein signature to improve the accuracy of the prediction. Equipped with profiles modelling human dynein heavy chain (DHC) proteins and other families, AUGUSTUS was run on the genomic sequences known to contain members of these families. Compared with AUGUSTUS ab initio version, the rate of genes predicted with high accuracy showed a dramatic increase. Availability: The AUGUSTUS project web page is located at http://augustus.gobics.de, with the executable program as well as the source code available for download.

introduction with ever faster and cheaper sequencing techniques, the amount of available nucleotide sequence data is growing rapidly. In comparison, the process of accurately annotating the generated data is still lagging far behind. Fully automated annotation is essential here as the sheer amount of data make manual inspection, even as a secondary step, impossible on the whole. Thus, improving gene prediction tools that perform automated annotation of protein coding regions as accurate as possible is becoming increasingly important for the generation, for example, of the corresponding protein sequence data. * To whom correspondence should be addressed in eukaryotes, the computational identification of the gene structure (in simplified terms, the locations of the protein coding exons in a nucleotide sequence) is a complex and error prone task. The most direct approach is pursued by ab initio methods that do not need any input but the genomic target sequence itself. Commonly, sequences are considered the result of a random process, and the outcome is the gene structure that is most likely to randomly produce the target sequence. Parameters for the underlying probabilistic model, often a Generalized Hidden Markov Model g hmm are derived from a training set of gene structures verified as accurate. As in any probabilistic approach, the prediction accuracy is limited already by constraints inherent to the model, even if it is a perfect description of the data. In order to overcome these theoretical bounds, it is necessary to employ extrinsic sources of information that give hints whether an interval of the sequence is, for example, a coding exon. These gene finding methods are usually based on alignments with informant sequences: comparative methods make use of similarities with the DNA of closely related species, transcript based methods map sequences to the target genome that are known to be expressed (such as ESTs or rnase q while homology based methods try to map transcripts of related genes. Current approaches combine these methods, some including an ab initio gene prediction. Gene structures found by these methods are the starting point for the pipelines generating reference annotations for genomes (). rnase q (transcriptome sequencing with next generation sequencing methods,) promises major advances for gene finding; however, currently the accuracy of rnase q based gene prediction suffers from mapping ambiguities and partially contained introns, especially in complex genomes. homology based gene predictors, such as Genewise () and Exonerate (), can determine gene structures by mapping a single protein sequence to the target genome, others like Projector () combine homology based and comparative approaches presented a combined homology based and comparative gene finding method that extends the prediction beyond the homologous part to a complete gene structure but requires an established gene structure for the informant sequence. Protein queries highly identical to the target sequence can be mapped with BLAT (); the software Scipio () can refine a mapping provided page 758 757763

conclusion the gene prediction program AUGUSTUS was extended by a method combining protein family based gene finding with an ab initio prediction. Equipped with protein signatures, prediction accuracy could be improved considerably, especially on full gene level on very long genes. The extrinsic protein data significantly improves the gene prediction compared with existing programs when sequence data only from distant species was available. The presented approach is complementary to transcript based methods, and easily combined with them, offering the potential of a further improvement of prediction accuracy. Block profiles are a protein signature suitable for aiding gene prediction. The approach for extending the model is generic and can be used to describe other types of constraints, for example on coding sequence length. Future plans include the integration of intron profiles, containing information about conserved intron positions.
