Motivation: The accumulation of high throughput data in public repositories creates a pressing need for integrative analysis of multiple datasets from independent experiments. However, study heterogeneity, study bias, outliers and the lack of power of available methods present real challenge in integrating genomic data. One practical drawback of many p value based meta analysis methods, including Fishers, stouffer s min p and maxP, is that they are sensitive to outliers. Another drawback is that, because they perform just one statistical test for each individual experiment , they may not fully exploit the potentially large number of samples within each study. Results: We propose a novel bi-level meta analysis approach that employs the additive method and the Central Limit Theorem within each individual experiment and also across multiple experiments. We prove that the bi-level framework is robust against bias, less sensitive to outliers than other methods, and more sensitive to small changes in signal. For comparative analysis, we demonstrate that the intra experiment analysis has more power than the equivalent statistical test performed on a single large experiment. For pathway analysis, we compare the proposed framework versus classical meta analysis approaches (Fishers, stouffer s and the additive method) as well as against a dedicated pathway meta analysis package meta path using 1252 samples from 21 data-sets related to three human diseases, acute myeloid leukemia (9 datasets), type II diabetes (5 data-sets) and Alzheimers disease (7 datasets). Our framework outperforms its competitors to correctly identify pathways relevant to the phenotypes. The framework is sufficiently general to be applied to any type of statistical meta analysis
introduction with rapid advances in high throughput technologies, the generation of various kinds of high throughput genomic data is prevalent in most biomedical research. Advanced techniques in sequencing (e.g. rnase q mirna seq dna seq and microarray assays (e.g. gene expression, methylation) have transformed biological research by enabling comprehensive monitoring of biological systems. Vast amounts of data of all types have accumulated in many public repositories, such as Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (), Array Express () and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/). Gene expression data, as measured by microarray and high throughput sequencing, are particularly abundant in public repositories, such that many diseases are represented by half a dozen studies or more it would be tremendously beneficial if all datasets associated with a given condition could be analyzed together because of the increase in power expected to be associated with the much larger number of measurements in the combined dataset. However, batch effects, patient heterogeneity and disease complexity all complicate the integration of data from different sources. Indeed, for the same disease, different studies produce different sets of differentially expressed (DE) genes (), and we will show that this problem is not resolved at the systems level, as pathway analysis results are often inconsistent as well. meta analysis techniques, which are statistical methods for the quantitative analysis of independent but related studies (), have already proven to be very useful for combining gene expression studies (), and will be critical to decipher the biological knowledge contained in vast amounts of often conflicting studies, independent of the data type. In this manuscript, we describe a novel meta analysis and apply it to gene expression data in the context of pathway analysis. meta analysis of gene expression data has primarily been used for DE gene detection (). Early meta analyses simply performed the intersection or union of DE gene lists obtained from individual studies (), resulting in a single list which is either too conservative or too inclusive, respectively were among the earliest to apply sophisticated meta analysis methods for DE gene detection. In their work, p values from multiple prostate cancer datasets were combined using Fisher's method (). Since then, other p value based meta analysis methods have been applied, such as stouffer s method (), min p (), maxP (), weighted Fisher's method (), and latent variable approaches (). A recent literature review () revealed that p value based meta analysis for gene detection accounts for approximately twice as many studies as any other type of meta analysis and is favored for its simplicity and extensibility. Therefore, we will focus on this type of p value based meta analysis investigate its limitations, and address them with our new approach. Pathway analysis belongs to a family of statistical hypothesis testing () methods that have been developed to leverage molecular pathway knowledge bases such as the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) () or Reactome (). These knowledge bases contain graphs that describe how genes interact together to accomplish specific biological processes. OverRepresentation Analysis or a (), Gene Set Enrichment Analysis g sea (), Gene Set Analysis (GSA) () and Impact Analysis draghi cidr a are examples of approaches designed to identify the pathways that are relevant in a given condition. All of them take gene expression changes and a list of pathways as input, and produce a ranked list of pathways along with their p values. Recently, meta analysis has also been used to combine multiple experiments at the pathway level (). The work in () uses classical methods, such as Fisher's method and stouffer s method, to combine p values of pathways from independent studies. The work in (), named meta path is a dedicated approach that performs meta analysis at both the gene and pathway level separately, and then combines the results to give the final p value and ranking of pathways. For gene level analysis, meta path calculates a t statistic for each gene in each study, then combines them using the maxP method (). A pathway enrichment score is calculated using these genes, for each pathway, using a kolmogorov smirnov test, and assessed for significance with a sample wise permutation test. At the pathway level, meta path calculates pathway enrichment for each individual study, then combines the p values again using the maxP method (). Finally, p values from the gene and pathway level are integrated using min p () to give the final p value and ranking of pathways. One practical drawback of many p value based meta analysis methods, including Fisher's, stouffer s min p and maxP, is that they are sensitive to outliers. For example, Fisher's method employs the log product of individual p values and thus, a single p value of zero in one individual case will result in a combined p value of zero regardless of the other p values. This can be a serious problem for pathway analysis methods that employ a finite number of iterations to construct an empirical distribution of a statistic which is then used to calculate an empirical p value. If the observed value of the statistic is more extreme than any of the values obtained by the iterations, such methods may report a p value of zero, which will, in turn, dramatically influence the meta p value. Another drawback of most p value based meta analysis approaches is that, because they perform just one statistical test for each individual experiment, they may not fully exploit the potentially large number of samples within each study. A statistical test which is not powerful enough to reject the null hypothesis in one individual experiment can only derive power by amassing a large number of experiments. Low power in the case of a single experiment can be due in part to a mathematical design which favors a moderate number of samples, but may fail to fully exploit large sample sizes. For example, the basic t test is designed to do well even with a small number of samples in each group. While the power of the t test increases as the number of samples increases, a set of 20 experiments with 5 samples each has more power than a single experiment comprised of the same 100 samples see in Supplementary Materials). Here we propose a p value based meta analysis framework which addresses the mentioned shortcomings and thus provides more reliable results. As we will demonstrate, the proposed method is not sensitive to outliers. To gain power from the large number of samples within each experiment, the proposed meta analysis integrates multiple independent studies on two levels: an intra experiment analysis, and an inter experiment analysis. First, for each individual experiment, the intra experiment analysis splits the dataset into smaller datasets, performs a statistical test on each of the newly created small datasets, then combines the p values. Next, the inter experiment analysis combines those processed p values from each of the individual experiments. We demonstrate the power of our bi-level meta analysis in the context of pathway analysis. We illustrate our approach using one of the most popular statistical methods for pathway analysis, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis g sea applying it to KEGG pathways, and 21 public gene expression datasets, conducted in independent laboratories, from three conditions: acute myeloid leukemia (9 datasets), type II diabetes (5 datasets) and Alzheimer's disease (7 datasets). We compare the result of the proposed framework with three classical meta analysis methods (Fisher's, stouffer s and the additive method), plus the standalone meta analysis method meta path. For all three conditions, our framework outperforms other approaches and correctly identifies the pathways designed to describe the biological processes responsible for these diseases.

conclusion in this article, we present a novel meta analysis approach that combines multiple studies to gain more statistical power. The new framework exploits not only the vast number of studies performed in independent laboratories, but also makes better use of the. Results of combining g sea p values using 4 meta
