Motivation: In the functional genomic era, a large number of gene sets have been identified via high throughput genomic and proteomic technologies. These gene sets of interest are often related to the same or similar disorders or phenotypes, and are commonly presented as differentially expressed gene lists, co-expressed gene modules, protein complexes or signaling pathways. However, biologists are still faced by the challenge of comparing gene sets and interpreting the functional relationships between gene sets into an understanding of the underlying biological mechanisms. Results: We introduce a novel network based method, designated corrected cumulative rank score (CCRS), which analyzes the functional communication and physical interaction between genes, and presents an easy to use web based toolkit called gs netcom to quantify the functional relationship between two gene sets. To evaluate the performance of our method in assessing the functional similarity between two gene sets, we analyzed the functional coherence of complexes in functional catalog and identified protein complexes in the same functional catalog. The results suggested that CCRS can offer a significant advance in addressing the functional relationship between different gene sets compared with several other available tools or algorithms with similar functionality. We also conducted the case study based on our method, and succeeded in prioritizing candidate leukemia associated protein complexes and expanding the prioritization and analysis of cancer related complexes to other cancer types. In addition, gs netcom provides a new insight into the communication between gene modules, such as exploring gene sets from the perspective of well annotated protein complexes.

introduction numerous systematic biological studies have revealed that cellular function in a biological system normally involves the participation and interaction of multiple genes (). In the functional genomic era, a large number of gene sets have been identified through the application of high throughput genomic, proteomic technologies, such as microarray, mass spectrometry and chip on chip assays and next generation sequencing technologies (). Gene sets of interest may be related to disorders or disease phenotypes and the biological interpretation of gene set data may therefore be of great importance. During the past several years, an increasing number of computational tools has been developed and played an important role in helping biologists explore these gene sets of interest. Of the tools contributing to the functional analysis of gene sets, most are enrichment tools and as reviewed by. A significant portion of these bioinformatic enrichment tools is based on Gene Ontology (GO) (), and only allow users to submit a single gene set and identify over-represented GO terms in 'interesting' gene set compared with the background through statistical analysis. Examples of such tools include go stat (), go term finder () and go east (). Recently, some new tools and improved versions of previous tools, which integrate diverse and heterogeneous data content (e.g. KEGG pathways, gene expression data) have been released for the comprehensive functional analysis of single gene set, examples of which include Gazer (), gene trail (), DAVID () and g sea (). Within a biological system, no gene set functions in an isolated manner, even in fairly complete pathways. One gene set is interconnected with other gene sets through complex mechanisms, and these relationships may affect related disorders and phenotypes. Therefore, a common challenge faced by experimental biologists is to gain a better understanding of the functional relationships between different gene sets. A few computational tools have been developed to compare gene sets, most of which are based on GO, such as fat i go () and prof com (). Some go based semantic similarity methods can also be used to compare two gene sets by averaging the pairwise distances between the elements (). Currently, most of the GO terms have been assigned a page 1522 15211528

discussion via the application of various technologies, biologists often identify gene sets of interest which may be involved with related disorders or phenotypes. However, comparing two gene sets and determining the functional relationships between them remains a challenging and daunting task. Several computational tools have been developed to compare gene sets. However, these tools generally found GO terms or keywords that are significantly over-represented in one set of genes versus a second reference set to compare two gene sets. To remedy these problems, we developed a novel network based method, designated CCRS, which takes into account the functional communication and physical interaction of genes, and presented an easy to use web based toolkit called gs netcom (http://bioinfo.hrbmu.edu.cn/GsNetCom/). The gs netcom software quantifies the functional relationships between gene sets and performs statistical tests on the analysis results. Based on the protein complex database CORUM, we evaluated the performance of the CCRS method. In comparison to other available tools or algorithms, CCRS provides a significant advance in exploring the functional relationship between gene sets in the context of PPI network and performs statistical tests on the analysis results. Also, in the case study of cancer associated protein complexes, CCRS successfully prioritized cancer associated complexes. In addition, gs netcom provides a new insight into the communication from gene modules, such as exploring gene sets from the perspective of well annotated protein complexes. In its current version, the CCRS method computes the shortest path of any two genes between two gene sets as the 'function distance'. However, 'function distance' could more effectively be modeled using edge capacitance or optimization of edge constraints. In the near further we plan to improve gs netcom by incorporating edge capacitance or optimization of edge constraints and some other biological information to comprehensively address the functional relationships between two gene sets. Furthermore, the annotation of gene sets could be improved by the supplementation of protein complex data.
