Motivation: proteo genomics has been well accepted as a tool to discover novel genes. In most conventional proteo genomic studies, a global false discovery rate is used to filter out false posi-tives for identifying credible novel peptides. However, it has been found that the actual level of false positives in novel peptides is often out of control and behaves differently for different genomes. Results: To quantitatively model this problem, we theoretically analyze the subgroup false discovery rates of annotated and novel peptides. Our analysis shows that the annotation completeness ratio of a genome is the dominant factor influencing the subgroup FDR of novel peptides. Experimental results on two real datasets of Escherichia coli and Mycobacterium tuberculosis support our conjecture.

introduction tandem mass spectrometry msms based proteo genomics () has been applied to refinement of annotated genes, discovery of novel genes (), personal genomics and disease related studies (). Unlike traditional genomic annotation techniques, such as in silico (ab initio or comparative) or cdna seq based methods, proteo genomics allows validating protein coding genes directly at the protein level, which is more favorable (). To identify novel genes, researchers usually search the experimental MS/MS spectra against a large protein database that is constructed from the genomic or transcript omic sequences and filter the search results to control the false discovery rate (FDR). It has been observed previously that, under a fixed FDR, the inflated database generated by, e.g. six open reading frame (6-ORF) translation of a whole genome significantly decreases the sensitivity of peptide identification (). However, few studies probe into the effect of the large database on the estimated FDR, especially for the novel peptides. Most proteo genomic studies estimate a global FDR for all peptide identifications (). That is, the identifications of annotated peptides and novel peptides are subject to FDR estimation in combination. Some researchers noted the high actual FDR of novel peptides and therefore employed more stringent filtering strategies, e.g. post error probability () or separate f drs for annotated and novel peptides (highlighted that for well annotated genomes, such as the Escherichia coli genome, the post error probability distribution of
