Motivation: N 6 methyl adenosine (m 6 A) is the most prevalent mRNA methylation but precise prediction of its mRNA location is important for understanding its function. A recent sequencing technology , known as Methylated RNA Immunoprecipitation Sequencing technology merip seq has been developed for transcriptome wide profiling of m 6 A. We previously developed a peak calling algorithm called exo me peak. However, exo me peak oversimplifies data characteristics and ignores the reads variances among replicates or reads dependency across a site region. To further improve the performance, new model is needed to address these important issues of merip seq data. Results: We propose a novel, graphical model based peak calling method, met peak for transcriptome wide detection of m 6 A sites from merip seq data. met peak explicitly models read count of an m 6 A site and introduces a hierarchical layer of Beta variables to capture the variances and a Hidden Markov model to characterize the reads dependency across a site. In addition, we developed a constrained Newtons method and designed a log barrier function to compute analytically intractable, positively constrained Beta parameters. We applied our algorithm to simulated and real biological datasets and demonstrated significant improvement in detection performance and robustness over exo me peak. Prediction results on publicly available merip seq datasets are also validated and shown to be able to recapitulate the known patterns of m 6 A, further validating the improved performance of met peak. Availability and implementation: The package met peak is implemented in R and C þþ, and additional details are available at https://github.com/compgenomics/MeTPeak Contact:

introduction compared with DNA methylation, which is a well established and extensively studied epigenetic phenomenon, m 6 A methylation in mRNA is still largely an uncharted territory. Recent surge of interest comes mainly as a result of two groundbreaking studies () that show high abun dancy of m 6 A in 25% of transcripts in human and mouse cells. A number of subsequent studies have provided significant insights into the mechanism as well as the functions of mRNA m 6 A methylation. It is known now that the m 6 A methyltransferase complex, or the m 6 A writer, consists of Wilms' tumor 1 associating protein (WTAP), methyltransferase like 3 (METTL3) and methyltransferase like 14 (METTL14) (). Different from DNA methylation, m 6 A methylation is reversible and V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

conclusion we presented met peak a novel graphical model based peak calling method for detecting m 6 A sites from merip seq data. We formulated the m 6 A peak calling problem as an inference of the mixture of binomial distributions by introducing a hierarchical layer of Beta distribution to model the variances among m 6 A sites in replicates. We also used HMM model to capture the reads dependency among the bins. To find the solution to the inference problem, we proposed a constrained Newton's method for estimating the Beta parameters and developed a fast inference moth ed for estimating the m 6 A peaks. The method is suitable for processing merip seq data with replicates and high variance, which are common cases in merip seq data. We have compared met peak with exo me peak both on simulated and real merip seq datasets and the results showed that met peak is highly robust against the data variances and outliers and making far less FPs than exo me peak. Finally, prediction of met peak on real merip seq datasets have suggested that it precisely recapitulates the motif and distribution of m 6 A sites, as well as correctly predicting the methylation differences among these methyltransferases, demonstrating the validity of met peak
