Motivation: Copy number variants cn vs have been implicated in a variety of neurodevelopmen-tal disorders, including autism spectrum disorders, intellectual disability and schizophrenia. Recent advances in high throughput genomic technologies have enabled rapid discovery of many genetic variants including cn vs. As a result, there is increasing interest in studying the role of cn vs in the etiology of many complex diseases. Despite the availability of an unprecedented wealth of CNV data, methods for testing association between cn vs and disease related traits are still underdeveloped due to the low prevalence and complicated multi-scale features of cn vs. Results: We propose a novel CNV kernel association test ck at in this paper. To address the low prevalence, cn vs are first grouped into CNV regions c nvr. Then, taking into account the multi-scale features of cn vs we first design a single cnv kernel which summarizes the similarity between two cn vs and next aggregate the single cnv kernel to a c nvr kernel which summarizes the similarity between two cn vrs. Finally, association between c nvr and disease related traits is assessed by comparing the kernel based similarity with the similarity in the trait using a score test for variance components in a random effect model. We illustrate the proposed ck at using simulations and show that ck at is more powerful than existing methods, while always being able to control the type I error. We also apply ck at to a real dataset examining the association between CNV and autism spectrum disorders, which demonstrates the potential usefulness of the proposed method. Availability and Implementation: A R package to implement the proposed ck at method is available at

introduction cn vs are deletions and duplications of DNA segments in the genome, ranging in size from one kilobase (Kb) to several mega bases (Mb), which represent the most common form of structural genetic variation in human genome (). The advent of high throughput technologies such as comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) microarrays has enabled rapid discovery of genetic variants including cn vs (). As more and more cn vs have been detected throughout the human genome, there is a growing appreciation for studying their potential role in the etiology of many conditions and diseases, including autism spectrum disorders (ASD), intellectual disability, schizophrenia and many other neurodevelopment disorders (). Understanding the relationship between cn vs and these diseases can contribute important new insights into the underlying genetics etiology and may further lead to effective means in prevention and treatments. A useful means to study the complex relationship between cn vs and human health conditions is through genetic association studies (). A powerful mode of genetic association analysis is collapsing methods, which study the association between a group of genetic variants and traits. Such methods have been widely used in SNPs association analysis () and rare variants association analysis (). However, these collapsing methods can not be directly applied to CNV association analysis due to its unique features. First, SNPs are probe based in that different subjects have the same loci genotyped. On the other hand, cn vs are sample based in that different cn vs can be detected in different subjects. It is very common that a particular rare CNV is detected in few subjects while is absent in the rest. In other words, a typical SNP data matrix is a regular matrix while a CNV data matrix is irregular in that different rows (samples) have different length of columns cn vs. A SNPs collapsing method usually combines multiple columns together for analysis. However, it is not clear how cn vs should be grouped together in the irregular data matrix. Second, It is more complicated to model the effect of cn vs than that of SNPs. SNPs usually takes values 0, 1, 2 (in an additive model) representing the copy of minor alleles. On the other hand, cn vs has multi-scale features including a start position, an end position and a type (deletion or duplication). Phenotypic heterogeneity (a deletion CNV and a duplication CNV can have different effects) are often observed. Also, it has been hypothesized that both CNV size (length) and CNV type (deletion or duplication) may affect the disease risk. Due to all these reasons, it is not straightforward to extend most current SNP or rare variant collapsing methods () to CNV association analysis. One way to fix those aforementioned difficulties is to break the multi-dimensional CNV information into pieces, and to apply some collapsing methods on a certain piece. For example, the recent CNV collapsing random effects test cc ret () treats the length of CNV as fix effect, and the CNV dosage (copy number) as random effect of interest. To test for association with traits, kernel based collapsing methods () can be easily applied to the CNV dosage (). Despite its feasibility, the interpretation of this method may be slightly different from classical CNV association analysis. It is no longer the CNV effect on the disease risk, but the CNV dosage effect on the disease risk, conditioned on the CNV length. Alternatively, instead of breaking the multi-scale CNV information into pieces, the presence/ absence analysis is often used in case control studies. Typically, a contingency table is created based on counting whether a CNV is detected in a subject, and then a statistical test such as Fisher's exact test (), is applied to evaluate the association. This kind of analysis only utilizes the presence absence information of a CNV and ignores other information, such as CNV type and size. Thus, neither cc ret nor Fisher's exact test exploits the full information in a cnv in this study, to utilize both type and size information in a CNV, we propose the CNV kernel association test ck at. We first design a single cnv kernel which accounts for the multi-scale features of a CNV. Intuitively speaking, the kernel is used as a similarity measure between two cn vs. To overcome low prevalence of cn vs we pool cn vs together to form CNV regions cn vrs and carefully aggregate the single cnv kernel to a c nvr kernel which describes the similarity between two cn vrs. Compared with a single CNV, more samples are likely to have cn vs detected in a region which can makes the c nvr kernel more informative. Finally, association between c nvr and the trait is tested by comparing the similarity in cn vrs (captured by the c nvr kernel) to that in the trait. In particular, the trait we considered in this paper is disease status. If the c nvr similarity between two patients (or two healthy controls) is consistently higher than the c nvr similarity between one patient and one healthy control, then it may suggest existence of association between the c nvr and the disease risk. Statistically speaking, the similarity comparison is evaluated in a logistic random effect model and the p value for the association test is also analytically calculated via a variance component score test in the logistic regression framework. Using extensive simulation studies, we demonstrate that the proposed ck at always has correct type I error rate and high power in a wide range of settings. Finally, the ck at is applied to a real ASD data example which provides new insights and formal testing results for previous observations.
