Motivation: Genes with indispensable functions are identified as essential; however, the traditional gene level studies of essentiality have several limitations. In this study, we characterized gene es-sentiality from a new perspective of protein domains, the independent structural or functional units of a polypeptide chain. Results: To identify such essential domains, we have developed an expectation maximization (EM) algorithm based Essential Domain Prediction (EDP) Model. With simulated datasets, the model provided convergent results given different initial values and offered accurate predictions even with noise. We then applied the EDP model to six microbial species and predicted 1879 domains to be essential in at least one species, ranging 10–23% in each species. The predicted essential domains were more conserved than either non-essential domains or essential genes. Comparing essential domains in prokaryotes and eukaryotes revealed an evolutionary distance consistent with that inferred from ribosomal RNA. When utilizing these essential domains to reproduce the annotation of essential genes, we received accurate results that suggest protein domains are more basic units for the essen-tiality of genes. Furthermore, we presented several examples to illustrate how the combination of essential and non-essential domains can lead to genes with divergent essentiality. In summary, we have described the first systematic analysis on gene essentiality on the level of domains.

introduction genes are widely regarded as the basic units of a cell, a complex system made up of a large number of components and reactions. Therefore, a fundamental question in synthetic biology is, what is the minimal gene set that is necessary and sufficient to sustain life ()? The individual genes that constitute a minimal gene set are called essential genes. Experimentally, essential genes are defined as those that when disrupted, confer a lethal phenotype to organisms under defined conditions. Therefore, the essentiality of a gene is the indispensability of this gene's product to the survival of), transposon mutagenesis (), or antisense RNA inhibitions (). These experiments have provided a tremendous amount of resources to further our understanding on gene essentiality, one important step closer to unraveling the complex relationship between genotype and phenotype (). Recent comparative research on the available essential gene datasets has shown surprising results and has challenged many early assumptions in genomics. First, it was discovered that microorganisms share a limited set of essential genes. For example, a comparison of the essential gene sets of four bacteria revealed that only 1272% of essential genes are shared between any pair, indicating that a large number of unique essential genes exist (Supplementary). This is somewhat expected as independent studies have firmly established that bacterial species share a very limited number of orthologs (e.g. 1953% in Supplementary), regardless of which ortholog detection method is used (). This may reflect the physiology of diverse microorganisms. Increasing the number of organisms in the list will further decrease the number of orthologs and thus common essential genes. For example, merely 265 orthologs and 34 essential genes are common to all four bacteria (Supplementary). It is highly unlikely that these 34 essential genes would be capable of executing all functions of a cell. Second, and more surprisingly, a recent study showed that, when tested experimentally in model bacteria, less than a quarter of the highly conserved genes were essential (). This suggests that evolutionary conservation of a gene does not necessarily imply that it is essential for microbial survival. Consider a hypothetical bacterium that utilizes both solar and chemical energy. Although the genes for converting solar and chemical energy have been highly conserved and optimized (thus allowing them to be conserved through evolutionary time), neither is essential for survival if both solar and chemical energy are present. Finally, orthologs are often observed to be essential in one organism but not another. For example, the d ape gene is essential in Escherichia coli but non-essential in Pseudomonas aeruginosa (). It is also possible for orthologs to have different functions in different organisms (), even though it is a fundamental assumption of genomics that most orthologs perform a similar function. This suggests that differences in genetic regulation, genetic redundancy and divergence in cellular pathways or processes between organisms may all affect gene essentiality; their combined effects result in the discrepancy in essentiality between orthologs. Given the above evidence, a theoretical approach that attempts to identify a universal minimal gene set by searching for conserved orthologs across multiple organisms is unlikely to succeed. Since relying on orthologs, or conservation on the gene level, does not adequately explain essentiality, are there other characteristics among different organisms that are more consistent with essentiality? Observing that genes from different evolutionary origins perform the same function (i.e. non orthologous gene displacements), a group of researchers switched their focus to defining the set of essential functions (). However, knowing a set of essential functions does not necessarily mean that the genes responsible for these functions can be easily identified, especially in understudied organisms in this study, we have reexamined gene essentiality from a novel essential protein domain point of view. Our results suggest that this new perspective may offer unique insights into the mechanistic basis of gene essentiality and help to resolve the controversy regarding this phenomenon. Protein domains with known function, such as those of the ATPase enzyme class (), are amino acid sequence patterns with an associated activity. They often correspond to structural domains, the independent globular components of the polypeptide chain found in three dimensional protein structures, although the correspondence is not exact (). Independent of neighboring sequences, a protein domain folds into a distinct structure and mediates the protein's biological functionality () (Supplementary). Protein domains can be detected from gene protein sequences by well established algorithms, such as HMMER (). Currently, the Pfam v.27.0 database contains 14 831 domains detected by HMMER, many of which have unknown functions (). We hypothesized that gene essentiality is likely preserved through the function of protein domains or domain combinations, rather than through the conservation of the entire genes. Numerous examples can be found in literature to support this postulation. For instance, there is only a single copy of DNA polymerase III subunits s and c domain III (PF12169) () in E.coli, p aeruginosa and Bacillus subtilis. The host gene of this domain, dna x is essential in all three species; however, the sequence identity between them is low (Supplementary). In further support of modularity within essential genes, previous studies have discovered that although a gene as a whole may be essential, not every domain within the gene is required for the essential function. For example, E.coli ft sk (b0890) is an essential gene consisting of two domains: the n terminal (a.a. 1780) and the c terminal (a.a. 7811329). Only the n terminal domain of this gene is required for its role in cell division and viability (). This study, among others, provides direct evidence that protein domains may be responsible for the essentiality of a gene. The structure of this paper is as follows: In the Section 2, we describe the data sources and give the details of the Essential Domain Prediction (EDP) model. In the Section 3, we first assess the performance of the EDP model on simulated datasets. We then use the EDP model to predict essential domains in six microbes, detailed domain information can be found in Supplementary Table S2. Next, we investigate the properties of these predicted essential domains, such as their conservation and functions. We also use these essential domains to reproduce the annotation of essential genes as a validation of our predicted essential domains and present several cases where literature provides support for our predictions. In the Section 4, we discuss the significance of our research, the advantages of explaining gene essentiality from a domain perspective, and possible improvements that can be applied to our EDP model.
