Motivation: Knowledge of drug drug interactions dd is is crucial for health-care professionals to avoid adverse effects when co administering drugs to patients. As most newly discovered dd is are made available through scientific publications, automatic DDI extraction is highly relevant. Results: We propose a novel feature based approach to extract dd is from text. Our approach consists of three steps. First, we apply text preprocessing to convert input sentences from a given dataset into structured representations. Second, we map each candidate DDI pair from that dataset into a suitable syntactic structure. Based on that, a novel set of features is used to generate feature vectors for these candidate DDI pairs. Third, the obtained feature vectors are used to train a support vector machine (SVM) classifier. When evaluated on two DDI extraction challenge test datasets from 2011 and 2013, our system achieves f scores of 71.1% and 83.5%, respectively, outper-forming any state of the art DDI extraction system. Availability and implementation: The source code is available for academic use at

introduction drug drug interaction (DDI) is a situation when one drug increases or decreases the effect of another drug (). Information about dd is is crucial for drug administration to avoid adverse drug reactions or therapeutic failure (van). For example, a recent study reports that dd is are a significant cause of hospital admissions (). While specialized databases are available for finding known dd is such as drug bank (http://www.drugbank.ca) or Micromedex (http://micromedex.com), their coverage is limited and there are discrepancies in DDI listing between existing databases (). As a consequence, most of newly discovered dd is need to be extracted from scientific publications (). text mining techniques such as automatic relation extraction have been applied successfully in large scale experiments to extract various types of relations [e.g. protein protein interactions pp is gene disease efficiently (). Therefore, automatic DDI extraction methods can be particularly relevant to effectively extract dd is and corresponding evidence from the scientific literature. To develop and evaluate automatic DDI extraction methods, a DDI corpus has been created by. This corpus was manually annotated with 18 502 pharmacological substances, mainly consisting of generic and brand names, and 5028 dd is. With the availability of this corpus and the introduction of two DDI extraction challenges in 2011 and 2013 (), several approaches have been proposed to extract dd is from biomedical text. In both challenges, systems built on machine learning (ML) approaches were dominant and achieved the best results (). In these systems, the DDI extraction tasks are modeled as classification problems where each candidate DDI pair is classified as an interacting pair or not. To build the classification models, data from annotated DDI corpora are often transformed into more structural representations using various natural language processing (NLP) tools. Among these ml based systems, support vector machine (SVM) methods are the most popular (). In general, ml based DDI extraction systems can be categorized into two groups, namely feature and kernel based methods. In feature based systems, each data instance is represented as a feature vector in an n dimensional space. The main focus in these systems is to define features that potentially best represent the data characteristics. For DDI extraction tasks, various feature types have been used ranging from lexical to syntactic and semantic information. For example, segura developed a system using bag of words and local context features. To improve the performance of feature based systems, some authors combine multiple types of features with the hope that these features can complement each other introduced a system that uses lexical, semantic and domain knowledge features. Chowdhury and lavell i (2013a) proposed a system that combines heterogeneous features. Their system comprises lexical, syntactic, semantic and negation features derived from sentences and their corresponding parse trees. In kernel based systems, the structural representations of data instances, e.g. syntactic parse trees or dependency graphs, are exploited. Various kernels have been proposed to quantify the similarities between two instances by computing the similarities of their representations. These kernels differ from each other *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com based on how syntactic representations are used and how similarity functions are calculated (). For the DDI extraction challenges, the use of kernels varies between the participating systems. Among them, the most commonly used kernels are all paths graph kernel (), shallow linguistic kernel () and path enclose tree kernel (). As the proposed kernels exploit different types of structural representations and similarity functions, they all have pros and cons. To compensate for the weakness of each individual kernel, kernel combination is often used. For example, Chowdhury and lavell i (2013b) proposed a hybrid kernel, which combines three different kernels. Their system achieved the best results in the DDI extraction 2013 challenge (Task 2). Furthermore, the combination can take place at the output level (ensemble approach) where the output of multiple systems is combined using a voting scheme developed a system that combines the output of two kernel based systems and a case based reasoning system using a majority voting scheme. This system yielded the best result in the DDI extraction 2011 challenge. Although systems using feature based kernels alone did not yield the best performance in the DDI extraction challenges, feature based kernels still play an important role in relation extraction tasks. In fact, the winning teams of the DDI extraction 2011 and 2013 challenges both incorporate feature based kernels proposed by as part of their systems. furthermore have shown that their feature based PPI extraction system achieved state of the art results on five PPI corpora. A recent study by on the performance of various types of kernels for PPI extraction tasks also suggests that to improve the performance of the current PPI extraction systems, novel feature sets should be explored over novel kernel functions. This suggestion may also apply to the DDI extraction tasks, as most current approaches to extract DDI pairs have also previously been used to extract PPI pairs. In this article, we propose a novel feature based approach to extract dd is from biomedical text. Our approach differs from existing approaches in two ways. First, we partition candidate DDI pairs into five groups based on their syntactic structures. Second, we apply a set of novel features that is optimized for each group based on the syntactic properties. Our results show that the proposed system achieves the best results in terms of f scores and performance efficiency when compared with the state of the art DDI extraction systems.
