Motivation: Biological sequence was regarded as an important study by many biologists, because the sequence contains a large number of biological information, what is helpful for scientists studies on biological cells, DNA and proteins. Currently, many researchers used the method based on protein sequences in function classification, sub-cellular location, structure and functional site prediction, including some machine learning methods. The purpose of this article, is to find a new way of sequence analysis, but more simple and effective. Results: According to the nature of 64 genetic codes, we propose a simple and intuitive 2D graphical expression of protein sequences. And based on this expression we give a new euclidean distance method to compute the distance of different sequences for the analysis of sequence similarity. This approach contains more sequence information. A typical phylogenetic tree constructed based on this method proved the effectiveness of our approach. Finally, we use this sequence similarity analysis method to predict protein sub-cellular localization, in the two datasets commonly used. The results show that the method is reasonable.

introduction bioinformatics is one of the great frontiers of life sciences, and it is also be one of the core areas of Natural Science in 21st century. Now, many researchers pay their attentions on protein function classification and sub-cellular localization. The methods of such studies, classified from the data characteristics, include sequence based methods, based on interaction networks, functional domains and so on. The sequence based method has two ways, homologous and non-homologous. The non-homologous method is constructing information from the sequence based on the chemical physical characters, such as the amino acid composition, the frequencies of different sub-sequences, the interval numbers of one sub-sequences () and so on. The homologous based method is mainly analyzing the amino acid sequence similarity, including the way using the alignment and the way computing the distance of sequences, using the mathematical descriptors abstracted from some matrixes, based on some graphical representations. The graphical representation what do not need machine learning or * To whom correspondence should be addressed. other complicated computing, can provide intuitive picture or useful insights for helping analyzing. Since 1983, many graphical representations of sequences have been provided in different biological topics, such as 2D-, 3D-, 4D-, 6d graphical representations of DNA sequences (). In recent years, many 2D graphical representations of proteins have been proposed by randi cr and ic and others () (). Also, many condensed matrices were provided (), such as, D/D matrix in which entries represent the quotient of the Euclidean and the graph theoretical distance between vertices in 2D plane; L/L matrix whose elements are defined as the quotient of the Euclidean distance between a pair of vertices (dots) of curve and the sum of distances between the same pair of vertices; M, M/M, CM and so on. Based on these matrices, many invariants can be obtained for comparison of sequences. Applying the above methods, the researchers have compared the similarities and dissimilarities of sequences (). Also many researchers had used these matrices in constructing phylogenetic tree. In this work, we propose a new Euclidean distance computing method based on a new graphical representation composed basing on genetic codes distribution. Then we apply this method in protein sub-cellular localization prediction using the similarity comparisons.

discussion our new graphical representation is seeking distribution property of amino acids from the nature of nucleotide triplets. As shown in, the 2D distribution of the 20 amino acids is not unique. Our method is based on the principles of symmetry and the nearest while using this method in phylogenetic tree construction, we select the sequences of only nine species. This nine species has been used in many other articles, including DNA phylogenetic tree construction and protein phylogenetic tree. Therefore, it has a strong representative, and biological evolution relations of this nine species are more clearly, really. We proposed a new formula for computing the distance of sequences, which can deal with the sequences with unequal lengths. We know that mostly the lengths of sequences are not equal. Euclidean distance is easy to miss information or have additional information to add. Many of the existing distance calculations are obtained special matrixes from the graphical expression, and then raised invariants from the matrixes, at last, calculated distance of the invariants to represent the distance of sequences. Although those ways can handle the situation of unequal lengths too, they need to calculate the matrixes and invariants, which are complicated. Our method is proceeding directly from the graphic expression, to obtain the distance between sequences and can effectively deal with the situation of unequal length sequences. In the sub-cellular localization, many articles used machine learning methods, especially SVM method. These methods have to set up a training set, part of the dataset, to train the model and get the model parameters, and then use the model to test the testing set. Therefore, this method is computationally expensive, and complex. Our method uses the distance between sequences to measure the sequence difference, the smaller the difference, we think they tend to be more consistent with the location information. Although our results are not as well as some results of machine learning methods, our way just only need to calculate the distance between the sequences, which is easy to operate.

conclusion in this article, we proposed a new graphical representation of proteins based on genetic code distribution. We applied this method in the phylogenetic tree constructing, the result of which is consistent with the result got from a multiple sequence alignment program, Cluster W. Then we provided a new distance computing method based on the graphical representation and its application in the protein sub-cellular localization prediction using the similarity comparisons. The results show that our new graphical representation and new distance are more effective than some methods, although not as good as some machine learning classifiers. But it is easier, because only need to compute the distance, not need machine learning or training. However, as we can see, the result of our method is not the best, so in the future research; we would try to improve our method to increase the accuracy, and test in many different datasets, expecting our method will have general applicability.
