Motivation: Structural information of macromolecular complexes provides key insights into the way they carry out their biological functions. Achieving high resolution structural details with electron microscopy requires the identification of a large number (up to hundreds of thousands) of single particles from electron micrographs, which is a laborious task if it has to be manually done and constitutes a hurdle towards high throughput. Automatic particle selection in micrographs is far from being settled and new and more robust algorithms are required to reduce the number of false positives and false negatives. Results: In this article, we introduce an automatic particle picker that learns from the user the kind of particles he is interested in. Particle candidates are quickly and robustly classified as particles or non particles. A number of new discriminative shape related features as well as some statistical description of the image grey intensities are used to train two support vector machine classifiers. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method: (i) has a considerably low computational complexity and (ii) provides results better or comparable with previously reported methods at a fraction of their computing time. Availability: The algorithm is fully implemented in the open source xmi pp package and downloadable from http://

introduction electron Microscopy (EM) is a key tool to study the structure and function of biological macromolecules at a medium high resolution. Single particle analysis is an EM modality in which multiple copies of the same macromolecule are simultaneously imaged into a single micrograph. Particles from several hundreds or even thousands of micrographs are commonly employed in a structural study. The standard data processing workflow of single particle reconstruction includes: particle selection, particle alignment, particle classification, three dimensional (3D) reconstruction and model refinement (). Different views of a specimen are required for the 3D reconstruction of a complex, but these views suffer from low signal to noise ratio (SNR) (due to low dose imaging) (), low contrast (due to close to focus conditions), and image deformations (due to the microscope aberrations). It is generally accepted that high resolution can only be achieved with thousands of projection images, so that the 3D reconstruction algorithm can compensate for these challenging imaging conditions. In particular, there is generally a direct relationship between the number of selected particles and the maximum achievable resolution (). Manually identifying that number of particles is not just time consuming and laborious, but also an error prone process. A robust automatic particle picker (APP) algorithm is, therefore, indispensable to enhance the technique's throughput. As the selection of several thousands of particles from low dose micrographs is the first and one of the crucial steps towards a high resolution reconstruction, a large amount of effort has been made by researchers to develop accurate methods for APP. These methods have been classified into groups by different authors (). Among them, the classification by, suggests a general categorization into template matching based and feature based approaches. Template matching based methods () calculate the cross correlation (or any other measure of similarity) between a set of templates and a micrograph image to seek for particle candidates. Templates are obtained either from different projections of an initial 3D volume () or from a number of manually picked particles (). Instead of using all templates (either from different projections of an initial 3D volume or from a number of manually picked particles), which severely increases the processing time, other alternatives can be employed, such as eigen images of templates () or some form of an average of each template cluster (). In feature based approaches, particles are sought through the calculation of some prominent geometric and or statistical features of the particle images (). feature based methods can be reference free or learning based. In the former, features corresponding to particles are known to fall within a certain region of the feature space and, therefore, no training is necessary and the algorithm can start picking particles straight away in the latter, however, a set of particles and non particles are required to train a classifier which is then able to distinguish between particles and non particles based on the training features. Although reference free methods require less effort from the user, they are of limited applicability, because the space region corresponding to particle features has to be known a priori. We previously introduced a feature based APP method () that learns features from the user selected particles via a continuous learning phase (the algorithm is available in the open source package xmi pp 2.4). In a manual picking step, a small dataset of particle and non particle images is formed to train an ensemble naive Bayesian classifier. Once the classifier is trained, it suggests new particles in a new micrograph. The user supervises this result by discarding the wrongly picked particles and identifying the disregarded ones. This feedback information is then submitted to the classifier which is updated to accommodate this new information. This semi-automatic picking is continued on several micrographs until the user is satisfied by the results. At this point, the trained classifier carries out the selection of the particles in the remaining micrographs in a fully automatic way. In this article, we introduce an APP method that follows the general learning structure of, but major improvements are made to increase speed and accuracy. Our new feature vector is completely different from the previous method and consists of a number of geometrical and statistical features; it is robust to noise, very fast to compute and most of its features are rotationally invariant. Instead of Naive Bayesian (NB), we now use a support vector machine (SVM) as the base classifier due to its interesting properties, like high generalization capabilities and small training classification time. In order to reduce the number of false positives, two SVM classifiers are used: one for discriminating between particle candidates and non particle objects and the other for checking if a particle candidate recognized by the first classifier is a real particle or not. In contrast to, which explores a big search space for particles, the proposed method limits the search space to the peaks obtained from the cross correlation of the micrograph with some pre-computed templates. Templates are generated during the manual picking step by clustering [the clustering algorithm is described in] the hand-picked particles and selecting the average of each cluster. As the correlation with all orientations of the template noticeably increases the computation time, a rotationally averaged template can be used instead. The algorithm has been successfully tested on three experimental datasets and compared with our previous algorithm (which had, in turn, been compared with other approaches), resulting in a more than an order of magnitude decrease in computing time while achieving even better performance.
