Analysing genome scale in silico models with stoichiometry based methods is computationally demanding. The current algorithms to compute chemical organizations in chemical reaction networks are limited to small scale networks, prohibiting a thorough analysis of large models. Here, we introduce a parallelized version of the constructive algorithm to determine chemical organizations. The algorithm is implemented in the Standard C programming language and parallelized using the message passing interface (MPI) protocol. The resulting code can be executed on computer clusters making use of an arbitrary number of processors. The algorithm is parallelized in an embarrassing parallel manner, providing good scalability. Availability: An implementation of the algorithm including source code can be obtained from

introduction stoichiometry based network analysis methods like flux balance analysis (), elementary mode analysis () and chemical organization analysis () have proven useful in gaining a better understanding of the functioning of biochemical systems at the systems level (). With the ongoing efforts to elucidate more and more biochemical details, genome scale metabolic networks have become available for an increasing number of organisms (). Analysis of such networks with species and reaction numbers ranging in the thousands pose a new computational challange (). To meet this challange, we introduce a parallelized version of the constructive algorithm to determine chemical organizations. A chemical organization is a set of network species constituting a subsystem of the whole network, that fulfills two properties: (i) algebraic closure and (ii) self maintenance. The first property ensures that the species of an organization can not generate a species that is not already contained in that set, while the second property ensures that a flux vector

conclusion the computational time required to compute the organizations for a given reaction network model does not solely depend on the network size, but also its structure (). Being np hard the computation of all organizations will remain un feasable for certain networks, even when using the parallelized version of the algorithm on a computer cluster. Nevertheless, the parallelized version reduces runtime to practical limits for large models, especially if many cpus are available. For example, all connected organizations of three previously not tractable networks () could be determined using the parallelized algorithm.
