Motivation: Cellular processes are controlled, directly or indirectly, by the binding of hundreds of different DNA binding factors (DBFs) to the genome. One key to deeper understanding of the cell is discovering where, when and how strongly these DBFs bind to the DNA sequence. Direct measurement of DBF binding sites (BSs; e.g. through chip chip or chips eq experiments) is expensive, noisy and not available for every DBF in every cell type. Naive and most existing computational approaches to detecting which DBFs bind in a set of genomic regions of interest often perform poorly, due to the high false discovery rates and restrictive requirements for prior knowledge. Results: We develop spars cape a penalized Bayesian method for identifying DBFs active in the considered regions and predicting a joint probabilistic binding landscape. Using a sparsity inducing penaliza-tion, spars cape is able to select a small subset of DBFs with enriched BSs in a set of DNA sequences from a much larger candidate set. This substantially reduces the false positives in prediction of BSs. Analysis of chips eq data in mouse embryonic stem cells and simulated data show that spars cape dramatically outperforms the naive motif scanning method and the comparable computational approaches in terms of DBF identification and BS prediction. Availability and implementation: spars cape is implemented in Cþþ with OpenMP (optional at compilation) and is freely available at www. stat ucla edu zhou software html for academic use.

introduction many complex processes in the cell, particularly gene regulation, are controlled by the binding of various factors to the DNA sequence. A key to understanding these processes is determining where each of these DNA binding factors (DBFs), including transcription factors (TFs), nucleosomes, RNA and other proteins and protein complexes, binds in the genome in a certain cell type and set of conditions. This collection of binding sites (BSs) for all DBFs over regions of interest is sometimes called a binding landscape. More formally, we define a binding landscape as the base pair specific probability of binding for each of a library of DBFs over a set of genomic regions. Considering DBFs one at a time leads to many false positives, both in determining which DBFs have significantly enriched BSs in a set of genomic regions and in predicting the exact locations of BSs, and results in a limited view of the processes controlled by these DBFs. This has motivated recent work on jointly predicting binding landscapes for a set of DBFs. Currently, joint landscapes at single base pair resolution for all DBFs have only been predicted in lower eukaryotes such as yeast with fewer DBFs and much smaller genomes (). In higher eukaryotes, predictions have been limited to a (usually small) pre-selected set of DBFs known to bind the regions of interest (). Of these methods, only that of does not require the DBF concentrations as prior knowledge, something made possible by considering at most two DBFs at a time, and only used chips eq data as a source of direct information. See, te if and Rippe (2010) and for recent examples of alternate approaches to answering related questions. Owing to computational limits, it is impossible to predict a joint base pair specific binding landscape for all DBFs with unknown concentrations over the entire genome in higher eukaryotes with large genomes and many DBFs. We are thus limited to exploring a subset of the genome. One motivating type of genomic subset is a set of regions known to be co bound by a small group of DBFs based on chips eq data. In such a genomic subset, we do not expect most DBFs to have a significant number of BSs. Thus, the false positive BSs in a predicted binding landscape can be substantially reduced if only the DBFs with significantly enriched binding in the regions of interest are considered. However, it is limiting to require the complete set of DBFs enriched in the considered regions to be known a priori as is done in existing work on similar questions in higher eukaryotes. In this article, we develop a method that offers a principled way to select an, often small, subset of DBFs active in the regions of interest and to reduce the false positive signal in the predicted probabilistic binding landscape, eliminating the need for prior knowledge of the set of enriched DBFs or DBF concentrations. In the motivating genomic subset, our method allows for the discovery of unknown cofactors that commonly bind near the DBFs with ChIP data (ChIP DBFs). The predicted joint binding landscape provides a global and quantitative view of the binding pattern among the DBFs. This is an initial step to the study of combinatorial regulatory logic among multiple DBFs. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.

discussion generating a base pair specific binding landscape for all known DBFs over the entire genome of higher organisms with large genomes, without prior knowledge of DBF concentrations, is currently prohibitively computationally expensive. When one then considers only certain genomic regions, it is expected that a large proportion of DBFs will not have true BSs, and performance suffers if all DBFs are considered. Requiring prior knowledge of the set of DBFs active in the regions of interest and their concentrations introduces the need for (often ad hoc) user dependent prior or iterative analysis or a need for additional experimental data. We contribute a new method, spars cape that eliminates the need for this prior information and takes advantage of binding data where available while outperforming alternate methods. One of the key features of our method is the note non nuc is all considered DBFs except for the nucleosome. ChIP is the set of DBFs for which ChIP data were available. No ChIP is the set of DBFs for which ChIP data were not available. In the c myc group simulation, there were 10 small datasets. Combined results are reported here but the predictions were made separately in each set. PP stands for posterior probability cut off inclusion of penalization in Bayesian inference based on the expected false positive site counts. This significantly reduces false positive results both in DBF selection and in BS prediction. A similar idea has been used in the contrast motif finder (). The unsatisfactory performance of COMPETE for the problems we investigate suggests that tuning prior DBF concentrations when they are not given is difficult in practice and using an improper vector of concentrations can be risky for joint prediction of landscapes. Moreover, both spars cape and the raw score method select DBFs by comparing against some control regions, but COMPETE does not have this critical component. We want to stress that our comparison against COMPETE is mostly for demonstration purpose as the method is not targeted at DBF selection or predicting sparse binding landscapes. As demonstrated by the results in this article, with the default method for choosing the level of penalization, a standard usage of spars cape usually works well. But in fact, spars cape is highly flexible. A user could independently choose less stringent DBF selection by setting a smaller penalty value and perform a single selection run, instead of 10-fold cross validation. This option is particularly useful when the goal is to predict sites for all DBFs that could at all plausibly have BSs in the considered regions. The default choice in the final post selection landscape prediction is to predict with the same penalty chosen in the selection stage and with fixed pwm s. A user may choose to make the predicted landscape less sparse by running the final prediction with no penalty, re estimated pwm s or both. Our modeling framework can easily be extended to include other types of information. Some measure of absolute binding affinity, as opposed to the relative binding affinity information in a normalized PWM, is available from protein binding microarrays () and could be included as energy models (). Further work integrating ChIP peak strength in the scoring of binding in ChIP windows could be fruitful, especially for nucleosomes. Other location specific information on DBF binding to the sequence could also be used. We plan further work using spar scapes joint binding landscape to predict gene expression and offer insights into the underlying regulatory network.
