Motivation: For a di allelic marker locus, the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) is a simple and powerful design for genetic studies. The TDT was originally proposed for use in families with both parents available (complete nuclear families) and has further been extended to 1-TDT for use in families with only one of the parents available (incomplete nuclear families). Currently, the increasing interest of the influence of parental imprinting on heritability indicates the importance of incorporating imprinting effects into the mapping of association variants. Results: In this article, we extend the tdt type statistics to incorporate imprinting effects and develop a series of new test statistics in a general two stage framework for association studies. Our test statistics enjoy the nature of family based designs that need no assumption of hardy weinberg equilibrium. Also, the proposed methods accommodate complete and incomplete nuclear families with one or more affected children. In the simulation study, we verify the validity of the proposed test statistics under various scenarios, and compare the powers of the proposed statistics with some existing test statistics. It is shown that our methods greatly improve the power for detecting association in the presence of imprinting effects. We further demonstrate the advantage of our methods by the application of the proposed test statistics to a rheumatoid arthritis dataset.

introduction genetic imprinting, as an example of epigenetic factors, occurs when certain genes increase levels of expression through inheritance from one of the parental chromosomes ().have constructed an imprinted gene database and 1% of all mammalian genes are believed to show imprinting effects (http://igc.otago.ac.nz). Abnormal expressions of imprinted genes result in numerous human genetic disorders, including prader willi beckwith wiedemann and angle man syndromes (). When the candidate * To whom correspondence should be addressed. gene of a disease under study is a marker allele per se or is in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with a marker allele, the parental asymmetric test (PAT) was proposed and extended to examine imprinting effects in the absence of maternal effects using complete nuclear families (nuclear families with both parents) with one or multiple affected children (). In the case of missing genotypes among parents, 1-PAT was proposed for incomplete nuclear families (nuclear families with a single parent) with an arbitrary number of affected children (). Based on a mixture of complete and incomplete nuclear families, cp at a combination of PAT and 1-PAT, was suggested to increase the test power (). Other methods for the detection of imprinting effects were generally derived in the framework of log linear model, leading to the likelihood ratio tests (). When the genes are imprinted, the performance of gene mapping would be affected. As a result, studies on incorporating imprinting effects into genetic linkage or association analysis have arisen the interest of researchers (). Among the approaches, a test statistic termed tdt i () was constructed based on the extensions of the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) () and was shown to be more powerful than the conventional TDT in the presence of imprinting effects. The tdt i first employs a parent of origin effects test statistic (POET) to test for imprinting effects and then chooses the most appropriate statistic from a set of tdt type statistics, which are TDT suitable for no imprinting effects, TDT p (the paternal version of TDT) for maternal imprinting, and TDT m (the maternal version of TDT) for paternal imprinting, to test for association. Note that the tdt i only accommodates complete nuclear families and thus is not suitable for incomplete families. 1-TDTI (), which is essentially the T 2 of the 1-TDT () tests, is a valid linkage association test in the presence of imprinting effects for incomplete nuclear families. On the other hand, genetic association analysis works over short distance in genome and provides fine mapping of genetic loci detected by linkage (). In this article, we aim to develop a class of test statistics to test for association incorporating imprinting effects in the presence of linkage. First, we propose a test statistic, termed tdt i for use in complete nuclear families. Like tdt i tdt i is also derived under a two stage process, where we employ a more powerful test PAT instead of POET in the first stage to test if there is paternal, maternal or page 2572 25712577
