A power set based statistical selection procedure to locate susceptible rare variants associated with complex traits with sequencing data ABSTRACT Motivation: Existing association methods for rare variants from sequencing data have focused on aggregating variants in a gene or a genetic region because of the fact that analysing individual rare variants is underpowered. However, these existing rare variant detection methods are not able to identify which rare variants in a gene or a genetic region of all variants are associated with the complex diseases or traits. Once phenotypic associations of a gene or a genetic region are identified, the natural next step in the association study with sequencing data is to locate the susceptible rare variants within the gene or the genetic region. Results: In this article, we propose a power set based statistical selection procedure that is able to identify the locations of the potentially susceptible rare variants within a disease related gene or a genetic region. The selection performance of the proposed selection procedure was evaluated through simulation studies, where we demonstrated the feasibility and superior power over several comparable existing methods. In particular, the proposed method is able to handle the mixed effects when both risk and protective variants are present in a gene or a genetic region. The proposed selection procedure was also applied to the sequence data on the ang ptl gene family from the Dallas Heart Study to identify potentially susceptible rare variants within the trait related genes. Availability and implementation: An R package rvs el can be down-loaded from

introduction the fundamental problem with rare variants [with minor allele frequency (MAF) 5 1%] is their low frequency, i.e. the limited number of observed carriers lowers the statistical power to detect phenotypic association with any single rare variant. Thus, almost all existing statistical methods to detect disease trait associated rare variants follow the framework of aggregating and testing all rare variants in a gene or a candidate genomic region thereby boosting the association signal (). The existing methods try to improve this basic idea of aggregating signals in two aspects: first, by more potent extraction of signals from individual rare variants; and second, by better aggregation signals extracted from multiple rare variants in a gene or a genetic region of interest. Improvements of the first kind include up weighing variants as they become rarer () along with flexibility of the threshold for a rare variant () and accommodation of both risk and protective variants in a genetic region of interest (). Methods for more powerfully aggregating statistical signals include kernel based adaptive clustering, which assigns weights to multi rather than single site genotypes (), and the C test statistic, which contrasts the observed versus expected variance of binomial ly distributed allele counts (), and regression based models that extract and aggregate signals (). However, these existing rare variant detection methods are not able to identify which rare variants in a gene or a genetic region out of all variants are associated with the complex diseases or traits. Once phenotypic associations of a gene or a genetic region are identified, the natural next step in the association study with sequencing data is to locate the susceptible rare variants within the gene or the genetic region. There have been a few testing procedures based on the subset selection of rare variants such as the variable thresholding (VT) () and rare cover r cover () methods. However, VT is not designed to select potentially causal variants within a gene or a genetic region. r cover collapses multiple rare variants within a gene or a genetic region using the combined multivariate and collapsing test (CMC) proposed by Liu and Leal (2008). It has low power to identify causal variants when both risk and protective variants are present within a gene or a genetic region. Moreover, r cover applies the Pearson's 2 statistic in the testing procedure, which may not be optimal for rare variants and is limited to case control designs only. Recently, Bayesian hierarchical models have been proposed to estimate the effects of rare variants under a regression framework (), where Bayesian credible regions for regression coefficients were provided to assess the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. association of each individual rare variant. However, credible regions for variants with low frequencies are too wide, indicating the uncertainty for estimation. In addition, estimation results in Bayesian analysis often rely on settings of unknown hyper-parameters, and intensive computing is required all the time considered the problem of locating susceptible variants as a statistical variable selection problem, and attempted to select both common and rare variants associated with a disease outcome using a penalized regression model, where regression coefficients were regularised to select variants with relatively high impacts on the outcome. In penalised regression models, the total number of non-zero coefficients is tuned by a regularization parameter, so the choice of an optimal regularization parameter is a crucial part of the l 1-norm regularization procedure. however did not try to select an optimal regularization parameter, as common methods such as cross validation and resampling might not be applicable to rare variants because of extreme sparsity. Alternatively, the authors ranked the potentially disease related variants with their impact on the outcome. Thus, the method is essentially unable to separate potentially causal variants from non causal variants within a gene or a genetic region. In this article, we propose a statistical selection procedure based on the linear combinations of the power set of a set of rare variants in a gene or a genetic region that is able to identify the locations of the potentially susceptible rare variants within a disease related gene or genetic region. A stage I association test first identifies the phenotypic association of a gene or a genetic region using existing methods that aggregate multiple rare variants. The proposed method then selects the subset out of the power set of all the rare variants that has the highest impact on the outcome (either quantitative or qualitative). The selection performance of the proposed method was evaluated through simulation studies, where different effect sizes, sample sizes, and proportions of risk variants, protective variants and non causal variants were considered. We also applied the proposed method to the sequence data of the ang ptl gene family from the Dallas Heart Study (DHS). Several studies have worked on the DHS data and have already identified some genes that are related to the traits (). For example, associations between the ANGPTL4 gene and both triglyceride and very low density lipoprotein in European American population have been suggested by several studies (). However, most of the existing rare variant association tests have not tried to locate potentially susceptible rare variants within the ANGPTL4 gene. Our proposed selection procedure was able to select several potentially causal rare variants within the ANGPTL4 gene that are associated with triglyceride and very low density lipoprotein.

discussion in this article, we proposed a power set based selection procedure to identify the locations of susceptible rare variants associated with complex diseases with sequencing data. The proposed selection procedure not only aggregates multiple rare variants to boost association signals, but also locates potentially causal and non causal variants within a disease related gene or a genetic region. Using the idea of the power set of all rare variants in a gene or a genetic region, the most outcome related subset of rare variants among the power set is identified. Our simulation studies suggested that the proposed power set based selection procedures ap set and wp set are able to locate potentially causal variants relatively accurately when both risk and protective variants are present in a gene or a genetic region. In the analysis of the DHS sequencing data, the best subset of variants selected by the proposed method are promising and could be potential trait related variants for future validation. Selecting susceptible rare variants is statistically challenging because of sparsity. To improve the selection performance of the proposed power set based selection procedure, there are three potential extensions. First, we used the data adaptive procedure () to screen potentially protective variants. However, the procedure may not perform well when sample size and effect size are small, as the procedure is based on a marginal association test. We noticed in the simulation studies that ASPs for both risk and protective variants could be improved by a maximum of 10% (data not shown) if we knew which variants are protective. Therefore, it is essential to develop an improved procedure to identify potentially protective variants. Second, we used allele frequency weights () for wp set and observed a similar performance of wp set and ap set in quantitative analysis. One possible explanation is that this weight is designed for binary case control outcomes. Another possible explanation is that the weight is assigned on the individual variant level while the selection is on the feature level. Thus, the variant level weights may not influence much on selecting the most outcome related feature. The development of optimal weights for each feature rather than each variant may improve the selection performance of the proposed method. Third, we combined variants within a subset using a weighted linear combination. A recent publication by has suggested that an exponential combination might be more powerful than a linear combination to detect rare variant associations when the number of causal variants within a gene or a genetic region is small. In addition to the improvement in the detection power, the exponential combination procedure () combines both risk and protective variants without the need of initial screening of protective variants, as it is not affected by the directions of variants. However, the numerical values of the exponential combinations depend on the number of variants when the test statistics of individual variants are exponentially combined, i.e. the more the variants that are combined, the larger statistic it has. Thus, the proposed power set idea can not be directly applied to the exponential combinations. Some modification of the exponential combination may be preceded to extend the proposed power set method. To improve in these three areas are our future work. Our proposed selection procedure can be easily applied to different types of phenotypic outcomes. We limited an outcome to be either quantitative or binary in this article. However, because our procedure is based on an association with regression residuals, it is readily extended to other types of outcomes by simply applying the generalized regression model.
