Motivation: Nucleo-cytoplasmic trafficking of proteins is a core regulatory process that sustains the integrity of the nuclear space of eukaryotic cells via an interplay between numerous factors. Despite progress on experimentally characterizing a number of nuclear localization signals, their presence alone remains an unreliable indicator of actual translocation. Results: This article introduces a probabilistic model that explicitly recognizes a variety of nuclear localization signals, and integrates relevant amino acid sequence and interaction data for any candidate nuclear protein. In particular, we develop and incorporate scoring functions based on distinct classes of classical nuclear localization signals. Our empirical results show that the model accurately predicts whether a protein is imported into the nucleus, surpassing the classification accuracy of similar predictors when evaluated on the mouse and yeast proteomes (area under the receiver operator characteristic curve of 0.84 and 0.80, respectively). The model also predicts the sequence position of a nuclear localization signal and whether it interacts with import in
introduction nucleocytoplasmic trafficking of proteins is a core regulatory process that involves traversing large membrane structures termed nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) (). The translocation of cargo macromolecules through the pore is facilitated by a number of nuclear transport factors, termed karyopherin s. To shed light on the mechanisms that are employed by individual nuclear proteins, this article proposes a probabilistic model of nuclear import that leverages recent experimental results to accurately and transparently recognize biologically relevant features. The main determinant of nuclear localization of proteins is the nuclear localization signal (NLS). The best characterized NLS is the classical nuclear localization sequence c nls which is recognized * To whom correspondence should be addressed. by the carrier protein import in (karyopherin-). import in acts as an adaptor protein, binding in turn to import in karyopherin 1 which docks the trimeric complex to the nuclear pore complex for further transport into the nucleus (). The c nls contains one mono partite or two (bi-partite) clusters of basic amino acids (). Structural studies have shown that peptides bind along a groove in import in with charged amino acids at 'minor' and 'major' binding sites along this groove (). A recent study subdivided cnl ss further into six groups (). In addition to the classical nuclear import pathway, several alternative import pathways have been characterized. Features of the targeting signal have been identified in the case of the proline tyrosine py nls pathway, which employs the carrier karyopherin 2 (). At present, the definition of an NLS common to different cargoes used by a single carrier has only been possible for the classical and karyopherin 2 mediated pathways. Many nuclear proteins do not contain any known NLS (). Many predictors identify homologs of a query protein and assign their subcellular location to it without explicitly considering if a localization signal is present. As a consequence, such predictors fail to provide both mechanistic explanations of predicted translocation and reliable output in the absence of well characterized homologs (). Predicting which proteins are imported on the basis of targeting signals without resorting to homology is a major challenge. Simple sequence matching using known NLS patterns renders many false positives and negatives (). To explain why import sometimes goes awry in biological terms, we require models that transparently capture and appropriately weigh in relevant aspects of nuclear import (e.g. interaction with karyopherin s and c nls recognition). A number of predictors are available to identify novel nuclear proteins from known localization features, against which new models should be benchmarked. For reasons explained below, we use nl strada mus () and c nls Mapper () as representatives for the current state of the art on technical and biological grounds, respectively. predict nls () explicitly matches a protein sequence against entries in the nls db database (). nuc pred also uses sequence matching () complemented by 'genetic programming' to recognize new putative nls s. According to its authors, nuc pred is more accurate than predict nls loc tree () and ba cello ().evaluated the performance of localization signal predictors, finding that they do not perform well on truly novel examples which suggests that current methods are unable to identify the features relevant to import. They developed nl strada mus () in response to this observation. nl strada mus is a hidden Markov model that predicts localization signal sites more accurately than those benchmarked against in their study. Its high accuracy is potentially due to the flexibility in signal recognition afforded by the probabilistic model. It is trained on alignments of yeast nls s but extends well to other species ().generated and experimentally screened random peptide libraries to identify import in binding sequences. Using yeast, plant (rice) and mammalian (human) import in proteins, six different groups of mono and bi-partite cnl ss were identified by cluster analyses of the sequences of the bound (and imported) peptides. The authors developed a computational method, c nls Mapper, that incorporates a sequence scoring matrix based directly on the statistics gathered from the collected peptides (). c nls Mapper is more accurate than PSORT II () and predict nls () on several yeast positive only datasets (). c nls Mapper identified 406 mono partite and 306 bi-partite cnl ss in the yeast proteome. The yeast gfp fusion localization database by identifies 447 of these as nuclear. yeast gfp records nuclear import status confirmed by microscopy for yeast strains tagged with green fluorescent protein gfp experimentally demonstrated that 29 out of 30 false mono partite positives indeed exhibited NLS activity, attesting to the high specificity of their predictor. nls s appear to operate similarly across species. Indeed, only one group in Kosugi and colleagues' study was deemed specific to a single species (rice). It is, thus, of general interest to gauge the ability of nuclear import models to deal with not only yeast but also a mammalian system. We note that nuc prot () offers a complementary resource for developing and evaluating models of nuclear import. nuc prot maps the mouse nuclear proteome, identified primarily from experimental assays, enriched using computational methods. To enhance a model's ability to recognize species specific targeting signals in sequence data, we develop probabilistic scoring functions from experimentally determined sequence patterns matched to actual sequences from the proteome under consideration. As a result, these functions accurately reflect the proteome specific distributions. We use data from the studies by to develop and evaluate our model. Protein interaction data offer a complementary view of how cargoes interface with the import machinery. Thus, to improve further on their recognition, we extract data indicating interaction with import in and the gtp binding protein ran all of which are essential for the translocation of proteins through the NPC. Finally, to increase the sensitivity to non-classical import signals, we incorporate matching of all patterns stored in nls db. We also use a support vector machine (SVM) to detect more subtle sequence similarities. We develop a model that recognizes nls s links interactions to localization signals and incorporates sequence similarity. We demonstrate that the model predicts the protein import into the nucleus more accurately than both nl strada mus and c nls Mapper. It identifies interactions with core NPC members, and correctly identifies cnl ss for novel proteins in both mouse and yeast. Our probabilistic model is transparent and provides biologically meaningful explanations for predictions.

conclusion we present a model that incorporates three different types of features to predict nuclear localization and responsible localization signals and interactions. The model predicts whether a protein is imported into the nucleus with an accuracy surpassing that of comparable predictors on the mouse and yeast proteomes. The MCC is 0.57 and 0.44 for mouse and yeast, respectively, and the AUC is 0.84 and 0.80. To understand the importance of explicitly recognizing nls s for nuclear import prediction, we compare our approach with localization predictors that do not incorporate such features directly. Nucleo has previously been shown to outperform six different predictors in terms of classifying import status of proteins () and falls predominately into this category. By re-using the independent dataset developed for evaluating Nucleo, we are able to show that our Bayesian network model outperforms the other predictors (MCC is 0.39 on the species combined data), with Nucleo as a clear second. The explicit recognition of NLS is thus not critical for predicting import accurately at least when limited to the dominant but far from exclusive classical nls s. By testing our model on a dataset with low sequence redundancy, we show that the generalization performance of our model is not the simple result of matching homology. A key benefit of our model (in relation to most models including Nucleo) is that it transparently indicates the influence of relevant variables. Thereby, it allows biologists to dissect predictions to find which features are responsible for importing each individual protein. We illustrate this principle by also using the model to predict the most probable c nls for the mouse and yeast nuclear proteomes. We establish on a smaller dataset that the model accurately recognizes nls s and interactions with the import machinery. We verify that the predicted nls s match 68 and 51% of known independent yeast and mouse nls s respectively. Additionally, by hiding functional nls s from the model and observing a significant decrease in support, we confirm that the model is sensitive to this biologically essential feature. Our Bayesian network based model can thus enable biologists to identify the nuclear localization signals responsible for binding with karyopherin s. By integrating protein protein interaction data, biologists are able to tap into an emerging data source. It is clear from our tests that interaction data contributes to prediction accuracy. In the absence of reliable interaction data, the model is flexible enough to operate with these variables unspecified, and to predict several novel import in interactors. We validate our top predictions using the literature and argue that the model assists in identifying novel import in interactions. Anecdotal evidence offers additional support for 16 of our top 20 import in interaction predictions. Considering the sparsity of training and test interaction data, we find the accuracy of predicting import in interactions encouraging (AUC is 0.64 and 0.67 for mouse and yeast, respectively). The current model is easy to extend with recently discovered localization signals, for example the py nls. cross referenced with the appropriate data, we believe that predicted nls s can be used to further characterize proteome specific nls s both structurally and functionally.
