Motivation: The rnase q paired end read (PER) protocol samples transcript fragments longer than the sequencing capability of to days technology by sequencing just the two ends of each fragment. Deep sampling of the transcriptome using the PER protocol presents the opportunity to reconstruct the un sequenced portion of each transcript fragment using end reads from overlapping PERs, guided by the expected length of the fragment. Methods: A probabilistic framework is described to predict the alignment to the genome of all PER transcript fragments in a PER dataset. Starting from possible exonic and spliced alignments of all end reads, our method constructs potential splicing paths connecting paired ends. An expectation maximization method assigns likelihood values to all splice junctions and assigns the most probable alignment for each transcript fragment. Results: The method was applied to 2×35 bp PER datasets from cancer cell lines MCF-7 and SUM-102. PER fragment alignment increased the coverage 3-fold compared to the alignment of the end reads alone, and increased the accuracy of splice detection. The accuracy of the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm in the presence of alternative paths in the splice graph was validated by qrt pcr experiments on eight exon skipping alternative splicing events. PER fragment alignment with long range splicing confirmed 8 out of 10 fusion events identified in the MCF-7 cell line in an earlier study by (Maher et al., 2009).

introduction high throughput sequencing technologies are providing unprecedented visibility into the mRNA transcriptome of a cell. In cancer, alternative splicing and gene fusion events () are common changes observed in the mRNA transcriptome. cancer specific splicing events are promising biomarkers and targets for diagnosis, prognosis and treatment purposes. Recently, several computational methods () have been developed to identify splicing events using rnase q data. These methods align rnase q reads to the reference genome rather than to a transcript database, * To whom correspondence should be addressed. making it possible to identify novel splicing events via gapped alignment of reads to the genome. New protocols and sequencing methods have expanded the length and type of rnase q reads, enabling more accurate characterization of the splices present in the transcriptome. A single read may constitute 35100 consecutive nucleotides of a fragment of an mRNA transcript. The paired end read (PER) protocol sequences two ends of a size selected fragment of an mRNA transcript and reports the results as a pair. In our experiment, for example, the expected size of mRNA fragments are around 182 bp (40 bp). 1 Both ends of the fragment are sequenced to at least 35 bp in length. This article focuses on predicting the alignment of an entire PER fragment, starting from the alignments of its end reads and using the alignments of other overlapping PER end reads to predict an overall alignment consistent with the expected length of the fragment. Since a PER fragment can be longer than single reads sequenced with to days rnase q technology, achieving such alignments may significantly increase the effective transcriptome coverage. Longer alignments also decrease alignment ambiguity in regions with genome repeats. A unique challenge in PER fragment alignment is that the expected distance between the two end reads within the transcript fragment, known as mate pair distance, can be very different from distance between the two end reads when aligned to the genome. This can happen when the two ends fall in different exons, so that their separation in genomic coordinates includes one or more intervening introns that are not present in the transcript (). This effect is illustrated as a long tail in the mate pair distance distribution when aligned on the genome (). Resolving the discrepancy between the expected mate pair distance and the paired end separation on the genome is not trival. rnase q aligners including top hat () and splice map () align PERs using heuristics. When the distance between end alignments is substantially longer than the expected mate pair distance, top hat reports the closest end alignment for a PER, while splice map considers PERs with ends mapped within 400 000 bp on the genome. While both heuristics have meaningful biological motivations, neither method predicts nor validates the PER alignment. Since both approaches discard PER alignments that span a very long interval or cross chromosomes, neither of them is capable of finding long range splicing or gene fusion events. In this article, we propose a new probabilistic framework for aligning rnase q PERs to a reference genome, without relying on transcript databases. Our goal is to discover both short range splice

discussion rna sequencing using the paired end protocol is a cost efficient way to sample transcript fragments longer than the sequencing
