Motivation: Systematic identification of microRNA (miRNA) targets remains a challenge. The miRNA overexpression coupled with genome wide expression profiling is a promising new approach and calls for a new method that integrates expression and sequence information. Results: We developed a probabilistic scoring method called target score. target score infers miRNA targets as the transformed fold changes weighted by the Bayesian posteriors given observed target features. To this end, we compiled 84 datasets from Gene Expression Omnibus corresponding to 77 human tissue or cells and 113 distinct transfected miRNAs. Comparing with other methods, target score achieves significantly higher accuracy in identifying known targets in most tests. Moreover, the confidence targets from target score exhibit comparable protein downregulation and are more significantly enriched for Gene Ontology terms. Using target score we explored on com ir oncogenes network and predicted several potential cancer related mirna messenger RNA interactions. Availability and implementation: target score is available at Bioconductor:

introduction micrornas (miRNAs) repress protein production in animal species by forming watson crick base pairing to the 3 0 untranslated regions of the target messenger RNAs (mRNAs) (). The binding primarily occurs at the 27 nt positions from the 5 0 end of the miRNA, which is termed as the 'seed' and the binding as the 'seed match' (). MiRNA regulations have been implicated in numerous developmental and pathogenic processes (). Functional characterization of miRNAs depends on precise identification of their targets. However, it has proved difficult to experimentally identify mirna mrna interactions. To date, according to mir tar base only 3565 interactions between 432 miRNAs and 1959 target genes in human have been confirmed using high confidence low throughput assays such as Western blot (). On the other hand, computational prediction provides a rapid alternative method to identify putative miRNA targets that can be subsequently validated. However, accurate prediction of miRNA targets remains a challenge with the current state of the art algorithms achieving 550% specificity and having poor agreement among them (). Most of these prediction programs are based on sequence complementarity, evolutionary conservation (), free energy () and/ or target site accessibility (). Although it is shown that evolutionary conservation can improve signal to noise ratios, the conservation approach is limited, as not all of the functional target sites are conserved (e.g. lineage and species specific target sites) and vice versa. In particular, the performance of conservation based methods drops drastically when restricted to only mammalian genomes because of short evolutionary time (). Similarly, the energy or accessibility based methods rely on secondary structure prediction tools such as rna fold (), which itself has room for improvements. These limitations also underscore the historical lack of genome wide functional data that measure the in vivo impact of miRNA regulation, which was alleviated by the recent developments of transcript omic and proteomic profiling methods (). Particularly, overexpression of miRNA coupled with expression profiling of mRNA by either microarray or rnase q has proved to be a promising approach (). Consequently, genome wide comparison of differential gene expression holds a new promise to elucidate the global impact of a specific miRNA regulation without solely relying on evolutionary conservation. To improve the prediction of relative repression of mRNA, several studies have proposed a series of additional determinants including seed match type (6mer seed, 7mer-tA1, 7mer-m8 and 8mer), number of target sites, site relative location on the 3 0 untranslated region, local AU content, 3 0 supplementary paring, seed pairing stability and target site abundance (), which are combined together in a single value termed as the 'context score' made available from targets can Web site (). Accordingly, we hypothesize that target prediction can be improved by integrating expression change and sequence information such as context score and *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com other orthogonal sequence based features such as conservation () into a probabilistic score. The proposed model differs from most of the previous expression based target prediction methods in three important aspects. First, our model is specifically designed for mirna overexpression experiments to interrogate targets of a particular miRNA in a specific cell condition. To our knowledge, only a few methods are suitable for such task (). Most existing methods such as gen mir () and group mir () are based on global mirna target expression correlation, which requires a large set of expression profiles of both mRNA and miRNA measured across various distinct conditions and may miss targets that are specific to only a subset of the input samples. Second, the proposed model is unsupervised such that it infers mirna targets solely based on their distinct high dimensional patterns of expression fold changes and sequence features. However, the existing methods are mostly regression based frameworks by treating gene expression as response and miRNA expression as input variables () or supervised learning by explicitly operating on a training dataset of confidence positive and negative targets (), which are incomplete and difficult to obtain. Third, our method operates on the entire gene set to more closely model the overall likelihood rather than only on a subset of genes pre filtered by targets can score () or sample variance ().

discussion most of recently developed miRNA target prediction methods exhibit a paradigm shift from rule based binary classification to a more context dependent quantitative and probabilistic approach (). The momentum of this shift is largely facilitated by the increasing amount of expression profiling data of mRNAs (and miRNAs) across various experimental conditions. However, most of these expression based methods are based on correlation and thus require a large set of expression profiles of mRNAs and miRNAs across various tissues, cell lines or patients, which limit their applications to only a general survey of the robust miRNA targets rather than condition specific miRNA targets. On the other hand, expression profiling following specific miRNA transfection (knockin) provides the most direct clue to identify in vivo functional miRNA targets. However, expression data measured by either microarrays or rnase q are noisy, and it is known that changes in expression can be caused by indirect regulatory effect by miRNAs (), which is not easily distinguishable from direct effects without the aid of sequence based information. To our knowledge, few programs are specifically developed for transfection based miRNA target prediction. Among them, syl amer is the earliest work developed to identify enriched km er motifs, which are the seed regions among the top ranked targets based on p values obtained from t test (van). Thus, the method does not model the distribution of fold changes or sequence features. Instead, syl amer is mainly designed to visually inspect the enrichment of km er patterns rather than predicting specific targets. In this article, we introduce target score a Bayesian probabilistic scoring method taking into account both the fold change due to miRNA overexpression and sequence based information. The proposed method is similar to exp micro (). However, exp micro requires training data to calculate the sequence based scores using sv micro and used only a two component GMM to model the fold changes. In contrast, target score models the distributions of multiple sets of precomputed or user supplied sequence based scores and fold changes using respective two and three component vbg mm. We complied (to our knowledge) the largest set of overexpression data compendium and demonstrated the utilities of target score in extensive tests. target score achieved superior ROC and PR performances (and S3). The cumulative protein outputs for miR-1/124/181 as a function of the top 200 rankings from target score reveals the (second) deepest protein downregulation comparing with the top targets from other methods (). Thus, the relative overall trends at the protein level are consistent with the predictions at the mRNA level, where target score dominates most of the tests. Moreover, target score targets are more enriched for meaningful BP when compared with targets predicted by other methods (and Supplementary). Using target score we constructed an on com ir oncogene regulatory network () and hypothesized that our predicted on com ir oncogene interactions may provide further insights into cancer network. The success of our method underlines the importance of integrating (preferably independent) informative predictors into a unified framework. On the other hand, the absolute PR performances are generally poor among all tested methods perhaps because of the limited number of validated targets and or the limitations of the methods. Although target score compares favorably with the published methods, there are a few issues that remain to be addressed in future work. Several studies have shown that the expression fold change also depends on the initial abundance and the natural decay or turnover rate of the corresponding mRNA species (). Presumably, a future target prediction algorithm will benefit from the use of this information in a cell specific context. Additionally, target score assumes that the mRNA targets are independent of each other. however have shown that miRNAs that have a higher number of available target transcripts will downregulate each individual target gene to a lesser extent than those with a lower number of targets. Although the context score from targets can cs has incorporated the static target abundance information as the total number of target sites that can be recognized by the same miRNA, it would be more realistic to consider the underlying expression level of the co targeted mRNA to infer the actual available target sites.) comprises 207 on com ir oncogene interactions, where 166 (41) are validated (predicted with target score ! 0:6), involving 26 on com irs (yellow) and 113 oncogenes (white). The red solid and blue dash edges are the validated and predicted interactions, respectively. The size of the node is proportional to the connection degree. Edge widths are proportional to the target score
