Motivation: Animal toxins operate by binding to receptors and ion channels. These proteins are short and vary in sequence, structure and function. Sporadic discoveries have also revealed endogenous toxin like proteins in non venomous organisms. Viral proteins are the largest group of quickly evolving proteomes. We tested the hypothesis that toxin like proteins exist in viruses and that they act to modulate functions of their hosts. Results: We updated and improved a classifier for compact proteins resembling short animal toxins that is based on a machine learning method. We applied it in a large scale setting to identify toxin like proteins among short viral proteins. Among the ∼ 26 000 representatives of such short proteins, 510 sequences were positively identified. We focused on the 19 highest scoring proteins. Among them, we identified conotoxin like proteins, growth factors receptor like proteins and anti-bacterial peptides. Our predictor was shown to enhance annotation inference for many uncharacterized proteins. We conclude that our protocol can expose toxin like proteins in unexplored niches including meta genomics data and enhance the systematic discovery of novel cell modulators for drug development. Availability: clan to x is available at

introduction in recent years, with the expansion of genomics data and the development of next generation sequencing' we have witnessed unprecedented growth in sequence information as reflected in the 20 million UniRef sequences. Several niches that remain poorly annotated are viruses, environmental meta genomics sequences and short proteins. Short sequences are of special interest from a biotechnological and medical perspective as they are relatively easy to produce, they are often one domain proteins and more importantly, they may be used in medical research. From a bioinformatics and statistical perspective, annotation of these sequences remains challenging due to low similarity signals (often within the realm of noise). Consequently, typical automated methods can not reliably assign such sequences to their homologous groups. As a result, short proteins constitute an uncharacterized and fragmented subset of sequence space. Another major uncharacterized group covers the world of viruses. Viruses are extremely diverse and their importance to agriculture and human health is self evident. Nevertheless, most viral proteomes are reported as 'translated sequences' with * To whom correspondence should be addressed. a very poor annotation of their content (polymerase and envelope proteins being the exception). Co-evolution of viruses and their hosts constitutes a major evolutionary driving force (). As a result, key cellular functions are acquired by viruses to enhance their infectivity and replication efficiency (). Examples of host cellular components that are mimicked by viral proteins include mimicry of receptors and antigens of the immune system. In addition, sophisticated modulation by viruses that infect any taxonomical group, from bacteria to human is directed towards the most sensitive cellular function including the ubiquitin system, signal transduction cascades and the translational machinery (). These mechanisms are best studied in light of host virus co-evolution (). Animal toxins make up one of the most highly over-represented functional groups among the short proteins. Toxins are proteins that appear in animal venom and are aimed at inflicting harm to the organism on which the venom acts (). Most animal toxins are short proteins (ranging from 30 to 120 amino acids). They are extremely varied in terms of function and include ion channel inhibitors, phospholipases, protease inhibitors, disintegrin s membrane pore inducers and more (). Such toxins are detected in sporadic species along the evolutionary tree of the animal kingdom including scorpions, snakes, bees, wasps, frogs and numerous animals living in the sea (e.g. stone fish snail, jellyfish, cone snail and hydra). Interestingly, proteins that share a common scaffold with animal toxins have also been sequenced in non venomous species. In recent years, an increasing number of proteins resembling animal toxins have been identified in non venomous contexts and shown to act as natural cell modulators. These toxin like proteins include proteases, protease inhibitors, as well as secreted proteins which resemble cell antigens, growth factors and more (). A strong evolutionary relation exists between animal toxins and ancestral cysteine cross-linked proteins (). Some of the more striking examples include proteins resembling snake -neurotoxins identified in humans and rodents (). To date, most of these toxin like proteins have been discovered sporadically but the availability of rich sequence resources argues for a more systematic search strategy towards cell modulators. We have developed a classifier for ranking protein sequences according to their toxin like properties. The classifier is able to create a robust characterization of proteins that display characteristics of short, cysteine based compact proteins, many of which are indeed toxin like (). Application of the classifier to the 10 000 predicted protein sequences from the sequenced honey bee proteome identified several such sequences, leading page i483 i482i488
