Motivation: As concurrent use of multiple medications becomes ubiquitous among patients, it is crucial to characterize both adverse and synergistic interactions between drugs. Statistical methods for prediction of putative drug drug interactions dd is can guide in vitro testing and cut down significant cost and effort. With the abundance of experimental data characterizing drugs and their associated targets, such methods must effectively fuse multiple sources of information and perform inference over the network of drugs. Results: We propose a probabilistic approach for jointly inferring unknown dd is from a network of multiple drug based similarities and known interactions. We use the highly scalable and easily ex-tensible probabilistic programming framework Probabilistic Soft Logic. We compare against two methods including a state of the art DDI prediction system across three experiments and show best performing improvements of more than 50% in a up r over both baselines. We find five novel interactions validated by external sources among the top ranked predictions of our model. Availability and implementation: Final versions of all datasets and implementations will be made publicly available.

introduction increasingly patients use multiple phar am ceutical drugs simultaneously to treat their illnesses. Interactions between drugs can result in reduced efficacy of one or more drugs, and in some cases, even dele trio us side effects. The risk of adverse effects is higher in demographics like the elderly that commonly take multiple medications at once. On the other hand, certain drugs interact to produce synergistic effects that are more effective in combatting diseases like cancer (characterizes a drug drug interaction (DDI) as a drug effect that is greater or less than expected in the presence of another drug. Although it remains crucial to verify potential dd is in vitro, it is prohibitively expensive to exhaustively test all possible interactions. Therefore, computational modeling and predictive methods provide a viable way to identify the most salient potential interactions for downstream experimental validation (). Interactions between drugs are classified as pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic. Computational and mathematical modeling methods rely on current understanding of the mechanisms underlying each of these types of interactions and are specific to each interaction type. A pharmacokinetic interaction with a drug affects the process by which the other drug is absorbed, distributed, metabolized or excreted in the body (). On the other hand, drugs acting on the same receptor, site of action or physiological system constitute a pharmacodynamic interaction. Although pharmacokinetic interactions are usually associated with an adverse or exaggerated response, pharmacodynamic interactions are implicated in both synergistic and detrimental effects. Many pharmacokinetic interactions are facilitated by the enzyme family Cytochrome P450 (CYP) and extensive but incomplete knowledge of its mechanisms have been used for computational modeling of pharmacokinetic interactions (). Similarly, prior work has applied mathematical modeling of known drug response mechanisms to simulate and predict pharmacodynamic interactions (). In contrast to computational modeling, statistical and predictive methods leverage data and evidence from related experiments as domain knowledge and biological priors. Recent advancements in high throughput experimentation have generated a wealth of biological characterizations of drug compounds and their target genes (). A key challenge for statistical models of dd is or the closely related problem of drug target interactions, lies in fusing or combining information from multiple data sources. Much related work has developed ways of computing similarity scores between drugs or pairs of drugs to be used as features for machine learning classifiers (). Sophisticated algorithms such as restricted Boltzmann machines and matrix factorization are especially effective in combining two types of similarities by learning latent representations of the entities (;); however, they do not inherently support multiple similarities in the same model. Statistical methods for DDI prediction are more generalizable as they do not rely on extensive expert knowledge of each mode of interaction. although apply their predictive methods only to pharmacodynamic interactions, statis i cals models can be easily extended to both types of interactions. To the best of our knowledge present state of the art results for DDI prediction of both pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions with their INDI system for combining similarity measures to use features for a local logistic regression classifier. However, these similarity based methods neglect the structural information encoded in the biological network of drugs and their interactions. Two general types of approaches have been studied for adding network information to similarity based features: methods that compute additional network based features and methods that perform inference directly over the structure of the network. We refer to these as network similarity methods and network based inference methods, respectively. Both kinds of approaches begin by formulating a graph of drugs and their interactions. network similarity methods proceed by computing relational features, based on the local neighborhoods of drugs such as neighborhood overlap and other well studied network attributes (). The relational features supplement the similarity information given as input to a classifier. In contrast, network based inference methods reason over the graph structure when predicting interactions. Multiple network based inference approaches have been introduced for the closely related problem of drug target interaction prediction. Bleakley and formulate the problem of inferring missing links in a bipartite graph of drugs and targets, and introduce a model that uses local bipartite structure for prediction similarly leverage local bipartite topology for inference and introduce a random walk approach for reasoning over the network of drugs and targets. However, local network based features can not enforce global constraints based on the full graph of entities. Given local relational features, current network based inference methods follow traditional machine learning algorithms in assuming the instances to be independent and identically distributed. In recent work,) improve upon existing bipartite drug target interaction prediction approaches using the probabilistic programming framework Probabilistic Soft Logic (PSL) to jointly classify all interactions, fusing similarity relations and global network information in this work, we formalize the problem of network based DDI prediction using multiple similarity relations. We collectively predict dd is considering statistical dependencies between predictions along with knowledge of observed interactions using PSL. We apply our collective approach to predict dd is on three kinds of interactions: (i) cyp related interactions (CRDs), (ii) nc rds and (iii) general interactions documented by drug bank (). For all settings, we evaluate our collective approach against two non collective methods including state of the art INDI system of Gottlieb et al. (2012) and a non collective PSL model. Our model achieves statistically significant improvement up to 5% in area under the ROC (AUC) results from Gottlieb et al. (2012). We further assess area under the precision recall curve a up r for all methods and show that our collective DDI prediction approach significantly outperforms the state of the art baseline method by up to 50%. Finally, we present important novel dd is predicted by our approach that are validated in literature.

discussion in this work, we formulate the problem of collective DDI prediction. We introduce a joint probabilistic approach using the PSL framework to fuse multiple sources of similarity information together with domain knowledge of the network structure for this domain. The originality of this work lies in proposing and experimentally validating a highly scalable, collective probabilistic approach for DDI prediction that is easily extensible with different sources of information and similarity measures. We evaluate our approach on two datasets containing three types of interactions, including one extracted for this work with known drug bank IDs for additional validations. We perform 10-fold cross validation on all settings and see that our collective PSL model significantly outperforms two other similarity based methods, including the state of the art INDI system, on two important metrics for link prediction, a up r and AUC. Our best performing PSL model improves more than 50% upon a up r of both baselines and achieves a best AUC of 0.97. Moreover, the non collective similarity based method implemented in PSL also significantly outperforms INDI in two settings and performs comparably to INDI in other settings. This result also highlights the effectiveness of PSL as an extensible framework for similarity based reasoning that enjoys the benefits of collective inference shown by the first result. Furthermore, the top then predictions of our best performing collective PSL methods contain five interactions that are unseen in drug bank but substantiated by drugs com and the bio interactor tool on drug bank. This result signifies the usefulness of our collective approach for producing high quality predictions that can be verified experimentally downstream. Another benefit of our collective PSL method is scalability and speed. The focus of the INDI method is combining similarities by computing interaction edge based similarity score using a nearest neighbor search approach. This feature computation is a computationally expensive procedure, requiring On 4  passes over the drug entities. For a dataset containing 807 drugs, this computation takes $12 h on average per fold on a single 32GB machine with 4 cores. The comparable non collective PSL model introduced in this work takes $1 h for a round of weight learning and inference per fold on the same machine. The collective PSL model completes computation for a fold in $7 h. The PSL framework admits highly efficient, polynomial time inference and here, we further reduce computational complexity by blocking unnecessary groundings of the model. Scalability is crucial for link prediction tasks in increasingly massive biological networks, as new drugs are frequently introduced. The task of DDI prediction is closely related to problems of predicting drug side effects, drug adverse reactions, and synergistic drug pairs. Our collective approach for similarity based reasoning in networks can be applied and generalized to all these related settings.
