Motivation: Hormone pathway interactions are crucial in shaping plant development, such as synergism between the auxin and brass in o steroid pathways in cell elongation. Both hormone pathways have been characterized in detail, revealing several feedback loops. The complexity of this network, combined with a shortage of kinetic data, renders its quantitative analysis virtually impossible at present. Results: As a first step towards overcoming these obstacles, we analyzed the network using a Boolean logic approach to build models of auxin and brass in o steroid signaling, and their interaction. To compare these discrete dynamic models across conditions, we transformed them into qualitative continuous systems, which predict network component states more accurately and can accommodate kinetic data as they become available. To this end, we developed an extension for the SQUAD software, allowing semi-quantitative analysis of network states. Contrasting the developmental output depending on cell type specific modulators enabled us to identify a most parsimonious model, which explains initially paradoxical mutant phenotypes and revealed a novel physiological feature. Availability: The package squad d is freely available via the Bioconductor repository at

introduction the ontogenesis of plants is characterized by an intrinsic developmental plasticity, which reflects their capacity to adapt to environmental conditions and is frequently conveyed by modulation of plant hormone pathways (). Thus, plant hormones are not only essential for various endogenous developmental programs, but also for the perception of, and adaptation to, environmental change. Several plant hormone pathways are known, and their often context specific overlapping activities suggest that they influence each other, sometimes * To whom correspondence should be addressed. in a hierarchical, sometimes in a synergistic manner. Auxin and brass in o steroids are among the best characterized hormones with well defined signaling pathways and cellular effects. Both hormones are limiting for cell elongation, a process in which they act synergistically because of crosstalk between their pathways (). A distinct feature that sets auxin apart from other plant hormones is the fact that it can be moved through the plant body by specialized molecular machinery. This regulated and directional transport, called polar auxin transport (PAT), contributes significantly to the local control of auxin action (). Although other hormones, including brass in o steroids (), might well be mobile within a certain range from their site of production, specialized transport systems apart from PAT have not been found so far. Together with auxin biosynthesis, PAT determines cellular auxin concentration, which is translated into a transcriptional response via the canonical auxin signaling pathway. This involves nuclear auxin receptors, transport inhibitor response 1 (TIR1) and homologs, a class of scf type E3 ubiquitin ligase F-box proteins that are activated by binding auxin, hence targeting transcriptional corepressor s of the auxin/indole-3-acetic acid aux iaa family for proteasome mediated degradation (). Since aux ia as inhibit the activation potential of auxin response factors (ARFs), this releases ARFs to activate transcriptional targets of auxin signaling through auxin responsive promoter elements aux res (). Importantly, auxin signaling involves a negative feedback loop, as aux iaa genes are among the most prominent, early auxin signaling targets. Moreover, auxin signaling also affects PAT, because it controls the expression of several of the integral plasma membrane auxin efflux carriers, the p informed (PIN) proteins (). Therefore, auxin transport and signaling are intimately linked, and local auxin activity is conveyed by their interplay (). The brass in o steroid pathway represents a more classic signaling paradigm, where perception of the hormone at the plasma membrane modulates the activity of nuclear targets to eventually trigger gene expression changes (). brass in o steroids are perceived by integral page 1405 14041412
