Motivation: The abundance of biomedical literature has attracted significant interest in novel methods to automatically extract biomedical relations from the literature. Until recently, most research was focused on extracting binary relations such as protein protein interactions and drug disease relations. However, these binary relations can not fully represent the original biomedical data. Therefore, there is a need for methods that can extract fine grained and complex relations known as biomedical events. Results: In this article we propose a novel method to extract biomed-ical events from text. Our method consists of two phases. In the first phase, training data are mapped into structured representations. Based on that, templates are used to extract rules automatically. In the second phase, extraction methods are developed to process the obtained rules. When evaluated against the Genia event extraction abstract and full text test datasets (Task 1), we obtain results with f scores of 52.34 and 53.34, respectively, which are comparable to the state of the art systems. Furthermore, our system achieves superior performance in terms of computational efficiency. Availability: Our source code is available for academic use at

introduction automatic relation extraction is an important and established way to extract information from biomedical literature (). Many relation extraction approaches have been proposed to extract binary relations between biomedical entities from text such as protein protein interactions (), drug drug interactions () and causal relations on drug resistance (). However, such binary relations can not fully represent the biological meaning of the original relations (). As a consequence, there is a need to have a better representation that can exemplify complex relations extracted from text. Recently, this shortcoming has been addressed in the BioNLP'09 Shared Task () by introducing the biomedical event extraction task, which aims to extract complex and nested events from text. In this shared task, an event is defined as follows: each event consists of a trigger, a type and one or more arguments. Depending on the event type, an argument can either be a protein or another event for more details] as illustrated in shows examples of three event types where a simple event (E1) has one protein as the argument, a binding event (E2) has two proteins as the arguments and a regulatory event (E3) has two events as the arguments. Several event extraction approaches have been proposed to the BioNLP'09 and BioNLP'11 challenges (). In general, to extract events from a given sentence, two steps need to be carried out: identifying event triggers and determining their arguments. First, the sentence is typically preprocessed and converted into structured representations such as dependency parse tree and candidate event triggers are often pre-selected using a dictionary. Next, the candidate event triggers and the parse tree are used as the input for the event extraction process. The proposed approaches to extract events can be divided into two main groups, namely, rule based and machine learning ml based approaches. rule based event extraction systems consist of a set of rules that are manually defined or generated from training data. To extract events from text, each pre-selected candidate trigger is first validated to determine its event type. Next, the defined rules are often applied to the parse tree which contains that trigger to find relations between the trigger and its arguments (). Evaluation results from the BioNLP'09 and BioNLP'11 show that rule based systems achieve high precision but low recall. In particular, the system proposed by achieves the highest precision on the BioNLP'09 event extraction track. ml based systems model event extraction tasks as a classification problem. In these systems, pre-selected candidate event triggers and the arguments attached to them are classified as true event triggers or not. Extraction methods proposed in the BioNLP'09 exploit various learning algorithms and feature sets to leverage the system performance (). Methods proposed after the BioNLP'09 can be divided into two groups based on how event triggers and arguments are determined. The first ml based group consists of systems that adopt the pipeline and feature sets proposed by bjorn e and later improved by, in which the evaluation of the candidate triggers and the determination of their arguments are carried out independently. For this type of approach, errors made in the trigger detection good results in terms of f scores on both BioNLP'09 and BioNLP'11 challenges. Apart from these two main approaches, there are a few systems that use different methods. mora propose a hybrid method that combines both rule and ml based approaches use a system using sub-graph matching use case based reasoning system introduce a system using dependency graphs by extending the function of an existing dependency parser. However, the performance of these systems is not comparable to the state of the art ml based systems. In this article we introduce a novel rule based method to extract biomedical events from text. Our method differs in many ways from the existing methods. First, we define a new structured representation to express the relations between event triggers and their arguments. Next, we transform the input text into this structured representation using a shallow parser. We then map the annotated events from the training data into these structured representations, based on that rules are extracted automatically by using predefined templates. The obtained rules are unified to make them more flexible. Finally, we develop event extraction algorithms to apply these unified rules. By using the structured representation to decompose the nested and complex structures of events into simple syntactic layers, we can use simple methods to learn and apply extraction rules. When evaluated on the BioNLP'11 test set, our system achieves an impressive performance in terms of precision and computational times. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first system of its kind to extract biomedical events from text.

conclusion in this article we have proposed a novel rule based method to extract biomedical events from text. Our core method to event extraction is the use of a structured representation to decompose nested and complex events into syntactic layers. This representation not only allows us to simplify the learning and extraction phases but also it requires less syntactic analysis of input sentences. The evaluation results show that our system performs well on both abstract and full text datasets. Furthermore, it achieves superior performance in terms of computational efficiency. It is clearly suited to large scale experiments. Our event extraction method is simpler than the existing ml based approaches. It is also more robust than the previously proposed rule based approaches since it learns rules automatically from training data. Its simplicity and robustness have been proven by the performance on simple and binding events. Its structured representation is generic and is capable of representing any relation types. The proposed feature sets based on the structured representation mainly consist of generic features and a few specific features. Therefore, it is suited to extract many types of relations. If needed, its specific features can be easily adapted to any new domain.
