The Ensembl database makes genomic features available via its Genome Browser. It is also possible to access the underlying data through a Perl API for advanced querying. We have developed a full featured Ruby API to the Ensembl databases, providing the same functionality as the Perl interface with additional features. A single Ruby API is used to access different releases of the Ensembl databases and is also able to query multi-species databases. Availability and Implementation: Most functionality of the API is provided using the ActiveRecord pattern. The library depends on introspection to make it release independent. The API is available through the ruby gem system and can be installed with the command gem install ruby ensembl api
introduction the Ensembl () and UCSC () genome browsers are the first point of call for a large community of genetics and genomics researchers. Both provide a graphical interface for browsing the genomes of a large number of species, displaying the location of genes, polymorphisms, repeats and regulatory regions. Each database can also be accessed directly via SQL and provides an interface for simple querying of the data: bio mart for Ensembl () and the for UCSC. In addition, the Ensembl team provides a Perl API for advanced scripted access to the data (). In recent years, the Python and Ruby scripting languages have gained significant ground in the bioinformatics community (, see e.g.), increasing the need for a programmable interface in these languages. In this article, we describe a second API to the Ensembl database, focusing on the Ruby programming community.

conclusion the library described here provides the functionality needed to query the Ensembl database using the Ruby programming language. This API has several advantages compared to the Perl version, including a single API for all releases, terse r code, a powerful interactive shell, a more useful implementation of the Slice concept and extensive introspection. The Ruby Ensembl API is also ideal for e.g. adding background information on candidate genes from the Ensembl database in applications geared at clinical geneticists eg in preparation). From a library maintainer's perspective, the metaprogramming and introspection capabilities of the Ruby language and the ActiveRecord module allow for providing full functionality and easy maintenance with minimal effort. They enable the Ruby API to be very flexible and by definition virtually insensitive to adding or removing data columns in tables. The API is available through the ruby gem system and can be installed with the command gem install ruby ensembl api. Source code is at http://github.com/ jan dot ruby ensembl api. Documentation and an extensive tutorial (with permission modified from the Perl API) is also available at the git hub website.
