We present a plug-in for Pathway Tools, an integrated systems biology software to create, maintain and query Pathway/ Genome Databases. Fully integrated into the graphical user interface and menu, this plug-in extends the applications functionality by the ability to create multiple sequence alignments, systematically annotate insertion sequence (IS) elements and analyse their activity by cross species comparison tools. Microarray probes can be automatically mapped to target genes, and expression data obtained with these arrays can be transformed into input formats needed to visualize them in the various omics viewers of Pathway Tools. The plug-in API itself allows developers to integrate their own functions into the Pathway Tools menu. Availability: Binaries are freely available for non-commercial users at http://genome.tugraz.at/PGDBToolbox/ and can be used on all platforms supported by Pathway Tools. A user guide is freely available at:

introduction pathway genome Databases pg dbs are highly integrated model organism databases that store genome sequence and annotation as well as a reconstruction of the metabolic and regulatory network. well curated pg dbs like EcoCyc () are an important tool to gain better understanding of cellular component interaction and how changes in an organism's network affect its phenotype. pg dbs are usually maintained, queried and visualized using the Pathway Tools software developed by the Bioinformatics Research Group at SRI International (), which has extensive capabilities in the fields of operon and pathway prediction, analysis of biological networks, species comparison and analysis of omics datasets. The importance of pg dbs to biochemical research is reflected by an ever growing number of p gdb collections and software tools maintaining and analysing such databases (). Our toolbox aims at further extending the capabilities of p gdb based systems biology research by means of plug-ins that can be added to the Pathway Tools software to address special aspects of analytical workflows not covered by the core software itself. Multiple sequence alignments of orthologous genes across related organisms, including a freely defined 5 0 sequence region, allow detecting differences in gene, promoter or regulator binding regions that affect gene function or expression. Systematic annotation of insertion sequence (IS) elements, combined with cross species comparison functions, provides insight into transposon activity and gene clusters affected thereof. Tools for mapping microarray probes to target genomes and visualizing expression profiles in the genome browser are provided; these tools also create input files for data visualization in Pathway Tools' various overview diagrams.
