Motivation: Inferring the underlying regulatory pathways within a gene interaction network is a fundamental problem in Systems Biology to help understand the complex interactions and the regulation and flow of information within a system of interest. Given a weighted gene network and a gene in this network, the goal of an inference algorithm is to identify the potential regulatory pathways passing through this gene. Results: In a departure from previous approaches that largely rely on the random walk model, we propose a novel single source k shortest paths based algorithm to address this inference problem. An important element of our approach is to explicitly account for and enhance the diversity of paths discovered by our algorithm. The intuition here is that diversity in paths can help enrich different functions and thereby better position one to understand the underlying system of interest. Results on the yeast gene network demonstrate the utility of the proposed approach over extant state of the art inference algorithms. Beyond utility, our algorithm achieves a significant speed up over these baselines.

introduction with advances in high throughput experimental technologies, we are now witnessing a revolutionary change in our ability to measure and store various forms of interaction data (e.g. protein protein protein dna rna protein metabolites and genetic interactions) for different organisms. The central objective in Systems Biology is to fuse and analyze the diverse molecular, cellular, tissue level and higher level data sources to deduce how sub systems and whole organisms work from these network of interactions. A node in such a network is usually a gene or its corresponding protein, and an edge in a gene network represents a protein protein interaction (PPI) or a transcription factor tf dna binding. A major challenge here is to identify the underlying regulatory pathways, each of which is a chain of interacting genes within a network. A regulatory pathway begins with a causal gene and ends at a target gene, and each gene in a pathway can either activate or deactivate some functions of its neighboring genes. The uncovering of potential pathways across genes helps biologists understand the cellular functions of each gene and protein. As noted earlier, a range of experimental methods such as two hybrid analysis have been developed to uncover a large amount of interactions between genes * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and proteins, and gene knock-out experiments and some studies () have also computed the confidence level associated with an interaction. On the basis of discovery that genes with high centrality in a gene network usually have higher essentiality, lethality and ple io tropy (), several research works () have focused on inferring the regulatory pathways on a number of organisms such as fly, yeast and human. Given a weighted directed gene network and a specific gene, we seek to develop efficient algorithms for the following sub problems i unknown causal if the given gene is a target gene, infer possible causal genes and their pathways; (ii) unknown target if the given gene is a causal gene, infer possible target genes and their pathways. Since, given a target gene, some biological experiments such as expression quantitative trait loci e qtl analysis can locate an approximate location of a causal gene and thus can provide candidate causal genes, another sub problem is (iii) candidate causal given a causal gene, infer the most likely causal gene among the candidates. Recently, approaches based on the random walk model have been suggested as a means to address this problem. A random walk typically starts from the given gene, walks through several nodes, and terminates according to some pre-defined parameters, such as walk length and edge weights. Generally, the number of visits to a node across multiple walks from a given gene gives a measure of influence or importance, which in turn provides a measure of how likely that node is involved in a pathway containing the given gene first proposed this model to address this inference problem with an additional requirement, rooted in domain knowledge, that the random walk could visit any node at most once proposed the electrical circuit model as an analogy of gene networks, in which each edge is a resistor and its conductance is proportional to the edge's weight. This circuit model can be solved according to kirchhoff s and Ohm's laws, and the amount of current flowing through each node can be interpreted as the possibility of this node being involved in a pathway. It has been shown that this circuit model can be interpreted as the random walk model (), but it can not directly apply on directed edges. The information flow model sto j miro vic used a similar approach to topic sensitive PageRank (), whereas the electrical circuit model () and pagerank based method () can be seen as the special cases of the information model. As we discuss later, these approaches have some important limitations that we seek to overcome. Specifically, in a clear departure from past work, here we discuss a novel approach to solving this inference problem by adapting the
