Motivation: For genetic studies, statistically significant variants explain far less trait variance than sub-threshold association signals. To dimension follow-up studies, researchers need to accurately estimate true effect sizes at each SNP, e.g. the true mean of odds ratios ors regression coefficients (RRs) or Z-score non central ities. nave nave estimates of effect sizes incur winners curse biases, which are reduced only by laborious winners curse adjustments (WCAs). Given that z scores estimates can be theoretically translated on other scales, we propose a simple method to compute WCA for z scores i.e. their true means non central ities. results wca of z scores shrinks these towards zero while, on p value scale, multiple testing adjustment (MTA) shrinks p values toward one, which corresponds to the zero Z-score value. Thus, WCA on z scores scale is a proxy for MTA on p value scale. Therefore, to estimate Z-score non central ities for all SNPs in genome scans, we propose FDR Inverse Quantile Transformation fi qt. It (i) performs the simpler MTA of p values using FDR and (ii) obtains non central ities by back transforming MTA p values on Z-score scale. When compared to competitors, realistic simulations suggest that fi qt is more (i) accurate and (ii) computationally efficient by orders of magnitude. Practical application of fi qt to Psychiatric Genetic Consortium schizophrenia cohort predicts a non-trivial fraction of sub-threshold signals which become significant in much larger super samples. Conclusions: fi qt is a simple, yet accurate, WCA method for z scores (and ors rrs via simple transformations).

introduction genome wide association studies g was represent a powerful and widely used tool for detecting associations between genetic variants and complex traits. In such studies, researchers directly assay and statistically impute () genotypes for one to several million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), respectively. The g was paradigm has been very successful in identifying genetic variants associated with a range of phenotypes (). However, as seen in g was of psychiatric disorders (), a considerable portion of the predicted genetic contribution is contributed by numerous moderate signals which are not deemed significant at accepted genome wide levels, i.e. 'suggestive' signals. With the advent of large scale whole exo me and genome sequencing studies, the field will likely see an exponential increase in the number of such suggestive signal. To successfully dimension future studies, e.g. for detecting as significant a certain number of signals which are only 'suggestive' in current cohorts, there is a need for statistical methods that accurately estimate unbiased effect sizes for suggestive signal SNPs and, even, all variants from genome scans (henceforth denoting not only extant g was and whole exo me sequencing but emergent whole genome sequencing studies as well). Given that effect size estimates such as z scores ORs and RRs can be theoretically translated from one scale to another, in this paper we concentrate on estimating the true means non centrality of z scores at each SNP. When estimating the true effect sizes, it is well established that the largest signals are generally the most affected by the bias known as 'winner's curse' (), i.e. their apparent effect size is (sometimes much) larger than their true values. This is due to statistics with the largest magnitude having an extreme value distribution (), as opposed to the Gaussian distribution we commonly assume for a random SNP Z-score. By incorrectly assuming a Gaussian distribution, nave nave estimators of extreme statistics have a tendency to overestimate the magnitude of these statistics (). In statistical genetics, researchers proposed a multitude of methods to perform winner's curse adjustment (WCA) for studies with one stage (discovery) () and two stage (discovery and replication) studies (). For z scores these WCA estimates, i.e. their non central ities or true means, are obtained by shrinking the z scores towards their null value of zero. However, a majority of these methods are only designed to handle mostly significant signals. Recently, two new tools for estimating the mean non centrality of all statistics in genome scans were proposed. The first, the Empirical Bayes (EB) method based on tweedie s formula (), was adapted from a general purpose statistical method. Because it employs empirical estimates of the density histogram (120 bins by default) of scan statistics, it is well suited for the large number of statistics from a genome scan (albeit less suited to instances in which the number of statistics is much smaller). In the context of genome scans, this method was used by, who found that the empirical histogram is less precise in the extreme tails off the distribution, where tail adjustment (TA) methods () provide better accuracy. Based on these observations, the authors proposed an interesting adaptive combination of EB and TA which, at the cost of increased computational burden, combines the best attributes of both methods. The second of these new tools is a computationally efficient, soft threshold method () which adjusts statistics such that their sum of squares do not overestimate the true mean. Because this method does not use empirical density estimation, it is applicable even to a small number of statistics. Similar to WCA, nave nave use of SNP p values as a measure of association for SNPs will overestimate their statistical significance. This is due to the fact that, due to the large number of tests, many SNPs will attain very low p values even under the null hypothesis of no association between trait and genotypes. Thus, to be used in assessing genome wide significance of SNPs, individual p values need to be first adjusted for multiple testing (). After multiple testing adjustment (MTA), the adjusted p values are much larger than the original ones, i.e. they are 'shrunken' towards the null value of one. Given that WCA shrinks z scores towards zero and MTA shrinks the p values towards one (which corresponds to a value of zero on the Z-score scale), we argue that WCA for effect sizes is very similar in spirit with, if not downright the homologue of, MTA for p values. Thus, MTA can be considered, if not identical to, a very good proxy for the WCA for p values. To accurately estimate the WCA of z scores from a genome scan, i.e. their true means non central ities we propose a novel two step method, which is inspired by the strong similarity between MTA and WCA. First, we perform a MTA for p values e.g. by using a False Discovery Rate (FDR) approach (). Second, we estimate the non centrality of z scores by back transforming the adjusted p value on the Z-score scale using an inverse Gaussian cumulative distribution function (cdf). When compared to competing methods, we show that the proposed procedure has very good performance in terms of (i) squared error loss, (ii) fraction of the variability in true means of univariate statistics explained and (iii) computational efficiency. A practical application of this approach shows that, due to their good performance, the proposed estimators can be used to predict with reasonable accuracy the number and location of sub treshold signals that are likely to become significant in much larger cohorts.
