Motivation: The medical imaging and image processing techniques, ranging from microscopic to macroscopic, has become one of the main components of diagnostic procedures to assist dermatologists in their medical decision making processes. computer aided segmentation and border detection on dermo scopic images is one of the core components of diagnostic procedures and therapeutic interventions for skin cancer. Automated assessment tools for dermo scopic images have become an important research field mainly because of inter and intra observer variations in human interpretations. In this study, a novel approach graph spanner— for automatic border detection in dermo scopic images is proposed. In this approach, a proximity graph representation of dermo scopic images in order to detect regions and borders in skin lesion is presented. Results: Graph spanner approach is examined on a set of 100 dermo scopic images whose manually drawn borders by a dermatologist are used as the ground truth. Error rates, false positives and false negatives along with true positives and true negatives are quantified by digitally comparing results with manually determined borders from a dermatologist. The results show that the highest precision and recall rates obtained to determine lesion boundaries are 100%. However, accuracy of assessment averages out at 97.72% and borders errors mean is 2.28% for whole dataset.

introduction melanoma is the fifth most common malignancy in the US. Invasive and in situ melanoma has rapidly become one of the leading cancers in the world. Malignant melanoma, the most deadly form of skin cancer, is one of the most rapidly increasing cancers. 62 480 incidences and 8420 deaths are the estimated numbers in the USA in 2008 (). In malignant melanoma, early diagnosis is particularly important since melanoma can be cured with a simple excision operation. der mos copy also known as der matos copy is one of the major non-invasive skin imaging techniques that is extensively used in the diagnosis of melanoma and other skin lesions. This imaging technique offers more visible image subsurface structures when compared to conventional clinical images (). der mos copy also helps identifying various morphological features; for instance, blotches, streaks, blue white areas, dots/ globules and pigment networks (). Because of these unique features, screening errors can be reduced at the inspection. In addition, greater differentiation between difficult lesions, such as pigmented Spitz * To whom correspondence should be addressed. nevi, clinically equivocal lesions can be provided (). dermo scopic assessment remains one of the most critical steps in the diagnosis and subsequent treatment of malignant melanoma. Recent improvements in imaging techniques have led to the automated discovery of lesions. Traditionally, assessment of tumor margins is done manually by a dermatologist. The recognition of cancerous regions is a time consuming and error prone process, and it is innate in the nature of the human inspection. Unfortunately, for inexperienced dermatologists, der mos copy may actually lower the diagnostic accuracy (). The use of a fast and reliable computerized system could markedly increase the number of examined images for the existence of cancer regions. Moreover, the computerized image analysis is able to minimize the effect of inter and intra observer variability. Inter-observer variability is defined in terms of the decisions assigned between different observers on the same subject. However, intra observer variability is defined in terms of the decisions assigned within the observer; for instance, the same dermatologist judges differently on the same image at different times. Therefore, unlike inexperienced dermatologists, when it comes to trying to minimize the chance of diagnostic errors, it is important to develop computerized image analysis techniques. These techniques alleviate the difficulty and subjectivity of visual interpretations which are the major contributors to the diagnostic errors (). In the investigation of melanoma, delineation of region of interest is the first and key step in the automated analysis of skin lesion images for many reasons. First and foremost, the border structure provides important information for accurate diagnosis. Asymmetry, border irregularity and abrupt border cut off are of many clinical features calculated based on the border lesion. Furthermore, the extraction of other important clinical indicators such as a typical pigment networks, globules and blue white areas critically depends on the border detection (). At the first stage for analysis of der mos copy images, automated border detection is usually being applied (). There are many factors that make automated border detection complex, e.g. low contrast between the surrounding skin and the lesion, fuzzy and irregular lesion border, intrinsic artifacts such as cutaneous features (air bubbles, blood vessels, hairs and black frames) to name a few (). According to automated border detection can be divided into four sections: pre-processing, segmentation, post-processing and evaluation. Preprocessing step involves color space transformation (), contrast enhancement () and artifacts removal (). Segmentation step involves partitioning of an image into disjoint regions (). Post-processing step is used to obtain the lesion

conclusion in this study, a novel approach for automatic detection of skin lesions: BH is presented. The BH is a s kds that keeps proximity graph representation in hierarchical form. It maintains geometric closeness relations among the point sets (colors). This data structure builds a hierarchical decomposition of a connected graph with certain properties (see Section 2.2 for properties). Our approach is examined on a set of 100 der mos copy images. Error rates: false positives and false negatives along with true positives and true negatives are quantified by digitally comparing results with manually determined borders from a dermatologist as the ground truth. The assessments obtained from our method are quantitatively analyzed with respect to be s precisions and recalls. Moreover, visual outcome showed that our method effectively delineated targeted lesions. Results proved that accuracy of automated assessments with the BH averages 97.72% which is higher than previously proposed methods. Also, BH is compared against well known graph based segmentation methods on der mos copy images and BH outperformed these methods. As a result, our approach finds both the lesions and the lesion borders with high precision rates.
