Motivation: The Illumina bead array is a popular platform for profiling DNA methylation, an important epigenetic event associated with gene silencing and chromosomal instability. However, current approaches rely on an arbitrary detection p value cut off for excluding probes and samples from subsequent analysis as a quality control step, which results in missing observations and information loss. It is desirable to have an approach that incorporates the whole data, but accounts for the different quality of individual observations. Results: We first investigate and propose a statistical framework for removing the source of biases in Illumina Methylation bead array based on several positive control samples. We then introduce a weighted model based clustering called lumi w cluster for Illumina bead array that weights each observation according to the detection p values systematically and avoids discarding subsets of the data. lumi w cluster allows for discovery of distinct methylation patterns and automatic selection of informative CpG loci. We demonstrate the advantages of lumi w cluster on two publicly available Illumina GoldenGate Methylation datasets (ovarian cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma). Availability: R package lumi w cluster can be downloaded from

introduction dna methylation is an important epigenetic modification and plays critical roles in transcriptional regulation, chromosomal stability, genomic imprinting and x inactivation (). Numerous literatures have established the influence of DNA methylation in transcriptional aberrations in human diseases including various types of cancer (). DNA methylation occurs in cytosine s of CpG dinucleotides in human in a non-random fashion across the genome. In particular, cpg rich regions (known as CpG islands) are usually hypo methylated whereas repetitive genomic sequences are hyper methylated in normal cells. Over the past decade, there has been vast research in studying alterations of * To whom correspondence should be addressed. DNA methylation in cancer. A general observed trend of perturbed DNA methylation includes hypo methylation of oncogenes and hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes, leading to genomic instability and tumorigenesis (). Several platforms are available for DNA methylation profiling that includes high throughput arrays and more recently, the next generation sequencing instruments. The experimental approaches in high throughput array based methylation include bisulfite conversion based methods, restriction enzyme based methods and immunoprecipitation based methods (). A popular robust methylation profiling platform via bisulfite conversion is the Illumina GoldenGate and Infinium Methylation Assays based on the bead array technology. This technology utilizes 3 m silica beads which are replicated 30 times on the array and has emerged as an attractive platform for genotyping, expression and methylation analysis (). This technology requires less sample input but produces high quality data (), thereby reducing the cost of array experiments. The increasing popularity of Illumina bead array technology is apparent given the numerous scientific publications since 2008. However, there is only a handful of statistical framework for analyzing Illumina bead array gene expression (), and limited work is available for methylation array counterpart (). Existing work for gene expression bead array falls into the categories of data preprocessing and differential expression detection. This includes background correction methods (), variance stabilizing techniques () and modified test statistics for differential gene expression in Illumina bead array (). Most of the framework for gene expression analysis is based on the assumption that the majority of the genes are not differentially expressed. In contrast, many sites are expected to be methylated (), and therefore the assumptions in gene expression are not applicable to methylation experiments. The goal of our article is to provide a statistical framework for array based methylation profiling on Illumina bead array technology, by studying the source of biases and the data generating mechanism of Illumina methylation assays. Specifically, we propose a model for correcting the source of biases in Illumina Methylation bead array and introduce a weighted model based approach for clustering the methylation profiles. The framework of our weighted model based clustering can also be directly applied to other Illumina bead array platforms, e.g. gene expression bead chip because it does not rely on the assumption that most beads are from the null distribution of no differential expression. In the next section, we describe the page 2850 28492855

discussion the delineation of DNA methylation patterns is important in understanding how these epigenetic changes might lead to aberrant expression patterns and disease (). Advancements in biotechnology have enabled high throughput profiling of DNA methylation, including the Illumina GoldenGate and Infinium bead array via bi sulphite conversion. These platforms are robust, highly reproducible and require less starting materials. In the first part of this study, we illustrated the source of biases present in Illumina Methylation arrays and proposed a model for correcting these biases. A common approach in analyzing Illumina Methylation data includes omitting CpG loci and samples that exhibit detection p values larger than an arbitrary cut off. This hard thresholding step often results in missing observations and information loss by discarding a subset of probes. We proposed a weighted model based approach called lumi w cluster that weights each CpG locus sample by its detection p values for clustering DNA methylation profiles. In this article, we set the weights as the median detection p values across samples (or CpG loci) which appears to perform well in the two case studies. Optimal selection of weight functions is beyond the scope of this article and will be an interesting future research direction.
