Motivation: The identification of the sites at which transcription factors (TFs) bind to Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is an important problem in molecular biology. Many computational methods have been developed for motif finding, most of them based on position specific scoring matrices ps sms which assume the independence of positions within a binding site. However, some experimental and computational studies demonstrate that interdependence s within the positions exist. Results: In this article, we introduce a novel motif finding method which constructs a subspace based on the covariance of numerical DNA sequences. When a candidate sequence is projected into the modeled subspace, a threshold in the q residuals confidence allows us to predict whether this sequence is a binding site. Using the TRANSFAC and JASPAR databases, we compared our q residuals detector with existing PSSM methods. In most of the studied TF binding sites, the q residuals detector performs significantly better and faster than MATCH and MAST. As compared with Motifscan, a method which takes into account interdependence s the performance of the q residuals detector is better when the number of available sequences is small. Availability: http://r-forge.r-project.org/projects/meet Contact:

introduction deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequence motifs are short sequence patterns with biological function. In the gene promoter region, there are DNA sequence motifs which hint at the interaction between the gene regulation machinery and the nucleic acids. They are involved in several DNA and ribonucleic acid (RNA) processes, such as the binding of some proteins to DNA, the ribosome binding to mRNA, and mRNA processing (D). Protein biosynthesis starts with a transcription process. This process, for example in eukaryotes, is led by several types of RNA polymerase that require special DNA sequences in promoters and a set of transcription factor (TF) proteins. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Due to the importance of gene regulation, a major problem in molecular biology is to discover the location of the transcription factor binding sites tfbs s within the genome. But the fact that most TFs bind to short, degenerate sequences makes it difficult to find sequence patterns to model the binding sites (). Many algorithms try to characterize these patterns, and such algorithms may be classified into consensus based methods or alignment based methods (). Most of the algorithms developed target the location of tfbs s. These follow one of two strategies: (i) to discover common binding sites into a set of unaligned sequences of co regulated genes and (ii) to make use of the previous knowledge of sequences to search for a motif within a genome (). The algorithms which use the previous knowledge of the binding site sequences are mostly based on position specific scoring matrices (). PSSM are matrices of frequencies of each nucleotide in each position of the binding site. Some examples of these algorithms are MATCH (), which uses information at each position to construct a PSSM; MAST (), based on the q fast algorithm and part of MEME suite (); r vista () which uses evolutionary data; and item e () which calculates the information loss of the binding sites. These models assume that the positions in binding sites are statistically independent. However, experimental evidence shows that TFBS have interdependence s between positions () and some computational studies suggest the same (). These findings have motivated the development of new strategies which take into account position interdependence s. Models based on Markov chains, such as WAM (), are restricted to modeling interdependence s between adjacent positions. Other algorithms estimate non-adjacent interdependence s using permuted Markov models (); Bayesian networks (); variable order Bayesian networks () or graphs (). Detectors constructed using these techniques have higher accuracy, but require the tuning of many parameters for optimal operation which typically requires a large number of binding site instances. Additionally, most of these algorithms are computationally intensive. On the other hand, a large body of knowledge exists for specific event detection in numerical sequences (signals), and the conversion
