Currently available bisulfite sequencing tools frequently suffer from low mapping rates and low methylation calls, especially for data generated from the Illumina sequencer, next seq. Here, we introduce a sequential trimming and retrieving alignment approach for investigating DNA methylation patterns, which significantly improves the number of mapped reads and covered CpG sites. The method is implemented in an automated analysis toolkit for processing bisulfite sequencing reads. Availability and implementation:

introduction the advancement of next generation sequencing technologies offers the opportunity to investigate the epigenetic modification on genome wide scale and at single base resolution (). Reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) has emerged as a popular tool for profiling DNA methylation at CpG rich regions. A major advantage of the RRBS method is its reproducibility over time and sample types. Compared with traditional enrichment based methods, RRBS is more applicable to formalin fixed and paraffin embedded clinical samples, due to its low DNA input requirement. However, there are considerable challenges when analyzing the reads from RRBS due to the complexity induced by the bisulfite conversion. Highly specialized analysis pipelines are needed to target different data types and different platforms. all samples sequenced by the Illumina next seq platform. An important feature of reads from an RRBS library is that most sequences have Gs at the second and third bases. Consequently low read quality will thus be observed at positions 2 and 3 on next seq 500, because 'G' bases do not have a dye attached. The easiest remedy appears to be trimming the first few low quality bases from each read to improve the subsequent alignment process. The first base of every sequence, however, is particularly informative in indicating methylation status at one CpG site which should predominantly be a 'C' if it was methylated and a 'T' if not methylated. Another possible solution is to mask the low quality bases by replacing their reads with 'N's. We tested this solution but did not observe any improvement compared with the mapping based on raw reads. This is understandable because the ambiguity of base calls still exists. Such issues can be largely alleviated when libraries are sequenced on a his eq platform. The downside is that one would obtain even fewer reads per library per sequencing run. Although this may be compensated by decreasing multiplexing (the number of individual libraries sequenced at the same time), the sequencing costs per library increase accordingly. Furthermore, many smaller laboratories do not have easy access to his eqs while a desktop next seq is both cheaper and easier to operate. next seq is also widely used in large sequencing facilities due to its fast turnaround time. Therefore, it is critical to adapt the current RRBS processing pipeline to incorporate this issue.
