Motivation: Oxidoreductases are a fundamental class of enzymes responsible for the catalysis of oxidation reduction reactions, crucial in most bioenergetic metabolic pathways. From their common root in the ancient prebiotic environment, oxidoreductases have evolved into diverse and elaborate protein structures with specific kinetic properties and mechanisms adapted to their individual functional roles and environmental conditions. While accurate kinetic modeling of oxidor-eductases is thus important, current models suffer from limitations to the steady state domain, lack empirical validation or are too specialized to a single system or set of conditions. Results: To address these limitations, we introduce a novel unifying modeling framework for kinetic descriptions of oxidoreductases. The framework is based on a set of seven elementary reactions that (i) form the basis for 69 pairs of enzyme state transitions for encoding various specific microscopic intra enzyme reaction networks micro models and (ii) lead to various specific macroscopic steady state kinetic equations macro models via thermodynamic assumptions. Thus, a syner-gistic bridge between the micro and macro kinetics can be achieved, enabling us to extract unitary rate constants, simulate reaction variance and validate the micro models using steady state empirical data. To help facilitate the application of this framework, we make available redox mech a Mathematica TM software package that automates the generation and customization of micro models. Availability: The Mathematica TM source code for redox mech the documentation and the experimental datasets are all available from:

introduction oxidoreductase the first enzyme class in the Enzyme Commission Nomenclature (EC 1.x.x.x, henceforth referred to as EC 1), consists of enzymes responsible for the catalytic transfer of electrons from an electron donor molecule to an electron accept or molecule. The universal presence of oxidoreductases in the energy producing pathways of bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes suggests that these proteins arose earlier during the process of biogenesis, and are thus essential for life (). In the EC 1, oxidoreductases are classified according to the types of donor and accept or molecules in the particular oxidation reduction (redox) reaction that they participate in (http://www.brendaenzymes.org), although the kinetics and regulatory behaviors of enzymes in the same classification may differ significantly across different organisms, or even across different tissues in the same organism (). To understand the functional role an oxidoreductase has within a pathway, and to characterize its differences from other oxidoreductases, it is necessary to be able to predict accurately its dynamics over a range of conditions. However, a full realization of the dynamics of an oxidoreductase is currently hindered by (i) the lack of detailed structural and mechanistic information on most of the oxidoreductases, e.g. complex in a dh dehydrogenase (), (ii) the technological limitations in obtaining the specific elementary kinetic rate constants and (iii) the computational limitations associated with molecular dynamics and other physical simulations over large spatial and temporal scales (). To bypass these limitations, simplified models are used, which typically follow either the macroscopic modeling approach of deducing a steady state velocity equation to represent the rate of the reaction, or the microscopic kinetic approach of defining a system of intra enzyme processes to represent the detailed kinetic mechanisms of the enzyme. A macroscopic steady state velocity equation is a mathematical relationship between reactant concentrations and empirically derived kinetic parameters that provides a steady state deterministic solution to the flux of the reactants through the enzyme. The relationship can be a simple hyperbolic function, such as the michael is menten kinetic equation, or a more complex function derived from a macroscopic approximation of many elementary reactions at steady state (). Kinetic models based on steady state velocity equations are widely used and published because steady state kinetic parameters are relatively easy to acquire via available measurement techniques, and the steady state 'snap-shots' of their dynamics can readily be compared (). For example, in our previous work (), a two substrate and two product (Bi Bi) steady state velocity equation termed the chemi osmotic rate law was derived for the chemi osmotic oxidoreductase complexes in the mitochondria, and corresponding enzyme assay protocols were developed and implemented to estimate the values of the kinetic parameters in the rate law and enable comparison across various cell lines. However, steady state velocity equations are based on many approximations and steady state assumptions that severely limit *To whom correspondence should be addressed. their range of applicability. Furthermore, although deterministic solutions can satisfactorily describe the average behavior of the enzyme over many ensembles that are consistent with in vitro experimental conditions, they might not accurately capture in vivo conditions within a cell or a cell's organelle, where the significantly lower volume and thus fewer copies of the enzyme and its reactants and stochastic fluctuations may become important (). Thus, many kinetic features of the enzyme could be over-estimated (e.g. the parameter values), under-estimated (e.g. stochastic variability of the velocity) or altogether lost (e.g. transient phase of the reaction). Microscopic kinetic models avoid the various steady state approximations by explicitly accounting for the intra enzyme reactions and solving the corresponding system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs;). Kinetic models based on intra enzyme reactions not only can produce a more complete deterministic description of the enzyme kinetics, but can also be used in conjunction with monte carlo methods such as gillespie s stochastic simulation algorithm (SSA) to produce stochastic time series, which can capture the intrinsic variability of the catalyzed reaction (). However, in contrast to the velocity equations, the rate constants of the intra enzyme reactions are not only harder to obtain experimentally (), but also less useful in comparison between models owing to the lack of standards between the various possible enzyme mechanisms. Here we present a novel framework for modeling oxidoreductase catalyzed reactions that uses a synergistic combination of both macroscopic and microscopic kinetic model descriptions of the reaction system (henceforth referred to as macro model and micro model respectively) to obviate the aforementioned modeling limitations. At the core of this unifying framework is a basis of seven elementary reactions. This basis can be used to express various mechanisms of oxidoreductase by (i) defining the specific micro model out of the 69 pairs of feasible enzyme micro state transitions spanned from the seven elementary reactions, and (ii) inferring the corresponding specific macro model through temporal separation and non-equilibrium thermodynamic assumptions. We show that, by sharing the same abstraction, the unitary rate constants of the micro model can be estimated from the experimentally determinable steady state parameters of the macro model to produce the same steady state output. In contrast, the intrinsic stochasticity of the enzyme captured by the micro model simulations can be superimposed onto the macro model time series. Additionally, we show how well known mechanisms can be encoded by the micro model how these mechanisms differ in their transient and steady state domains and how they can be combined to simulate a cascade or a super complex. The application of this framework is facilitated by a Mathematica TM software package, redox mech which generates customizable micro models through simple x cellerator like arrow notations for chemical reactions.

conclusion we have introduced a general microscopic framework for the kinetic modeling of Bi Bi oxidoreductases by decomposing their redox capabilities into seven elementary reactions. By using different combinations of enzyme state transitions, this approach enables and subsumes more specialized models for specific members of the family, or specific conditions. Furthermore, in the steady state regime, the approach leads to macroscopic rate equations consistent with previous derivations and with experimental data, unifying both microscopic and macroscopic approaches for modeling enzymatic reaction of EC 1. Because the microscopic models are composable, the generality of the approach can also be used to model EC 1 super complexes as cascades of individual complexes. In addition, the microscopic framework allows incorporation of elementary binding reactions of specific inhibitory reactants to enable modeling of regulatory control mechanisms, as well as alternative electron transfer reactions to enable modeling of slippage mechanisms involved in reactive oxygen species production. Altogether, this framework provides a way to flexibly and programmatically describe the core enzymes of cellular energetics for possible integration into future comprehensive models of metabolism that will further our understanding of the central role bioenergetics play, not only in the maintenance of life but also in disease and aging.
