Barcode quality index (B) is a novel, unified measure of sequence quality and contig overlap tailored to the needs of DNA barcoding. Re-analysis of published data demonstrates the utility of B.

introduction dna barcoding is an emerging enterprise that aims to build a reference database of high quality DNA sequences generated from expert identified vouchered specimens (). Once populated, the reference database will allow non specialists to easily identify specimens by sequencing a standard set of markers. Unfortunately, low quality sequences may obscure subtle differences among specimens resulting in inaccurate identification. The BARCODE data standard governs the quality and type of sequences archived as references (). Quality is assessed through a combination of base caller error probabilities, sequence coverage and contig size. For example, a reference COI sequence should contain at least 486 bp of contiguous sequence within the reference region, have 1.6 (bidirectional) coverage, and have error probabilities of 0.01 or smaller assigned to at least 60% of its bases (q = 20; 10log 10 p;). For (nearly) fixed length markers, a threshold for each variable can be effectively employed. In contrast, the application of absolute thresholds particularly contig size to variable length markers results in severe distortion. Some of this distortion can be ameliorated by the use of contig size for normalization, but distortion persists in extremely long or short sequences due to dependance among variables: there is a strong positive correlation between the number (or percent) of low quality bases and contig size, while at the same there is a strong negative correlation between sequence coverage and contig size. The criteria for selecting barcode markers must include a comparison of sequence quality among candidate markers. To accomplish this the c bol Plant Working Group (2009) generated a set of sequences for each marker; a set of trimming and assembly criteria were applied; and the numbers of passing contigs for each marker were compared. Although markers lacking adequate sequence quality were recognized, statistically significant differences in quality among markers could not be identified c bol Plant Working Group, 2009). DNA barcoding needs a distortion free index that combines measures of sequence quality with contig size and overlap. Such an index must be amenable to statistical analysis and comparable among sequences, markers and editing protocols. This will enable uniform quality evaluation of newly generated sequences particularly those of variable length markers.

application to avoid conflating PCR success with sequence quality, the de novo sequence traces generated by the c bol Plant working were re tabulated excluding presumed PCR failures (i.e. read failure of both primers). In addition, the data were reanalyzed using B 30. The original base calls and quality values (KB 1.2) were extracted with trace tuner (3.0.6; http://sourceforge.net/projects/tracetuner/) and trimmed and filtered as described in the original publication. Presumed PCR failures were excluded. Contigs were assembled with ph rap (0.990329; http://www.phrap.org/). MUSCLE (3.8.31;) was used to align the contig to the trimmed reads in order to determine observed contig length (c) excluding ph rap induced trimming. Non-overlapping contigs were assumed for single, or paired reads, that could not be assembled into contigs (i.e. c = the combined length of the trimmed reads). Statistical differences in sequence quality among markers were examined using the method of Scheff (1953) at P = 0.05. The binomial and Gaussian distributions were used for the re tabulated and B 30 analyses, respectively (R 2.11.1; MASS 7.3-6; agricola e 1.0-9; http://cran.r-project.org/). The most striking differences between the published and re tabulated analyses are a 522% increase in re tabulated scores and a rank order rearrangement of B, C and M. Given the published trimming and assembly criteria, the minimum B 30 score for a passing contig in the re tabulated analysis is 0.375 (assuming a Gaussian quality distribution). Scores above the minimum reflect a greater number of high quality bases or additional contig overlap. Although the re tabulated and B 30 analyses are very similar, they are not perfectly correlated (). Mean B 30 for non-coding markers a K and Pis 3138% higher than the minimum passing score whereas coding markers are 3851% higher. The inclusion of non-overlapping contigs depressed mean B 30 14% for coding and 611% for non-coding markers. Neither the published nor re tabulated analyses could identify any statistically distinctive groups of markers, whereas the B 30 analysis was able to identify four distinct groups. The increased statistical resolution of the B 30 analysis can be attributed to the ability to use more powerful statistical distributions and a reduction in variation within markers. Thus, B provides a more nuanced (resolved) and statistically amenable measure of sequencing success that considers both sequence quality and contig coverage.
