Motivation: Gene regulation commonly involves interaction among DNA, proteins and biochemical conditions. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) technologies, protein dna interactions are routinely detected in the genome scale. Computational methods that detect weak protein binding signals and simultaneously maintain a high specificity yet remain to be challenging. An attractive approach is to incorporate biologically relevant data, such as protein co occupancy to improve the power of protein binding detection. We call the additional data related with the target protein binding as supporting tracks. Results: We propose a novel but rigorous statistical method to identify protein occupancy in ChIP data using multiple supporting tracks (PASS2). We demonstrate that utilizing biologically related information can significantly increase the discovery of true protein binding sites, while still maintaining a desired level of false positive calls. Applying the method to GATA1 restoration in mouse erythroid cell line, we detected many new gata1 binding sites using GATA1 co occupancy data.

introduction understanding the association between protein occupancy and the target gene expression is essential to study the mechanism of gene regulation. The first step is to identify the protein binding sites in the genome. Current chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) technologies coupled with microarray hybridization chip chip or parallel DNA sequencing chips eq enable the identification of transcription factor binding sites in vivo in the genome wide scale. Many computational methods have been developed to detect transcription factor occupancy from chip chip and chips eq data, which we refer to as peak calling. Making choices of program parameters and choosing significance thresholds to accurately control genome wide false positives (FPs), however, is often difficult. We have previously developed a statistical method () that can precisely control the expected number of genome wide FP peak calls in the context of correlated multiple comparisons. With FPs controlled, it is further desired to improve the peak calling methods to reduce false negative instances. Gene regulation is a complex process that usually involves the cooperation of multiple transcription factors, which may interact to form a regulatory module that binds to a DNA segment to regulate their target gene's expression. Certain histone modifications may also play crucial roles in regulatory mechanisms heintz man * To whom correspondence should be addressed). The binding potential of a target transcription factor, therefore, can be partially learned from the co binding proteins and features that jointly participate in a regulatory module within the cell. As the prevalent ChIP technologies increase the need for analyzing chip chip and chips eq data, several studies have made efforts to utilize multiple biological features into ChIP data analysis. For example, methods have been developed for segmenting the genomic regions into active intervals of interest (). Few methods for peak calling, however, have incorporated the joint effects of related biological features while detecting binding sites for a target protein. Datta and have proposed a method that uses a log linear model to infer co binding associations between two or more transcription factors. Their method is a post-processing algorithm that takes the p values from existing peak calling algorithms as input, but can not incorporate general types of data. In this article, we propose a novel yet rigorous method that accounts for the co binding information and relevant biological features to detect DNA occupancy of a target protein from ChIP data. Without assuming distributions of the related biological features, which we call supporting tracks, we first use a logistic regression model to describe the correlation between the binding of the target protein and the supporting tracks. The output is the probability of each position being potentially occupied by the target protein, predicted by the supporting tracks. We then introduce a varying threshold method to call significant peaks from the ChIP data of interest, where the threshold for each probe is adjusted by its predicted probability of protein binding. Our approach is similar to that of a Bayesian method that incorporates prior knowledge of protein binding into the analysis. Different from Bayesian methods, we still control the family wise FP rate, or false discovery rate (FDR) (), at a user specified level. Our varying threshold method, called PASS2, is a generalization from the PASS algorithm (), and is related with conditional test in statistics (). Using simulation studies and real datasets of GATA1 binding in a mouse erythroid regulation study (), we show that the proposed method can identify many more gata1 binding sites than using the target ChIP data alone, when the FDR is controlled at a common level. Our study shows that the proposed framework is robust with respect to irrelevant supporting data added to the model. The additional binding sites detected by incorporating the related biological features are potentially real gata1 binding sites, many of which are either experimentally verified or enriched near RefSeq Genes (). To our best knowledge, the proposed method is the only algorithm that incorporates multiple sources of information in peak calling to improve the power of detecting weak protein binding signals, and simultaneously, our page i505 i504i510

discussion we introduced a new statistical method to improve the power of detecting protein binding in ChIP data by combining additional A B). This region also shows depleted H3K27me3 and enriched H3K4me3 signals. Horizontal black lines indicate signal means. biological features. The proposed method not only improves the sensitivity of peak calling than traditional methods, but also precisely controls a user specified level of FP rate or FDR. The additional sites detected by our method are those regions with medium or low binding signals, which can not pass the genome wide statistical significance control. After taking into account of the correlation between the binding sites and biologically related supporting features, regions coincide with strong supporting signals will become detectable by our method. Using both simulation and real data analysis, we observed that our method can effectively detect 20% more true binding sites than traditional peak calling methods. Under all scenarios we tested, our method also precisely controlled the proportion of FP calls at 10% FDR level. We further observed that the proposed method is robust to irrelevant data tracks added to the model. Our method does neither assume any distributions on the supporting data nor it attempts to estimate data distributions empirically. Such assumptions and estimation procedures may introduce unwanted bias and uncertainty in peak calling. Our method is flexible to incorporate any types of biological information that overlap with the ChIP regions. By converting continuous data into bins, the binding probabilities computed from our logistic regression model will be robust to outliers and extreme values. Our analysis showed that a proper discretization method applied to supporting tracks can also have significant impact on peak calling results.
