Motivation: spike in datasets provide a valuable resource for assessing and comparing among competing microarray analysis strategies. Our previous wholly defined spike in datasets, the Golden and Platinum Spikes, have provided insights for the analysis of Affymetrix gene chips. However, a similar dataset, in which all cRNA identities and relative levels are known prospectively, has not been available for two color platforms. Results: We have generated a wholly defined spike in dataset for Agilent microarrays consisting of 12 arrays with more than 2000 differentially expressed, and approximately 3600 background, cRNAs. The composition of this Ag Spike dataset is identical to that of our previous Platinum Spike dataset and therefore allows direct cross platform comparison. We demonstrate here the utility of the Ag Spike dataset for evaluating different analysis methods designed for two color arrays. Comparison between the Ag Spike and Platinum Spike studies shows high agreement between results obtained using the Affymetrix and Agilent platforms. Availability: The Ag Spike raw data can be accessed at

introduction since their introduction in the mid-1990s (), DNA microarrays have become a leading tool in a diverse assortment of research disciplines, including cancer and other disease research, developmental biology and evolutionary biology. The popularity of microarrays owes much to their ability to simultaneously interrogate the expression level of tens of thousands of genes, enabling genome scale transcriptional profiling of multiple tissues in essentially a single experiment. Although next generation sequencing approaches such as rnase q provide potentially compelling advantages over microarray based gene expression profiling no limitation to known transcripts, no cross hybridization issues and a broader detection range for expression levels ()comparisons between these two technologies have indicated that rnase q may have less accurate measurement of absolute RNA expression level (), less sensitive detection of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) () and a higher error rate for weakly expressed genes (). For the present, therefore, microarrays remain an important, cost effective and mature platform for gene expression profiling. The benefit of profiling numerous genes simultaneously by microarrays leads to one of the technique's biggest drawbacks: it is generally not possible to independently verify such a large number of individual data points, making it difficult to assess the accuracy of the data analysis. This is of particular concern due to the tremendous number of microarray data analysis methods, which have proliferated in tandem with the increased use of the arrays themselves. Most previous studies of microarray performance, including the microarray quality control ma qc project, used RNA samples in which the identities of most of the individual RNA transcripts were not known (Affymetrix Latin square data, www affymetrix com support technical sample data datasets affx. Such an experimental design limits the evaluation of accuracy to only a small number of spike in cRNAs present in the sample. We previously generated two wholly defined control datasets for the Affymetrix GeneChip platform, the Golden Spike and Platinum Spike datasets (). In these 'spike in' experiments, the identities and relative concentrations of the complete complement of present cRNAs are known. Over 1300 cRNAs are differentially expressed with designated fold changes ranging from 1.2 to 4, and over 2500 cRNAs serve as background with constant expression levels. We and others have used these datasets to determine optimal methods for analysis of Affymetrix microarrays under various experimental conditions (). Unfortunately, similar wholly defined spike in datasets do not exist for other popular microarray platforms, in particular for dual channel platforms. Different from affymetrix s single channel design, for dual channel microarrays the two samples to be compared are labeled separately with different fluorescent dyes
