Motivation: Detection of allelic imbalances in chips eq reads is a powerful approach to identify functional non-coding single nucleotide variants sn vs either polymorphisms or mutations, which modulate the affinity of transcription factors for chromatin. We present ABC, a computational tool that identifies allele specific binding of transcription factors from aligned chips eq reads at heterozygous sn vs. ABC controls for potential false positives resulting from biases introduced by the use of short sequencing reads in chips eq and can efficiently process a large number of het-erozygous sn vs. Results: ABC successfully identifies previously characterized functional sn vs such as the rs4784227 breast cancer risk associated SNP that modulates the affinity of FOXA1 for the chromatin. Availability and implementation: The code is open source under an artistic 20 license and ver-sioned on git hub (https://github.com/mlupien/ABC/). ABC is written in PERL and can be run on any platform with both PERL

introduction genome wide association studies g was have identified thousands of single nucleotide variants (SNV) representing genomic loci associated with human traits and disease (). The causal variant(s) underlying each association are hard to identify because most of the associated loci fall outside of annotated genes (). chips eq allows for the identification of transcription factor (TF) binding sites across the genome (). Functional studies have shown that many trait disease associated loci modulate the affinity of TFs for chromatin (). Noncoding somatic mutations found in tumors can also modulate TF binding to promote tumor growth and progression (). The generation of chips eq data for TFs in normal cells and tumors () provides an opportunity to directly assess the functional effect of risk variants and somatic mutations on TF binding. This creates a need for a computational tool to systematically identify sn vs imparting an allelic imbalance in TF binding to the chromatin. To eliminate alignment biases existing tools () incorporate the alignment of the chips eq reads to two separate genomes. The use of two representative parental genomes assumes a diploid set of chromosomes. Therefore, the applicability of these tools to cancer
