abs yn te (Archaeal and Bacterial Synteny Explorer) is a web based service designed to display local syn ten ies in completely sequenced prokaryotic chromosomes. The genomic contexts are determined with a multiple center star clustering topology on the basis of a user provided protein sequence and all (or a set of) chromosomes from the publicly available archaeal and bacterial genomes. The results consist in a dynamic web page where a consistent color coding permits a rapid visual evaluation of the relative positioning of genes with similar sequences within the synteny. Each gene composing the synteny can be further queried interactively using either local or remote databases. abs yn te results can be exported in .CSV or high resolution .PDF formats for printing, archival, further editing or publication purposes. Performance, real time computation, user friendliness and daily database updates constitute the principal advantages of abs yn te over similar web services. Availability:

introduction the availability of more than 1400 completely sequenced archaeal and bacterial genomes at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) repository provides a wealth of information to researchers involved in prokaryotic genetics. In particular, the comparison of the relative genetic positioning on microbial chromosomes is of special interest not only to measure evolutionary relationships between different species but also to deduce the function of uncharacterized proteins. This conservation of orthologous gene order is commonly referred as 'synteny' even if in its original definition the term had a different meaning (). The extraction of syntenic information from sequenced genomes involves the impractical manipulation of large data files and the complexity of the task increases with the number of genomes that need to be compared. The comparative analysis of genome segments from prokaryotic organisms has been addressed by web services such as GeConT2 (), PSAT () and gc view (). Unfortunately, these web applications suffer from one or more restrictions as discussed below. In response to these limitations, we have developed abs yn te (Archaeal and Bacterial Synteny Explorer) * To whom correspondence should be addressed. a web tool, which only requires a user provided protein sequence to display the corresponding synteny from a daily updated list of archaeal and bacterial genomes. This interactive web application is executed in real time and is designed to extract, compare and predict orthologous gene clusters originating from any combination of sequenced prokaryotic organisms.
