Motivation: There are numerous examples of rna rna complexes, including microrna mrna and small rna mrna duplexes for regulation of translation, guide RNA interactions with target RNA for post-transcriptional modification and small nuclear RNA duplexes for splicing. Predicting the base pairs formed between two interacting sequences remains difficult, at least in part because of the competition between unimolecular and bimolecular structure. Results: Two algorithms were developed for improved prediction of bimolecular RNA structure that consider the competition between self structure and bimolecular structure. These algorithms utilize two novel approaches to evaluate accessibility: free energy density minimization and pseudo energy minimization. Free energy density minimization minimizes the folding free energy change per nucleotide involved in an intermolecular secondary structure. pseudo energy minimization (called access fold minimizes the sum of free energy change and a pseudo free energy penalty for bimolecu-lar pairing of nucleotides that are unlikely to be accessible for bimolecular structure. The pseudo free energy, derived from unimolecular pairing probabilities, is applied per nucleotide in bimolecular pairs, and this approach is able to predict binding sites that are split by unimolecular structures. A benchmark set of 17 bimolecular RNA structures was assembled to assess structure prediction. pseudo energy minimization provides a statistically significant improvement in sensitivity over the method that was found in a benchmark to be the most accurate previously available method, with an improvement from 36.8% to 57.8% in mean sensitivity for base pair prediction. Availability and implementation: pseudo energy minimization is available for download as access fold under an open source license and as part of the rna structure package, at: http://

introduction rna has been increasingly recognized as an active player in cellular biology. RNA molecules catalyze many reactions, are involved in transcript splicing and editing and serve as signals for protein localization (). The function of an RNA molecule is intimately related to its structure, and therefore the prediction of RNA structure is an important tool for understanding mechanism. There are a number of computational methods for predicting RNA secondary structure for a single sequence grn as bind mRNA targets to direct post-transcriptional modifications and many spliceosomal RNAs form functional duplexes for splicing of introns from mRNA (). Predicting RNA binding sites, especially for longer RNAs such as mRNA transcripts, is an important step in understanding the function of existing and newly discovered non-coding RNAs (). It is also a tool for designing siRNAs used to study gene function or as therapeutics (). Computational prediction of rna rna binding sites is a difficult problem because intermolecular structure competes with the formation of self structure in a concentration dependent manner. Algorithms for prediction of intermolecular structure generally build upon single stranded folding algorithms and come in two main types: free energy minimization and partition function calculations. These utilize dynamic programming algorithms to compute the thermodynamics of folding using parameters fit to experiments, most popularly the Turner nearest neighbor parameters (). Free energy minimization schemes compute the structure with the lowest folding free energy and are guaranteed to output the optimal structure given the input parameters and energy model. Partition function calculations consider the entire ensemble of possible structures and are used to determine probabilities for formation of each structure. In this way, a partition function calculation gives the probability that each possible base pair occurs given its prevalence within the ensemble (). These algorithms are successful at single stranded structure prediction but perform with lower accuracy on bimolecular structures. To get around these challenges, there has been a focus on the development of algorithms that predict only specific types of RNA RNA interactions. An example of a well characterized biological phenomenon for which there are multiple algorithms that perform with relative success is the hybridization of miRNAs and their mRNA targets. These are endogenous, 1925 nt strands of RNA that base pair with a target mRNA, most often at its 3 0-UTR and most often to repress translation via the recruitment of rna induced silencing complex, RISC (). Computational methods for the prediction of mirna mrna targets rely on the well characterized binding structures that have been previously determined: the miRNA must be complementary to the 3 0-UTR of its target mRNA; must have a strong 'seed' binding site at the 5 0-end of the interaction but not the 3 0-end; must form a thermodynamically stable duplex; the sequence of the target mRNA must be conserved in the genomes of related species and can not be impeded by strong secondary structure in the target mRNA (). It is clear from this example that these algorithms are designed to test mirna target structure specifically. The principles of targeting the 3 0-UTR and having a more thermodynamically stable 5 0-end of the duplex do not apply to general prediction of bimolecular structure and would lead to false positives and negatives when applied to other types of binding problems. It is necessary to develop a generalized algorithm for the reliable prediction of intermolecular binding sites of unknown structure class. This article introduces three algorithms for predicting rna rna interactions. Each of these methods predicts only bimolecular helices, i.e. base pairs composed of one nucleotide from each of the two input sequences, where the helices are interrupted by unpaired nucleotides in internal or bulge loops. The first algorithm, density min computes the minimum free energy density structure or the structure with the lowest ratio of folding free energy change to number of nucleotides in the bimolecular structure. It was hypothesized that minimizing density would lead to shorter, more stable helices between strands that would be able to outcompete the potential intramolecular pairing partners. The second algorithm, access fold uses a heuristic to utilize information from unimolecular partition function calculations to consider accessibility of nucleotides for pairing. In this approach, an energy, which is the sum of folding free energy change and a pseudo energy that accounts for accessibility, is minimized. The pseudo energy scales with the probability that a single nucleotide is involved in an intramolecular base pair as determined by the single stranded partition function calculation. The pseudo energy term serves to account for the propensity to form self structure excluding inaccessible nucleotides from base pairing in the bimolecular structure. This pseudo energy penalty model for accounting for accessibility was also incorporated into the free energy density minimization algorithm described above to test any synergistic improvement. This algorithm is referred to as e density min i.e. extended density min. A set of 17 systems with known bimolecular structures was assembled for benchmarking, and the performance of pseudo energy minimization was compared to multiple variations of free energy minimization, partition function calculation and combination algorithms designed to predict rna rna interactions: BiFold, duplex fold bi partition and max expect from rna structure (); rna plex and rna up from the Vienna package () and b indigo from the a alberts lab (). BiFold, duplex fold and rna plex are variations of free energy minimization algorithms. BiFold predicts the minimum free energy structure including self structure and treats unimolecular and bimolecular pairs equally (). duplex fold rna plex and b indigo do not allow self pairing to occur. rna plex and b indigo are faster because they use modified functions for computing loop energies (). bi partition and max expect are full bimolecular partition function calculations that do not consider intramolecular base pairs (). bi partition assembles structures by selecting only those base pairs that meet a minimum pairing probability threshold as determined by the user. max expect computes the identical partition function, but the predicted structure is the structure with maximum expected accuracy (). rna up uses a partition function calculation to determine the accessibility of an interval of nucleotides in each strand and then computes the minimum free energy structure involving those intervals that are accessible () and is used as the current gold standard for using accessibility information. In all cases except BiFold, these are programs that predict the structures of interacting RNA sequences but only predict the bimolecular pairs, i.e. those pairs that involve one nucleotide from each strand. For BiFold, both unimolecular and bimolecular pairs can be predicted, but the class of structures is restricted to those that are not equivalent to pseudo knots e.g. kissing loop interactions are not considered ().

discussion a major barrier to the development of general algorithms addressing the rna rna interaction prediction problem is a limited number of experimentally determined bimolecular structures. In many experimental applications, it is only important to know that the interfering RNA binds the target, as determined by expression profiles. In developing a general algorithm for prediction of bimolecular structure; however, it is important to use only those structures whose exact base pairs are determined as a test set to measure success. In this work, a general algorithm for bimolecular structure prediction was developed and benchmarked using a small set of known structures. Accuracy could be improved when a larger set of known structures is available for testing. Another issue is that the small set of types of rna rna interactions provides limited power to show that differences in program performances are statistically significant. A larger set of known structures would additionally improve this. Although algorithms addressing specific biological problems have been successful, particularly in predicting miRNA binding sites, it is necessary to develop a general algorithm for newly discovered nc rnas. An algorithm for predicting rna rna interactions that 3 the base pairs colored in red were correctly predicted by access fold while the base pairs colored in blue were correctly predicted for both access fold and rna up. The base pairs in gray were not correctly identified by either algorithm. Note that the hairpin stem loop in the top strand is not able to be predicted by either program because it involves pairs from one strand only. This hairpin stem loop interrupts the accessible region, resulting in two regions in the top strand that are accessible to binding uses information from bimolecular free energy minimization as well as unimolecular partition function calculations was developed here and called access fold. In this approach, a pseudo energy term is incorporated into the free energy minimization algorithm. This term scales with the probability that a single nucleotide is involved in an intramolecular base pair as determined by the single stranded partition function calculation. The pseudo energy term serves to penalize the propensity to form self structure excluding inaccessible nucleotides from base pairing in the bimolecular structure. A set of 17 known bimolecular structures was compiled for testing, and the performance of pseudo energy minimization was compared to multiple variations of free energy minimization, partition function calculation and combination algorithms designed to predict rna rna interactions. pseudo energy minimization provides a statistically significant increase in sensitivity when compared to the prior best available algorithm for considering self structure rna up. This result is interesting because rna up rigorously calculates target structure accessibility, whereas access fold uses a heuristic that assumes the probability of forming a pair is independent of the probability the neighboring nucleotide is unpaired shows that this heuristic can be advantageous in situations where a binding site is discontinuous. One aspect of bimolecular structure prediction that is inadequately addressed is the concentration dependence of interaction. The equilibrium for formation of bimolecular pairs is concentration dependent, but the equilibrium for unimolecular pairs is independent of concentration. It is possible that the scaling factor, c, is contributing to the improved performance by access fold by independently weighting the unimolecular and bimolecular components of structure. Other programs treat intra and inter-molecular pairs equally, which does not model interactions appropriately. On the other hand, the scaling factor in access fold is also not rigorously accounting for concentration because a biophysical model would penalize the interaction once per bimolecular complex, not per base pair, and also because the concentrations of strands vary for RNA types. One possible avenue for further improving the accuracy of bimolecular structure prediction methods would be to explicitly account for effect of concentration on the interaction between strands. The scaling factor, c, also accounts for the fact that the pseudo free energy is treating the un pairing probabilities of each nucleotide as independent. This means that the pseudo free energy would tend to over penalize the opening of regions for binding. The poorer performance of density min and e density min programs that minimize the density of folding free energy change, as compared to access fold indicates that predicting compact bimolecular structures is not sufficient to model the competition provided by unimolecular structure. The results are provided here as an alternative method for comparison. Interestingly, for mirna mrna interactions, all of the free energy minimization approaches failed to identify the experimentally verified target locations, with the exception of one interaction identified by Bifold (). This suggests that when there is specific knowledge about interactions, such as the requirement for complementarity in the seed region that is often used in miRNA target prediction, tailored applications should to be used. These results also support the prevailing consensus that miRNA target selection is kinetically controlled.
