Motivation: cysteine rich proteins cover many important families in nature but there are currently no methods specifically designed for modeling the structure of these proteins. The accuracy of di-sulfide connectivity pattern prediction, particularly for the proteins of higher order connections, e.g. 3 bonds, is too low to effectively assist structure assembly simulations. Results: We propose a new hierarchical order reduction protocol called cys con for disulfide bonding prediction. The most confident disulfide bonds are first identified and bonding prediction is then focused on the remaining cysteine residues based on SVR training. Compared with purely machine learning based approaches, cys con improved the average accuracy of connectivity pattern prediction by 21.9%. For proteins with more than 5 disulfide bonds, cys con improved the accuracy by 585% on the benchmark set of pdb cys. When applied to 158 non-redundant cysteine rich proteins, cys con predictions helped increase (or decrease) the tm score (or RMSD) of the ab initio QUARK modeling by 12.1% (or 14.4%). This result demonstrates a new avenue to improve the ab initio structure modeling for cysteine rich proteins. Availability and implementation:

introduction the methods of protein structure prediction can generally be grouped into template based and template free (or ab initio) modeling (). Since the topology of the protein structure can be decided by the contact maps, many efforts have been dedicated to predicting residue residue contacts. In the template based modeling where homologous templates can be detected from the PDB, residue contacts can be reliably derived from the template structures (). But for the ab initio modeling targets that do not have homologous templates, the contact information must be predicted from sequence either by feature based training () or correlated mutations (). In the 11th CASP (Critical Assessment of protein structure Prediction) experiment, the modeling of several New Fold targets reached an unprecedented resolution due to the successful integration of the ab initio contact predictions (). However, except for the targets that have a high number of homologous sequences which can be used for detecting the conserved mutations and contacts, the accuracy of ab initio contact predictions is in general too low to be useful for 3D structure determination (). One feasible improvement is to decompose the contact map into different types of contacts that can be predicted more reliably, such as disulfide bonds. Disulfide bonds are formed between cysteine residues, which are the only coded amino acids that have a reactive sulfhydryl group. This type of residue interaction can be formed between residues from either the same or different polypeptide chains, which usually induces long range contacts along the protein sequence (). It has been widely acknowledged that the long range contacts are crucial to protein structure modeling because they constrain the possible conformations and reduce the entropy of unfolded states (). Thus, accurate prediction of the disulfide bonding network should improve ab initio protein structure prediction (). Disulfide bonds are important for protein function and structural stability. For instance, the formation of disulfide bonds is a key posttranslational modification in numerous proteins (). In dual oxidase proteins, disulfide bonds contribute importantly to protein protein interactions (). Previous studies have revealed that incorrectly formed disulfide bonds can be deleterious to both the function and stability of some proteins (). Due to the importance of disulfide bonds in both protein structural and functional studies, many computational methods have been developed for predicting their connectivity patterns from protein sequence, with the aim to identify the correct bonding of oxidized cysteine residues. This problem was first addressed via maximum weight perfect matching (), where the weight of each edge is equivalent to the contact potential between the two cysteine residues, which was derived by monte carlo simulated annealing. Following this work, considerable efforts were devoted to machine learning based ab initio approaches to predict the contact potential for improving the performance. Progress in this regard focuses on two directions: i. Developing more powerful prediction algorithms: e.g. neural network (NN) (), support vector machine (SVM) (), kernel method (), correlated mutation analysis () and support vector regression (SVR) (); ii. Introducing novel feature representations: besides traditional global and local sequence derived features, recent studies have shown that some features such as protein subcellular localization (), correlated mutations () and context based features () can also improve the performance. In addition, feature selection methods such as Fisher score () were proposed to overcome the high dimensional problems and improve the prediction. Different from the above ab ini to approaches which perform predictions by only using the amino acid sequence information, the other trend is using the homology modeling techniques, where some prediction features are extracted from the modeled structures. For instance, the spatial distance between the cysteine residues in the modeled structure can be used as an encoding feature (). Other studies in this trend include: Lin and Tseng (2010) and O'. Despite this type of methods is promising considering the rapid increase of the deposited 3D structures in PDB, which may increase the possibility of finding good templates, they may still fail for large portion of proteins, which can not find good templates in current PDB. This study aims to further enhancing the disulfide bonds prediction by using only the amino acid sequence information. Although existing methods can predict disulfide connectivity patterns with reasonable accuracy, there are still challenging problems that seriously limit the prediction performance. One of the biggest challenges is the high order problem: sequences with more disulfide bonds are much more difficult to predict accurately than those with fewer bonds. In fact, the entire pattern prediction accuracy will be very low for sequences with more than five bonds. The reason is that a disulfide connectivity pattern represents a unique correct combination of all the disulfide bonds in the sequence, and it is correct only if all the independent bonds are correctly predicted. For a sequence with 5 bonds, there will be 945 different bond combinations (c.f. Equation 4), where only 1 arrangement is correct and the random prediction success rate is $0.1%. The situation will be even worse for many cysteine rich proteins, which often contain more than five disulfide bonds. To this end, we propose a new algorithmic improvement based on the idea of order reduction by first finding the most confident disulfide bonds. For example, if we can determine 1 confident bond from a query sequence of high order (e.g. 5 bonds), then the problem is reduced to finding the correct combination among 4 remaining bonds, which has only 105 candidate patterns, much less than the original 945. It is fulfilled by an effective confident bond detector based on the observation that some disulfide bonds are found aligned at the same positions in the multiple sequence alignments (MSA). The detected confident bonds will be eliminated from the following decision process to reduce the complexity. Then, a maximum weight graph matching approach will be used to determine the remaining bonds, where the weights are predicted using a statistical machine learning predictor. Our hierarchical system for predicting disulfide connectivity patterns is called Cysteine contact cys con. The new order reduction characteristic enables cys con to achieve higher prediction accuracy than traditional approaches.
