Motivation: 3 0 end processing is important for transcription termination , mRNA stability and regulation of gene expression. To identify 3 0 ends, most techniques use an oligo dt primer to construct deep sequencing libraries. However, this approach can lead to identification of artifactual polyadenylation sites due to internal priming in homo polymeric stretches of adenine s. Although heuristic filters have been applied in these cases, they typically result in a high proportion of both false positive and negative classifications. Therefore, there is a need to develop improved algorithms to better identify mis priming events in oligo dt primed sequences. Results: By analyzing sequence features flanking 3 0 ends derived from oligo dt based sequencing, we developed a nave nave Bayes classifier to classify them as true or false internally primed. The resulting algorithm is highly accurate, outperforms previous heuristic filters and facilitates identification of novel polyadenylation sites.

introduction 3 0 end processing of pre mrnas influences transcription termination, mRNA stability and localization and dynamic regulation of translation. In plants, yeast and metazoans, sequence elements in the 3 0 untranslated region (3 0 UTR) direct cleavage and polyadenylation (reviewed in). Among these elements is the polyadenylation signal (PAS), a defined hexameric sequence located 1030 nucleotides (nt) upstream of the cleavage and polyadenylation site (pA site), which binds Cleavage and Polyadenylation Specificity Factor complex (). The PAS predominantly comprises the sequence aau aaa (), although single nucleotide variants are also functional (). In addition to the PAS, a guanine uracil or uracil rich downstream sequence element can be found 2040 nt downstream of the pA site that is recognized by Cleavage Stimulatory Factor (). In some instances, a uracil rich sequence element is present upstream of the PAS, which may also act to enhance usage of a specific PAS by recruiting Cleavage Factor I (). In combination, these sequence elements help define the site of cleavage and polyadenylation at the 3 0 end of a pre mrna. Most efforts to identify 3 0 ends of mRNAs have relied on priming with an oligonucleotide of deoxy thymine s oligo dt. These efforts include early studies relying on expressed sequence tags (ESTs;), as well as more recent work using deep sequencing (reviewed in). These include Poly(A) Site sequencing pass eq and polya seq (), which rely on oligo dt containing primers for first strand cDNA synthesis. While these approaches are technically straightforward, oligo dt binding can occur in internal homo polymeric stretches of adenine s () leading to identification of false positive pA sites. A more selective method is poly a position profiling by sequencing (referred to as 3pseq), where a splint rna dna oligonucleotide with overhanging thymine s is hybridized and ligated to the polyadenylated tail of mRNAs to prevent internal priming (). However, 3pseq is technically demanding and most laboratories are more likely to use oligo dt primed approaches. In these latter cases, internal priming events are generally filtered from datasets based on the number of adenine s in the genomic sequence downstream of the cleavage site (). However, the strict definition of these heuristic filters inevitably misses some internal priming events (false positives) and also excludes true 3 0 ends (false negatives;). Thus, additional methods are needed to easily analyze oligo dt primed deep sequencing data to identify true pA sites. A nave nave Bayes classifier, based on Bayes theorem, is a supervised learning algorithm in which the features used to predict the class are considered conditionally independent (). nave nave Bayes classifiers are computationally efficient, require relatively small training datasets, handle both continuous and discrete features and ignore non relevant features (). Here, we demonstrate the effectiveness of a nave nave Bayes classifier to identify internal priming events in oligo dt primed sequencing data. We find that our trained algorithm outperforms heuristic filters and enriches for 3 0 ends in oligo dt sequencing data that bear canonical motifs important for cleavage and polyadenylation. Biological validation shows that our method is highly accurate, facilitating identification of novel 3 0 UTRs and 3 0 ends in multiple animal species.
