Motivation: Given the importance of non-coding RNAs to cellular regulatory functions, it would be highly desirable to have accurate computational prediction of RNA 3D structure, a task which remains challenging. Even for a short RNA sequence, the space of tertiary conformations is immense; existing methods to identify native like conformations mostly resort to random sampling of conformations to achieve computational feasibility. However, native conformations may not be examined and prediction accuracy may be compromised due to sampling. state of the art methods have yet to deliver satisfactory predictions for RNAs of length beyond 50 nucleotides. Results: This paper presents a method to tackle a key step in the RNA 3D structure prediction problem, the prediction of the nucleotide interactions that constitute the desired 3D structure. The research is based on a novel graph model, called a backbone k tree to tightly constrain the nucleotide interaction relationships considered for RNA 3D structures. It is shown that the new model makes it possible to efficiently predict the optimal set of nucleotide interactions (including the non-canonical interactions in all recently revealed families) from the query sequence along with known or predicted canonical base pairs. The preliminary results indicate that in most cases the new method can predict with a high accuracy the nucleotide interactions that constitute the 3D structure of the query sequence. It thus provides a useful tool for the accurate prediction of RNA 3D structure. Availability and Implementation: The source package for bk tree is available at http://rna-informatics.

introduction in the past decade, there have been many revelations of the importance of non-coding RNAs to cellular regulatory functions and thus a growing interest in the computational prediction of RNA 3D structure (). Nevertheless, RNA 3D structure prediction from a single RNA sequence is a significant challenge. One major unresolved issue is the immense space of tertiary conformations even for a short RNA sequence. Existing methods usually employ random sampling algorithms for computation feasibility, which assemble sampled tertiary motifs into native like structures (). To reduce the chance to miss native structures, the assembly algorithms have mostly been guided with constraining structural models. For example, mc fold mc sym () de novo assembles 3D structure from a database of 3-nt tertiary fragments. Other methods follow samplings that preserve the secondary structure (). However, these constraining models do not necessarily ensure that native conformations are examined. The state of the art methods have yet to deliver the desired prediction accuracy for RNA sequences of lengths beyond 50 nucleotides (). In this work, we introduce a novel method to predict nucleotide interactions from known or predicted canonical base pairs as a key step toward accurate prediction of 3D structure. Accurate knowledge of the nucleotide interactions is crucial to predicting the 3D structure of an RNA and subsequently predicting its functional roles. To predict nucleotide interactions, our method is guided by a novel graph model called a backbone k tree for small integer k, to globally constrain the nucleotide interaction relationships (NIRs) that constitute the 3D structure. In such a k tree graph, nucleotides are organized into groups of size k  1, such that NIRs are permitted only for nucleotides belonging to the same group and groups are connected to each other with a tree topology (see section 2). This model was inspired by our recent discovery of the small treewidth of the NIR graphs for more than 3500 RNA chains extracted from 1984 RNAs whose structures have been resolved (), where the treewidth of each NIR graph is computed by an approximation algorithm (). Treewidth is a graph metric, which indicates how much a graph is tree like (). We have been able to develop dynamic programming (DP) algorithms with On k1  time and space complexities, efficient for small k, to compute the optimal backbone k tree spanning over the nucleotides on the query sequence, given a scoring function (). To ensure that the computed optimal k tree can actually yield the set of nucleotide interactions that constitutes the native 3D structure, our method proposes to identify detailed patterns of nucleotide interactions for every group of k  1 nucleotides found in known RNA 3D structures and to score every such pattern. We consider nucleotide interactions from the established geometric nomenclatures and families (), including base base base phosphate base ribose (), base stacking interactions as well as the phosphodiester bonds between two neighbouring nucleotides on the backbone. To test our method, we adopted an improved 3-tree model, and pre-computed candidates of interaction patterns for every group of 4 given nucleotides (see supplementary in the Supplementary Material). These annotated atom level interaction patterns have been extracted from resolved 3D structures of RNAs in the RNA Structure Atlas (). To avoid overfitting, only nucleotide interactions from RNAs of length 100 nucleotides were selected. To score such patterns, we trained artificial neural networks (ANNs) to compute the confidence of every admissible nucleotide interaction pattern for every group of 4 given nucleotides. We filtered out unlikely interaction patterns and kept only those with high confidences. With this 3-tree model, our algorithm efficiently predicts an optimal set of nucleotide interactions from the query sequence (along with canonical base pairs) within computational time On 3 . We have implemented the algorithm into a program called bk tree as a part of a 3D structure prediction framework supplementary in the Supplementary Material). We evaluated our methods through testing bk tree on two sets of data. First, the performance of nucleotide interaction prediction was measured on a set of 43 RNAs of lengths ranging from 26 to 128 nucleotides, a benchmark used by the survey of state of the art 3D structure prediction methods (). The resolved, atom level interactions of these high resolution RNAs were extracted with FR3D (). Sensitivities (STY), positive predictive values (PPV) and Matthews correlation coefficients (MCC) () of the nucleotide interactions predicted by bk tree were calculated for these 43 RNAs. The overall performance was also compared with previous programs MC (), Rosetta (), and NAST (). Second, performance of nucleotide interaction prediction was also evaluated by testing bk tree on a set of 13 single RNA chains from PDB () of lengths between 100 and 200 nucleotides, whose nucleotide interaction patterns have not been extracted for the construction of ANNs. To evaluate the significance of our method to 3D structure prediction, we modeled 3D conformations from predicted nucleotide interactions for all 43 RNAs. Both root mean square deviation (RMSD) values and deviation index (DI;) values were calculated from the modeled 3D conformations. RMSD comparisons on about a dozen representative RNAs were also made with previous methods MC, Rosetta, NAST, and rna mo ip (). These evaluations show that bk tree predicted nucleotide interactions with high accuracies across the tested RNAs, including RNAs whose interaction patterns were not used for training. Our method also impressively outperformed the other methods on the overwhelming majority of the tested RNAs and showed a great potential for handling RNAs beyond short lengths.
