Motivation: Current algorithms for estimating DNA copy numbers (CNs) borrow concepts from gene expression analysis methods. However, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays have special characteristics that, if taken into account, can improve the overall performance. For example, cross hybridization between alleles occurs in SNP probe pairs. In addition, most of the current CN methods are focused on total CNs, while it has been shown that allele specific CNs are of paramount importance for some studies. Therefore, we have developed a summarization method that estimates high quality allele specific CNs. Results: The proposed method estimates the allele specific DNA CNs for all Affymetrix SNP arrays dealing directly with the cross hybridization between probes within SNP probe sets. This algorithm outperforms (or at least it performs as well as) other state of the art algorithms for computing DNA CNs. It better discerns an aberration from a normal state and it also gives more precise allele specific CNs. Availability: The method is available in the open source R package ACNE, which also includes an add on to the aroma affymetrix framework (http://www.aroma-project.org/).

introduction genomic aberrations are involved in the pathogenesis of different diseases, especially cancer (). These genomic abnormalities may contribute to a cell becoming cancerous, especially if tumor suppressor genes or oncogenes are affected. DNA copy number aberrations (CNAs) are genomic aberrations that involve amplifications or deletions of a part of the genome (a whole chromosome, an arm or a segment). The DNA copy numbers (CNs) in a CNA may be larger (amplifications) or smaller (deletions and homozygous deletions) than the normal state (CN equals to two). Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) is another genomic aberration that occurs in a segment of the genome that lacks one of the two parental chromosomes. For each SNP in an LOH zone, one of the alleles has CN equals to zero. CN for a zone with LOH may be one (loss of one of the parental chromosomes), two (copy neutral * To whom correspondence should be addressed. LOH) or even larger than two. In the latter two cases, the additional copies of the region with LOH have been regenerated by the cell using the present copy. The single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays can be used to study the CNAs and also the LOH cases. Although the initial application of these arrays was genotyping, they can also be utilized for estimating the number of copies at the locus where the interrogated SNP is located. There are also genomic aberrations that do not affect total CNs or genotypes, e.g. translocations and reversions. Such aberrations can not be identified using SNP arrays. Several companies have developed this type of arrays but we will focus in the Affymetrix () platform. Affymetrix has a family of SNP arrays starting from the 10K arrays, which interrogates 10 000 SNPs. Afterward they developed the 100K and 500K chip sets, both using two different restriction enzymes. The more recent genome wide human SNP array 5.0 (GWS5) and genome wide human SNP array 6.0 (GWS6) arrays also use two enzymes, but they differ from their predecessors in various characteristics. The GWS arrays have non polymorphic probes in addition to SNP probes, which are used for studying the DNA CN variations cn vs and cover parts of the genome where there are no SNPs. The GWS5 has the same number of SNPs as the 500K as well as 420 000 non polymorphic probes, while GWS6 has around 900 000 SNPs and a bit less than 950 000 non polymorphic probes. The probes in each chip are grouped in probe sets corresponding to single SNPs. Probes complementary to both alleles (A and B) in the same SNP are known as probe pairs. There are probes in the array that are complementary to both strands of the SNP. The length of each probe is 25 nt. The probe sets from the 10500K arrays are formed by perfect match (PM) and mismatch probes (MMs), where the MMs differ from the PMs in the central nucleotide. To give space for more PMs, the GWS arrays do not have MMs. Several processing methods have been proposed to obtain the DNA CN information from SNP arrays. The first algorithms used were directly inherited from gene expression analysis, as d chip () and RMA (). There also exist more recent ones that are specific to the CN data, e.g. c nag (), plas q (), Italics (), crm a (), CN5 () and crm a v2 (). The whole pipeline to treat SNP arrays consist of several low level methods, namely background removal, normalization (to equalize the signal levels for several arrays), summarization (to extract a signal proportional to the CN of each of the alleles), genomic post-processing (to deal with signal bias related to size and other page 1828 18271833
