We have implemented aggregation and correlation toolbox (ACT), an efficient, multifaceted toolbox for analyzing continuous signal and discrete region tracks from high throughput genomic experiments, such as rnase q or chip chip signal profiles from the ENCODE and mod encode projects, or lists of single nucleotide polymorphisms from the 1000 genomes project. It is able to generate aggregate profiles of a given track around a set of specified anchor points, such as transcription start sites. It is also able to correlate related tracks and analyze them for saturation ie. how much of a certain feature is covered with each new succeeding experiment. The ACT site contains downloadable code in a variety of formats, interactive web servers (for use on small quantities of data), example datasets, documentation and a gallery of outputs. Here, we explain the components of the toolbox in more detail and apply them in various contexts.

introduction there is now an abundance of genome sized data from high throughput genomic experiments. For instance, there are chip chip chips eq and rnase q experiments from the ENCODE (ENCODE Project) and mod encode mod encode consortium, 2009) projects. There are also genome sequence data that can be used to generate tracks measuring sequence content, such as the densities of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from dbSNP () and the 1000 genomes project. In most cases, the representations of these data take the form of either signal tracks that describe a genomic landscape or distinct region tracks that tag portions of the genome as active. The aggregation and correlation toolbox (ACT) provides a powerful set of programs that * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. can be applied to any experiments producing data in these formats. The ability to analyze multiple genomic datasets is important, as demonstrated by tools like Galaxy (). ACT provides a unique set of functionality that complements existing methods of analysis.

discussion there are number of additional analyses that can be done to fine tune the output of ACT. For instance, it is possible to use the online genomic signal aggregator (GSA), which assigns each genomic position to the nearest anchor in order to reduce the artifacts caused Page: 1154 11521154
