Motivation: Approaches to identifying new risk loci, training risk prediction models, imputing untyped variants and fine mapping causal variants from summary statistics of genome wide association studies are playing an increasingly important role in the human genetics community. Current summary statistics based methods rely on global best guess reference panels to model the genetic correlation structure of the dataset being studied. This approach, especially in admixed populations, has the potential to produce misleading results, ignores variation in local structure and is not feasible when appropriate reference panels are missing or small. Here, we develop a method, adapt mix that combines information across all available reference panels to produce estimates of local genetic correlation structure for summary statistics based methods in arbitrary populations. Results: We applied adapt mix to estimate the genetic correlation structure of both admixed and non admixed individuals using simulated and real data. We evaluated our method by measuring the performance of two summary statistics based methods: imputation and joint testing. When using our method as opposed to the current standard of best guess reference panels, we observed a 28% decrease in mean squared error for imputation and a 73.7% decrease in mean squared error for joint testing
introduction summary statistics of association tests, such as effect size estimates and their standard errors, are becoming the datatype of choice in many genetic analyses due to two significant advantages. First, summary statistics based methods are generally orders of magnitude faster than their genotype based counterparts. The rapidly increasing size of existing and planned cohorts is causing computational bottlenecks for some standard analyses. Second, analyses of summary statistics are often a necessity since access to individual level data is complicated by privacy and other issues (). Publication of summary statistics is now required for all Nature Genetics genome wide association study g was papers, and these statistics have already been released for a large number of traits. For these reasons, a growing number of summary statistics based methods, including imputation of z scores joint testing fine mapping of causal variants, quality control of g was results and gene based tests, have recently been published (). Moving forward, the integration of summary statistics will be vital for increasing our knowledge of various complex diseases and phenotypes (

discussion summary statistics based methods requiring an estimate of the genetic correlation matrix are becoming increasingly popular; however, very few g was include LD information in their released data. In prior work, this information has been approximated by using LD information from 'best guess' reference panels, but here we show that this can lead to high error rates even when a population closely matching the study population is available (). Our method can be used to improve the accuracy of any summary statistics based method that requires LD information by more accurately estimating the local genetic correlation structure using information available across several reference populations. Our simulations have demonstrated the importance of accurately estimating the genetic correlation matrix. Using adapt mix to estimate LD for summary statistics methods can increase their power and decrease their false positive rates. For example, for z-score imputation showed that as long as there is a best guess reference panel available, there is no increase in false positive rate when imputing summary statistics. However, in the case that there is no best guess panel available, we have shown that there adapt mix learning local genetic correlation structure improves summary statistics based analyses i187 is a potential for increased false positives by using the wrong reference panel. One of the biggest benefits of our method is allowing the analysis of arbitrary populations when a matching reference panel is not available. We were able impute z scores and compute joint statistics with better precision 'best guess' panels alone even after leaving out the relevant 'best guess' panels from our computation of R. For datasets with admixed individuals, the high variability of ancestry proportions may make it harder to consistently model LD in an accurate manner with a single reference panel. For example, in the Native American component Latinos, there is a high level of population substructure (). In the 1000 Genomes reference panels, there are currently no Native American reference panels available. Although proxy populations such as CHB and JPT are often used, they are unlikely to capture the full resolution of each underlying sub-population. Accounting for all the fine scale differences seen in admixed individuals will improve with the collection of additional reference panels. In this work, we aimed to minimize the MSE of imputed summary statistics in our objective function because imputation was one of our main focuses. For other purposes, it may be more appropriate to use a different objective depending on how the pairwise correlation estimates will ultimately be used. For example use summary statistics to fine map causal variants by finding the set of variants that maximize the likelihood of a multivariate normal distribution. In this case, optimizing frequencies for reference panels by using the multivariate normal likelihood may improve performance. Improvements to adapt mix may be made by using an out of sample approach to learning the mixture frequencies due to the potential of overfitting. Typically, overfitting will cause high prediction error variances. We have shown though, with the example of joint testing that overfitting should not be a major concern as the error variances are smaller when using adapt mix compared with a 'best guess' panel. Another enhancement could be made to adapt mix by using partial correlations. Often covariates such as principal components are included in g was which alter the genetic correlation structure of the individuals being studied. Partial correlations which account for these covariates may provide even more accurate estimates of the R for use in summary statistics methods.
