Often competing hypotheses for biochemical networks exist in the form of different mathematical models with unknown parameters. Considering available experimental data, it is then desired to reject model hypotheses that are inconsistent with the data, or to estimate the unknown parameters. However, these tasks are complicated because experimental data are typically sparse, uncertain, and are frequently only available in form of qualitative if then observations. ADMIT (Analysis, Design and Model Invalidation Toolbox) is a MatLab tm based tool for guaranteed model invalidation, state and parameter estimation. The toolbox allows the integration of quantitative measurement data, a priori knowledge of parameters and states, and qualitative information on the dynamic or steady state behavior. A constraint satisfaction problem is automatically generated and algorithms are implemented for solving the desired estimation, invalidation or analysis tasks. The implemented methods built on convex relaxation and optimization and therefore provide guaranteed estimation results and certificates for invalidity. Availability: ADMIT, tutorials and illustrative examples are available free of charge for non-commercial use at

introduction data based mathematical modeling can help to improve the understanding of complex biological networks, e.g. by analyzing and identifying core elements, or by predicting the network's behavior. However, usually the data are uncertain and come from heterogeneous sources. This then results in competing model hypotheses and hence an incomplete understanding of the underlying network structure and biological mechanisms. In iterative cycles of mathematical modeling and biological experimentation, model hypotheses are tested and rejected if inconsistent with the experimental data. For the remaining hypotheses the parameters can be estimated, e.g. to allow for quantitative predictions. Depending on the available data and the assumed uncertainty description, one can distinguish between several approaches for parameter estimation. To obtain optimal parameter estimates (by minimizing a cost function) of nonlinear models and measurements * To whom correspondence should be addressed. data with statistical uncertainty descriptions, methods using global or local optimization can be considered [e.g.. Efficient implementations of such methods are available in software tools, [e.g.. However, finding a suitable threshold that classifies a model as consistent with the data is challenging (). A complementary approach is based on an unknown but bounded (or set based uncertainty description [e.g. Milanese and; Walter and Piet. Because entire sets can be directly taken into account (theoretically) definite statements can be made, which therefore allows a rigorous perspective on parameters and model consistency. We present ADMIT, a MatLab tm based toolbox that uses a set based uncertainty description and convex relaxation and optimization framework for model invalidation and parameter estimation (). Besides unknown but bounded measurement data, qualitative information such as temporal or causal if then observations or discrete state variables can be used (). The toolbox automatically constructs a convex constraint satisfaction problem that incorporates all available data and the model equations. Using convex relaxation and optimization methods, outer bounds of the consistent parameters or states can be determined by solving the constraint satisfaction problem. For this purpose, either the solvers implemented in ADMIT or more efficient external state of the art numerical solvers for mixed integer linear programs can be used.
