The Affymetrix Axiom genotyping standard and best practice work-flow for Linux and Mac users consists of three stand-alone executable programs (Affymetrix Power Tools) and an R package sn polisher. Currently, SNP analysis has to be performed in a step by step procedure. Manual intervention and or programming skills by the user is required at each intermediate point, as Affymetrix Power Tools programs do not produce input files for the program next inline. An additional problem is that the output format of genotypes is not compatible with most analysis software currently available. affy pipe solves all the above problems, by automating both standard and best practice workflows for any species genotyped with the Axiom technology. affy pipe does not require programming skills and performs all the steps necessary to obtain a final genotype file. Furthermore, users can directly edit SNP probes and export genotypes in PLINK format. Availability and implementation: https://github.com/nicolazzie/

introduction there are two widely used high throughput SNP genotyping platforms: Illumina and Affymetrix. These producers differ not only in their genotyping technologies but also in the downstream software available to obtain genotype calls. Illumina has developed an integrated software, genome studio V R , with a graphical user interface (GUI) for visualization of the genotyping data from the assay platform. genome studio V R only runs on the Windows operating system (OS). Affymetrix provides a GUI software, Genotyping Console TM , for Windows OS (http:// www affymetrix come store browse levels even software products only jsp product id131535. However, for linux unix and Mac OS users, the Affymetrix genotyping workflow consists of a step by step procedure for which no GUI or automation is available. There are two types of workflow: the standard (http://www.affymetrix.com/support/ downloads manuals axiom genotyping solution analysis guide pdf and the 'best practice' (http://www.affymetrix.com/ support downloads manuals axiom best practice supplement user guide pdf workflow. The standard workflow consists of a four step procedure, and is the basic workflow. The 'best practice' workflow includes an extra step for plate wise quality control (QC). In both workflows, the first three steps use a set of stand-alone executable programs, which were originally written in C+ + (Affymetrix Power Tools; ap tools whereas the fourth step requires the use of the R programming language (http://www.Rproject.org/) and a specific R package sn polisher. In addition, if the 'best practice' workflow is run, users must manually calculate two plate wise statistics, excluding individuals in specific low quality plates. A schematic overview of the process is shown in. To carry out the analysis, executable programs, the sn polisher R package and many input files for each of the steps have to be downloaded from the Affymetrix Web site, in addition to writing long command line instructions for each step. The first phase of the analysis is sample QC, which creates a statistic dish qc to measure the signal across non polymorphic loci. Affymetrix suggests retaining samples with a default dish qc 482%. Both, the evaluation of the output file and the creation of the new input file for the next program in the workflow (i.e. excluding samples that do not pass the threshold), have to be executed manually. In the second phase, genotyped samples with call rate (CR) lower than a default value of 97% are identified. Users then need to manually evaluate the output file and create a new input file, selecting the CR cut off and excluding samples failing the CR criteria. The 'best practice' workflow has an extra step for plate wise QC. This step, however, is not automated and requires the manual calculation of two statistics, 'Plate Pass Rate' and 'Average Plate Call Rate', with default values 95 and 99%, respectively. Users then have to assess the quality of each plate and create a new input file for the next program. The next phase requires the genotyping step to be rerun for the samples passing the quality criteria. In the last phase, the sn polisher R package is used to evaluate the quality of the signal and to classify each SNP probe into six classes: '. The Affymetrix workflow provides genotypes, irrespective of their SNP probe quality, in snp probe by row format, with a 0/1/2/1 coding, for homozygotes 'B' and 'A' (0 and 2, respectively), heterozygotes (1) and missing genotypes (1). Although the use of the ap tools does not require any C++ programming skills, just basic command line use, the use of sn polisher requires at least a basic knowledge of R. Therefore, the lay user can not easily run the full analysis. Currently, a Linux or linux based environment is commonly *To whom correspondence should be addressed. used to handle large datasets, therefore a pipeline that integrates the analyses steps into a single application would be of general use. affy pipe is a python based pipeline that addresses the need to automate the whole workflow and hence reduce the time, effort and programming skills needed to obtain genotype calls. affy pipe allows both standard and 'best practice' workflows to be run, and produces edited final files in PLINK format (), a standard and widely used format for genetic analyses. Although this pipeline was built originally for the Water Buffalo Axiom 90 K assay (), it is able to handle any species genotyped with the Affymetrix Axiom technology.
