Motivation: Determining the methylation state of regions with high copy numbers is challenging for second generation sequencing, because the read length is insufficient to map reads uniquely, especially when repetitive regions are long and nearly identical to each other. single molecule real time (SMRT) sequencing is a promising method for observing such regions, because it is not vulnerable to GC bias, it produces long read lengths, and its kinetic information is sensitive to DNA modifications. Results: We propose a novel linear time algorithm that combines the kinetic information for neighboring CpG sites and increases the confidence in identifying the methylation states of those sites. Using a practical read coverage of $30-fold from an inbred strain medaka (Oryzias latipes), we observed that both the sensitivity and precision of our method on individual CpG sites were $93.7%. We also observed a high correlation coefficient (R ¼ 0.884) between our method and bisul-fite sequencing, and for 92.0% of CpG sites, methylation levels ranging over [0,1] were in concordance within an acceptable difference 0.25. Using this method, we characterized the landscape of the methylation status of repetitive elements, such as LINEs, in the human genome, thereby revealing the strong correlation between CpG density and hypo methylation and detecting hypo methylation hot spots of LTRs and LINEs. We uncovered the methylation states for nearly identical active transposons, two novel LINE insertions of identity $99% and length 6050 base pairs (bp) in the human genome, and 16 to l2 elements of identity 99.8% and length 4682 bp in the medaka genome.

introduction there has been a great deal of interest in identification of genome wide epigenetic DNA modifications in recent years, because DNA modifications play an essential role in cellular and developmental processes (). Some of human transposable elements (TEs), such as long interspersed nuclear elements (LINE), transpose actively within somatic cells along differentiation of neural tissues and are partly regulated by DNA methylation (). Each family of human TEs exhibits a variety of methylation statuses in different tissue types, which was found by looking at the mixture of methylation information on the consensus sequence of TEs in the same family (). Many human diseases are also associated with DNA methylation state of TEs. In particular, un methylation of repetitive elements (REs), such as line 1 (L1) elements, has been related to some cancers (). Although only a few L1 elements exhibit activity in the human genome (), it has been reported in various cancer genomes (), and importantly, transposition is correlated with un methylation in the promoter region of L1 elements (). Therefore, it is essential to develop an experimental framework that can characterize the methylation state of REs in a genome wide manner. The advent of second generation sequencing technology has increased the efficiency of the generation of precise genome wide methylation maps at a single base resolution using bisulfite treatment (); however, these sequencing based technologies have difficulty in characterizing the methylation status of CpGs in regions that are highly similar to other regions. bisulfite treated short reads from these regions often fail to map uniquely to their original positions; instead, they are likely to be aligned ambiguously to multiple genomic positions. Especially, the younger and more active transposons retain higher fidelity and are therefore difficult to address using short reads. The pac bio RS II sequencing system uses DNA polymerases to perform single molecule real time (SMRT) sequencing (), and is able to sequence reads of an average length of 10 kb. It is also able to sequence genomic regions with extremely high GC content. A striking example is the sequencing of a 2-kb region with GC content of 100% (), indicating that SMRT sequencing is less vulnerable to sequence composition bias than first second generation sequencing is. SMRT sequencing of bisulfite treated DNA fragments may allow identification of DNA methylation; however, this approach is unlikely to process long, highly identical repeats because bisulfite treatment breaks DNA into fragments of 1500 bp (). Instead, we explored another advantage of SMRT sequencing to detect DNA modifications directly.

discussion in this study, we addressed the problem of uncovering the landscape of DNA methylation of repetitive elements (REs). To this end, we developed a unique application of SMRT sequencing to epigenetics. This direction had been already explored in the research community for bacterial and viral species. However, this application in large vertebrate genomes has been largely unexplored because of the subtle cytosine methylation signals in the kinetic information. Therefore, we proposed a new method to utilize relatively small amounts of kinetic information by incorporating a model reflecting our prior knowledge on the regional patterns of CpG methylation of vertebrate genomes. We confirmed the validity of our strategy by comparing the prediction to bisulfite sequencing data on medaka and to bead chip analysis on human samples. These two datasets had very different characteristics, which seemed to be partly because of the methods used (i.e. bead chip was designed to observe mainly CpG islands that are often hypo methylated while bisulfite sequencing is used for genome wide methylation analysis) and partly because of the nature of the samples used (i.e. the medaka samples were derived from an inbred strain, while the human samples were from diploid cells). Despite such differences in characteristics, our method using the same parameters performed almost equally well for both datasets. These observations suggested that the choice of parameters is robust for a wide variety of samples, which is a desirable feature for any method. We also presented an extension of our method to accommodate intermediate methylation states, the discrete methylation level (DML) and confirmed a high correlation (R  0.884) between DML and bisulfite methylation level. We explored the epigenetic landscape of REs within the human genome. Using the hg19 reference genome is an apparent limitation. By assembling individual personal genomes instead of the reference genome, new insertions of these REs are expected to be found, and such active occurrences should be of interest. Indeed, we detected two novel LINE insertions that were estimated to be methylated. Importantly, the more recent the insertion event, the less divergent it would be from the original copy, and therefore, there would be less likelihood of it being anchored by short reads. In such cases, long SMRT reads shed new light on the ecosystem of active REs in personal human genomes. We demonstrated the use of long SMRT reads can increase the potential comprehensiveness of the epigenetics study. In addition, our method can substantially reduce laboratory work. For example, in the projects of resequencing or de novo assembly using SMRT sequencing, you can call the methylation statuses of the sample as well, completely in silico, without any additional experiment. This is another important strength compared to conventional bisulfite sequencing or affinity based assays.
