Aggregation plots are frequently used to evaluate signal distributions at user interested points in chips eq data analysis. ag plus a new and simple command line tool, enables rapid and flexible generation of text tables tailored for aggregation plots from which users can easily design multiple groups based on user definitions such as regulatory regions or transcription initiation sites. Availability and Implementation: This software is implemented in Ruby, supported on Linux and Mac OSX, and freely available at

introduction aggregation plots are frequently used to convert genome wide chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing chips eq data into a simple curve of averaged chips eq signal intensities at user interested points (anchor points), such as regulatory sequences (). Aggregation plots allow differences in the signal distribution among different chips eq data to be assessed intuitively. Many chips eq data analysis toolkits include software for the creation of aggregation plots, including HOMER, bw tools CGAT, ngs plot and ht seq (). These software are designed to analyze transcription start sites tss s transcription factor binding sites tfbs s exon intron structures, etc. For example, ngs plot takes a configuration file of gene sets with corresponding raw data to produce a visual of different chips eq signal distributions at gene loci. More recently, chips eq applications have begun to offer diverse purposes for aggregation plots. However, user definitions of the anchor points required for aggregation plots are not trivial, e.g. comparisons of the signal distribution of transcription start sites around different gene sets (gene ontology database or a set defined by their gene expression profile data) or regulatory regions (promoters, enhancers or other non-coding region). Therefore, a simpler tool for loci definitions and grouping tasks is preferred. Here, we introduce ag plus a flexible tool designed for the creation of aggregation plots using various points of user interest.

conclusion we have developed ag plus a tool that enables rapid and flexible creation of aggregation plots. This tool is expected to reduce effort and time for aggregation style analysis by chips eq users.
