Motivation: protein protein interaction (PPI) networks are powerful models to represent the pairwise protein interactions of the organisms. Clustering PPI networks can be useful for isolating groups of interacting proteins that participate in the same biological processes or that perform together specific biological functions. Evolutionary orthologies can be inferred this way, as well as functions and properties of yet uncharacterized proteins. Results: We present an overview of the main state of the art clustering methods that have been applied to PPI networks over the past decade. We distinguish five specific categories of approaches, describe and compare their main features and then focus on one of them, i.e. population based stochastic search. We provide an experimental evaluation, based on some validation measures widely used in the literature, of techniques in this class, that are as yet less explored than the others. In particular, we study how the capability of Genetic Algorithms (GAs) to extract clusters in PPI networks varies when different topology based fitness functions are used, and we compare GAs with the main techniques in the other categories. The experimental campaign shows that predictions returned by GAs are often more accurate than those produced by the contestant methods. Interesting issues still remain open about possible generalizations of GAs allowing for cluster overlapping. Availability and implementation: We point out which methods and tools described here are publicly available.

introduction biological networks have received much attention in the past few years since they model the complex interactions occurring among different components in the cell (). Thanks to the development of advanced high throughput technologies (von), large volumes of experimental data on protein protein interactions pp is have been made available. Special kinds of biological networks, PPI networks, are where the cellular components under analysis are proteins. In a PPI network, nodes correspond to proteins and edges correspond to pairwise interactions between proteins. Proteins are organized into different putative complexes, each performing specific tasks in the cell (). Proteins interacting with each other often participate in the same biological processes or can be associated with specific biological functions being strongly related (). It is worth pointing out that interacting proteins can belong to 'protein complexes' or 'functional modules' with different biological meanings. A protein complex is a molecular machine consisting of several proteins that bind to each other at the same place and time, whereas a functional module consists of a few proteins that control or perform a particular cellular function by interacting among themselves (these proteins do not necessarily interact at the same time and place). However, pairwise protein interaction data stored in public databases usually do not distinguish explicitly between such temporal and spatial information about pp is. In the following, we will refer either to 'complex' or 'module' to indicate a group of proteins that are connected by a large number of pairwise interactions. The detection of protein complexes using PPI networks can help in understanding the mechanisms regulating cell life, in describing the evolutionary orthology signal [e.g., in predicting the biological functions of uncharacterized proteins, and, more importantly, for therapeutic purposes. The problem of detecting protein complexes using PPI networks can be computationally addressed using clustering techniques. Clustering consists of grouping data objects into groups (also called clusters or communities) such that the objects in the same cluster are more similar to each other than the objects in the other clusters (). Possible uncharacterized proteins in a cluster may be assigned to the biological function recognized for that module, and groups of proteins performing the same tasks can be singled out this way. As observed in (), a generally accepted definition of 'cluster' does not exist in the context of networks, as it depends on the specific application domain. However, it is widely accepted that a community should have more internal than external connections. For biological *To whom correspondence should be addressed.

discussion the goal of this review is 2-fold: (i) providing a compact overview of the main techniques presented in the literature for PPI networks clustering and (ii) presenting an experimental campaign to show the capability of GAs in extracting clusters from PPI networks, according to different topology based fitness functions, and with respect to the main other approaches. Both aspects allow us to draw interesting considerations and conclusive remarks. A first observation is that some of the methods discussed here (almost in the LD category) obtain modules one at a time by the selection of a seed node that is expanded until a condition, generally related to the cluster density, is satisfied. Thus, they can be considered bottom up approaches: individual nodes are grouped together until all the graphs have been examined. Approaches that simultaneously find the clusters (e.g. PS ones) are instead top down approaches. They consider the whole graph and try to partition it in connected components by cutting edges. Owing to the threshold constrains that many LD methods require to satisfy, to decide when a group of connected nodes is a cluster, nodes with few interactions are often discarded. The presence of these proteins would reduce the value of the function to optimize. The elimination of sparsely connected nodes has two main drawbacks. First, it prevents the possibility of obtaining topological shapes different from maximally dense subgraphs. Second, important information on the network structure could be lost. In, the authors observe that bottom up approaches discard a high percentage of nodes, though the returned clusters may have a more accurate p value. On the other hand, top down approaches produce a lower number of unassigned proteins, yielding modules with larger size but with lower p value. Results on the network coverage of PPI clustering techniques are provided in Pizzuti and rom bo (2012a), where it is shown that some of the LD approaches are able to reach a good compromise between the percentage of input network that is included in the output clustering and the overall accuracy of the clustering. population based methods follow a top down approach, however, they rely on the evolution of solutions, guided by fitness maximization and their combination, to either connect or disconnect pairs nodes. They simultaneously extract the output clusters, thus guaranteeing a total coverage of the input network, as no protein is unassigned. Another point is that proteins, generally, may participate in multiple biological processes. Thus, methods that assign a protein to only one group, such as the GAs tested here, hamper the possibility of proteins to be clustered in several groups, on the basis of the different functions they have in the cell. This limits their potentiality in describing the complexity of biological systems, as also proved by the experimental campaign provided here. The experimental results described in Section 3 show that the application of GAs to detect protein complexes in PPI networks is promising concerning the accuracy of the discovered groups, but it deserves further study to improve the number of predicted true complexes. Generalization to allow overlapping clusters would be desirable to enhance the prediction capability of such approaches. An interesting direction to investigate would be that of combining LC and GAs, to make the latter ones able to detect overlapping clusters. To this aim, the link similarity measure by so lava et al. (2012) (see also Section 2.4) could be applied. Note also that the performances of the considered approaches vary with respect to the different considered interaction datasets. Interestingly, OCG, that in Becker et al. (2012) has been shown to overcome Ahn on human datasets, is outperformed by the latter one on Y2H for both recall and f measure. However, all the networks considered here refer to yeast PPI data, as Saccharomyces cerevisiae is one of the best characterized organisms. As proved by the experimental campaign provided in Pizzuti and rom bo (2012a), the performances of PPI network clustering techniques may become different when they are applied on less complete networks, and only a few of them are able to keep a good accuracy. Future work may include also analyzing how gap pi algorithms perform on the PPI networks of organisms such as human and fly, which are less characterized than yeast. In conclusion, the investigation of population based methods for PPI networks clustering is relatively recent and not yet enough explored, presenting interesting potentialities. Thus, additional research is necessary and desirable to improve the predictive power of these approaches.
