Motivation: Biological network comparison software largely relies on the concept of alignment where close matches between the nodes of two or more networks are sought. These node matches are based on sequence similarity and or interaction patterns. However, because of the incomplete and error prone datasets currently available, such methods have had limited success. Moreover, the results of network alignment are in general not amenable for distance based evolutionary analysis of sets of networks. In this article, we describe net dis a topology based distance measure between networks, which offers the possibility of network phylogeny reconstruction. Results: We first demonstrate that net dis is able to correctly separate different random graph model types independent of network size and density. The biological applicability of the method is then shown by its ability to build the correct phylogenetic tree of species based solely on the topology of current protein interaction networks. Our results provide new evidence that the topology of protein interaction networks contains information about evolutionary processes, despite the lack of conservation of individual interactions. As net dis is applicable to all networks because of its speed and simplicity, we apply it to a large collection of biological and non-biological networks where it clusters diverse networks by type. Availability and implementation: The source code of the program is freely available at http://www.stats.ox.ac.uk/research/proteins/ resources.

introduction the ability to recreate evolutionary relationships between biological objects has driven much of our increased biological understanding. In particular, the reconstruction of phylogenetic trees using sequence data is now commonplace and has provided evidence for evolutionary mechanisms such as mutation, insertion and deletion. Similar to sequence data, over the past decade, the amount of available interaction data between proteins has been steadily increasing. These data are routinely represented as protein protein interaction (PPI) networks, with proteins as nodes and interactions as edges. Despite the abundance of PPI data now available, there is no tree reconstruction method based purely on these networks. Yet, it is conjectured () that such trees based on networks may give rise to a step change in biology, much as tree building methods from sequences did there already are more elegant methods available for constructing species trees, e.g. based on genomic sequences. Trees built from PPI networks would span a limited species set and are by themselves perhaps not of interest. In contrast, the methodology that is able to correctly build a phylogenetic tree from interaction data would be much of interest, as it should reveal information about the evolutionary mechanisms at play in biological networks. Such a method would also be useful in other domains where alternative means of generating taxonomies are not available. There is currently a lack of consensus regarding likelihood based statistical models for PPI network evolution (). Moreover, often phylogenetic tree reconstruction methods based on distances perform better and are more robust to mis-specification than maximum likelihood methods (). Hence, we concentrate here on the development of a one dimensional network comparison statistic, which can be used to compile a distance matrix to build trees. The most tractable methods for network comparison are those which compare at the level of the entire network using statistics that describe global properties (e.g.), but these statistics are not sensitive enough to be able to reconstruct phylogeny or shed light on evolutionary processes. In contrast, there are several network alignment based methods that compare networks using the properties of the individual proteins (nodes) e.g. local network similarity and or protein functional or sequence similarity (). The aim of these methods is to identify matching proteins nodes between networks and use these matching nodes to identify exact or close subnetwork matches. A few of these methods have been expanded to the multiple network problems (). These methods are usually computationally intensive and tend to yield an alignment that contains only a relatively small proportion of the network, although this has been alleviated to some extent in more recent methods (). The analysis is further confounded by a large number of false positives and false negatives thought to be present in current PPI data studied the effect of errors and incompleteness in alignments of simulated networks and estimated that only nearly complete networks (490%) can produce reliable alignments. Finally, PPI network alignment methods are all based on the loose premise that the respective orthologs of two interacting proteins also interact, forming pairs of so called intero logs and or that orthologs will share neighbourhood topology. While there is some evidence for the existence of such conserved interactions across species (), particularly in proteins with high sequence similarity, *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals permission soup com found taking the noise and incompleteness of the data into account, that the fraction of correctly transferred interactions is at most 3%, between reasonably diver ese species, even if orthologs are defined as those proteins matched with a blast E val 10 10 (). Moreover, current evidence points to a far larger rate of change in pp is than expected; specific interaction matches seem not to be the rule, but rather the exception (). Thus, we do not follow the network alignment paradigm, but instead we take our lead from alignment free sequence comparison methods that have been used to identify evolutionary relationships (). alignment free methods based on k tuple counts (also called k grams or k words have been applied to construct trees from sequence data (). A key feature is the standardization of the counts to separate the signal from the background noise. Inspired by alignment free sequence comparison, we use subgraph counts instead of sequence homology or functional one to one matches to compare networks. Yet, even when comparing synthetic networks of the same size, generated from the same model, their small subgraph content can be volatile (). Our proposed method, net dis compares the subgraph content not of the networks themselves but instead of the ensemble of all protein neighbourhoods ego networks in each network, through an averaging many to many approach. The comparison between these ensembles is summarized in a net dis value, which in turn is used as input for phylogenetic tree reconstruction. The biological intuition for our new approach is based on a collection of results. The idea of using the subgraph content to build a distance between networks arises because motifs and modules have long been identified as important components of biological networks () and have been conjectured to play an important role in evolution (); see also and Pr zu lj (2007) for previous explorations of biological network comparison based on subgraph counts. A key idea of our article is not to compare just the subgraph content of two networks, but instead the ensembles of subgraphs of the two networks, as hinted at in. This use of subgraph content ensembles means that net dis requires only the interaction data and is very different in concept from PPI network alignment methods. net dis differs from standard subgraph count approaches in two key aspects: it introduces the ensemble view and applies a standardization that controls for background noise. We first use our method on simulated networks using several random graph models and show that it correctly classifies networks by model type even when confounded by varying network density and size. We then use it to successfully reconstruct the correct phylogenetic tree for the set of organisms for which significant PPI data are currently available. Our ability to reconstruct correct phylogenies adds evidence that PPI data retain evolutionary information, despite the lack of conservation of individual interactions. We have also investigated our method's ability to separate by type a large set of networks from several biological and non-biological domains. The resulting tree is found to be highly clustered by domain type, outperforming a recent and far more computationally intensive community detection approach.

discussion in this article, we add evidence to the idea that the topology of protein interaction networks alone contains evolutionary information without any additional biological data. Our results reveal that current PPI data are sufficiently abundant to derive correct phylogenetic relationships, at least between the model species. From PPI data with genome coverage of at least 15%, our method, net dis is able to deduce correct phylogenies between species without resorting to sequence homology. We emphasize that net dis is not proposed as a competitive method for the generation of phylogenetic trees for biological species; existing techniques based on molecular sequences already address this particular problem comprehensively. Our main result is that from the topology of protein interaction networks alone, it is possible to generate a correct phylogenetic tree. It is therefore worth considering the underlying assumptions of net dis explore what they may reveal about protein interaction network evolution. The core principle of this work is that species that are more related will on average share more PPI network neighbourhoods that are topologically similar than unrelated species do. It is tempting to assign a biological interpretation to the net dis algorithm: a given biological function is normally credited to a community of interacting proteins that act together to perform that function in the cell. Closely related species will have, on average, more of these communities in common. Our method detects this phenomenon by comparing ensembles of ego networks derived from the PPI networks. net dis could also be used to consider the similarities between biological networks during a cellular or adaptive response, where it is thought that understanding the differences between these networks is key (). Obtaining phylogenies of cell states based on network data would provide a biological perspective on these phylogenies, which would be both new and completely free from sequence data. This perspective would further complement phylogenies derived from phenotypic traits with another type of molecular data. The method could be refined by adding information on the proteins, such as protein function, structure, subcellular location or age (); we would expect that including such information would increase the sensitivity of the method. One particular focus of our ongoing and future research efforts will be the derivation of theoretically well founded background expectations of subgraph counts used in net dis. At present, the method relies on specifying a gold standard dataset to estimate these expectations. While our results so far indicate that the method is robust to the choice of gold standard, it seems feasible that derivation of exact expectation formulas may increase method sensitivity and or remove potential bias. We conclude with noting that, as no other data besides network data are used as input to the method, many types of network data can be analysed together. This makes the method inherently different from the network alignment paradigm. As a proof of concept, we presented some results indicating its ability to correctly classify simulated networks from random graph models as well creating a reasonable taxonomy for a diverse mixture of empirical networks. The ability to highlight relationships between networks from different sources in a systematic way may help researchers across different fields to identify empirical analyses or theoretical models which are applicable to their specific problem.
