Motivation: Building an accurate alignment of a large set of distantly related protein structures is still very challenging. Results: This article presents a novel method 3DCOMB that can generate a multiple structure alignment (MSA) with not only as many conserved cores as possible, but also high quality pairwise alignments. 3DCOMB is unique in that it makes use of both local and global structure environments, combined by a statistical learning method, to accurately identify highly similar fragment blocks hsf bs among all proteins to be aligned. By extending the alignments of these hsf bs 3DCOMB can quickly generate an accurate MSA without using progressive alignment. 3DCOMB significantly excels others in aligning distantly related proteins. 3DCOMB can also generate correct alignments for functionally similar regions among proteins of very different structures while many other MSA tools fail. 3DCOMB is useful for many real world applications. In particular, it enables us to find out that there is still large improvement room for multiple template homology modeling while several other MSA tools fail to do so. Availability: 3DCOMB is available at

introduction multiple protein alignment has been extensively used for classification, analysis of evolutionary relationship, motif detection and structure function prediction. When proteins are distantly related, sequence methods usually fail to yield accurate alignment. In contrast, structure methods, which exploit geometrical information, may still work well. As more protein structures are experimentally solved, multiple structure alignment (MSA) is becoming more useful and important. However, developing computational methods for accurate MSA, especially of a large set of distantly related protein structures, is still regarded as an open challenge. An MSA method consists of two critical components: a scoring function measuring * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of the quality of an MSA and an algorithm searching for the MSA optimizing the score. Many MSA algorithms have been developed, such as MAMMOTH (), MATT (), multi prot (), MUSTANG (), pos a () and s align (). These methods can be broadly divided into two groups: horizontal first or vertical first. The former progressively merges pairwise alignments into an MSA, which may be suboptimal since pairwise alignment errors carry over to the final result. The vertical first methods identify some similar fragment blocks (SFB) among proteins and then extend the SFB alignments to MSAs. The number of sf bs could grow exponentially with respect to the number of proteins, so these methods may have to examine a large number of sf bs not to miss the best MSA, which is usually computationally expensive. As such, the challenge facing a vertical first method is to identify only those sf bs which are very likely contained in the best MSA. This article presents 3DCOMB, a novel vertical first method for MSA. 3DCOMB distinguishes itself from others in its search algorithm and scoring function. 3DCOMB makes use of both local and global structure environments, combined by a novel machine learning method, to accurately identify highly similar fragment blocks hsf bs which are very likely contained in the best MSA. 3DCOMB searches for the best MSA starting from the alignment of an hsf b. Local structure environment is used to describe the structural difference between two short segments centered on two residues. Global structure environment is used to measure the similarity of two substructures centered at the two residues. Both features are combined by a probabilistic graphical model Conditional Random Fields (CRF) () to determine if two residues shall be aligned or not. Existing methods [e.g. blo maps ()] employ only local structure environment and sometimes fail to detect good hsf bs. They usually have to examine a large number of not so conserved fragment blocks in order to find the best MSA. In contrast, 3DCOMB can generate accurate MSAs from only very few hsf bs and thus, improve accuracy without too much computational time. Many methods do not explicitly take into consideration the quality of pairwise alignments in building an MSA, so it may not necessarily contain high quality pairwise alignments. 3DCOMB aims to generate an MSA with not only as many conserved cores as possible, but also accurate pairwise alignments. A core is a fully aligned column without any gaps, consisting of one residue from each input protein. 3DCOMB achieves this by employing a novel scoring function corel entm score for MSA where
