Motivation: The next generation sequencing era requires reliable, fast and efficient approaches for the accurate annotation of the ever increasing number of biological sequences and their variations. Transfer of annotation upon similarity search is a standard approach. The procedure of all against all protein comparison is a preliminary step of different available methods that annotate sequences based on information already present in databases. Given the actual volume of sequences, methods are necessary to pre-process data to reduce the time of sequence comparison. Results: We present an algorithm that optimizes the partition of a large volume of sequences (the whole database) into sets where sequence length values (in residues) are constrained depending on a bounded minimal and expected alignment coverage. The idea is to optimally group protein sequences according to their length, and then computing the all against all sequence alignments among sequences that fall in a selected length range. We describe a mathematically optimal solution and we show that our method leads to a 5-fold speed up in real world cases. Availability and implementation: The software is available for downloading at

introduction all against all sequence alignments in protein datasets are routinely performed with programs such as BLAST () or dynamic programming approaches (). By this, sequences group into subsets of sequence identity values that are important in several applications, including transfer of structural and functional features between protein sequences (for details see www uniprot org program and wwweb i. ac uk goa electronic annotation methods. Proteins that share at least some 30% of sequence identity may overlap in their three dimensional structures (), while proteins sharing at least some 60% of sequence identity are likely to share also similar functions (). It is also important to consider the relative length of the pairwise aligned sequences before transferring annotations (). Multidomain proteins are less functionally conserved than single domain ones () and methods based on transfer of function after homology search can group proteins with different functions in the same cluster. Therefore, both sequence identity values and the percentage of overlapping positions over the alignment length (coverage) were constrained in developing methods for annotation problems (). Evolutionary studies include alignments in the early stage of their workflow (V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com 2013), as well as different computational methods to speed up computation (). Considering the computational cost, the all against all similarity search is an extremely demanding process. Recently, in problems related to evolutionary studies showed that by considering subsequence level homology, the speed of the all against all alignment process could be increased by a factor of four, while maintaining the possibility of retrieving homologous sequences. On the same line of research, here we present an algorithm that can speed up the computational time of the similarity search by constraining the expected alignment coverage.
