Motivation: In the past decade, a number of technologies to quantify allele specific expression (ASE) in a genome wide manner have become available to researchers. We investigate the application of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarrays to this task, exploring data obtained from both cell lines and primary tissue for which both RNA and DNA profiles are available. Results: We analyze data from two experiments that make use of high density Illumina Infinium II genotyping arrays to measure ASE. We first preprocess each data set, which involves removal of outlier samples, careful normalization and a two step filtering procedure to remove SNPs that show no evidence of expression in the samples being analyzed and calls that are clear genotyping errors. We then compare three different tests for detecting ASE, one of which has been previously published and two novel approaches. These tests vary at the level at which they operate (per SNP per individual or per SNP) and in the input data they require. Using SNPs from imprinted genes as true positives for ASE, we observe varying sensitivity for the different testing procedures that improves with increasing sample size. Methods that rely on RNA signal alone were found to perform best across a range of metrics. The top ranked SNPs recovered by all methods appear to be reasonable candidates for ASE. Availability and implementation: Analysis was carried out in R (http://www.R-project.org/) using existing functions.

introduction understanding the genetic basis of variation in gene expression is of considerable interest in biomedical research. The preferential expression of one of the two alleles of a gene, known as allele specific expression (ASE) is one important class of such variation. Allelic expression imbalances have been widely studied in the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. context of development, where key epigenetic mechanisms such as x inactivation and genomic imprinting lead to the silencing of one allele (). Recent studies have also linked ASE to the susceptibility of a number of human diseases (). genome wide assessment of ASE has recently become feasible with the availability of high density single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chips and second generation sequencing. A number of microarray based studies which quantify ASE in a high throughput way have been published in the past decade (). With microarrays, oligonucleotide probes that distinguish between the signal from allele A and allele B for SNPs in genomic DNA can measure the relative expression from each allele when mRNA (converted to cDNA) is hybridized to the chip. For individuals who are heterozygous (AB) at a particular SNP, distortions in the expected 1:1 ratio of allele A to allele B in the RNA signal can be an indication of ASE. Both DNA and RNA hybridizations are necessary for each sample, in order that genotype calls (AA, AB, BB) and allelic expression ratios are available for each SNP on the array. illumina s two color Infinium technology has been used to measure ASE in lymphoblastoid cell lines (). Infinium chemistry differentially labels allele A and allele B with red and green dye, respectively (). The fluorescence of each probe is quantified by illumina s scanning software and summarized values for each SNP are output by the genome studio software. To process the raw signal from the DNA hybridizations into genotype calls, illumina s proprietary gen call algorithm, implemented in the genome studio software is typically used. A number of ASE detection methods have been proposed. These include locus specific approaches, that search for ASE on a snp by snp basis () and tests that combine data from neighboring SNPs in the genome (). Irrespective of the testing method, careful preprocessing to remove non informative SNPs and dye bias has been shown to be important in array based ASE data sets that make use of the Illumina genotyping platform ().

discussion we have shown that careful preprocessing of data from Illumina array based ASE studies is important for improving signal consistency between different samples, and for avoiding potential false positives. The normalization and filtering approaches we have described ensure that the input data for a given ASE testing method is appropriately standardized and error free (as far as practicable). A similar strategy is likely to be useful when other microarray platforms, such as affymetrix s two color Axiom technology, are used to measure ASE. A summary of the findings of our methods comparison is given in. The new heuristic approach we describe (Cluster) outperforms the other methods at recovering SNPs from known imprinted genes across a range of sample sizes, making it ideal in small studies. The Variance method was demonstrated to perform well on larger sample sizes, and was particularly good at detecting rare cases of ASE, driven by one or two individuals with extreme allelic expression imbalances. Both methods are appealing on account of their simplicity and the absence of any tuning parameters that the user must pre-set to obtain a result. Tan's method was found to perform worst initially, however, we observed that the performance could be improved considerably by relaxing the threshold for ASE (). Less conservative values of  recovered more true positive imprinted SNPs than the default value used in previous studies (  2), which indicates that true positive candidates for ASE will have been missed in previous analyses. Tan's method is also less powerful and less consistent than both the Cluster and Variance methods in the gene set analyses carried out, and was less likely to detect multiple independent ASE hits in genes represented by several SNPs on the array. Together, these results indicate that the newer, simpler methods proposed in this article (Cluster and Variance) offer a good alternative to Tan's methods for detecting ASE in SNP microarray data sets. Future work will be to compare the results obtained from SNP microarrays with other high throughput technologies such as rna sequencing to assess the relative advantages and disadvantages of
