Allosteric ligands have increasingly gained attention as potential therapeutic agents due to their higher target selectivity and lower toxicity compared with classic ortho steric ligands. Despite the great interest in the development of allosteric drugs as a new tactic in drug discovery, the understanding of the ligand protein interactions underlying allosteric binding represents a key challenge. Herein, we introduce allo score a web server that predicts the binding affinities of allo-steric ligand protein interactions. This method exhibits prominent performance in describing allo-steric binding and could be useful in allosteric virtual screening and the structural optimization of allosteric agonists antagonists. Availability and implementation: The allo score server and tutorials are freely available at http://

introduction all oster y as a major regulatory mechanism, is of fundamental importance in a wide variety of biological phenomena, including signal transduction, catalysis and metabolism (). The functionality of allosteric proteins consists of their ability to orchestrate the activity of ortho steric sites in response to a signal, which is quintessentially fomented by effectors binding at distinct, often distant, functional sites, which are also referred to as allosteric sites (). Compared with ortho steric ligands, which target highly conserved ortho steric sites, allosteric ligands can bind to any evident suitable pockets on protein surfaces. Thus, allosteric ligands are capable of discriminating between closely related proteins (e.g. receptors, protein kinases). This specific mode of action endows allosteric ligands with unparalleled advantages compared with ortho steric ligands, including higher specificity, fewer side effects and lower toxicity (). Current drug discovery efforts under pharmaceutical regimes are increasingly investing in allosteric ligands, and structure based drug design depends mainly on protein ligand interactions. In this regard, characterizing allosteric ligand protein interactions contributes to allosteric drug discovery (). Despite the distinctive advantages shared by allosteric ligands, the development of allosteric drugs remains daunting, due to the special binding modes of allosteric ligand protein interactions compared with ortho steric ligand protein interactions. Recent studies have pinpointed conspicuous differences between the physicochemical properties of allosteric and ortho steric ligands (). Allosteric ligands are generally more lipophilic and more rigid compounds than ortho steric ligands, which suggests that current universal computational algorithms are incapable of effectively portraying the associations of allosteric ligands with proteins. Thus, there is a pressing need for the development of a novel method to assess the binding affinities of unique allosteric ligand protein interactions in this study, we introduce allo score a web server that predicts the binding affinities of allosteric ligand protein interactions, for the first time. This method elaborately selects a subset of energy terms that are best suited to delineate the characteristics of allosteric binding. allo score exhibits good performance in dissecting allosteric binding and could be useful in allosteric virtual screening and structural optimization of allosteric agonists antagonists
conclusion the allo score web server conveniently provides a user friendly interface to predict the binding affinities of allosteric ligand protein interactions. Furthermore, critical energy contributions that contribute to allosteric binding are offered. To the best of our knowledge, this web server is the first of its kind and will be of considerable value to scientists interested in allosteric drug design and screening.
