Motivation: The use of allosteric modulators as preferred therapeutic agents against classic ortho steric ligands has colossal advantages, including higher specificity, fewer side effects and lower toxicity. Therefore, the computational prediction of allosteric sites in proteins is receiving increased attention in the field of drug discovery. allo site is a newly developed automatic tool for the prediction of allosteric sites in proteins of interest and is now available through a web server. Availability: The allo site server and tutorials are freely available at

introduction all oster y is a fundamental process that regulates a protein's functional activity by means of changes in the conformation and dynamics induced by the action of an effector at a site distinct from the active site, also termed as the allosteric site. From the perspective of drug discovery, because allosteric sites evolved under lower sequence conservation pressure compared with the evolutionarily conserved active sites, targeting allosteric sites can provide unprecedented advantages in terms of higher specificity, fewer side effects and lower toxicity (). Therefore, identification of allosteric sites in proteins of interest is a prerequisite for the development of allosteric drugs with a wide range of chemo types. Thus far, several methods have been tried to detect allosteric sites in proteins, including the geometry based generic predictor, 'binding leverage', and normal mode analysis (). Owing to the limited size of the datasets in these studies, as well as the lack of knowledge about common characteristics of allosteric sites, such methods often suffer from an overly specialized range of applications (), and therefore it is imperative to develop novel and general methods to precisely locate allosteric sites in proteins. Currently, a vast array of known allosteric sites has been discovered by high throughput screening followed by X-ray crystallography, phage display and tethering, yet most of these discoveries are serendipitous. This reliance on serendipity can be ascribed to the pronounced deficiency of understanding of the structural characteristics of allosteric sites. With our continuous endeavors invested in recruiting the allosteric proteins and allosteric sites deposited in the allosteric database (ASD) (), together with recent preliminary understanding of the characteristics of allosteric proteins and modulators (), we hope to lay the foundation for exploiting a high efficiency model to detect allosteric sites. In this study, we present for the first time a web service, allo site which uses elegant algorithms such as pocket based analysis and support vector machine (SVM) classifier to predict the location of allosteric sites in proteins. allo sites model uses a rigorous selection of high quality datasets for training and exhibits a high accuracy of 95% on the test set. More importantly, the prediction of novel allosteric sites for several proteins using allo site was experimentally supported by mutagenesis. Thus, the prediction capability and the user friendly interface of this web server can be of great benefit to biologists and medicinal chemists by serving as a starting point for identifying the location of allosteric sites and following allosteric drug design.

conclusion the allo site web server conveniently provides a user friendly interface to predict the allosteric sites of a protein structure of interest. Furthermore, critical properties that are pertinent to characterize the allosteric site are offered. To the best of our knowledge, this web server is the first of its kind and will be of considerable value to scientists interested in allosteric drug design.
