Motivation: Long arrays of near identical tandem repeats are a common feature of centromeric and subtelomeric regions in complex genomes. These sequences present a source of repeat structure diversity that is commonly ignored by standard genomic tools. Unlike reads shorter than the underlying repeat structure that rely on indirect inference methods, e.g. assembly, long reads allow direct inference of satellite higher order repeat structure. To automate characterization of local centromeric tandem repeat sequence variation we have designed alpha centauri (ALPHA satellite CENTromeric AUtomated Repeat Identification), that takes advantage of Pacific Bioscience long reads from whole genome sequencing datasets. By operating on reads prior to assembly, our approach provides a more comprehensive set of repeat structure variants and is not impacted by rearrangements or sequence underrepresentation due to mis assembly. Results: We demonstrate the utility of alpha centauri in characterizing repeat structure for alpha satellite containing reads in the hydatidiform mole (CHM1, haploid like genome. The pipeline is designed to report local repeat organization summaries for each read, thereby monitoring rearrangements in repeat units, shifts in repeat orientation and sites of array transition into non satellite DNA, typically defined by transposable element insertion. We validate the method by showing consistency with existing centromere high order repeat references. alpha centauri can, in principle, run on any sequence data, offering a method to generate a sequence repeat resolution that could be readily performed using consensus sequences available for other satellite families in genomes without high quality reference assemblies. Availability and implementation: Documentation and source code for alpha centauri are freely available at

introduction centromeres and other heterochromatic regions in most complex genomes are enriched with long arrays of near identical tandem repeats, known as satellite DNAs, which challenge standard assembly efforts and are vastly underrepresented in genomic studies (). Local arrangements of the fundamental repeat unit, or monomers, within each satellite array are commonly organized into multi monomeric repeating units or, higher order repeats (HORs;). These sites are observed to be highly variable in copy number and repeat structure (), providing a new and largely uncharacterized source of sequence variation to study in the context of sequence evolution and biomedical research. Previous efforts to characterize repeat variants from whole genome sequencing (WGS) data relied on predictions made by short read assembly or km er frequency (). Although useful in predicting the most common repeat unit organizations in a given genome, such strategies are not designed to efficiently survey local rearrangement of repeat patterns involving variant sequence organization between adjacent repeats, precise sites of inversion in arrays and transition boundaries with non satellite DNA that may interrupt an array. In contrast, long read analysis, where a complete repeating unit can be observed in its entirety more than once, enables direct characterization of these events without assembly based inference (). To automate the survey of repeat variants in quality assessed long read datasets, we developed alpha centauri (ALPHA satellite CENTromeric AUtomated Repeat Identification), a bioinformatics pipeline for evaluating local h or structure across long read WGS datasets. When provided with long read data and a training dataset of repeat units from a satellite family of interest, alpha centauri is designed to predict h or patterns based on clustering discrete repeat units on each read. In doing so, the user is provided with characterization of h or structure on the read: defined either as regular, or containing the same ordering of near identical monomers, or irregular, that is, containing a rearrangement, inversion or discontinuous spacing in monomers when compared to other HORs on the same read. Further, regions of the read that do not contain an identifiable repeat unit are flagged to go through a secondary analysis using rep base libraries () to label sites of characterized repeat insertions. We demonstrate the utility of alpha centauri on WGS data from a hydat i form mole genome (CHM1), using a collection of previously characterized 171 bp monomers from an at rich human centromeric satellite family, known as alpha satellite ().
