Motivation: In addition to alternative splicing, alternative polyadenyla-tion has also been identified as a critical and prevalent regulatory mechanism in human gene expression. However, the mechanism of alternative polyadenylation selection and the involved factors is still largely unknown. Results: We use the ENCODE data to scan DNA functional elements, including chromatin accessibility and histone modification, around transcript cleavage sites. Our results demonstrate that polyadenylation sites tend to be less sensitive to DNase I. However, these polyadeny-lation sites have preference in nucleosome depleted regions, indicating the involvement of chromatin higher order structure rather than nucleosomes in the resultant lower chromatin accessibility. More interestingly , for genes using two polyadenylation sites, the distal sites show even lower chromatin accessibility compared with the proximal sites or the unique sites of genes using only one polyadenylation site. We also observe that the histone modification mark, histone H3 lysine 36 tri methylation (H3K36Me3), exhibits different patterns around the cleavage sites of genes using multiple polyadenylation sites from those of genes using a single polyadenylation site. Surprisingly, the H3K36Me3 levels are comparable among the alternative polyadenyla-tion sites themselves. In summary, polyadenylation and alternative polyadenylation are closely related to functional elements on the DNA

introduction posttranscriptional RNA processing, including 5 0 capping, intron splicing, RNA editing and polyadenylation [poly (A)], has been recognized as important regulation steps of gene expression. Alternative polyadenylation (APA) is a widespread mechanism in eukaryotic cells to control gene expression by producing transcript isoforms with different poly (A) sites. It has been reported that $30% of human genes can select APA sites in their 3 0 untranslated regions (UTRs) (). Even though most of the genes with APA produce identical proteins, APA can also alter gene expression by changing microrna binding regions (), transportation and protein production rates (). Recent research provides evidence that genes have preference for isoforms with shorter 3 0-UTRs in embryonic or cancer cells because these isoforms have higher translational efficiency than longer isoforms (). The study of polyadenylation in five mammals demonstrated that the usage of poly (A) sites is more conserved in the same tissue across different species than within a species (). All of these reflect the functional and evolution al importance of APA regulation. In general, poly (A) sites contain two core elements, the conserved aau aaa hexamer in the upstream and the guu rich region in the downstream. The aau aaa referred as polyadenylation signal (PAS), is located $1035 nucleotides upstream of the cleavage site and acts as the binding motif for the cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor cps f. The gu or U-rich region, located 2040 nucleotides downstream of poly (A) sites, is recognized by the cleavage stimulatory factor cst f. cst f is recruited by cps f and assembled into a protein complex to process polyadenylation (). The high evolution al conservation of these two motifs indicates their critical roles in polyadenylation. To investigate other factors related to polyadenylation and the alternative selection of poly (A) sites, we combined different types of data from the ENCODE project (), including rna pet data, dnase seq data, m nase seq data and chips eq data. We observed the low chromatin accessibility around poly (A) sites, especially around the distal poly (A) sites of genes using two cleavage sites. This low chromatin accessibility is not because of the high density of nucleosomes. Conversely, poly (A) sites prefer nucleosome depleted regions. In addition, the higher level of tri methylated histone H3 at lysine 36 (H3K36me3) was observed around APA sites compared with unique poly (A) sites, suggesting the role of histone modification in simultaneously deploying multiple poly (A) sites for a single gene. However, no significant difference was detected among the multiple poly (A) sites themselves.

discussion we discovered the low chromatin accessibility around poly (A) sites across six human cell lines, especially for the distal poly (A) sites of genes using multiple poly (A) sites. The phenomenon of less number of nucleosomes located around poly (A) sites is consistent with previous reports. Specifically, regions around poly (A) sites contained higher AT % than those random exonic or exon ending sites (e.g. P52.2  10 16 , Wilcoxon tests, n he k cell line). Therefore, we excluded the possibility that the lower chromatin accessibility around poly (A) sites was resulted from higher nucleosome occupancy. Interestingly, the proximal instead of the distal poly (A) sites exhibited similar chromatin accessibility with the unique poly (A) sites, although both the distal and the unique poly (A) sites were the final termini of gene transcription. H3K36me3 modification was found to peak within actively transcribed genes especially in exonic regions and, therefore, has been considered as an indicator for transcriptional regions of genes (). Accordingly, the unique poly (A) sites of genes with only one cleavage site, as the transcription termini, were expected to have lower H3K36me3 compared with the proximal poly (A) sites of APA genes. Surprisingly, there was no significant difference between the distal and the proximal poly (A) sites of the same gene. These APA sites all tended to have higher H3K36me3 than the unique poly (A) sites (), indicating the distinct role of H3K36me3 in genes using APA. Previous study reported that H3K36me3 was more enriched at poly (A) sites of short isoforms than those of long isoforms (). This discrepancy may be due to the distinct criteria for the selection of proximal and distal poly (A) sites. We required the usage of both sites in the considered cell line. On the contrary, they pooled the poly (A) sites from multiple breast tissues to claim a short or long isoform and did not require the usage of both poly (A) sites when they compared histone modification signals in a specific cell line. Thus, some of the poly (A) sites of their short or long isoforms can be the unique sites according to our definitions. Instead of using the windows, they focused on the distributions of the distance between the poly (A) site and the nearest H3K36me3 mark. When we applied the kolmogorov smirnov test to our selected sites in our considered cell lines, there was still no significant difference for the distance distributions among the APA sites of the same genes (P40.84 for all the six cell lines). For the H3k36me3 study, to confirm there were no additional poly (A) sites in the downstream, we searched for the longest genomic ranges of genes ab initio instead of relying on the known gene annotation, as we showed in Section 3. Thus, after identifying the initial and terminal sites of transcripts from the rna pet reads, overlapped transcripts were clustered and considered as the same genes. Similar results were observed. We also examined the possible associations between poly (A) site signals and DNase hypersensitivity, nucleosome occupancy or H3K36me3 marks. The range of significant spearman s rank correlation coefficients was 0.019 to 0.142 for DNase hypersensitivity, 0.063 to 0.065 for nucleosome occupancy and 0.078 to 0.166 for H3K36me3. Thus, the association patterns were inconsistent among different cell lines, and the correlation magnitude was small. As we mentioned before, the rna pet data in the ENCODE project are of high quality, indicating the low false discovery rate even for poly (A) sites with low rna pet signals. Furthermore, the level of rna pet signals is confounded by gene expression, and gene expression is also tightly associated with DNase hypersensitivity, nucleosome occupancy or H3K36me3 marks. The human poly (A) sites identification had been implemented by machine learning methods using sequence and structural patterns around poly (A) sites (). The accuracy rate for their model or poly as vm () was $6070% when applying coding sequences as the negative set. Here, we applied the Support Vector Machine method libs vm () and input DNase sensitivity, nucleosome occupancy signals and histone marks as features. The accuracy was 6568% for poly (A) sites prediction, 5657% for APA prediction and 5456% for proximal or distal poly (A) sites prediction. The results suggest that our discovered DNA functional elements provide comparable information with the sequence and structural patterns when predicting poly (A) sites. In the future, we can develop a complicate model to use all these features to further improve the prediction of poly (A) sites. In conclusion, we observed distinct patterns of DNase I sensitivity and H3K36me3 around the multiple cleavage sites simultaneously used by a gene. The detailed mechanism needs more specific biological examinations in the K562 cell line. The big arrows indicate the APA sites of DTNBP1 and the uniquely deployed poly (A) site of HCCS in the considered cell line. The APA sites tend to display higher H3K36me3 modification than the unique poly (A) site
