alu hunter is a database of tax on specific primate Alu elements for use in phylogeny and population genetics. The software automatically isolates potentially polymorphic Alu insertions in sequences submitted to GenBank by screening the elements against reference genomes. The resultant database of variable markers is a valuable resource for researchers interested in characterizing Alu elements in their primate tax on of interest. Availability and Implementation: The alu hunter database can be accessed at http://www.aluhunter.com.

introduction alu elements are a class of primate specific short interspersed elements (SINEs) that replicate through the genome via a 'copy and paste' mechanism. Inserted Alu elements are rarely precisely excised and always ancestral ly absent, making them nearly free of homo plas y of known polarity, and thus ideal markers for inferring phylogeny (). If two tax a share a retrotransposon insertion at a certain genomic location, it is most likely due to shared descent. As a result, one can easily infer the phylogeny of a group of primates using presence or absence data for a sufficient quantity of Alu elements by grouping via doll o parsimony those that share a particular Alu insertion to the exclusion of the tax a that do not. Their use has allowed the resolution of certain phylogenetic problems within primates that traditional DNA sequence based or morphology based methods had failed to decisively resolve, such as the placement of tarsier s within haplo rhines (). Determining whether an Alu known to be present in one tax on is present in another can be easily accomplished with the standard laboratory techniques. Given amplification primers flanking a known Alu element, a researcher need only to amplify the region with PCR and use gel electrophoresis to determine the amplicon's size. Sequencing can then confirm whether the Alu is present in an organism's genome, since relying on size estimates alone is prone to misinterpretation of rare shifted parallel insertions of Alu elements (). Unfortunately, the process of finding novel, phylogenetically informative Alu elements ones already known to be absent in other taxa can take weeks of lab work, a process that can benefit from an efficient in silico solution. Because of their prevalence in primate genomes, Alu elements are often unintentionally sequenced, meaning sequence repositories such as GenBank are sources of millions of non-human primate Alu elements. However, most of these insertions are useless for purposes of phylogenetic or population genetic analysis, because they are not variable at the generic or subgeneric levels. The human genome, for example, contains over 1 million Alu elements, but 0.5% are polymorphic within the species (). Isolating useful Alu elements for researchers of primate phylogeny or population genetics requires the determination of whether an Alu was inserted before the diversification of a tax on of interest and is therefore fixed, or was inserted recently and is therefore potentially polymorphic. One simple bioinformatic solution is to search a sister taxon's genome for the Alu element's flanks. If the flanks are found in a sister taxon's genome with no Alu element in between, one can assume that the Alu was inserted since the split with the sister tax on and is therefore potentially polymorphic within the tax on of interest. This method has only recently become possible with the availability of a large amount of source DNA sequences in which to find Alu elements and the advent of multiple, publicly available primate genome sequences against which to screen them. alu hunter uses this screening process to bioinformatic ally isolate polymorphic insertions on a large scale. The project is an attempt to broadly characterize all Alu elements in GenBank sequences and isolate those that may be informative at the generic or subgeneric level.
