Motivation: Modern techniques have produced many sequence annotation databases and protein structure portals, but these Web resources are rarely integrated in ways that permit straightforward exploration of protein functional residues and their co-localization. Results: We have created the a mass database, which maps 1D sequence annotation databases to 3D protein structures with an intuitive visualization interface. Our platform also provides an analysis service that screens mass spectrometry sequence data for post-translational modifications that reside in functionally relevant locations within protein structures. The system is built on the premise that functional residues such as active sites, cancer mutations and post-translational modifications within proteins may co-localize and share common functions. Availability and implementation: a mass database is implemented with Biopython and Apache as a freely available Web server at a mass
introduction our ability to read the 'source code' of life has produced large databases of biological sequences, and analysis of sequence data has given much insight into how genes and proteins work. Conservation at the nucleotide or residue level has unveiled the active sites in enzymes and important binding motifs on proteins. Sequencing of tumors has also unveiled specific site mutations that affect the functions of important signaling molecules. Complementing the advances in gene sequencing, mass spectrometry has enabled routine and rapid protein sequencing. This technique enables the high throughput discovery of protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) such as phosphorylation and acetylation, which can dramatically alter biological function in ways not easily predictable from the genome sequence. These PTMs provide yet another layer of complexity that influences biophysical mechanisms at single residues. These residue specific annotations will continue to grow in several bioinformatics databases () Alongside sequence informatics, the field of structural bioinformatics is well established, with projects such as the Protein Data Bank (PDB;) providing researchers with a large collection of determined protein structures. New projects such as the Protein Structure Initiative () are dramatically increasing the coverage of this dataset by developing high throughput crystallography techniques. As the number of crystallized proteins has increased, an opportunity has arisen to unify sequence annotation data with protein structure data to gain additional insights into the function of proteins. Multiple Web portals have been designed that offer analysis and visualization of specific functional residues in proteins. Much of this work focuses on predicting the possible function of non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). These online databases include SNPs3D (), snp effect (De), poly phen (), MSV3d () and mut db (). These databases focus exclusively on SNPs, but recently new databases have been created to address the new need of characterizing the functions of PTMs. phospho 3d () curates phospho sites from the phospho elm () database and provides Jmol (Jmol: an open source Java viewer for chemical structures in 3D. www jmol org visualizations of these sites on individual pages. Another recent project is ptm func which extracted nearly 200 000 phosphorylation, acetylation and ubiquitin y lation sites from several data sources (). They established an impressive analysis pipeline that attempts to predict the function of these modifications; however, their database does not permit visualization or query of novel sites. While there is clearly a plethora of structure mapping Web resources, they offer a heterogeneous set of features. These databases solely focus on either variants or modifications, but we believe that unification of these annotations may allow researchers to gain additional insights. Some of these tools offer visualizations of single sites on proteins, but rarely allow exploration of multiple arbitrary residues at once. We believe that a better tool would enable the interactive exploration of any set of residues simultaneously. This would enable investigators to find co-localized features across annotation databases that may share allosteric functions. Such a service would allow users to guess at the 'big picture' of how a protein functions. We have developed a mass a free resource that brings together multiple databases: the UniProt KnowledgeBase (), the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) () and the phospho site database () of PTMs. Alongside this aggregation of these sequence level annotations, our system matches searched proteins with structures from the PDB. Structures are *To whom correspondence should be addressed. visualized with the Jmol viewer, and sequence annotations can be interactively explored in 3D by clicking links within the interface. With this system, users can explore the annotations and physical location of any arbitrary residue. The system also permits the upload of mass spectrometry data to find possible functional roles of thousands of queried sites by performing a search of annotated neighboring residues. Because our resource a masses together multiple bioinformatics databases and is rooted in the analysis of mass spectrometry data, we have named our resource a mass and it can be accessed at a mass d borg
discussion our platform enables the exploration of proteins in an intuitive manner not possible with existing tools. We hope that a mass will grow into a valuable resource for the biomedical research community and we shall thus have a substantial roadmap of desired features planned for future releases. We plan to integrate many more biological databases to bring together more functional annotations. For example, the COSMIC database has given us an excellent jumpstart in providing mutational frequencies of single amino acids; however, the recent release of full tumor sequencing data from The Cancer Genome Atlas project () hints that much more mutation data can be integrated in the coming years as sequencing becomes cheaper. Our analysis system is simplistic, as it only considers proximity of co-localized features to infer significance. Our primary focus for this system was to create an interactive visualization, as we felt that such visualization was not adequately implemented in existing platforms. Nonetheless, existing platforms perform far more sophisticated analysis of the structural consequences of modified sites, typically for SNPs. For example, poly phen and SNPs3D both offer computerized classification of whether amino acid changes affect function based on changing biophysical properties such as side chain hydrophobicity, charge or packing. Adding this deeper level of analysis in the future would improve the utility of our tool. The challenge for posttranslational modifications will be to find appropriate algorithms to assess functional consequences of these novel side chains. We have observed that many proteins in the UniProt database lack comprehensive functional annotations, especially when proteins from less studied species are queried. Furthermore, highly valuable feature records such as mutagenesis sites tend to be species specific because those annotations arise from academic publications that focused in a single model organism. We plan to address this issue in the future by integrating a homology clustering system into a mass whereby all homologous proteins (and their associated residue annotations) can be visualized in alignments and simultaneously projected onto 3D structures. This improvement poses considerable user interface design challenges. Many protein structures within the PDB have multiple proteins in complex; however, several distinct structures can be structurally aligned on common shared protein sequences to elucidate other possible complexes that may exist in vivo. For example, a structure containing proteins A and B can be structurally aligned with a separate structure consisting of proteins B and C. Such an alignment may hint how proteins A and C can interact in vivo. Performing such alignments across all structures may expand the set of possible neighboring features that can be discovered. Furthermore, adopting a technique similar to ptm func (), whereby conserved domains among many distinct proteins are aligned, may allow greater generalization to be made for the functions of single sites. With the development of a mass we have a system that is capable of quickly finding functional neighbors of any queried sites. This analysis, however, is only performed on submission of data, or when the user explores a particular residue through the Web interface. In the future, we plan to implement algorithms that will automatically find clusters of functional residues in each structure. The challenge here is presenting the results in a format that scores and ranks identified clusters by relevance. Given our developed system and planned features, we envision that a mass will serve as a valuable tool to the research community at large by both enabling the understanding of datasets and the discovery and annotation of unrecognized functional sites of proteins.
