AMPA is a web application for assessing the antimicrobial domains of proteins, with a focus on the design on new antimicrobial drugs. The application provides fast discovery of antimicrobial patterns in proteins that can be used to develop new peptide based drugs against pathogens. Results are shown in a user friendly graphical interface and can be downloaded as raw data for later examination. Availability: AMPA is freely available on the web at

introduction the widespread use of antibiotics has promoted the emergence of antibiotic resistant strains that often pose serious health problems. Many efforts have been directed toward finding alternative antibiotics unaffected by resistance mechanisms. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are regarded as one of the most promising alternatives in this regard (). AMPs usually act through membrane permeation, receptor independent mechanisms that greatly reduce the risk of inducing resistance in microorganisms (). Moreover, many AMPs are active against a wide diversity of pathogens, including gram negative and gram positive bacteria, fungi and parasites. All these features make AMPs attractive candidates for fighting microbial infection. A growing interest, therefore, exists for identifying natural AMP leads that can be developed into novel antibiotics. An increasing number of proteins and peptides with antimicrobial effects have been identified in many organisms, many of such proteins belonging to the innate defense system but others are unrelated to immune response. The design of new AMPs based on these proteins is hampered by the fact that the mechanisms of their

description the AMPA algorithm is based on an antimicrobial propensity scale derived from high throughput screening results () from the AMP bacte nec in 2A for which antimicrobial IC 50 values for all amino acid replacements at each position have been determined (). From these data, an antimicrobial index a i can be calculated providing a fair assessment of the tendency for such amino acids to be present in an AMP sequence. As low IC 50 values correspond to high activity, amino acids with a low index are the most favored to be part of an AMP. By using a sliding window method the algorithm draws an antimicrobial profile. The regions (12 amino acids length) located below the threshold are considered putative antimicrobial domains. The AMPA server has been integrated within the new t coffee web server framework (), developed in Perl and Java. To submit a job, the query sequences must be provided in fast a format. Also the window size and the threshold values must be specified (default values are provided). Once launched, the job is processed and the output results page is displayed and sent to the email address provided. On the top of the results page, an interactive antimicrobial profile of the query sequences is provided. Antimicrobial profiles can be switched on and off for a better visual inspection of the results. The information on the antimicrobial stretches of the query protein (i.e. the number and location of the antimicrobial regions and the mean a i of the protein together with a statistical evaluation of the results) is displayed on the top of the web page and can be downloaded for later examination. AMPA is intended for multiple purposes. While its main application is the fast automatic detection of antimicrobial regions in proteins that can serve as new templates for AMP design, as shown in, ampa derived a i values can be used to automatically classify proteins or domains thereof as either antimicrobial or non antimicrobial and to compare different protein sequences in this regard. When used in conjunction with the t coffee alignment tool, antimicrobial regions can be checked to identify potentially conserved antimicrobial domains. The AMPA screening system has been optimized to work with the default window size and threshold values provided. Both search parameters, however, can be tuned for specific purposes such as locating antimicrobial regions in very large or very short proteins or to analyze sequences using more stringent than usual criteria. For instance, long antimicrobial domains in large (e.g. 1000 residue) proteins may be better defined by increasing the window size from 7 to 919 amino acids. Larger window sizes, however, are not advised, as the averaging process may miss small antimicrobial motifs. On the other hand, for very short sequences (25 residues), small window sizes may provide slightly better defined antimicrobial profiles. Threshold values, on their part, while not altering the antimicrobial profile, can be adjusted to highlight the highest scoring stretches in proteins with more than one antimicrobial region.
