Analyses of amyloid o genic sequence fragments are essential in studies of neurodegenerative diseases. However, there is no one internet dataset that collects all the sequences that have been investigated for their amyloid ogen i city. Therefore, we have created the amy load website which collects the amyloid o genic sequences from all major sources. The website allows for filtration of the fragments and provides detailed information about each of them. Registered users can both personalize their work with the website and submit their own sequences into the database. To maintain database reliability, submitted sequences are reviewed before making them available to the public. Finally, we re-implemented several amyloid o genic sequence predictors, thus the amy load website can be used as a sequence analysis tool. We encourage researchers working on amyloid proteins to contribute to our service. Availability and implementation: The amy load website is freely available at http://comprec-lin.

introduction the mechanisms for development of amyloid o genic diseases such as the Alzheimer's or Parkinson's diseases are still not completely known. It has been proved that for these diseases to occur, specific protein fragments must become exposed in the structures. These fragments are characterised by a high aggregation propensity, which leads to the formation of fibres with a s terri c zipper form, soluble oligomers or amorphous aggregates (). The amyloid o genic sequence fragments are essential to understand the development of amyloid diseases. Several difficulties are encountered in studies of amyloid o genic fragments. First, there are a few internet data sources which contain such fragments. The most popular are amy pdb (), waltz db (), amyl hex with amyl frag () and zipper db (), or datasets used to validate analytical methods, such as TANGO () or aggres can (). None of these sources contains all available data. The waltz db for instance, is designed for hexapeptide s while zipper db collects amyloid o genic sequences obtained with computer modelling. amy pdb on the other hand, includes amino acid templates characteristic of specific amyloid protein families, rather than amyloid o genic fragments as such. Secondly, most of the datasets do not provide a user friendly way of data browsing and filtering. To the best of our knowledge, currently only waltz db enables its users to filter data. Finally, various computational methods have been developed to predict the occurrence of amyloid o genic fragments in protein sequence. Most of these are based on empirical amino acid features, e.g. contact sites density or hydrogen bonding (), machine learning methods () or consensus methods (), to mention only a few. As with the fragment data, these tools are not collected together in one place on the Internet. Therefore, if a sequence is analyzed with several different predictors, each method must be used separately. To address these difficulties, we present the amy load internet database which consolidates a great majority of the currently available amyloid o genic and non amyloid o genic sequences, and several prediction methods. The amy load website allows a user to fully personalize their work with over 1300 unique sequence database entries and implemented prediction methods, and also to submit new data to the database. Links to other yet not implemented amyloid predictors are also available in our service.
