Motivation: Despite many attempts for algorithm development in recent years, automated identification of intact glycopeptides from LC-MS 2 spectral data is still a challenge in both sensitivity and precision. Results: We implemented a supervised machine learning algorithm, Random Forest, in an automated workflow to identify n glycopeptides using spectral features derived from ion trap based LC-MS 2 data. The workflow streamlined high confident n glycopeptide spectral data and enabled adaptive model optimization with respect to different sampling strategies, training sample size and feature set. A critical evaluation of the features important for glycopeptide identification further facilitated effective feature selection for model improvement. Using split sample testing method from 577 high confident n glycopeptide spectral data, we demonstrated that an optimal true positive rate, precision and false positive rate of 73, 88 and 10%, respectively, can be attained for overall n glycopeptide identification Availability and implementation: The workflow developed in this work and the application suite, SweetHeart , that the workflow supports for n glycopeptide identification are available for download at http://sweet-heart.glycoproteomics.

introduction protein glycosylation is a prevalent post-translational modification, which involves intricate sets of glycan biosynthesis pathways to modify specific sites of the protein sequence with attached oligosaccharide chains (). Unlike other post-translational modification such as phosphorylation, ubiquitination and methylation, protein glycosylation is structurally and compositionally diverse (). As glycan moiety on the protein sequence affects the physicochemical properties of proteins through the change of structural conformation and binding motif, glycan heterogeneity endows glycoproteins with graduated functional vers at ilities in many biological processes. For example, different glycoproteins on the membrane of immune cells are responsible for triggering immune responses to different antigens (). Glycoproteins can also modulate cell adhesion and signaling by differentiating the receptors on cell surface or binding to specific lectins (). Moreover, the spatial and temporal dynamics of glycoproteins highly regulate the development of organisms (Flanagan;) and aberrant glycoproteins during growth or development could cause diseases (). Given the significant roles of glycosylation in mediating the biological functions of glycoproteins and thus their clinical implications, there is currently a growing awareness and increasing demand for highly efficient and precise protein glycosylation profiling. Recent advances in mass spectrometry (MS) technology have enabled compositional, structural and quantitative profiling of the gly comes and glyco proteomes (). Owing to the relatively large glycan size and compositional diversity, high throughput glycopeptide identification with intact glycan moiety attached is precluded from the conventional approach of bottom up database search with tandem mass spectrometry (MS 2 ) data. Consequently, current ms based glyco proteomics technologies re lie mostly on separate analysis of released glycans and de glycosylated peptides (), instead of intact glycopeptides, as it should be. However, by doing so, the valuable information on site specific glycosylation and its associated heterogeneity, which is important for delineating the function and activity of the glycoprotein (), is lost in the process. Recognizing the need to automate the laborious and often manually impossible process of mining the intact glycopeptide MS and MS 2 data, computational tools including glyco miner (), gly pid (), glyco pep Grader (), pepto on ist (), gly db (), medic el Integrator Protein n glycosylation suite (), glycopeptide search (), by onic () and GlycoPeptide Finder () have been developed in recent years to facilitate site specific glycosylation analysis. Each of these tools differs by the computational strategies and algorithms and was often optimized for handling datasets from only one or two of the several available liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS 2 ) platforms. In general, however, all share the same common approach for realizing the prospect of intact glycopeptide identification. The essential steps are (i) accurate mass measurement in precursor MS spectra; (ii) deducing possible glycan composition and peptide backbone sequence from the LC-MS 2 spectra; (iii) pattern matching the marker fragment ions for peptide backbone and glycan against theoretical spectra from protein and glycan database, or attempt to de novo sequencing the glycan moiety; and (iv) scoring for best matches. For example, using collision induced dissociation (CID) on a quadrupole time of flight qt of mass spectrometry, the diagnostic sugar oxon ium ions, sequential neutral losses of glycosyl residues and the Y1 ion, which is the peptide backbone plus one hex nac attached to Asn, can usually be detected in the LC-MS 2 spectra of glycopeptides (). These are particularly useful for n glycopeptide analysis because all n glycosylation s comprise a common penta saccharide core of Hex 3 hex nac 2. By matching for monosaccharide mass difference and peptide database search based on Y1 ion with precursor mass measured at high accuracy, possible glycopeptides can be deduced (). More recently, higher energy collision dissociation and electron transfer dissociation modes of fragmentation have been introduced as alternatives or in combination with the ion trap based CID mode on the lt q orbit rap hybrid platform to improve the sensitivity and confidence of glycopeptide identification (). In all automated data analysis, scoring scheme is crucial to find the best glycopeptide from multiple candidates derived from MS spectra, especially for unknown protein with multiple glycosylation sites or complex sample. Most of the computational tools do provide this functionality, either using probability based function, such as bi nominal distribution (), or deterministic statistics, such as weighted average of important features associated with glycan composition and peptide backbones (). Recently, we have developed a computational suite called Sweet-Heart (), which implements a novel scoring scheme based on a supervised machine learning algorithm to first identify the glycosylation of intact n glycopeptides and then to further deduce the mass values of respective peptide backbones for further sequencing by either targeted multi-stage mass spectrometry (MS 3 ) or electron transfer dissociation experiments. Sweet-Heart requires no prior knowledge of glycan or peptide mass input and was shown to outperform currently available tools in its ability to process ion trap based CID data at higher sensitivity and specificity, especially in global proteomic applications. Supervised machine learning allows for systematic pattern identification from a large set of features in the training dataset and minimizes manual tuning for optimal model generalization (), which is well suited for an unbiased analysis of MS data and has been widely applied for identification of protein sequences, phosphorylation modification, metabolite fingerprinting and biomarkers (). Machine learning algorithms such as linear support vector machine and logistic regression have been used to facilitate glycosyl compositional annotation and scoring of released glycans at MS level based on known glycan compositions (), but not yet adapted to distinguish the correct isomeric or isobaric entities from all possible peptide and glycan combinations, which requires tandem MS analysis. For instance, the mass of hexose neu ac is identical with fucose neu gc. de amid ation on peptide also confuses the assignment between 2 fucose and 1 neu ac or between fucose hexose and 1 neu gc because of introduction of isobaric mass difference. The obstacle for intact glycopeptide identification using supervised machine learning on LC-MS 2 data is insufficient number of high confident spectral data for model training. As ion fragmentation patterns of glycopeptides vary in different MS instrument, ionization and fragmentation techniques, it is not easy to obtain enough training data with comparable MS technologies from public domains for model building. Here, we describe a strategy to dynamically improve the supervised machine learning algorithm, Random Forest, implemented in Sweet-Heart, through the increment of high confident n glycopeptide spectral data collected from previous model predictions. With reciprocal model improvement, we aim for the flexibility of model optimization to enhance automated glycopeptide discovery with high sensitivity and precision.
