Motivation: Manual inspection has been applied to and is well accepted for assessing critical assessment of protein structure prediction (CASP) free modeling (FM) category predictions over the years. Such manual assessment requires expertise and significant time investment, yet has the problems of being subjective and unable to differentiate models of similar quality. It is beneficial to incorporate the ideas behind manual inspection to an automatic score system, which could provide objective and reproducible assessment of structure models. Results: Inspired by our experience in CASP9 FM category assessment, we developed an automatic superimposition independent method named Quality Control Score (QCS) for structure prediction assessment. QCS captures both global and local structural features, with emphasis on global topology. We applied this method to all FM targets from CASP9, and overall the results showed the best agreement with Manual Inspection Scores among automatic prediction assessment methods previously applied in c asps such as Global Distance Test Total Score gd tts and Contact Score (CS). As one of the important components to guide our assessment of CASP9 FM category predictions, this method correlates well with other scoring methods and yet is able to reveal good quality models that are missed by gd tts
introduction critical assessment of protein structure prediction (CASP), is an experiment running for 16 years that has been absolutely essential for evaluating progress (or lack of thereof) in prediction, spotting and encouraging most successful methods and stimulating discussions in the field of structure prediction (). For each biannual CASP prediction period, organizers collect sequences with 3D structures in the works * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and release them to predictors; predictors deliver structure models and assessors critically evaluate the quality of predictions after the experimental structures have been determined. By separating the process of prediction and assessment, CASP provides an objective basis for comprehensive evaluation of models (). Based on the availability of structural templates and the prediction difficulty, targets in CASP are currently divided into two categories: template based modeling (TBM) and free modeling (FM) (). Without an easily detectable template, targets in the FM category are the most challenging and predicted models are usually of low quality. FM category models are traditionally evaluated by manual inspection () because well established structure comparison measures, such as root mean square deviation (RMSD) or even Global Distance Test Total Score gd tts may miss promising models (). For instance, gdt like scores may emphasize on small but precisely modeled substructure (such as a long -helix) rather than decent general fold and topology. However, model evaluation by human experts is subjective and time consuming, and it is impossible to carefully examine all the models within the time frame of a CASP experiment. A practical compromise () is to limit manual inspection to the top models selected by a scoring system (e.g. gd tts. However, this initial selection biases final results. To avoid the bias, recent CASP assessors utilized additional scores (e.g. CC contacts or distances) to select candidates for visual inspection. Combination of different methods lowers the probability of missing reasonable models and improves the evaluation of structure prediction. As the assessors of the CASP9 FM category, we introduced a novel automatic structure prediction assessment method named Quality Control Score (QCS). We suggest that the score is particularly useful to compare poor predictions. QCS reflects our manual evaluation experience and aims to capture global features of models defined by mutual arrangement of secondary structure elements (SSEs). inter residue contact component is included in QCS to quantify the accuracy of modeling atomic details. Overall, QCS is in agreement with manual inspection and correlates well with gd tts. However, QCS can reveal models with better global topology that are missed by gd tts. QCS is not only suitable to select candidates for manual inspection in the CASP assessment, but also can be used as an independent and objective method to assess the quality of structure prediction with emphasis on the global topology. Moreover, qcs page 3372 33713378

conclusion we developed an automatic method for structure prediction assessment, which is inspired by the manual assessment traditionally carried out by CASP assessors. Not dominated by local features of the prediction, QCS emphasizes the global topology. QCS is a good complement for superimposition based scores as gd tts and can be used for CASP in the future and generally for automatic structure prediction assessment. Moreover, QCS can be upgraded into a tool for general structure alignment and comparison. With emphasis on global features of the structure, QCS or the ideas presented could be useful for remote homology detection and structure classification of proteins.
