Motivation: Evolving technology has increased the focus on genomics. The combination of to days advanced techniques with decades of molecular biology research has yielded huge amounts of pathway data. A standard, named the Systems Biology Graphical Notation s bgn was recently introduced to allow scientists to represent biological pathways in an unambiguous, easy to understand and efficient manner. Although there are a number of automated layout algorithms for various types of biological networks, currently none specialize on process description (PD) maps as defined by s bgn. Results: We propose a new automated layout algorithm for PD maps drawn in s bgn. Our algorithm is based on a force directed automated layout algorithm called Compound Spring Embedder (CoSE). On top of the existing force scheme, additional heuristics employing new types of forces and movement rules are defined to address s bgn specific rules. Our algorithm is the only automatic layout algorithm that properly addresses all s bgn rules for drawing PD maps, including placement of substrates and products of process nodes on opposite sides, compact tiling of members of molecular complexes and extensively making use of nested structures (compound nodes) to properly draw cellular locations and molecular complex structures. As demonstrated experimentally, the algorithm results in significant improvements over use of a generic layout algorithm such as CoSE in addressing s bgn rules on top of commonly accepted graph drawing criteria. Availability and implementation: An implementation of our algorithm in Java is available within chi lay library (https://

introduction popular belief is that diagrams directly address people's innate cognitive abilities (). Due to the fact that symbols, diagrams and other graphical representations vary widely around the world, it is necessary to have a common interpretation. Standard notations play an important role in communication and facilitate rapid development in many research areas to address this issue in the field of systems biology, a group of modelers, biochemists and software engineers published the Systems Biology Graphical Notation s bgn which allows scientists to represent biological pathways and networks in an easy to understand and efficient way (). It consists of three complementary languages: process descriptions (PD), activity flows and entity relationships.

conclusion the main motivation behind this study was to build a specialized automated layout algorithm for PD maps that comply with the conventions in sb gnpd maps. Our proposed algorithm adds the necessary heuristics to achieve this on top of a CoSE algorithm. The first enhancement provides proper packing of complex members and disconnected molecules by using two different rectangle packing algorithms: tiling and poly omi no packing. The second one supports port nodes and provides rotation ability for process nodes by introducing a new force type. An important point to note here is that, those enhancements are added without disturbing the force directed structure of the algorithm. There is still room for improvement, however, especially in handling special cases such as irreversible processes. Our proposed layout algorithm has been integrated into chi lay library, which is also available through pax tools
