Motivation: In genome wide association studies g was of complex diseases, genetic variants having real but weak associations often fail to be detected at the stringent genome wide significance level. Pathway analysis, which tests disease association with combined association signals from a group of variants in the same pathway, has become increasingly popular. However, because of the complexities in genetic data and the large sample sizes in typical g was pathway analysis remains to be challenging. We propose a new statistical model for pathway analysis of g was. This model includes a fixed effects component that models mean disease association for a group of genes, and a random effects component that models how each genes association with disease varies about the gene group mean, thus belongs to the class of mixed effects models. Results: The proposed model is computationally efficient and uses only summary statistics. In addition, it corrects for the presence of overlapping genes and linkage disequilibrium (LD). Via simulated and real g was data, we showed our model improved power over currently available pathway analysis methods while preserving type I error rate. Furthermore, using the wtc cc Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) dataset, we demonstrated mixed model analysis identified meaningful biological processes that agreed well with previous reports on T1D. Therefore, the proposed methodology provides an efficient statistical modeling framework for systems analysis of g was. Availability: The software code for mixed models analysis is freely available at http://biostat.mc.vanderbilt.edu/LilyWang.

introduction genome wide association studies g was have become a main approach for identifying disease genes. These studies examine large numbers of genetic polymorphisms across the genome in hundreds or thousands of samples at a time. So far, g was have * To whom correspondence should be addressed. identified many genetic variants statistically associated with diseases or traits (). However, for complex diseases, typically individual genetic variants only have weak marginal effects on disease risk, even for real associations. Therefore, after multiple comparison adjustment for the large number of tests performed in g was real but weak associations are likely to be missed by the conventional strategy of considering only the most significant hits (). To help increase power and to better understand the disease mechanisms underlying complex diseases, several recent studies () considered g was Pathway Analysis g was pa (). These approaches test for effects of groups of genetic variants that belong to the same biological pathway such as those defined in kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG;) or Gene Ontology () databases. The underlying assumption is that complex diseases are likely to be caused by changes in activities in biological pathways, where a number of mutations in different genes each contributes a modest amount to disease predisposition but works together to cause major disruption in normal biological processes. Higher power in pathway based analysis is achieved by combining weak signals from a number of individual genetic variants in the pathway. Recently, a number of g was pa approaches (), such as the modified gene set enrichment analysis g sea algorithm () have been proposed. Typically, to preserve correlation patterns between genes, p values are estimated by permuting sample labels. However, for a typical g was the recalculation of test statistics for half a million or more single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) with hundreds or even thousands of samples for each permutation is extremely computationally intensive. In addition, a recent review () comments: 'the permutation studies that are currently being conducted require raw genotype data, which are not always available. An important methodological improvement would make the p values alone, and not raw data, the basis of analysis in g was pa. When raw genotype data are not available, a simple and popular approach for pathway analysis is an over-representation analysis based on Fisher's exact test. This method condenses test statistics page 687 686692
