Motivation: There is a substantial body of works in the biology literature that seeks to characterize the cyclic behavior of genes during cell division. Gene expression microarrays made it possible to measure the expression profiles of thousands of genes simultaneously in time course experiments to assess changes in the expression levels of genes over time. In this context, the commonly used procedures for testing include the permutation test by de Lichtenberg et al. and the Fishers g test both of which are designed to evaluate periodicity against noise. However, it is possible that a gene of interest may have expression that is neither cyclic nor just noise. Thus, there is a need for a new test for periodicity that can identify cyclic patterns against not only noise but also other non cyclic patterns such as linear, quadratic or higher order polynomial patterns. Results: To address this weakness, we have introduced an empirical Bayes approach to test for periodicity and compare its performance in terms of sensitivity and specificity with that of the permutation test and Fishers g test through extensive simulations and by application to a set of time course experiments on the Schizosaccharomyces pombe cell cycle gene expression. We use conserved and cycling genes by Lu et al. to assess the sensitivity and CESR genes by Chen et al. to assess the specificity of our new empirical Bayes method. Availability and implementation: The SAS Macro for our empirical Bayes test for periodicity is included in the supplementary materials along with a sample run of the MACRO program.

introduction there is a substantial body of works in the biology literature that seeks to characterize the cyclic behavior of genes during cell division. In cancer cells, genomic instability can arise when cell division becomes irregular and identifying genes that have cyclic behavior during cell division may add to the understanding of the biological process of these cells and open doors to targeted therapies. Gene expression microarray technology made it possible to measure the expression levels of thousands of genes simultaneously and open ways to conducting time course experiments which aim at describing the change in the expression levels of genes during successive phases of cell division. Of the several methods proposed for testing periodicity in time course gene expression profiles, the two most commonly used methods are Fisher's g test by and the permutation test described by), both of which we briefly describe in Sections 2.1 and 22 provide comparative analysis of methods for assessing periodicity on time course gene expression data on yeast cells. They argue that analyses based on commonly used methods might have resulted in an overestimation of the number of cyclic genes as quite a large number of genes were identified as periodic by these methods and the overlap among the resulting list of genes is poor. This finding motivates our investigation to construct a new periodicity test that can more accurately distinguish periodicity from not only noise but also from other 'non-periodic' patterns. Toward this, we present a new test for periodicity that uses a polynomial mode as the null hypothesis against a pattern of expression modeled by a flexible family of periodic functions. We use an empirical Bayes approach to estimate the parameters of the periodic mode. We then compare the performance of our approach with that of the Fisher's g test and the permutation test through extensive simulations. We apply our method to 10 publicly available gene expression time course experiments (Supplementary) conducted by rustic i Olivia and Peng on the fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe (). In Section 2, we describe the Fisher's g and the permutation tests followed in Section 3 by an introduction to our empirical Bayes procedure for testing for periodicity and its algorithm. In Section 4, we describe simulation setups to compare the three methods and present the results of these simulations in Section 5. In Section 6, we apply our method to the S.pombe time course gene expression. We end in Section 1 with a conclusion and some discussions in Section 7. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.

discussion we have demonstrated through simulations that a goodness of fit comparison of the Bayesian periodic model and the polynomial regression model has better sensitivity to distinguish periodic patterns from non-periodic patterns when compared with the permutation test and Fisher's g test. This property extends to the case where there are data missing at random. The property is also observed when there are deviations of the inter division time from the true inter division time. The Bayesian approach seems to be able to distinguish periodic patterns from pure noise as well as from any linear, quadratic, cubic and bayesian approach while ranked within the top 1000 by the permutation test and Fisher's g test shows that most of these genes are not reported being involved in the cell division process. Therefore, it is highly critical to have a testing procedure that has high sensitivity in recognizing any periodic pattern as well as high specificity in eliminating patterns (or no patterns) that are not periodic, including noise, from the final list of genes. Using extensive simulation studies and application to 10 cell cycle gene expression experiments as well as evaluating the ranks of CESR genes by each periodicity test, we have shown that the Bayesian test of periodicity has such desirable sensitivity and specificity characteristics. However, we feel that computational efficiency of the empirical Bayes approach can be improved. In its current form, a high level of computations is required to obtain the posterior realizations of the model parameters and perform further calculations. For example, obtaining the Bayesian probabilities for each gene in each cell cycle experiment by rustic i may take about 4 hours in SAS  Version 9.2 on a 3.00 GHz PC with Intel  Core TM 2 Duo CPU and 3.25 GM of RAM PC; however, first, considering the limited resources both in terms of financial and human resources, a more sensitive and specific gene list for further small scale studies should not be sacrificed for obtaining such a list rapidly. Second, we believe that the implementation of the Bayesian test of periodicity on a different platform such as open bugs can definitely help reduce the computation time which makes such an issue less and less relevant. Although the main application area for the empirical Bayes Periodicity test is the time course gene expression data, it can also be used for the inventory management of consumer goods describes the need of using cyclical demand signals to maximize the profit. Thus, our testing approach for periodicity can be applied to time series demand data on a given product over a time period and identify the products among tens of thousands of products which have periodic consumer demand. The empirical Bayes periodicity test can also be used to identify 'cyclical' stocks which may potentially provide valuable information for investors. As an example, Akar and bas kaya (2011) use univariate spectral analysis to identify cyclic behavior of the Turkish stock market. Our method can also be used to test for cyclic behavior of stock markets at given inter cycle times. Conflict of Interest: none declared.
