Motivation: Gene blocks are genes co-located on the chromosome. In many cases, gene blocks are conserved between bacterial species, sometimes as operons, when genes are co transcribed. The conservation is rarely absolute: gene loss, gain, duplication, block splitting and block fusion are frequently observed. An open question in bacterial molecular evolution is that of the formation and break up of gene blocks, for which several models have been proposed. These models, however, are not generally applicable to all types of gene blocks, and consequently can not be used to broadly compare and study gene block evolution. To address this problem, we introduce an event based method for tracking gene block evolution in bacteria. Results: We show here that the evolution of gene blocks in proteobacteria can be described by a small set of events. Those include the insertion of genes into, or the splitting of genes out of a gene block, gene loss, and gene duplication. We show how the event based method of gene block evolution allows us to determine the evolutionary rate and may be used to trace the ancestral states of their formation. We conclude that the event based method can be used to help us understand the formation of these important bacterial genomic structures. Availability and implementation: The software is available under GPLv3 license on http://github. comreamdc1gene block evolution git. Supplementary online material: http://iddo-friedberg.net/ operon evolution
introduction in bacterial and archaeal genomes, gene blocks are sequences of genes co-located on the chromosome, whose evolutionary conservation can be conservation of gene blocks can be strikingly apparent () and has been used in phylogenetic and functional studies (). conservation s across numerous tax a indicate that at least some conserved blocks are operons: a special case of gene blocks where the genes are co transcribed to poly cis tronic mRNA and are often associated with a single function, such as a metabolic pathway or a protein complex. It is estimated that 550% of bacterial genes reside in operons (). Typically operons are under the control of one or more regulator proteins, which facilitate co regulated transcription. From an evolutionary point of view, there are several questions that are asked about operons and gene blocks. How did these units evolve? What confers fitness upon genes in an operon or block structure as opposed to not being neighboring? Are certain operons more or less evolutionarily conserved in bacteria? What affects the conservation of the operon or gene block structure in different tax a Several models exist to explain gene block evolution (for more extensive reviews see). One of the first models proposed for bio pathway evolution V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.
