Motivation: A large amount of biomolecular network data for multiple species have been generated by high throughput experimental techniques, including undirected and directed networks such as protein protein interaction networks, gene regulatory networks and metabolic networks. There are many conserved functionally similar modules and pathways among multiple biomolecular networks in different species; therefore, it is important to analyze the similarity between the biomolecular networks. Network querying approaches aim at efficiently discovering the similar subnetworks among different species. However, many existing methods only partially solve this problem. Results: In this article, a novel approach for network querying problem based on conditional random fields (CRFs) model is presented, which can handle both undirected and directed networks, acyclic and cyclic networks and any number of insertions deletions. The CRF method is fast and can query pathways in a large network in seconds using a PC. To evaluate the CRF method, extensive computational experiments are conducted on the simulated and real data, and the results are compared with the existing network querying methods. All results show that the CRF method is very useful and efficient to find the conserved functionally similar modules and pathways in multiple biomolecular networks.

introduction the high throughput experimental techniques have been dramatically improved in past decades and a large amount of biomolecular network data have been produced. For example, protein protein interaction (PPI) networks are available in many databases such as DIP (), which catalogs experimentally determined protein interactions for many species including Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Drosophila melanogaster, Escherichia coli and Caenorhabditis elegans. Since the biomolecular networks contain many conserved functionally similar modules and pathways, * To whom correspondence should be addressed. it is important to analyze the similarity among multiple biomolecular networks to discover signaling pathways, find conserved modules and reveal new biological function subnetworks. Network querying approaches attempt to address this problem via optimally mapping the queried network into a subnetwork of the given biomolecular network. There already exist many methods for network querying in literature. path blast () is a network alignment and search tool for comparing PPI networks, but it only could be used to query a short protein path devised an algorithm called meta pathway hunter for querying metabolic networks. meta pathway hunter could find queries for more general pathways, but it only could be applied to small networks without cycles. q path () is a comprehensive framework for querying a linear pathway in a network of interest, while QNet () extends the type of queried network from the linear pathways to trees and networks of bounded tree width proposed an efficient framework for finding pathways based on Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) and it only could deal with the simple path. The efficiency, accuracy and capability to handle general network structures are three major criteria for devising network querying approaches. Many previous methods are either limited by the size of networks, the types of networks or the maximum allowable number of insertions deletions. For example, path blast q path and HMM method only consider the simple path (i.e. linear chain), while meta pathway hunter and QNet can not query the network with cycles. Some recent approaches advanced the step to the network querying problem with general network structure. SAGA () is an approximate graph matching technique that minimizes a subgraph distance function with a parameter  over all possible matchings to get the similar subgraph. path match graph match () formally define the path matching and graph matching problems and give algorithms for these problems, respectively. They reduced the path matching problem to find a longest weighted path in a directed acyclic graph, and the graph matching problem to find the highest scoring subgraphs in a large graph. mn aligner () is a network alignment method based on the integer quadratic programming. It only works well for the small network alignment problem since solving the large scale integer quadratic programming is time consuming. TORQUE () is a topology free querying algorithm. Given a query, TORQUE finds a matching set of proteins that are sequence similar to the query and then span a connected
