Motivation: next generation RNA sequencing rnase q has been widely used to investigate alternative isoform regulations. Among them, alternative 3 0 splice site (SS) and 5 0 SS account for more than 30% of all alternative splicing (AS) events in higher eukaryotes. Recent studies have revealed that they play important roles in building complex organisms and have a critical impact on biological functions which could cause disease. Quite a few analytical methods have been developed to facilitate alternative 3 0 SS and 5 0 SS studies using rnase q data. However, these methods have various limitations and their performances may be further improved. Results: We propose an empirical Bayes change point model to identify alternative 3 0 SS and 5 0 SS. Compared with previous methods, our approach has several unique merits. First of all, our model does not rely on annotation information. Instead, it provides for the first time a systematic framework to integrate various information when available, in particular the useful junction read information , in order to obtain better performance. Second, we utilize an empirical Bayes model to efficiently pool information across genes to improve detection efficiency. Third, we provide a flexible testing framework in which the user can choose to address different levels of questions, namely, whether alternative 3 0 SS or 5 0 SS happens, and or where it happens. Simulation studies and real data application have demonstrated that our method is powerful and accurate. Availability and implementation: The software is implemented in Java and can be freely down-loaded from http://ebchangepoint.sourceforge.net/.

introduction with continued development and improvement, next generation RNA sequencing rnase q has become more and more popular, owing to its affordable cost and advantages over existing technologies. In addition, its superior ities in detecting transcripts in undetermined genomic sequences and very accurate digital resolution make it a more attractive technology which is expected to gradually replace microarray technology (). Many compelling biological problems, once hard to tackle, can be solved by new methods built upon rnase q. In particular, alternative splice forms play important roles in building complex organisms from a limited number of genes. They provide a major mechanism for enhancing transcriptome and proteome diversity, and critically regulate various biological functions (). Using rnase q people observe that more than 90% of human genes undergo alternative splicing, a much higher percentage than anticipated (). Of various alternative splice forms, alternative 3 0 SS and 5 0 SS are particularly important and constitute more than 30% of all AS events as revealed by rnase q (). Several studies have V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com found that alternative 3 0 SS and 5 0 SS events are relevant to many diseases. By analyzing alternative 3 0 SS and 5 0 SS events, we can obtain precious diagnostic and prognostic information for therapies (). Thanks to high throughput rnase q genome wide quantitative studies on AS events become feasible (). Quite a few computational methods have been developed to detect and identify AS events. These methods can be roughly classified into three categories based on their strategies. The first category, represented by Cufflinks (), performs differential splicing detection based on transcript quantification, which is the most challenging. Short reads, sampled from rnase q can be aligned to multiple transcripts due to the similarity and overlaps between alternative transcripts (). It makes the expression estimation of individual transcript an undetermined problem. In addition, various sampling biases, including position specific biases (Bohnert and R at sch 2010;) and sequence specific biases () in the rnase q data, incur daunting difficulties for accurate transcript quantification. Consequently, the efficiency of these methods is diminished by the uncertainty in transcript quantification. The second category of methods aims to detect differential splicing by testing differential expression of the annotated events obtained from existing splicing databases. Representative examples in this category include alexa seq (), MISO (), MATS () and splice trap (). Among them, MISO employs a statistical model to estimate expression of alternatively spliced exons and isoforms (); MATS leverages a Bayesian statistical framework to flexibly test the hypothesis of differential alternative splicing patterns (). These methods may work well when splicing events are well and accurately annotated. They are not applicable to detect novel AS events not cataloged yet in existing annotation databases. The third category of methods, including diff splice (), dex seq () and FDM (), utilizes splice junction read information to overcome the annotation dependency limitation. The performances of these methods are highly dependent on the number and quality of splice junction reads. Sequencing costs often set limits to sequencing depth and coverage of rnase q datasets () and, consequently, performance of these junction read based methods. Furthermore, the number and quality of aligned splice junction reads will also rely on sequencing technology as well as read mapping tools (). Very recently propose a change point model which requires no annotation information. It relies on characterizing the coverage change for detecting alternative polyadenylation (APA). In principle, it can be applied for detecting 3 0 /5 0 AS events. However, compared with APA, a key difference for 3 0 /5 0 alternative splicing is that junction read information can be useful and utilized for locating splice sites. For example, a simple strategy for calling 3 0 / 5 0 AS events is to identify locations supported by at least N independent splice junction reads with different alignment start positions (). It is noted that when sequencing depth is not enough, a significant proportion of 3 0 /5 0 AS events may not be covered by junction reads, in particular when using a stringent N threshold for ensuring quality. Due to the junction read coverage limitation, there is room for improvement even when sequencing depth is high. Exon read coverage may be used as clues for 3 0 /5 0 AS events. We expect that using both coverage and junction read information will improve both sensitivity and specificity of AS 3 0 /5 0 calls compared to relaying solely on junction reads or read coverage. It is therefore desirable to develop a method that can systematically integrate both junction read information and coverage information. From a methodology point of view, Wei's method is a f request ist approach and fails to pool and exploit information across many genes under investigation. In addition, it tests only whether there is a change point but not where the change point is. Thus its change point location estimation does not guarantee any multiplicity control. In this paper, we develop an empirical Bayes change point model for identifying 3 0 /5 0 AS events. Our approach requires no annotation information and is applicable to detect novel aberrant splicing events. Compared with previous methods, our approach has several unique merits. First of all, our model does not rely on annotation information. Instead, it provides for the first time a systematic framework to integrate read coverage information and junction read or annotation information, when available, in order to obtain better performance. Secondly, we utilize an empirical Bayes model to efficiently pool information across genes for improving detection efficiency. Thirdly, we provide a flexible testing framework in which the user can choose to address different levels of questions, namely, whether alternative splicing happens, and or where it happens. Simulation studies and applications to real data have demonstrated that our method is powerful and accurate.
