The rapid advancement of genomic technology has revealed the enormous complexity and combinatorial nature of chro-matin modifications. To facilitate interpretation of the combinatorial nature of chromatin, we have developed a novel method to integrate all chromatin datasets into distinct nucleosome types (nucleosome alphabet). We have applied this approach to Saccharomyces cerevi-siae, generating a nucleosome alphabet, which forms chromatin motifs when mapped back to the genome. By applying novel chroma-tin alignment and global word search approaches, we have defined distinctive chromatin motifs for introns, origins of replication, tRNAs, antisense transcripts, double strand break hotspots and DNase hypersensitive sites, and can distinguish genes by expression level. We have also uncovered strong associations between transcription factor binding and specific types of nucleosomes. Our results demonstrate the uses and functionality of defining a chromatin alphabet and provide a unique and novel framework for exploring chromatin architecture.

introduction the DNA of all eukaryotic organisms is organized and structured into chromatin, a nucleoprotein complex through which genetic material is structured and manoeuvred to elicit cellular processes such as transcription, cellular division, differentiation and DNA repair The core component of eukaryotic chromatin is the nucleosome, which is composed of 147 base pairs of DNA wrapped around a histone octamer of H2A, H2B, H3 and H4. The amino and carboxyl termini of histones are susceptible to an enormous number of post-translational covalent modifications, of which 59 distinct modifications have currently been identified. These modifications have been proposed to function by directly altering the intrinsic chromatin structure and or by presenting or alternatively binding of chromatin modifying complexes (). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) in combination with high throughput sequencing (NGS) and microarrays chips eq and chip chip has been used to measure the occupancy of specific histone modifications and histone variants at a genomic scale. For Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a broad spectrum of histone modifications, including but not limited to H3K14Ac, H3K9Ac and H3K79me3, have been investigated with low resolution (200300 bp) microarrays (). higher resolution (50100 bp) microarrays have been used to interrogate the location of modifications such as H3K4me3, H3R2me2a and H3K4Ac (). chips eq has recently been used to map H2A.Z, H2BK123ub, H3K36me2 and H3K36me3 (). In addition to ChIP, micro cocc al nuclease m nase digestion assays have been used to map nucleosome positioning and occupancy at near bp resolution across the yeast genome (). The analysis of these datasets has been instrumental in expanding our understanding of chromatin s regulatory potential. However, each of these genome wide datasets is only a small portion of an extremely complex system. Emerging evidence suggests that chromatin modifications function in a combinatorial code that extends across several neighbouring nucleosomes (). It is therefore advantageous to examine the pattern and spacing of nucleosomes with their histone variants and modifications, i.e. the chromatin 'architecture' of genomic functional elements (). We have integrated numerous genomic datasets and identified the dominant nucleosome types (nucleosome alphabet) by their post-translational modifications and histone variants. Our nucleosome alphabet has allowed us to identify chromatin motifs for genomic functional elements, including novel motifs for introns, ARS consensus sequences (ACS), tRNAs, DNase hypersensitivity sites (DHS), double strand break hotspots (DSB Hotspots) and antisense transcripts. We have also identified significant associations between transcription factor (TF) binding and specific types of nucleosomes. Overall, our approach allows us to uncover the shared chromatin architecture across all similar functional elements, and apply traditional sequence alignment and motif finding algorithms to chromatin for the first time.

discussion as high throughput chromatin data are continually generated through efforts such as the ENCODE and mod encode projects, it is becoming increasingly important to be able to visualize and understand how these histone modifications interact with each other (ENCODE, 2011). The importance of the combinatorial nature of chromatin can be seen in the NuA4 complex in human, a large multimeric complex that is involved in regulation of transcription, cell cycle and DNA repair. This complex has seven chromatin binding domains, including two bromodomain s two SANT domains, two chromo domains and a PHD domain (). These domains could allow this complex to bind simultaneously to histone tails containing methylated lysines and arginine s acetylated lysines as well as, de acetylated histone tails. This suggests that the targeting of b CBF1, TYE7, STE12, REB1, FKH2, ADR1, GCN4, RPN4, FKH1, AFT2, RCS1 C CBF1, ABF1, PHD1, REB1, SWI5, MSN2, GCN4, SKN7, SOK2, NRG1, SWI6, PHO2, STB4, SWI4, RCS1, GLN3, GAT1 H BAS1, CBF1, ABF1, PHD1, ROX1, STE12, RAP1, REB1, FKH2, SWI5, MET31, DIG1, TEC1, GCN4, HAP5, SKN7, FHL1, YAP6, RTG3, SUT1, SOK2, NRG1, SWI6, SKO1, XBP1, PHO2, SWI4, AFT2, NDD1, CST6, ACE2, RLM1, RCS1, PHO4, GLN3, ARG80, ASH1, MOT3, MAC1 I UME6, STE12, CIN5, SPT2, HSF1, MSN4, DIG1, TEC1, YAP6, SUT1, PHO2, NDD1, DAL82, SPT23 V MSN4 Y UME6, PHD1, SUM1, MSN2, SOK2, SWI4 a significance determined by hyper-geometric testing to conserved TF binding sites (this complex would require a special arrangement of modifications across several nucleosomes, and demonstrates the need for studying chromatin architecture across numerous covalent modifications. To address the difficulties involved in interpreting multidimensional datasets, we have implemented a novel method that integrates numerous chromatin datasets across a variety of platforms into a simple chromatin alphabet. Using our chromatin alphabet, we have been able to identify chromatin motifs for functional regions, define tf nucleosome associations and uncover novel chromatin architectures for introns, ACS, tRNAs, DHS, DSB Hotspots and antisense transcripts. Current approaches addressing interpretation of combinatorial covalent modifications in the human genome, such as chom hmm and seq way show that genome wide analysis of multiple modifications is feasible (). The advantage of our approach is the identification of similar functional elements by their chromatin architecture, the eventual development of blast like algorithms and identification of biologically important chromatin attributes by sequence alignment. As the number of genome wide datasets increases, our technique can be readily applied while simultaneously incorporating older datasets from a variety of platforms. Future applications of our chromatin sequence alphabet will allow for the development of a human chromatin alphabet using the substantial amount of data generated by the ENCODE project (ENCODE, 2011).
