Motivation: In systems biology, kinetic models represent the biological system using a set of ordinary differential equations (ODEs). The correct values of the parameters within these ODEs are critical for a reliable study of the dynamic behaviour of such systems. Typically, it is only possible to experimentally measure a fraction of these parameter values. The rest must be indirectly determined from measurements of other quantities. In this article, we propose a novel statistical inference technique to computationally estimate these unknown parameter values. By characterizing the ODEs with non-linear state space equations, this inference technique models the unknown parameters as hidden states, which can then be estimated from noisy measurement data. Results: Here we extended the square root unscented Kalman filter sr uk f proposed by Merwe and Wan to include constraints with the state estimation process. We developed the constrained square root unscented Kalman filter csuk f to estimate parameters of non-linear state space models. This probabilistic inference technique was successfully used to estimate parameters of a glycolysis model in yeast and a gene regulatory network. We showed that our method is numerically stable and can reliably estimate parameters within a biologically meaningful parameter space from noisy observations. When compared with the two common non-linear extensions of Kalman filter in addition to four widely used global optimization algorithms, csuk f is shown to be both accurate and computationally efficient. With csuk f statistical analysis is straightforward, as it directly provides the uncertainty on the estimation result. Availability and implementation: Matlab code available upon request from the

introduction living organisms develop a highly interconnected web of dynamic mechanisms between different levels of molecular components, which are organized into diverse biochemical reaction networks. A better understanding of the general principles of these biological processes requires a system level study of the underlying mechanisms (). The integration of computational and mathematical methods with experimental efforts is necessary to gain such systems level understanding. In systems biology, the specific type of modelling that studies the detailed quantitative analysis of the dynamics of cellular processes is mechanistic or kinetic modelling (). Such models are often characterized by sets of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) () that describe the underlying interactive mechanisms of the system in a quantitative manner (). They account for the change of concentration of certain chemical species such as the metabolites, messenger RNA (mRNA) or proteins over time. These changes are specified through the rate laws, which are determined from in vitro biochemical experiments. The rate laws may have multiple parameters that need to be determined correctly to faithfully mimic observations (). While it might be possible to experimentally measure some of these parameters, for most of them, conducting biological experiments to determine their values are difficult, expensive, time consuming or not currently possible (). As a result, different computational techniques have been developed for the indirect determination of these unknown parameter values from some other measured quantities (). In general, the parameter estimation problem is formulated as a non-linear optimization problem that aims at minimizing the difference between simulated and measured values from experimental time course data (). Starting with an initial guess, these methods exhaustively search the parameter space to find the set of values that produce the best fit between the simulated and the measured data. Extensive research exists on the application of different optimization techniques, such as non-linear least square fitting and methods following steepest descent gradient techniques (), methods suitable for global optimization including simulated annealing (SA;) and evolutionary computation (). But due to the non-linear nature of the dynamics, the optimization problems of biochemical networks are most often multimodal (). Exploring such parameter space is computationally expensive for these optimization techniques. Moreover, they often get stuck in local minima (). Their performance also suffers in the presence of large measurement errors (). This is compounded as few optimization techniques are *To whom correspondence should be addressed. able to take into consideration the system noise (). An alternative to traditional optimization methods is to use the Bayesian inference method. This method takes both the system and measurement noise into consideration when extracting information from noisy or uncertain data (). The major advantage is its ability to infer the full probability distribution of the states and the parameters instead of making a simple point estimate. This method tries to estimate the posterior distribution of the parameter conditioned on the observed data y, pj y. However, the calculation of this posterior density involves high dimensional integration for which analytical expressions are generally not available (). Their numerical solution might also be computationally challenging as the problem is translated to a combinatorial summation problem (). The Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) () method, which works with batch data, has the capability to represent the posterior distribution numerically (). Recently, MCMC techniques have been widely used in biological systems for predicting different targets (). Sequential approaches such as the sequential Monte Carlo (SMC), also known as particle filters (), and Kalman filtering type approaches () were primarily developed for data produced in a sequential fashion. These methods yield better approximations compared with the batch processing algorithms when applied to the whole data (). There has been extensive research in recent years to apply the sequential approximation methods to estimate states and parameters in biological systems. The work of demonstrate the applicability of the SMC in the state estimation of biological models. Although SMC or particle filters are more sophisticated than the Kalman filtering methods, they involve calculation of several hyper parameters and have to solve numerous sets of ODEs, which leads to a high computational cost ().reported that parameter estimation using particle filtering for a regular size biological model requires the cost of pet a scale computing. Such large scale computing can only be performed with high end clusters and supercomputers. In that respect, Kalman filtering methods are much more suitable for biological systems, as they are less resource intensive in terms of computational cost. To date, efforts have been made to apply Kalman filtering based methods to estimate parameters of biological systems (to name a few). In this article, we propose a new form of the unscented Kalman filter for the estimation of unknown parameter values of biological systems within a constrained boundary. Unlike other non-linear extensions to the Kalman filter (KF), this algorithm remains numerically stable. We illustrate the efficiency of this method by estimating the unknown parameters and hidden states of two different systems. The first system is the upper part of Glycolysis in yeast (), modified from. With this, we study the parameter estimation of a medium size kinetic model. The second model is from the dream 6 contest on the estimation of model parameter challenge (). The result from the parameter estimation of these models clearly demonstrates the applicability of our newly proposed algorithm to much larger and real life biological models.
