Motivation: The precise dynamics of gene expression is often crucial for proper response to stimuli. time course gene expression profiles can provide insights about the dynamics of many cellular responses, but are often noisy and measured at arbitrary intervals, posing a major analysis challenge. Results: We developed an algorithm that interleaves clustering time course gene expression data with estimation of dynamic models of their response by biologically meaningful parameters. In combining these two tasks we overcome obstacles posed in each one. Moreover, our approach provides an easy way to compare between responses to different stimuli at the dynamical level. We use our approach to analyze the dynamical transcriptional responses to inflammation and anti-viral stimuli in mice primary dendritic cells, and extract a concise representation of the different dynamical response types. We analyze the similarities and differences between the two stimuli and identify potential regulators of this complex transcriptional response. Availability: The code to our method is freely available

introduction understanding a complex transcriptional response to stimuli is a key goal in biological research. Such a response involves a timely activation and repression of hundreds of genes, requiring a tight and accurate regulation. For example, the transcriptional response to inflammation in immune cells in mice is regulated by at least a dozen transcription factors, operating through different modes of activation, including fast responding factors (e.g. NFB) and secondary response factors synthesized de novo during the response (e.g. Irf8), resulting in a wide range of dynamical transcriptional responses (). Thus, to fully understand the transcriptional response, a static analysis indicating which genes are induced at one given time point is not sufficient, and it is important to analyze the transcriptional dynamics of the induced genes. A widely used approach to study transcription dynamics is by collecting time course measurements of gene expression in predefined time points following a stimuli. A possible concern in analysis of such data is the inherent limitation of gene expression measurements. These are exacerbated by the temporal aspects of the data the chosen time points might not capture the interval in which a gene is up-regulated. As a result this data is often difficult to analyze, and the comparison between experiments carried over different time courses is non-trivial. In the literature there are several approaches for analysis of time course data. One approach is to cluster the data so that every cluster captures a group of genes with similar dynamical response. This can be done using traditional clustering algorithms, such as k mean (). However, the standard distance functions are not adequate to handle the given data which is sampled at various non uniformly distributed time points. Several works addressed this specific task addressed this obstacle by assigning genes to a preselected set of potential profiles. However, the set of potential profiles are not selected from the data, and might contain profiles that do not represent true biological responses. An additional obstacle is that the clustering is done on the noisy and missing expression patterns of genes which might lead to false assignments to clusters. Thus, an unbiased clustering algorithm fitted for this type of data is needed. An alternative approach is to consider a mathematical model of the response dynamics, and then fit it to measurements. This in effect, translates the discrete measurements to a continuous function from a biologically plausible family of functions. Moreover, the parameters of this class of functions can be biologically relevant and mark the important aspects of the dynamics (e.g. point of induction). For example the impulse model proposed by, is designed to capture the typical impulse like response to a stimulus, using a function with biologically meaningful parameters. A problem with models such as this one is that they have many parameters and can lead to overfitting over a typically small number of time points. In addition, the modeling is done per individual gene, thus clustering is still necessary to obtain a concise representation of the dynamical responses types. Here, we present dynamite c (Dynamic Modeling and Clustering), an integrative approach that simultaneously models time course gene expression profiles with biologically meaningful parameters, and assigns them to clusters of different dynamical responses. Our approach is to model gene responses using an impulse model (). Our premise is that many genes have a similar response. Thus, instead of estimating the profile of each gene separately, and thus risk overfitting, our method estimates the profile with a prior that prefers to match one out of a set of 'prototype' responses (). We thus pose the parameter estimation task as jointly learning the prototypes and the parameters of individual genes. When learning these prototypes we, in fact, assign genes to clusters. These two problems are solved by iterating between them (). We used dynamite c to study the responses to two related stimuli in mice primary dendritic cells that simulate either inflammation (LPS stimulus) and anti-viral infection poly ic stimulus). In their experiment collected gene expression measurements of a dense time course following the stimulus. We show that our revised impulse model and algorithm result in a good fit for the induced genes and meaningful clusters. We reveal distinct types of dynamical response to stimulation, and compare between genes that have the same dynamical response under both conditions and other genes that change their response dynamics. In addition, we point out potential transcription factors that could regulate this complex transcriptional response.

discussion time series expression data are a valuable approach to study the dynamics of the transcriptional response to a stimuli. Here, we provide tools to address the challenge of analyzing such complex data. Our dynamite c method is an integrative approach where we use a simple two impulse model () to describe the response dynamics, and at the same time cluster the data so that every cluster captures a group of genes with similar dynamics. By exploiting the fact that most responses contain groups of co regulated genes with a similar behavior, we can estimate a set of prototypical responses in our function space, and use them as a meaningful prior when estimating the parameters for individual genes. As a consequence our method avoids overfitting and is more robust to measurement noise while still fitting each gene with specific parameters. In addition we cluster the genes into meaningful dynamical clusters, according to the typical prototype (prior) we learn for each gene. We validated our results first on synthetic data, demonstrating our robustness to noise, to a small number of samples, and to non-uniform sampling. To demonstrate the properties of our method we applied dynamite c to a dataset describing the response to two related but distinct stimuli of immune cells. As we show the resulting clusters capture distinct parts of the immune response that represent separate biological functions and are regulated by different overlapping cis regulatory motifs. Moreover, we show that the estimated model parameters are biologically meaningful and allow us to provide a finer description of the differences between the two stimuli. Taken more broadly, we apply the general theme of parameter 'sharing' between genes to reduce overfitting when estimating the dynamics at the level of each gene. This theme can be realized page i400 i392i400
