Motivation: The inherent promiscuity of small molecules towards protein targets impedes our understanding of healthy versus diseased metabolism. This promiscuity also poses a challenge for the pharmaceutical industry as identifying all protein targets is important to assess (side) effects and repositioning opportunities for a drug. Results: Here, we present a novel integrated structure and system based approach of drug target prediction i dtp to enable the large scale discovery of new targets for small molecules, such as pharmaceutical drugs, co-factors and metabolites (collectively called drugs). For a given drug, our method uses sequence order independent structure alignment, hierarchical clustering and prob-abilistic sequence similarity to construct a probabilistic pocket ensemble (PPE) that captures promiscuous structural features of different binding sites on known targets. A drugs PPE is combined with an approximation of its delivery profile to reduce false positives. In our cross validation study, we use i dtp to predict the known targets of 11 drugs, with 63% sensitivity and 81% specificity. We then predicted novel targets for these drugs two that are of high pharmacological interest, the peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma and the oncogene b cell lymphoma 2, were successfully validated through in vitro binding experiments. Our method is broadly applicable for the prediction of protein small molecule interactions with several novel applications to biological research and drug development. Availability and implementation: The program, datasets and results are freely available to academic users at

introduction most metabolites and pharmaceutical drugs bind to more than one protein (), resulting in a phenotype composed of many molecular (side) effects. For the pharmaceutical industry, predicting and minimizing off target effects is important because they are the source of low efficacy and high toxicity that result in a high failure rate of new drugs in clinical trials (). Recent studies estimate that each drug on average binds to at least six known and several unknown targets (). Thus, knowledge of off target effects can help reduce drug resistance and provide opportunities for multi target drug development (). Moreover, off target ligands for a given drug may inspire 'drug repositioning', where a drug already approved for one condition is redirected to treat another condition, thereby overcoming delays and costs associated with clinical trials and drug approval (). Therefore, predicting off target binding sites to comprehensively understand the side effects of drugs and exploit drug repositioning opportunities is central for rapid, cost efficient drug development. In addition to drug development, identifying all cellular targets of a given biological cofactor, metabolite or other small molecules is of great importance for understanding cellular function and dysfunction in general (e.g. metabo lome target interactions and associated diseases) (). Finally, identifying possible targets of environmental pollutants may help us to understand and avoid health hazards from released chemicals. Computational methods to predict new targets for existing endogenous or administered small molecule compounds are, therefore, of high biological and pharmacological value. (For simplicity, we herein refer to all these compounds collectively as 'drugs', meaning 'a small molecule chemical substance with effects on a biological system'.) These methods can be divided into three broad categories: structure based, expression based and ligand based. structure based methods utilize information from drug targets by employing binding site similarity or molecular docking (); expression based methods exploit molecular activity perturbation signatures that result from drug activity (); and ligand based methods utilize the chemical and structural properties of a drug to discover new targets (). In addition to these methods, previously unknown targets for existing drugs have also been predicted using side effect similarity (), genome wide association studies () and medical genetics (). Recently, methods that combine information from multiple sources have been introduced and will likely become the preferred approach (); however, because most of these methods were not benchmarked on drugs with known targets (sensitivity analysis), it is difficult to evaluate their success rate. To date, the only studies to report a true positive prediction rate have done so at relatively low rates (29% and 49%, respectively) (). Moreover, a high throughput framework based on structural information remains unavailable, and current methods do not satisfactorily capture the structural flexibility of drugs that can adopt several conformations, allowing them to interact differently with different targets. In this study, we propose a novel computational drug target prediction method that integrates structural signatures of small molecule compounds with their tissue delivery profiles. i dtp incorporates four major developments: (i) Unlike previous methods, this framework is generic and does not target a specific drug. (ii) i dtp uses the probabilistic pocket ensemble (PPE) to capture the promiscuous nature of different binding pockets for the same drug. (iii) i dtp uses the approximated drug delivery profile add p of the respective drug to predict biologically relevant targets. The drug delivery profile (DDP) is defined as the distribution of drug concentrations in different tissues after circulation. Since such information is not directly available, we approximated the DDP, denoted as add p as the average of the mRNA expression of the known drug targets in 79 human tissues. Thus, an add p is a vector of length 79. (iv) i dtp has a performance guarantee supported by (i) cross validation on a benchmark dataset; (ii) in vitro binding experiments; and (iii) large scale text mining. Application of i dtp allowed us to propose a novel cellular target for coenzyme A (CoA), a novel drug gable pocket and lead compound for Bcl-2, and plausible mechanistic information for the inhibition of CYP2E1 by trol ox
discussion we have developed a computational method to extract implicit structural signatures of a drug binding site from an ensemble of structures of proteins to which this drug binds. We showed that such a PPE, can be built using as few as one structure of a drug protein complex and a set of apo structures of other known drug binding proteins. The PPE of a given drug is constructed using sequence order independent alignments and a probabilistic scoring function, which allows weakly conserved but significant structural patterns of the interactions between the drug and its several target proteins to emerge and be quantified. Thus, our PPE is able to encode features related to promiscuous target interactions and structural flexibility of a drug. The validity of 11 pp es was confirmed by illustrating that they reliably identify known targets of the respective drugs. We found that by combining a PPE with an add p as an orthogonal source of structure independent information, the resulting method, i dtp enables large scale prediction of novel drug targets. The challenge of identifying new drug target pairs in silico has attracted significant interest from the computational community. However, compared with other algorithms, i dtp includes unprecedented features, because no previous studies have combined sequence order independent alignment and probabilistic scoring function to model the drug protein interaction, nor have they employed the add p to filter out false positive predictions. Most previous studies have not assessed the performance of their methodologies by exploiting known drug targets, as we did here to validate the success rate of PPE. Because other studies used considerably different datasets and their programs are not publicly available, a direct comparison among methodologies is unfortunately impossible. However, compared with i dtp other existing methods including conventional docking or structure based virtual screening, share one or more of the following limitations: (i) they are known to scale poorly with the size and complexity of drugs and drug binding sites () and (ii) their algorithms do not appropriately account for the different conformations of both drug and binding site residues. Our method addresses these concerns by constructing a structural signature from a set of binding sites, instead of a single binding site, and by using a probabilistic sequence similarity function that allows accounting for the different conformations of drugs and binding site residues. (The improvement expected from this methodology is analogous to the improvement from a multiple sequence alignment compared to a pairwise alignment.) We also incorporated the add p to identify relevant new targets. The predictive power of i dtp was supported by both computational cross validation and text mining. Additionally, we validated two of our predicted interactions by in vitro experiments. First, we showed that CoA bound to hp parc lbd with an apparent K d of less than 500 mM, displaying characteristics of a neutral antagonist. CoA is a ubiquitous cofactor that can reach high concentrations in eukaryotes depending on cell type and subcellular localization ($0.14, 0.7 and 5 mM in animal cytosol, peroxy some s and mitochondria, respectively) (). It is therefore possible that this predicted interaction plays a currently unrecognized) measured from FA titrations between fluorescein e labeled PGC1-NR2, N-CORNR2 nc or RID2) or S-CORNR2 (SMRT RID2) peptides and hp parc lbd in the absence of a ligand or in the presence of (a) a 10 M excess and (bd) increasing molar excess of Rosiglitazone, CoA or CD5477, respectively i dtp A computational drug target prediction method biological role in fatty acid signaling and metabolism. i dtp predicted that the CoA binding site on hp parc lbd is the receptor's ligand binding pocket, which also binds rosiglitazone and CD5477. Indeed, the ligand binding pocket of hp parc is one of the largest among the nuclear receptor protein family (), allowing hp parc to bind a variety of ligands. Thus, CoA may trigger a conformational change that disrupts or unsettles the binding surface of both coactivators and corepressor s producing the characteristics of a neutral antagonist. However, we can not strictly rule out that CoA binds to the surface where coactivators and corepressor s would normally bind, creating competition for the binding site. Second, we verified another CoA interaction predicted by i dtp by showing that CoA binds in vitro to recombinant Bcl-2 with a K d of $350 lM. The predicted CoA binding pocket on Bcl-2 is adjacent to the known binding site for Bax-BH3. Because we showed that CoA binds Bcl-2 without displacing Bax-BH3, we can indeed infer non-competitive binding. The predicted binding pocket of CoA is interesting for drug design purposes, because it is located adjacent to the well explored Bax-BH3 binding pocket (); therefore, it may provide an alternative target site with possible synergetic effects. Beyond validating our computational predictions, our in vitro experiments also suggest the usefulness of i dtp for various applications: The case of the coah pparc illustrates how i dtp might be used to reveal biologically relevant interactions between small molecules (ligands, cofactors or metabolites) and cellular proteins. Thus, our method could help establish metabolite protein pairs for large scale metabolic analyses or for predicting possible targets for chemical small molecule pollutants such as bisphenol s. The interaction between CoA and Bcl-2 illustrates how i dtp could be used for drug discovery by suggesting possible lead compounds and novel drug gable protein binding pockets. In addition, i dtp could provide insight into the binding mechanisms of known drugs for which the drug target complex has not yet been determined. For example, our results suggest that formic acid binds to CYP2E1 (Supplementary file pred targets. CYP2E1 is an enzyme known to interact with more than 70 small drugs and xenobiotic compounds (). Induction of CYP2E1 has been shown to cause oxidative stress and alcohol induced liver injury in mouse models (); however, trolox6hydroxy2578 tetramethyl chroman2 carboxylic acid], a drug that contains the formic acid structure, has been shown to reduce the aforementioned toxicity (). Hence, our results suggest a direct interaction between the trol ox formic acid moiety and CYP2E1 that results in reduced toxicity. To further evaluate the usefulness of i dtp for pharmaceutical purposes, we identified the genetic diseases associated with the predicted target proteins for each drug using the databases online Mendelian Inheritance in Man () and Human Gene Mutation Database (). A co citation index with high statistical significance (P  0.005) was found for 16 predicted drug target pairs (including coah pparc. The predicted drug targets were associated with major human diseases, such as cancer, heart problems and metabolic dysfunctions (Supplementary), making these results a potentially valuable basis for drug discovery and repositioning. However, the use of i dtp for drug repositioning, in the strict sense of re-using a fda approved chemical compound, remains currently limited, as a relatively large set of 3D structures of known targets is required to construct a high confidence PPE. The rapid pace of experimental determination of protein structures will reduce this limitation in the future.
