Motivation: Comprehensive two dimensional gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC × GC–MS) brings much increased separation capacity, chemical selectivity and sensitivity for metabolomics and provides more accurate information about metabolite retention times and mass spectra. However, there is always a shift of retention times in the two columns that makes it difficult to compare metabolic profiles obtained from multiple samples exposed to different experimental conditions. Results: The existing peak alignment algorithms for GC × GC–MS data use the peak distance and the spectra similarity sequentially and require predefined either distance based window and or spectral similarity based window. To overcome the limitations of the current alignment methods, we developed an optimal peak alignment using a novel mixture similarity by employing the peak distance and the spectral similarity measures simultaneously without any variation windows. In addition, we examined the effect of the four different distance measures such as Euclidean, Maximum, Manhattan and Canberra distances on the peak alignment. The performance of our proposed peak alignment algorithm was compared with the existing alignment methods on the two sets of GC × GC–MS data. Our analysis showed that Canberra distance performed better than other distances and the proposed mixture similarity peak alignment algorithm prevailed against all literature reported methods. Availability: The data and software mSPA are available at

introduction an emerging technology, comprehensive 2D gas chromatography mass spectrometry gcg cms brings much increased separation capacity, chemical selectivity and sensitivity for metabolomics analysis although there are several issues. This approach usually uses a short column after the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. main analytical column. Typically, the second column is operated at a higher temperature than the first column with different stationary phase. The compounds co eluted from the first column are further separated in the second column because of the difference of column temperature and the chromatography matrix. The further separated compounds are directed to a high capacity time of flight mass spectrometry system for detection. The GC  GCMS platform offers significant advantages for analysis of complex samples including: an order of magnitude increase in separation capacity, significant increase in signal to noise ratio and dynamic range and improvement of mass spectral deconvolution and similarity matches. Since the GC  GCMS system can provide more accurate information about compound retention times and mass spectrum, it represents a powerful tool for the analysis of compounds in complex biological systems. However, while gathering GC  GCMS data, there is always a shift of retention times in the two columns. Retention time shifts make it difficult to compare metabolic profiles obtained from multiple samples. In order to correct the retention time shifts in the GC  GC system, two alignment approaches have been developed: profile alignment and peak alignment. The profile alignment directly uses the entire chromatographic data, i.e. the raw instrument data, as the input data. In the peak alignment approach, the raw instrument data are first de convoluted to peak list, and the peak lists of multiple samples are then employed as the input data to correct retention time shifts. The selection of the two approaches for retention time correction depends on the methods of downstream statistical analysis. Currently, four profile alignment methods have been reported introduced an algorithm based on the generalized rank annihilation method developed a correlation optimized shifting method. These two methods were designed to align small or local regions of interest in GC  GC data. In order to correct the entire chromatogram in both dimensions proposed an indexing scheme together with a piecewise retention time alignment algorithm developed a 2D correlation optimized warping (2-D COW) method for warping the GC  GC data. However, all the profile alignment methods align the GC  GCMS data based on 2D retention times alone, although the signature feature of a compound, i.e. mass spectrum of fragment ions, is readily available in the raw instrument data. Aligning compound peaks solely based on the 2D retention times may introduce a high rate of false positive alignment because page 1661 16601666
