We have established an RNA mapping database rm db to enable structural, thermodynamic and kinetic comparisons across single nucleotide resolution RNA structure mapping experiments. The volume of structure mapping data has greatly increased since the development of high throughput sequencing techniques, accelerated software pipelines and large scale mutagenesis. For scientists wishing to infer relationships between RNA sequence structure and these mapping data, there is a need for a database that is curated, tagged with error estimates and interfaced with tools for sharing, visu-alization, search and meta analysis. Through its on-line front end the rm db allows users to explore single nucleotide resolution mapping data in heat map bar graph and colored secondary structure graphics ; to leverage these data to generate secondary structure hypotheses ; and to download the data in standardized and computer friendly files, including the rd at and community consensus snrnas m formats. At the time of writing, the database houses 53 entries, describing more than 2848 experiments of 1098 RNA constructs in several solution conditions and is growing rapidly.

introduction understanding the secondary and tertiary structures of RNAs is critical for dissecting their diverse biological functions, ranging from catalysis in ribosomal RNAs to gene regulation in metabolite sensing ribo switches and protein binding elements in RNA messages (). RNA structure has therefore been intensely studied with a variety of biophysical and biochemical technologies (). Among these tools, a facile, information rich and widely used technique is structure mapping (also called structure probing or footprinting), in which the chemical modification, enzymatic cleavage or degradation rate of an RNA nucleotide correlates with the exposure, flexibility or other structural features of the site. Modern methods often reverse transcribe probed RNA molecules into DNA fragments whose lengths can be subsequently analyzed to infer the locations of probe events. These methods permit the single nucleotide resolution readout of structural data for RNAs as large as ribosomes (), and in recent years, investigators have developed high throughput technologies, such as 96 well capillary electrophoresis () and deep sequencing () to perform this step. Furthermore, several bioinformatic pipelines have been implemented to rapidly quantify, map and analyze the resulting data (). RNA mapping experiments are now routinely used to improve automated secondary structure modeling (), probe entire viral genomes (), simultaneously map arbitrary RNA mixtures through deep sequencing () and infer an RNA's 'contact map' by coupling to exhaustive single nucleotide mutagenesis (). These developments could enable novel methods in RNA structural biology, especially if predictive relationships between RNA sequence structure and these data can be established. However, unlike existing structural biology fields like nuclear magnetic resonance and crystallography, there is no equivalent of the Biological Magnetic Resonance Bank () or the Protein Data Bank () that stores curated datasets. Structure mapping data are available in the supporting material of papers or self reported in snrnas m format (), but these formats do not typically include error estimates; are not always normalized or background subtracted with standardized protocols; are not linked to RNA structures and are not straightforward to visualize, which would enable consistency checks during further analysis. We have therefore created an RNA mapping database rm db and are populating it with curated structure mapping measurements in human and machine readable formats amenable to inferring relationships between sequence structure and structure mapping data. Data contained in the rm db are freely available and can be easily integrated with future repositories such as rna central (). *To whom correspondence should be addressed.

discussion the throughput of structure mapping experiments has taken significant leaps with multiplexed capillary electrophoresis and next generation sequencing that allow probing of thousands of RNAs at once. These data should, in principle, permit the development of confident structural biology tools that couple structure mapping measurements to secondary and tertiary structure modeling. However, until recently, researchers have had few resources that enable curation and sharing of high throughput quantified RNA mapping data. It is our hope that the rm db will make such projects possible.
