Current tools for liquid chromatography and mass spec-trometry for meta bolo mic data cover a limited number of processing steps, whereas online tools are hard to use in a programmable fashion. This article introduces the Metabolite Automatic Identification Toolkit ma it package, which makes it possible for users to perform meta bolo mic end to end liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry data analysis. ma it is focused on improving the peak annotation stage and provides essential tools to validate statistical analysis results. ma it generates output files with the statistical results, peak annotation and metabolite identification. Availability and implementation: http://b2slab.upc.edu/software-and-downloads/metabolite-automatic-identification-toolkit/.

introduction liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (LC/MS) is an analytical technique used widely in metabolomics to detect molecules in biological samples (). A wide array of software tools is available for LC/MS profiling data analysis, including commercial, programmatic and online tools. A commercial example is Analyst  , whereas some open source packages permit programmatic processing, such as the R package x cms () to detect peaks or CAMERA () and a stream () for peak annotations. There have been efforts on just peak annotation using JAVA (). mz mine and mz match are modularized tools coded in JAVA that are focused on LC/MS data preprocessing and visualization (). Online tools permit sample processing through a web Graphical User Interface, such as x cms online (http://xcmsonline.scripps.edu) or metabo analyst (). Refer to supplementary for a comparative between the capabilities for some of the main available tools. In this context, we introduce a new R package called Metabolite Automatic Identification Toolkit ma it for automatic LC/MS analysis. The goal of the ma it package is to provide an array of tools that makes programmable meta bolo mic end to end statistical analysis possible (see Section 3 of the Supplementary Material for details about the ma it modularity). ma it includes functions to improve peak annotation through the process called biotransformation s and to assess the predictive power of statistically significant metabolites that quantify class separability.
