Motivation: In vitro and in vivo cell proliferation is often studied using the dye carboxy fluorescein succ in imi dyl ester (CFSE). The CFSE time series data provide information about the proliferation history of populations of cells. While the experimental procedures are well established and widely used, the analysis of CFSE time series data is still challenging. Many available analysis tools do not account for cell age and employ optimization methods that are inefficient (or even unreliable). Results: We present a new model based analysis method for CFSE time series data. This method uses a flexible description of proliferating cell populations, namely, a division-, age and label structured population model. Efficient maximum likelihood and Bayesian estimation algorithms are introduced to infer the model parameters and their uncertainties. These methods exploit the forward sensitivity equations of the underlying partial differential equation model for efficient and accurate gradient calculation, thereby improving computational efficiency and reliability compared with alternative approaches and accelerating uncertainty analysis. The performance of the method is assessed by studying a dataset for immune cell proliferation. This revealed the importance of different factors on the proliferation rates of individual cells. Among others, the predominate effect of cell age on the division rate is found, which was not revealed by available computational methods. Availability and implementation: The MATLAB source code implementing the models and algorithms is available from

introduction proliferation is essential in many biological processes, ranging from development to wound healing, immune response and stem cell renewal. Due to this eminent role, a key challenge in cell biology is to quantify proliferation dynamics. Nowadays, there are different experimental methods available to assess cell proliferation, e.g. time-lapse microscopy () and proliferation assays based upon carboxy fluorescein succ in imi dyl ester (CFSE) labeling (). While time-lapse microscopy is highly informative, it is difficult to apply in vivo. cfse based proliferation assays can be employed in vivo and in vitro, but the data analysis is more intricate and no single cell time courses are available. To study proliferation using CFSE, cells are incubated with carboxy fluorescein diacetate succ in imi dyl ester cfda se. cfda se can diffuse across the cell membrane and once in the cytoplasm is converted to CFSE, which binds covalently to intracellular proteins. V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com CFSE is a fluorescent dye and its concentration is reduced by protein degradation as well as cell division. During cell division, CFSE is distributed approximately equally among daughter cells (); hence, proliferation results in a progressive dilution of the dye (), which can be recorded using flow cytometry. As the individual cells do not, in general, divide with the same rates, an initially unimodal distribution () becomes multi-modal as time progresses (). The modes are related to different numbers of cell divisions (); however, often the cells with different numbers of divisions are not strictly separated. For this reason, the calculation of the number of cells with a certain division number using peak detection and deconvolution methods () is error prone. Furthermore, even knowledge about the number of cells with a particular division number does not enable the comparison of different hypotheses regarding, e.g. the proliferation rates. The need for quantitative data analysis and hypothesis testing inspired the development of a multitude of model based approaches. Nowadays, age structured population (ASP) models (), division structured population (DSP) models (), label structured population (LSP) models (), age and division structured population (ADSP) models (), and division and label structured population d lsp models () are used to study CFSE data. These classes of population balance models account for up to two properties of individual cells: @BULLET number of divisions i (! DSP and d lsp model) @BULLET CFSE concentration x (! LSP and d lsp model) @BULLET cell's age a (! ASP and ADSP model and are mostly written as systems of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) or partial differential equations (PDEs). Population balance models which account for the cell age the time passed since cell division, i.e. ASP and ADSP, can also be formulated as sets of nested integrals (De). This alternative formulation is employed for the smith martin model () and the cyt on model (). For the smith martin model and cyt on model (with progression fraction equal to zero), equivalent PDE formulations are available (). For a comprehensive introduction to structured population models, we refer to the review by De Boer and Perelson (2013). As the population models available in the literature did not capture the complexity of the process, we recently introduced the division-, age and label structured population dal sp model (). The dal sp model, a system of coupled PDEs, provides a flexible description of proliferation dynamics (), but it has never been used to analyse CFSE data. Accordingly, no parameter estimation, model selection and uncertainty analysis methods have been available for this type of model until now. In this manuscript, we introduce methods to infer the parameters of dal sp models from CFSE distribution time series data and to assess the dependency of the proliferation rates on factors such as cell age. For this we introduce a statistical model linking predictions of the dal sp model to measure CFSE data and formulate the corresponding inverse problem. As the optimization problem is nonlinear, we compare different optimization procedures. Furthermore, we implement the first identifiability and uncertainty analysis methods for dal sp models. Combined with model selection methods, these methods facilitate an in depth analysis of CFSE time series data, which we illustrate for a published dataset.

application we illustrate the proposed model based quantification method by studying T lymphocyte proliferation. T lymphocytes are part of the adaptive immune system and their pool expands upon pathogen recognition. This expansion is frequently monitored using CFSE labeling ().

conclusion in vivo and in vitro proliferation assays using CFSE require accurate tools for quantifying biologically meaningful parameters (). To meet this requirement, we propose to use dal sp models which account for the age of individual cells. In contrast to the frequently used LSP and d lsp models, dal sp models allow for non exponential inter division time. To exploit dal sp models for the analysis of CFSE time series data, we derived sensitivity equations for gradient calculation, and we developed a tailored numerical scheme exploiting the hierarchical structure of dal sp models. As an accurate model based analysis of experimental data requires reliable inference, we compared different optimization algorithms with respect to convergence and computation time. Our comparison, which is to the best of our knowledge the first comparison of this kind for structured population models, revealed that multi start local optimization outperforms stochastic global optimization for this class of PDE models. This confirms results by for ODE models. Indeed, for some dal sp models the evaluated stochastic global optimizers did not even converge if a large number of function evaluations ( 10 5 ) was allowed. For the same models, multi start local optimization with accurate gradients provided reproducible results. This underpin ed the importance of using sensitivity equations, which have so far not been described for LSP and d lsp models. The latter raising questions regarding the reliability of previous estimation results. The efficient deterministic optimizers were used to maximize a likelihood function which accounts for the stochasticity of the acquisition process. This likelihood function is statistically more meaningful than least squares type objective functions (). We employed the proposed likelihood function for model selection and found evidence for a dependence of the division rate on the cell age. More precisely, the hill type division rate with a high degree, n a ) 1, indicated a lower bound for the inter division time, which could be interpreted as a minimal length of the cell cycle. This seems biologically more plausible than the time and CFSE concentration dependent division rates proposed in previous publications (). Furthermore, age dependent rates of cell division have been reported for similar biological systems using time-lapse microscopy data (). Beyond model selection, we provided the first detailed Bayesian uncertainty analysis for structured population models. This was challenging due to the computational complexity of PDE models and the number of unknown parameters. We established computational feasibility by exploiting tailored numerical methods and an initialization using optimization results. The posterior samples obtained using MCMC methods revealed a low level of uncertainties for latent properties, such as the age distribution and the parameters of the cell division rate. In addition, the marginal distribution of parameters are consistent with the profile likelihoods, which substantiated the results further. All the modeling, simulation, parameter estimation and model selection methods used in this publication are implemented in the open source MATLAB toolbox shaped a lsp. The availability of the code will facilitate the application of the method and simplify the development of extensions, e.g. toward multiple cell types (), asymmetric cell division () and alternative dal sp models (). In particular the implementation of a cyt on based model () would be interesting as these models allow for a fraction of non dividing cells. In addition to extensions, alternative parameterizations can be included, e.g. a parameterization of the probability density functions for a cell to divide and die at age a as used in the cyt on models) in contrast to a parameterization of the age dependent rate of cell division and cell death. The incorporation of the features in shaped a lsp would allow for an even broader spectrum of applications and improve user friendliness. In summary, this study presents a novel model based analysis method for CFSE time series data. Besides a statistical model, we present findings regarding optimizer performance and uncertainty analysis. These findings and the methods we developed can be easily transferred to other structured population models and might also be applicable to other types of population balance models. Accordingly, this study will help to make the most of CFSE time series data and other data requiring cell cycle corrections.
