Motivation: Understanding the details of protein rna interactions is important to reveal the functions of both the RNAs and the proteins. In these interactions, the secondary structures of the RNAs play an important role. Because RNA secondary structures in protein rna complexes are variable, considering the ensemble of RNA secondary structures is a useful approach. In particular, recent studies have supported the idea that, in the analysis of RNA secondary structures, the base pairing probabilities b pps of RNAs (i.e. the probabilities of forming a base pair in the ensemble of RNA secondary structures) provide richer and more robust information about the structures than a single RNA secondary structure, for example, the minimum free energy structure or a snapshot of structures in the Protein Data Bank. However, there has been no investigation of the b pps in protein rna interactions. Results: In this study, we analyzed b pps of RNA molecules involved in known protein rna complexes in the Protein Data Bank. Our analysis suggests that, in the tertiary structures, the b pps (which are computed using only sequence information) for unpaired nucleotides with intermolecular hydrogen bonds h bonds to amino acids were significantly lower than those for unpaired nucleotides without h bonds. On the other hand, no difference was found between the b pps for paired nucleotides with and without intermolecular h bonds. Those findings were commonly supported by three probabilistic models, which provide the ensemble of RNA secondary structures, including the McCaskill model based on Turners free energy of secondary structures.

introduction protein rna interactions play important roles in various aspects of biological processes, such as splicing, translation and RNA silencing. Recently, several experimental techniques have been developed to investigate protein rna interactions (). In addition, the increasing number of determined 3D structures of protein rna complexes deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (has promoted many computational studies to understand the detailed mechanisms underlying the protein rna interactions (). Most of these studies consistently showed the importance of electrostatic interactions between the positively charged amino acids of the proteins and the negatively charged phosphate groups of the RNA. However, only a few studies have considered the role of RNA secondary structures in the protein RNA interactions (), although many RNA binding proteins are known to recognize the specific secondary structures of their partner RNA (). In addition, the secondary structures are phylogenetically conserved and are closely related to the functions of RNAs (). One difficulty for analyzing RNA secondary structures in protein rna complexes in the PDB is that only snapshots of the secondary structures are available but they are variable in reality (). Moreover, the probability of forming a specific RNA secondary structure, such as the minimum free energy structure, often becomes extremely small (typically 510 10 ) (). These facts are known as the ambiguity or uncertainty of RNA secondary structures. To tackle this uncertainty, a probability distribution of secondary structures has been considered in many analyses of RNAs (). Specifically, base pairing probabilities b pps that provide probabilities for each base pair with respect to an ensemble of RNA secondary structures are often used for RNA secondary structure analysis (see Section 2.4 for the detailed definition of b pps. For example, the b pps played essential roles in the analysis of an RNA aptamer (), in which an unstable stem in the RNA aptamer was confirmed by both computational analysis of b pps and biochemical experiments. This indicates the importance of considering the ensemble in the analysis of RNAs. However, there is no study that considers the ensemble of RNAs in the analysis of protein RNA interactions. In this study, we systematically investigate b pps of RNA molecules involved in known protein rna complexes (taken from the PDB; see Section 2.1 for the detailed dataset). More specifically, b pps of both paired and unpaired nucleotides (Section 2.2) with and without intermolecular hydrogen bonds h bonds to amino acids (see Section 2.3 for the detailed definition) are *To whom correspondence should be addressed. systematically analyzed (see Section 3). In the analysis, we tried three probabilistic models of RNA secondary structure (Section 2.4), including the McCaskill model based on Turner's energy model (), when computing b pps and confirmed that our results are consistently supported.
