Motivation: The question of how to best use information from known associated variants when conducting disease association studies has yet to be answered. Some studies compute a marginal p value for each Several Nucleotide Polymorphisms independently, ignoring previously discovered variants. Other studies include known variants as covariates in logistic regression, but a weakness of this standard conditioning strategy is that it does not account for disease prevalence and non-random ascertainment, which can induce a correlation structure between candidate variants and known associated variants even if the variants lie on different chromosomes. Here, we propose a new conditioning approach, which is based in part on the classical technique of liability threshold modeling. Roughly, this method estimates model parameters for each known variant while accounting for the published disease prevalence from the epidemiological literature. Results: We show via simulation and application to empirical datasets that our approach outperforms both the no conditioning strategy and the standard conditioning strategy, with a properly controlled false positive rate. Furthermore, in multiple data sets involving diseases of low prevalence, standard conditioning produces a severe drop in test statistics whereas our approach generally performs as well or better than no conditioning. Our approach may substantially improve disease gene discovery for diseases with many known risk variants. Availability: lt soft software is available online

introduction the NHGRI catalog of Published Genome Wide Association Studies g was () lists thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with several hundred complex phenotypes. However, it is currently unknown how to optimally use these discovered SNPs when conducting additional g was. Typically, known variants are ignored and SNPs are tested independently for association via logistic regression for case control phenotypes and linear regression for quantitative phenotypes (). Occasionally, known variants are used as covariates in the regression models to determine additional signals exist in the data beyond those already discovered, as in recent studies of Type 2 diabetes (). We show that for standard case control studies neither one of these strategies, testing SNPs marginally or standard conditioning on associated variants, is optimally powered to discover new loci. Surprisingly, standard conditioning will often dramatically decrease power (). For example, in the Welcome Trust Case Control Consortium wtc cc Type 1 diabetes (T1D) dataset wtc cc 2007b), conditioning on a known variant on Chromosome 6 decreases the one degree of freedom (df)  2 statistic from a logistic regression likelihood ratio test by an average of 27% at independent known associated variants on entirely different chromosomes relative to the same test without conditioning on the

discussion we have shown that the practice of standard conditioning on known associated variants does not account for study design and disease prevalence potentially leading to significant power loss. This power loss is due to the induced correlation between associated variants in case control studies. The phenomenon of higher odds ratios in cases with fewer risk alleles at other loci than in cases with more risk alleles at other loci can be viewed as a gene gene interaction (). This is a statistical, rather than biological, interaction. By properly modeling the ascertainment and prevalence while still leveraging known associated variants, our lt score statistic improves study power relative to no cond log and std cond log tests in case control studies of mid to low prevalence diseases. This increase in power is a function of the total phenotypic variance explained by known variants and disease prevalence. The datasets examined here had either a low prevalence or a small fraction of the variance explained and therefore we did not expect a large improvement. However, as more associated variants are discovered, the performance of lt score will increase giving rise to power gains as a function of covariate effect size and disease prevalence. This approach can also be applied to clinical covariates, and in this case, an average power gain of 17% was achieved (unpublished data). We have verified that results similar to supplementary are obtained when comparing genetic + clinical covariates to clinical covariates only (see Supplementary). However, conditioning on clinical covariates is a fundamentally different problem, both because a different parameter estimation method is needed and because with clinical covariates, it is often the case that samples are non randomly ascertained for covariate value as well as case control status. A recent T2D meta analysis () uses the standard conditioning statistic and shows a significant gain in power. Their ratio of cases to controls is closer to a randomly ascertained study and in this case we expect std cond log to outperform no cond log and increase power. In addition to their beneficial study design, some of the conditioned variants are proximal to the new discoveries. Both of the elements serve to improve the power of standard conditioning. () also examine the potential benefits of genome wide conditioning in T2D. However, we believe the use of our lt score statistic on these data could improve the power further
