Motivation: Antibody amino acid sequences can be numbered to identify equivalent positions. Such annotations are valuable for antibody sequence comparison, protein structure modelling and engineering. Multiple different numbering schemes exist, they vary in the nomenclature they use to annotate residue positions, their definitions of position equivalence and their popularity within different scientific disciplines. However, currently no publicly available software exists that can apply all the most widely used schemes or for which an executable can be obtained under an open license. Results: an arc i is a tool to classify and number antibody and t cell receptor amino acid variable domain sequences. It can annotate sequences with the five most popular numbering schemes: Kabat, Chothia, Enhanced Chothia, IMGT and AHo.

introduction the variable domains of antibodies and t cell receptors (TCR) contain these proteins' major binding regions. Alignment of these variable sequences to a numbering scheme allows equivalent residue positions to be annotated and for different molecules to be compared. Performing numbering is fundamental for immuno informatics analysis and rational engineering of therapeutic molecules (). Several numbering schemes have been proposed, each is favoured by scientists in different immunological disciplines. The Kabat scheme () was developed based on the location of regions of high sequence variation between sequences of the same domain type. It numbers antibody heavy (VH) and light (Vk and Vj) variable domains differently. chothia s scheme () is the same as kabat s but corrects where an insertion is annotated around the first VH complementarity determining region (CDR) so that it corresponds to a structural loop. Similarly, the Enhanced Chothia scheme () makes further structural corrections of in del positions in contrast to these kabat like schemes, IMGT () and AHo () both define unique schemes for antibody and T cell receptor (TCR) (Va and Vb) variable domains. Thus, equivalent residue positions can easily be compared between domain types. IMGT and AHo differ in the number of positions they annotate (128 and 149 respectively) and where they consider indels to occur. Separate online interfaces exist that can apply each numbering scheme: Kabat, Chothia and Enhanced Chothia through ab num (); IMGT through domain gap align (); and AHo through pyi g classify (). No program currently exists that can apply all schemes or for which an executable is available under open license. We have developed an arc i a program that can annotate sequences with all five of the numbering schemes described above. We provide both a web interface and the software under open license so that these fundamental annotations can be easily available for further immuno informatics analyses.

conclusion we have developed an arc i a program for annotating antigen receptor variable domain amino acid sequences with five commonly used numbering schemes. The program can be run as command line tool or imported as a Python module for incorporation in custom scripts. We also provide a public web browser interface that can annotate small numbers of sequences. an arc i is freely distributed under the GPLv3 license and available at opig.stats.ox.ac.uk/ webapps an arc i conflict of Interest: none declared.. The web based interface to an arc i. The species, domain type and numbering is reported for each sequence. The annotations can either be downloaded or visualized on the web page
