Motivation: Despite numerous successful genome wide Association Studies g was detecting variants that have low disease risk still poses a challenge. g was may miss disease genes with weak genetic effects or strong epistatic effects due to the single marker testing approach commonly used. g was may thus generate false negative or inconclusive results, suggesting the need for novel methods to combine effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms within a gene to increase the likelihood of fully characterizing the susceptibility gene. Results: We developed an cg was an algebraic graph based centrality measure that accounts for linkage disequilibrium in identifying significant disease sub-networks by integrating the association signal from g was data sets into the human protein protein interaction (PPI) network. We validated an cg was using an association study result from a breast cancer data set and the simulation of interactive disease loci in the simulation of a complex admixed population, as well as pathway based g was simulation. This new approach holds promise for dec on vol uting the interactions between genes underlying the pathogenesis of complex diseases. Results obtained yield a novel central breast cancer sub-network of the human interactome implicated in the proteoglycan syndecan mediated signaling events pathway which is known to play a major role in mesenchymal tumor cell proliferation, thus providing further insights into breast cancer pathogenesis. Availability and implementation: The an cg was package and documents are available at

introduction genome wide Association Studies g was have successfully identified genetic variants in human populations, however many authors have pointed out that g was may not detect genetic variants with low or moderate risk, which don't reach the intrinsic genome wide significance cut off (5.00e  08) (). Today, only a few common variants have been linked to disease and the associated loci explain only a small fraction of the). Because the effect of a gene polymorphism may be small, g was may fail to detect a significant signal if the effect of a variant in another gene is not taken into account (). Since complex diseases are typically caused by multiple factors, including multiple genes, through gene gene interactions (), single marker based analysis in g was may generate false negative and inconclusive results (). Currently the challenges facing g was include i the translation of associated loci into suitable biological hypotheses, (ii) the well known problem of missing heritability () and (iii) the understanding of how multiple modestly associated loci within genes interact to influence a phenotype (). Detecting the underlying genetic etiology of the disease can be difficult, as it may involve a single gene or interactions between two or more genes. Recent studies have demonstrated that there is a relationship between gene function and phenotype, and that functionally related genes are more likely to interact (). Alternatively, the effect can be at the phenotypic level, where a pair of genes can interact to produce a specific phenotype (). Interactions can play critical roles in the cause of disease, therefore standard g was analysis alone is insufficient to examine the complex genetic structure of complex diseases (). The challenge of gene gene interaction methods is that the large number of multi-locus genotype combinations generated from large numbers of genetic variants may leads to the so called 'curse of dimensionality' problem (). Recently, gene set based methods have been used to examine gene sets, particularly in the form of biological pathways or grouping genes by cellular functions or functional groups, using g was datasets (O'). These methods search for significantly enriched gene sets collected from predefined canonical pathways or functional annotations such as Gene Ontology (GO) terms. However, these approaches have limitations, such as (i) the requirement for strong disease specific background knowledge, (ii) the incomplete annotation of pathways or GO annotations in the current knowledgebase () and (iii) the results might be limited to a priori knowledge, thus, making it difficult to identify a meaningful combination of genes (). Because risk genes may differ in different individuals, but may still lie in the same pathway (), the protein protein interaction (PPI) network based approach was recently introduced. This approach has been shown to largely overcome some of the limitations in its flexibility in setting the components of a gene set (). Examining the combined effects of genes by detecting genetic signals beyond single gene polymorphisms may increase our ability to fully characterize the susceptible genes and unravel the pathogenesis of disease (). These existing network based approaches are mostly based on combining p values from standard g was for correlated SNPs into an overall significance level for a gene, and combining p values for the genes in a pathway into an overall significance level to investigate the association of a pathway with the disease (). However, in many cases, SNPs within genes and genes within pathways are correlated, and these methods do not account for this dependency, but rather assume genes or SNPs to be independent and uniformly distributed under a null hypothesis, which may lead to erroneous results. In addition, most of these network based approaches do not account for topological properties of biological networks, which may lead to meaningless sub-networks (). Here, we present a method, an cg was that leverages PPI network information, local ancestry (in the case of admixed populations) and Linkage Disequilibrium data to mine g was results. an cg was introduces flexibility in estimating gene and subnetwork specific ancestry using the inferred local ancestry from ancestry inference approaches such as in (). From different simulation results, we demonstrate that an cg was holds promise for comprehensively examining the interactions between genes underlying the pathogenesis of genetic diseases and also underlying ethnic differences. In addition, we applied an cg was to a g was data set from postmenopausal women of European ancestry with invasive breast cancer (). Our result yielded an interesting central breast cancer sub-network of the human interactome implicated in the proteoglycan syndecan mediated signaling events pathway.

discussion we introduced an cg was a post g was method based on an algebraic graph based approach that leverages the topological analysis of the PPI network to (i) identify hub genes, and use their topological properties, (ii) identify the most meaningful and significant genes or sub-networks relevant to a disease and those underlying ethnic difference in disease risk in the case of admixed populations and (iii) account for the correlation that exists between SNPs within or between genes and genes within pathways. an cg was integrates the association signal from standard g was data, the local ancestry for admixed populations and the SNP LD into the human PPI network. In addition, an cg was also handles other user defined weights such as topological weight. an cg was introduces flexibility in estimating gene and subnetwork specific ancestry using the inferred local ancestry from ancestry inference approaches such as in (). When ruling out the gene and subnetwork specific ancestry, the proposed method corrects for possible bias in the inferred local ancestries obtained from current approaches of local ancestry inference (). In addition, it tests for case control unusual difference in ancestry at the gene and sub-network level using the corrected local ancestry of admixed populations we have done 3 types of simulation to test an cg was (i) causal simulation (with some causal SNPs) on a 4-way admixed population to test if an cg was can recover the g was signal and ancestry differences, (ii) null simulation (without disease SNPs) on a 4-way admixed population to test if an cg was produces a false signal or type I error and (iii) pathway based simulation with weak disease effect to test an cgw ass ability to recover interactive disease genes within a pathway. All simulated data sets are available with the an cg was package, at http://www.cbio.uct.ac.za/ an cg was. Our results from the causal simulation of a 4-way admixed population; and the data set of invasive breast cancer demonstrated that an cg was can recover weak and moderate association signals from standard g was results by leveraging effects of all SNPs within a gene and sub-network to unravel signals of possible disease associated genes or pathways (further discussion in Supplementary Text S9). Although our statistical methods account for false discovery, we assessed the ability of an cg was to control both type I and II errors based on null simulation with no causal loci and causal simulation of disease loci in the simulation of an admixed population, respectively. In these assessments, no false positive negative signals were identified (Supplementary Tables S1 and S4). Moreover, an cg was can detect ancestry differences in admixed data as shown in, which displays candidate ancestry difference at the gene subnetwork level. However, our current method can not perform allelic tests of association directly from the data, controlling for differences in gene subnetwork specific ancestry (candidate peaks), as this is very challenging due to gene gene interactions (or considering sub-networks of iterative genes). This would mean a large number of multi-locus genotype combinations generated from large numbers of genetic variants, leading to the so called 'curse of dimensionality' problem (). Inferring accurate local ancestry is also challenging () and currently we do not have access to a phenotypic data set of an admixed population. Otherwise it would be interesting to apply the proposed approach to such a population to evaluate the performance of this approach in identifying the pathways associated with a disease. The lack of accurate knowledge of complex traits and the incomplete human protein interaction network makes it challenging to directly compare the results from different pathway analysis methods. Nevertheless, we used a g was data set of invasive breast cancer (Supplementary Text S8) to compare an cg was to dmg was. These results have shown that an cg was identified more cancer associated genes in its results than dmg was and holds promise for dec on vol uting the interactions between genes underlying the pathogenesis of complex diseases. dmg was recently released a new feature () that uses gene expression profiles for edge weights (). However, because the new dmg was still uses the same greedy searching algorithm to break down the biological network into sub-networks, it still doesn't take advantage of the topological properties of biological networks like an cg was does.
