ANGES is a suite of Python programs that allows reconstructing ancestral genome maps from the comparison of the organization of extant related genomes. ANGES can reconstruct ancestral genome maps for multi chromosomal linear genomes and uni chromosomal circular genomes. It implements methods inspired from techniques developed to compute physical maps of extant genomes. Examples of cereal, amnio te yeast or bacteria ancestral genomes are provided, computed with ANGES. Availability: ANGES is freely available for download at http://paleoge nomics irma css fuca anges. Documentation and examples are available together with the package.

introduction the reconstruction of the organization of ancestral genomes is a long-standing problem, motivated by several applications in comparative genomics (). It has received a renewed interest during the past few years, due, among others, to the increasing number of sequenced and assembled genomes and major methodological advances. Two general approaches have been followed by recent methods. The global parsimony aims at computing ancestral gene orders that minimize the number of genome rearrangements; following the pioneering work of Sankoff et al., it can now address hard problems of ancestral genome reconstruction (). The local parsimony approach that was pioneered in follows principles used in computing physical maps of extant genomes and was explored in several recent articles (). In a series of recent articles, we followed the latter approach and described different methods for computing ancestral genome maps from the comparison of extant species. All methods are centered on variants of a combinatorial framework widely used to compute physical maps of extant genomes, the consecutive ones Property (). We implemented this framework for the reconstruction of animal, fungi and plant ancestral genomes and showed its validity on well accepted ancestral genomes as well as its robustness to parameter change in the present note, we describe ANGES, a suite of Python programs implementing and extending several of these methods, to reconstructing both eukaryotic and prokaryotic ancestral genome maps. It is currently the only available method able to handle a wide range of genetic or genomic data on any domain of life.
