Computational methods in molecular biology will increasingly depend on standards based annotations that describe biological experiments in an unambiguous manner. annot are is a software tool that enables biologists to easily annotate their high throughput experiments, biomaterials and data in a standards compliant way that facilitates meaningful search and analysis. Availability and Implementation: annot are is available from

introduction metadata describing high throughput investigations enable unambiguous interpretation of experiments, experiment reproducibility and meaningful searching and analysis of the resulting data. The microarray community has developed mage tab (), an annotation format for microarray data. mage tab allows laboratories to manage, exchange and publish well annotated biomedical data using a spreadsheet based paradigm. Several public repositories and analysis tools for microarray data such as array express (), Stanford Microarray Database (SMD) (), MeV (), Bioconductor () and ca array () support microarray data submissions with mage tab annotations, and open source tools are available for conversion of legacy formats into mage tab (). In order to improve the volume, quality and granularity of annotations, there is a compelling need for software that enables biologists to easily annotate such data. We describe annot are a tool that facilitates annotation of gene expression data in mage tab format. annot are is available under the terms of the MIT License at http://code.google.com/p/annotare/. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.

discussion annot are is a collaborative open source software development effort involving many institutions. The tool is freely available from an not ares project web site http://code.google.com/p/annotare/. Updates and improvements are planned in response to current usability studies. A web based version of annot are is also under development. Not only will a web based version be able to take advantage of finding key ontology terms or publications via the internet, but it will be configurable so that it can be directly connected to a software package or database. Both array express and SMD will provide access to the web based annot are tool to construct and view high throughput experimental annotations. In addition to the web based version of annot are future work will provide support for the mage tab version 1.1 as well as rnase q data. In particular, annot are will be extended to allow researchers to annotate their rnase q or chips eq experiments to satisfy the mins eqe data sharing requirements for high throughput sequence data a submitted for publication).
