The eukaryotic transcriptome is composed of thousands of coding and long non-coding RNAs ln crnas. However, we lack a software platform to identify both RNA classes in a given tran-scriptome. Here we introduce an no cript a pipeline that combines the annotation of protein coding transcripts with the prediction of putative ln crnas in whole transcriptome s. It downloads and indexes the needed databases, runs the analysis and produces human readable and standard outputs together with summary statistics of the whole analysis.

introduction rnase q has effectively portrayed the transcriptional complexity in eukaryotes demonstrating the widespread transcription of ln crnas in a diverse group of organisms. However, annotation of de novo generated transcriptome s remains a complex task requiring efficient management of large datasets. Current tools for annotation identify coding sequences by similarity searches () while ln crnas are typically predicted relying on sequence composition, lack of conservation and lack of ORFs (). To fulfill the need of a single platform, we developed an no cript a pipeline linking together these processes. It uses multiple programs to annotate sequences based on similarity and composition. It is capable of assigning protein names, domains, metabolic pathways (), Enzyme classes (), GO terms () and other annotations. Further, it can identify putative ln crnas based upon lack of any protein domain similarity, lack of long ORFs and high non-coding potential. By default, a transcript is classified as l ncrna if it satisfies all the following conditions: (i) length 200 nucleotides, (ii) lack of similarity with any protein, domain and other short ncRNA from rf am and rRNAs, (iii) longest open reading frame (ORF)  100 amino acids and (iv) non-coding potential score 0.95.

discussion an no cript is a pipeline for the annotation of transcriptome s. The pipeline is optimized to run quickly without bargaining on accuracy. It is the first platform with the ability to annotate coding genes along with the prediction of putative ln crnas without the need for a reference genome or comparative supporting data.
