ann tools is a versatile bioinformatics application designed for comprehensive annotation of a full spectrum of human genome variation: novel and known single nucleotide substitutions snps nv short insertions deletions in del and structural variants copy number variation svc nv. The variants are interpreted by interrogating data compiled from 15 constantly updated sources. In addition to detailed functional characterization of the coding variants, ann tools searches for overlaps with regulatory elements, disease trait associated loci, known segmental duplications and artifact prone regions, thereby offering an integrated and comprehensive analysis of genomic data. The tool conveniently accepts user provided tracks for custom annotation and offers flexibility in input data formats. The output is generated in the universal Variant Call Format. High annotation speed makes ann tools suitable for high throughput sequencing facilities, while a low memory footprint and modest CPU requirements allow it to operate on a personal computer. The application is freely available for public use; the package includes installation scripts and a set of helper tools. Availability: http://anntools.sourceforge.net/

introduction increasing volumes of next generation sequencing and microarray data demand efficient bioinformatics analysis tools capable of high throughput processing and accurate interpretation of various types of detected changes. Detailed annotation of the genomic variants with assessment of their possible functional or regulatory roles allows researchers to highlight potentially significant findings and prioritize candidates for further analyses. While there are a number of bioinformatics tools developed specifically for this purpose () to the best of our knowledge, the majority of the published methods are limited * To whom correspondence should be addressed. to interpretation of single nucleotide substitutions snps nv and small insertions deletions in del and do not currently offer an integrated analysis of the full spectrum of variants occurring in the coding and non-coding regions of the human genome. Here we present ann tools a fast, versatile and user friendly application designed for complete annotation of novel and publicly known snps nv in del and svc nv called from next generation sequencing and microarray data. The main advantages of our method are its integrative approach not limited by the specific type or genomic location of the variant, the ability to evaluate both functional and regulatory regions and incorporation of variant frequency data to highlight potentially significant variants. Our application allows individual and batch query processing and offers flexibility in input data formats. The output is generated in the universal Variant Call Format (VCF), as the current de facto community standard (). Complete documentation is available on the ann tools website (http://anntools.sourceforge.net/). We provide installation scripts, demos and a set of helper tools to perform custom annotation and data transformation for future visualization and analysis.

conclusion in summary, we developed a fast and comprehensive tool capable of annotating multiple types of human genomic variants in a high throughput setting. Easily parallelized Python source code allows for the simultaneous annotation of multiple call sets in high performance computer cluster environments. On the other hand, a low memory footprint and modest CPU requirements enable ann tools to run on a personal computer. The tool is designed with clear separation of application logic from the user interface and data, permitting independent development, testing and maintenance.
