Motivation: When working with non model organisms, few if any species specific markers are available for phylogenetic, phylo geographic and population studies. Therefore, researchers often try to adapt markers developed in distantly related tax a resulting in poor amplification and ascertainment bias in their target tax a. Markers can be developed de novo and anonymous nuclear loci (ANL) are proving to be a boon for researchers seeking large numbers of fast evolving independent loci. However, the development of ANL can be laboratory intensive and expensive. A workflow is described to identify suitable low copy anonymous loci from high throughput shotgun sequences, dramatically reducing the cost and time required to develop these markers and produce robust multilocus datasets. Results: By successively removing repetitive and evolutionary conserved sequences from low coverage shotgun libraries, we were able to isolate thousands of potential ANL. Empirical testing of loci developed from two reptile tax a confirmed that our methodology yields markers with comparable amplification rates and nucleotide diversities to an ls developed using other methodologies. Our approach capitalizes on next generation sequencing technologies to enable the development of phylogenetic, phylo geographic and population markers for tax a lacking suitable genomic resources. Contact:

introduction in a recent review noted that next generation sequencing methodologies make the acquisition of many marker datasets readily feasible. The ability to generate libraries of random sequence from across the genome at a relatively low expense has already changed the way that markers are developed for phylogenetic and population genetic studies. In particular, the use of the Roche 454 platform for generating large fragments of randomly sheared genomic DNA has already provided a wealth of markers. Most marker development studies have focussed on the large number of microsatellites that can be readily obtained from partial sequencing runs on non model organisms eg to whom correspondence should be addressed 2009 and large numbers of species can be analysed simultaneously on this platform (). In addition, almost entire mitochondrial genomes and a number of protein coding genes () have been recovered from these kind of data. One class of marker that should be present in high numbers but has yet to be exploited from these data are anonymous nuclear loci (ANL) (). ANL represent randomly selected fragments of DNA that, by chance, are likely to be from non-coding regions of the genome, given that a large percentage of eukaryotic genomes comprise non-coding regions (). The advantages of these markers are numerous: they are likely to be independent; not biased to a single area of the genome and unlikely to be under selection and so free to accumulate mutations at varying rates, providing a suite of sufficiently fast evolving markers useful for phylogenetics, phylogeography and population genetics. ANL have been successfully used in multilocus reconstruction of phylogenetic () and phylo geographic () histories. A criticism of using anonymous markers is that paralogous loci and repetitive elements may go undetected, potentially confounding phylogenetic and phylo geographic inferences (). In addition, the development of these markers has required intensive laboratory methods including a substantial amount of cloning during development from small insert libraries (), Bacterial Artificial Chromosome libraries () and Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism fragments (). Herein, we describe the development of ANL from randomly generated sequences produced by the Roche 454 platform and provide empirical data to evaluate the methods.

discussion the use of low coverage genome surveys has revolutionized microsatellite development in non model organisms (), and we have now developed a workflow to further exploit these genomic resources to develop markers suitable for phylogenetic, phylo geographic and population studies. Our approach targets low copy number sequences which, due to the nature of the data and the methodology we have chosen, are likely to be from non-coding regions of the genome. Although these regions are likely to accumulate mutations relatively quickly, they are also rich in repetitive elements found that repetitive elements still posed a problem after screening against GenBank and known repeat libraries. Although we have also utilized known repeat libraries in our methodology, our approach further minimizes potential problems caused by repetitive elements by de novo determination and exclusion of sequences that are repetitive within the dataset. This effectively removes species specific SINES and other high copy number elements not present in repeat libraries or in public databases. Paralogous sequences are more difficult to detect but removing loci with sites that are heterozygous across all sequenced individuals has been demonstrated as a practical solution (), and this is the approach we used for the sea snake analysis. Even though we tested a small number of loci, successful amplification in the reference tax a (80% and 71% for G. la zell i and H. spiralis, respectively) is comparable to amplification success reported in other studies (65% in; 76% in). During the screening process, the attrition rate of markers was high, but the reasons for attrition varied, primarily based on the phylogenetic span of trialled tax a. In the geh yr a study, 50% of the markers did not amplify in the out group and only one of the four sequenced products was invariant. In contrast, within the more recently diverged hydro p his group, 33% of the loci tested were invariant and a further 42% showed evidence of paralogs. Nevertheless, the relatively high attrition rate of loci during screening is more than offset by the large number of sequenced fragments suitable for screening. If a larger pool of potential loci are desired, increasing the size range of fragments considered or altering primer design parameters will increase the yield of potential markers.
