Translational control of gene expression has emerged as a major mechanism that regulates many biological processes and shows dysregulation in human diseases including cancer. When studying differential translation, levels of both actively translating mRNAs and total cytosolic mRNAs are obtained where the latter is used to correct for a possible contribution of differential cytosolic mRNA levels to the observed differential levels of actively translated mRNAs. We have recently shown that analysis of partial variance (APV) corrects for cytosolic mRNA levels more effectively than the commonly applied log ratio approach. APV provides a high degree of specificity and sensitivity for detecting biologically meaningful translation changes, especially when combined with a variance shrinkage method for estimating random error. Here we describe the a not a (analysis of translational activity) r package which implements APV, allows scrutiny of associated statistical assumptions and provides biologically motivated filters for analysis of genome wide datasets. Although the package was developed for analysis of differential translation in poly some microarray or ribosome profiling datasets, any high dimensional data that result in paired controls, such as RNP immunoprecipitation microarray rip chip datasets, can be successfully analyzed with a not a. Availability: The a not a Bioconductor package, www bioconductor .org.

introduction translational control of gene expression acts primarily at the initiation step of translation prior to peptide bond formation and controls how many ribosomes are initiated per mRNA (), thereby enabling instantaneous control of gene expression. Studies in many biological model systems and human diseases have documented that such regulation can be mRNA specific and can have large biological impact (). genome wide patterns of differential translation nonetheless remain understudied, in part for lack of adequate statistical analysis procedures (). genome wide translational control data are currently generated using two approaches: poly some microarrays which involve
