Motivation: genome wide pervasive transcription is widespread in eukaryotes, revealing an extensive array of antisense transcription that involves hundreds of previously unknown non-coding RNAs. Individual cases have shown that antisense transcription influences sense transcription, however, genome wide mechanisms of how anti-sense transcription regulates sense transcription remain to be elucidated. Results: Here, we performed a systematic analysis of sense antisense transcription and nucleosome occupancy in yeast. We found that antisense transcription is associated with nucleosome occupancy in sense promoters. Using RNA polymerase II inactivation data as a reasonable approximation to antisense transcription inactivation data, we further showed that antisense transcripts increase nucleosome occupancy in sense promoter regions they overlap, and reduce nu-cleosome occupancy in sense promoter regions around their transcription termination sites. These results reveal the previously unappreciated roles of antisense transcription in directing nucleosome occupancy in sense promoters. Our findings will have implications in understanding regulatory functions of antisense transcription. Contact:

introduction pervasive transcription is widespread in eukaryotic genomes (). The pervasive transcription gives rise to many non-coding (nc) RNAs which are critical for biological processes such as transcriptional regulation and genome stability (). Some nc rnas overlap protein coding genes, leading to the interleaved organization of transcription. Among these overlapping nc rnas are a class that are transcribed antisense to the protein coding sense transcripts. Experiments on individual genes have shown that antisense transcripts repress sense transcription through transcriptional interference () and inhibitory histone modifications (). How antisense transcripts regulate sense transcription across the genome has so far, however, not been elucidated. The nucleosome is the basic unit of eukaryotic chromatin. Nucleosome occupancy in promoter regions is important for regulation of gene expression (). A natural question is whether antisense transcription regulates sense transcription by influencing nucleosome occupancy in sense promoters. In this study, we analysed sense antisense transcription and investigated into the mechanisms of how antisense transcripts regulate sense transcription on a genomic scale in yeast. We found that antisense transcription causes sense transcripts to show high nucleosome occupancy in promoter regions. We also found that dynamic change in nucleosome occupancy in sense promoters is coupled to change in antisense expression.

conclusion individual cases have shown that antisense transcription influences sense transcription through transcriptional interference and histone modifications. However, genome wide mechanisms of how antisense transcription regulates sense transcription remain to be determined. Here, we found that antisense transcripts are associated with high nucleosome occupancy in their overlapped sense promoter regions and low nucleosome occupancy in sense promoter regions around their TTSs (Supplementary). Moreover, dynamic antisense expression change is correlated with nucleosome occupancy change in sense promoters. These results reveal the mechanisms of how antisense transcription regulates sense transcription, and also provide new level of understanding the determinants of nucleosome occupancy in gene promoters. As we used RNA polymerase II inactivation data as an approximation to test the influence of antisense transcription on nucleosome occupancy, it will be very interesting to directly examine how antisense transcription regulates nucleosome occupancy in sense promoters by experiments.
