Antigenic cartography is a useful technique to visualize and minimize errors in immunological data by projecting antigens to 2D or 3D cartography. However, a 2D cartography may not be sufficient to capture the antigenic relationship from high dimensional immunological data. antigen map 3D presents an online, interactive, and robust 3D antigenic cartography construction and visualization resource. antigen map 3D can be applied to identify antigenic variants and vaccine strain candidates for pathogens with rapid antigenic variations, such as influenza A virus. Availability and implementation

introduction antigenic variation is a common strategy for an infectious pathogen to evade its host immunological response. The infectious pathogen can alter its surface protein(s) so that it will not be recognized by specific host antibody. As a result, the pathogen can re infect the same host. Antigenic variation can be either antigenic drift from accumulating mutations or antigenic shift from exchanging surface proteins from two different strains. For influenza A virus, antigenic drift leads to seasonal epidemics and antigenic shift to pandemics. Rapid detection of antigenic variant events and accurate quantification of antigenic variant extent are essential for selection of an effective vaccine strain and development of a prompt vaccination program. This has been especially important for influenza A virus, as vaccination is the primary option for reducing the impacts of influenza. The antigenic characterization in influenza virus are performed using immunological assays, such as hemagglutinin inhibition, micro neutralization and enzyme labeled immunosorbent assays. However, analyses of these immunological data are not trivial for the following reasons: (i) these assays are very crude and much noise is present in these datasets; (ii) it is not uncommon that there are empty entries in the resulting immunological tables; and (iii) the data distribution in these datasets is unique, and unobserved values are not distributed randomly in the tables, especially for datasets that contain viruses with large isolation time intervals. Antigenic cartography is an analog of geographic cartography in presenting the antigens as 2D or 3D maps (). Antigenic cartography has been shown to effectively detect influenza antigenic drift events; * To whom correspondence should be addressed. therefore, cartography is useful in antigenic characterization and vaccine strain selection (). Antigenic cartography has become a standard tool in influenza surveillance of the World Health Organization influenza reference laboratories. Because 2D cartography may not be sufficient to capture the antigenic relationship from the high dimensional immunological data, we developed an antigenic cartography tool, antigen map 3D, to construct 3D antigenic cartography.
