Because cancer has heterogeneous clinical behaviors due to the progressive accumulation of multiple genetic and epigenetic alterations, the identification of robust molecular signatures for predicting cancer outcome is profoundly important. Here, we introduce the app ex web based analysis platform as a versatile tool for identifying prognostic molecular signatures that predict cancer diversity. We incorporated most of statistical methods for survival analysis and implemented seven survival analysis workflows, including cox single cox multi in trans single in trans multi super pc time roc and multivariate. A total of 236 publicly available datasets were collected, processed and stored to support easy independent validation of prognostic signatures. Two case studies including disease recurrence and bladder cancer progression were described using different combinations of the seven workflows. Availability and implementation: app ex is freely available at http:// www appe xkr
introduction the identification of robust molecular signatures that predict cancer patient outcome is profoundly important because cancers have heterogeneous clinical courses even if they have similar clinicopathological characteristics. By using prognostic molecular signatures, cancer patients may be treated more effectively. For example, the on co type DX breast cancer assay is now used in the clinic to predict the clinical behavior of breast cancer patients (). Various software tools supporting cancer genomics studies have been reported. Most of these studies provide a database platform for searching disease associated genes and target drugs (), whereas only one system provides a software environment for handling a user's own cancer genomics data with clinical information to determine a significant prognostic signature (). Beyond software toolkits for cancer research, many investigators use commercial programs or script language, such as SPSS, Matlab or R, for advanced statistical analysis. However, there are few suitable web based analysis tools that help researchers develop gene signatures. For many oncology investigators, doing proper statistical analyses using publicly available tools can be a daunting task. In addition, most genome wide analysis tools are not equipped with tools for identifying prognostic signatures by survival analysis. Here, we constructed app ex a web based software platform to help researchers in the efforts to identify prognostic signatures from genomics data. app ex is designed to be easy to use and flexible, and it is freely available for advanced statistical survival analyses. A user friendly graphical interface similar to a desktop application is provided so that users can easily handle their own data on app ex even if they are not familiar with statistical analysis packages. In addition, app ex contains 4200 publicly available datasets directly applicable on the system so that users can easily validate newly identified signatures in independent patient cohorts.
