Motivation: Gene therapy aims at using viral vectors for attaching helpful genetic code to target genes. Therefore, it is of great importance to develop methods that can discover significant patterns around viral integration sites. Canonical correlation analysis is an unsupervised statistical tool that is used to describe the relations between two related views of the same semantic object, which fits well for identifying such salient patterns. Results: Proposed method is demonstrated on a sequence dataset obtained from a study on HIV-1 preferred integration regions. The subsequences on the left and right sides of the integration points are given to the method as the two views, and statistically significant relations are found between sequence driven features derived from these two views, which suggest that the viral preference must be the factor responsible for this correlation. We found that there are significant correlations at x = 5 indicating a palindromic behavior surrounding the viral integration site, which complies with the previously reported results. Availability: Developed software tool is available at

introduction advances in genome sequencing technologies provided scientists determine target sites of viruses in human genome. This concept has brought along an innovative step called 'gene therapy'. In gene therapy, connection parts of viruses to genome, which are called as LTRs (Long Terminal Repeats), are used for linking helpful genetic code to target gene. However, in order to understand linking characteristics of such a vector to a target gene, first, a cell of host genome must be infected with a virus having proper LTR. This methodology has been applied to one of the most popular gene therapy challenges, HIV-1 (Human Immunodeficiency Virus type 1 infected a human lymphoid cell line with hiv1 based vector and obtained 524 chimeric sites. After transcriptional profiling they showed a correlation between gene activity and viral insertion preference. A hot spot, covering a region of 2.5 Kb, was reported to include only 1% of these sites. * To whom correspondence should be addressed after sequencing phase, virus specific patterns (motifs) can arise in chimeric sequences. In order to detect such common patterns, a numerous types of motif search approaches have been proposed described a series of components to determine alignments of multiple sequences. They derived log likelihood scoring schemes and then implemented a greedy algorithm for finding alignments of functionally related sequences. In another study presented a Gibbs sampling based () method to discover and weigh binding site patterns in DNA sequences manually identified symmetrical palindromic behavior between the frequencies of bases on each side of integration sites in HIV-1 consensus sequences reported by. In this study, in order to find such common sequence patterns automatically, we propose a method based on the well known statistical tool called 'Canonical Correlation Analysis' (CCA). CCA seeks correlated functions (covariates) of two different, but related, views (i.e. two sets of related variables;). The availability of such correlated functions of the two views of the same semantic object is likely to exist due to an underlying factor responsible for the correlation. In relation to the problem of finding patterns around viral integration sites, we are given DNA sequences targeted by the virus as the semantic object; two nearby windows placed on each sequence can be used as the two views, where the fragments falling in windows are represented by some sequence driven features such as base dimer frequencies or a more sophisticated one such as moment descriptors; and the correlation of the two functions over these views is expected to be due to the viral preference as the factor responsible for this correlation. CCA has proved to be a powerful method in previous studies especially in g was (Genome Wide Association Studies)., have proposed a canonical correlation based U statistic metric to detect single nucleotide polymorphism snp based gene gene co association in two sample case control datasets. They explored its type i error rate through simulations on two real datasets. In another study have implemented CCA to detect genetic associations between SNPs and gene expression levels. By this methodology, they claim to reduce the amount of necessary comparisons. For large scale genomic studies suggested using a sparse implementation of CCA. They divided their dataset into small subsets of variables belonging to different types and performed variable selection by maximizing the correlation between these subsets. cca based
