Motivation: Principal component analysis pc a is a basic tool often used in bioinformatics for visualization and dimension reduction. However, it is known that pc a may not consistently estimate the true direction of maximal variability in high dimensional low sample size settings, which are typical for molecular data. Assuming that the underlying signal is sparse, i.e. that only a fraction of features contribute to a principal component (PC), this estimation consistency can be retained. Most existing sparse pc a methods use l1 penalization i.e. the lasso, to perform feature selection. But, the lasso is known to lack variable selection consistency in high dimensions and therefore a subsequent interpretation of selected features can give misleading results. Results: We present S4VDPCA, a sparse pc a method that incorporates a subsampling approach, namely stability selection. S4VDPCA can consistently select the truly relevant variables contributing to a sparse PC while also consistently estimate the direction of maximal variability. The performance of the S4VDPCA is assessed in a simulation study and compared to other pc a approaches, as well as to a hypothetical oracle pc a that knows the truly relevant features in advance and thus finds optimal, unbiased sparse PCs. S4VDPCA is computationally efficient and performs best in simulations regarding parameter estimation consistency and feature selection consistency. Furthermore, S4VDPCA is applied to a publicly available gene expression data set of medulloblastoma brain tumors. Features contributing to the first two estimated sparse PCs represent genes significantly over-represented in pathways typically deregulated between molecular subgroups of medulloblastoma. Availability and implementation: Software is available at https://github.com/mwsill/s4vdpca. Contact

introduction principal component analysis pc a is the most popular method for dimension reduction and visualization that is widely used for the analysis of high dimensional molecular data. In bioinformatics typical applications range from outlier detection as part of quality control () to exploratory data analysis for revealing new molecular subgroups (), as well as pathway and network analysis (). Common biological data sets for such applications are continuous molecular data typically generated by high throughput profiling techniques, e.g. gene expression, copy number variation, methylation and micro RNA expression data. In general, pc a aims to project a high dimensional data matrix into a lower dimensional space by seeking linear combinations of the original variables, called principal components (PCs). By construction, these PCs capture maximal variance and are orthogonal V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

application to demonstrate practicability to find sparse and interpretable PCs in high dimensional molecular data sets, the proposed S4VDPCA method was applied to a gene expression data set of medulloblastoma brain tumors (). Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor and comprises four distinct molecular variants. These subgroups are known as WNT, SHH, group C and group D. WNT tumours show activated Wnt signaling pathway and carry a favourable prognosis. SHH medulloblastoma show Hedgehog signaling pathway activation and are known to have an intermediate to good prognosis. While both WNT and SSH variants are molecularly already well characterized, the genetic programs driving the pathogenesis of group C and group D medulloblastoma remain largely unknown. Here we applied the proposed S4VDPCA method to gene expression data of 8 group C, 20 group D, 20 SHH and 16 WNT tumors. Gene expression has been measured by the 4x44K Agilent Whole Human Genome Oligo Microarray. After normalization and quality control the data set comprised gene expression values of 18406 annotated genes. The data set is publicly available at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, Accession No. GSE28245. The first two sparse PCs have been extracted by applying the S4VDPCA and the results are visualized as bi plot representation in. The loadings vector of the first sparse PC comprises 2035 non-zero coefficients and the second PC involves 1532 non-zero coefficients. The bi plot displays the projection of the tumor samples onto the two sparse PCs while also visualizing the covariance structure of the selected genes within this rank two approximation by grey arrows. Each arrow represents a gene and the length of the arrow reflects the size of the corresponding coefficient in the two loadings vectors. Arrows that point in similar directions represent positive correlated genes. Arrows parallel to a PC axis are genes with a non zero loadings coefficient only in one of the two loadings vectors of the two PCs. The four molecular subgroups can clearly be separated by projecting the samples in the space spanned by the first two sparse PCs. While most WNT and SHH medulloblastoma s form clusters far away from samples of other subgroups, group D and group C tumors are closer to each other. A set of 2035 genes is still too large for a reasonable interpretation, but the most dominating genes, i.e. those showing the highest absolute coefficients can be highlighted. In, 15 prominent oncogenes with a high absolute coefficient have been highlighted, including SFRP1 and its transcription factor GLI1. Both arrows point away from the WNT samples into the direction of SHH medulloblastoma. This means that the SFRP1 expression is up-regulated in SHH tumors and down-regulated in WNT sample and matches the current knowledge that SFRP1 is a tumor suppressor gene responsible for Hedgehog signaling mediated regulation of the WNT signaling pathway. Moreover, the arrows of DKK1 and WIF1, which are known target genes of the WNT signaling pathway, both point in direction of the WNT medulloblastoma. FSTL5, a known marker for poor prognosis in non wnt non shh medulloblastoma (), points into a direction of group C and group D tumors. Since the loadings coefficient of FSTL5 is zero in the second PC the arrow for FSTL5 is parallel to the first pc however individual interpretation of all non-zero coefficients is still too complex. An alternative way to try to understand the importance of the genes selected by sparse pc a methods is to perform a pathway analysis. Here we performed hypergeometric testing of the genes selected in the first and second PC to evaluate whether these genes are overrepresented in KEGG pathways (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes;). To perform this analysis the r bioconductor package hts analyzer was used (). The top six pathways most significantly overrepresented by genes selected in the first and second PC are shown as graphs above and to the right of the bi plot. Each node or circle of the graph represents a pathway and the size of each node is proportional to the number of genes assigned to that pathway. Pathways are connected by edges and the width of each edge is proportional to the number of genes shared by two pathways. The white red coloring of the nodes corresponds to FDR adjusted p values that are also shown in the Supplementary Material. Among the top six pathways overrepresented by genes selected in the first sparse PC are the Wnt signaling pathway and Neuroactive ligand receptor interaction. Even though these pathways include a wide range of genes, both pathways are expected to be deregulated in medulloblastoma. Interestingly, genes selected in the second, sparse PC are also significantly overrepresented in the Wnt signaling pathway and the Hedgehog signaling pathway. This result directly reflects the known interaction between these two pathways and is in agreement with the bi plot where the largest distances between WNT and SHH samples are along the axis of the second PC. Similar results calculated by applying conventional pc a the RSPCA with lasso, RSPCA adaptive lasso and the RSPCA with SCAD penalty are shown in the Supplementary Material.
