Motivation: genome wide association studies gw ass are effective for describing genetic complexities of common diseases. phenome wide association studies phew ass offer an alternative and complementary approach to g was using data embedded in the electronic health record (EHR) to define the phenome. International Classification of Disease version 9 (ICD9) codes are used frequently to define the phenome, but using ICD9 codes alone misses other clinically relevant information from the EHR that can be used for p he was analyses and discovery. Results: As an alternative to ICD9 coding, a text based phenome was defined by 23 384 clinically relevant terms extracted from Marshfield Clinics EHR. Five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with known phenotypic associations were genotyped in 4235 individuals and associated across the text based phenome. All five SNPs genotyped were associated with expected terms (P  0.02), most at or near the top of their respective p he was ranking. Raw association results indicate that text data performed equivalently to ICD9 coding and demonstrate the utility of information beyond ICD9 coding for application in p he was
introduction the genetic complexities of common diseases have been well defined by the use of the genome wide association study g was. Aside from only a few examples, gw ass have failed to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that reach a threshold, where they can be used to predict, prevent or even treat complex diseases. This may be due in part to disease heterogeneity and the fact that most SNPs genotyped during a g was represent tag SNPs for unknown and un genotyped causal variants (). As a complementary or alternative strategy to g was phenome wide association studies phew ass have demonstrated their effectiveness for rediscovering g was associations while also identifying novel diseases np correlations (). Whereas g was is a phenotype to genotype strategy, p he was reverses this paradigm by exchanging the disease and genome in a g was with a specific genetic variant and phenome in a p he was. As such, p he was is a genotype to phenotype strategy. The first p he was was published in 2010 by in this first proof of principle study, five disease associated SNPs previously identified by g was were genotyped in a cohort of 6005 patients from Vanderbilt University Medical Center. Each SNP was associated with hundreds of International Classification of Disease version 9 (ICD9) codes that defined the icd9 based phenome. Of the five SNPs, four demonstrated that the p he was technique was able to rediscover the expected associations (). The advantage of p he was over g was is that p he was has the capacity to identify multiple diseases that share a common genetic V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com 1981doi: 101093 bioinformatics btv076
discussion phew ass are quickly proving effective at rediscovering and discovering new gene disease associations. Thus far, most phew ass have focused on genetic variants with predetermined snp disease associations (), the largest of which was conducted on 3144 SNPs previously identified by g was (). p he was exhibits the power to identify novel associations and link multiple conditions to a shared genetic etiology (). A commonality for the majority of phew ass published to date is the use of ICD9 coding to define the phenome. An advantage of icd9 based phenome s is the logical architecture of the codes such that similar conditions have similar codes. For example, ICD9 codes 390459 define diseases of the circulatory system, ICD9 codes 410414 define different sub-types of ischemic heart disease, ICD9 codes 410.0410.9 define acute myocardial infarctions and at the highest phenotypic resolution, ICD9 codes 410.00410.02 define acute myocardial infarctions of anterolateral wall. It is not surprising that icd9 based phew ass have utilized a collapsing strategy to define cases and controls at varying levels of phenotypic resolution (). The current text based phenome was arranged alphabetically, and as such, lacks intuitive structure. Another challenge of a text based phenome is the interpretation of the word strings. Cases and controls in an icd9 based phenome are defined by the existence of a given ICD9 code. Although errors exist in the coding, it is assumed that ICD9 coding is assigned based on clinical manifestations. In comparison, phenotypes described by text data may be less clear. Cases and controls may be in completely assigned because of misspellings or alternative word usage, such as abbreviations. Furthermore, words defining a text based phenome may capture a term, yet context beyond the term may be lacking. For example, non-specific terms such as 'positional' (Supplementary) are captured in the text based phenome. Further curation of the text based phenome to remove such terms may improve the effectiveness of a text based p he was. Using biomedical named entity recognition tools may be one approach (). In addition to non-specific terms, it is conceivable that association results from clinically meaningful terms may still be difficult to interpret. Some clinical notes may indicate that a 'patient has a trial fibrillation', 'patient does not have a trial fibrillation' and or 'patient has a family history of a trial fibrillation'. Under these circumstances, all individuals with the word string a trial fibrillation' will be lumped together independent of meaning. This may explain why a trial fibrillation' was not the top word string for rs2200733, although it was still in the top 20 (P  7.1E-4). The application of natural language processing techniques, such as negation analysis () and ontology driven concept extraction (), may be effective when addressing these challenges. Regardless, raw association results indicate that text data performed equivalently to ICD9 coding, and in some instances, clinical text data outperformed ICD9 coding (and). Like g was p he was is challenged by multiple comparison testing. The current standard for adjusting multiple comparison testing has been the application of a Bonferroni correction (). Unique to p he was is the correlative structure in the phenotypic data. As described earlier, in an icd9 based p he was similar ICD9 codes may be correlated, especially in phenome s that use a collapsing strategy to define cases and controls at different phenotypic resolutions. Furthermore, correlations may also exist across codes (). This text based p he was is no different. A good example of the correlative structure in the text data may include the a trial fibrillation SNP rs2200733 where the bigram 'fibrillation with', is rooted in the trigram a trial fibrillation with', with both showing similar associations (). Of all SNPs tested, the AMD SNP rs1061170 not only passed a snp dependent Bonferroni correction (P  2.1E-6) but also passed an experiment wise correction [P  4.3E-7 assuming a  0.05 and 116 920 total tests (total tests  5 SNP  23 384 phenotypes)] (). Like ICD9 codes, clinical text data can be efficiently extracted from an EHR system and can be effectively applied to a p he was (). With all of the words in a text based phenome rooted to standard terms from a medical dictionary (), this approach may be easily translatable to other EHR systems. Clinical text data has the capacity to describe phenotypic information at a high resolution, while also allowing the use of drug information that may provide additional insights into the interpretation of the p he was result, as demonstrated by the amd associated SNP and its Application of clinical text data association with the AMD drug Visudyne (). Because ICD9 codes are used primarily for billing, only those conditions that arise during a clinical visit are recorded. For patients who come in and out of a service area, or for conditions that predate an EHR system, ICD9 coding may not provide a comprehensive assessment of a patient's disease history. In comparison, clinical notes may capture both current and in depth historical health information. This may explain in part the larger case sizes for clinical text data compared with ICD9 coding. Of interest, text data and ICD9 coding demonstrated similar associations, yet both datasets had incomplete correlations between the cases and controls identified by either text data or ICD9 coding (). In general, a larger percentage of cases are unique to text data compared with cases identified by ICD9 coding. For example, cases of ankylosing spondylitis and MS were dramatically different in the text based approached compared with the icd9 based approach suggesting the potential for increased false positives in a text based phenome. Conversely, SNP rs12678919, known to be associated with triglyceride metabolism, was associated with 508 patients with the word string 'elevated triglycerides' (P  4.2E-5), whereas rs12678919 genotype was associated with 322 patients diagnosed with pure hyper gly ceri demi a (P  1.4E-4). The correlation between cases and controls for this example was 0.35 with 67% of cases unique only to text data and 48% of cases unique only to ICD9 data (). This result may suggest that neither text data, nor ICD9 coding, can comprehensively identify all cases. Improvement in a text based phenome may be achieved by implementing concept identification approaches, such as negation analysis, word sense disambiguation, and abbreviation expansion. Furthermore, further improvement may be achieved by combining different data types. In conclusion, this study demonstrates for the first time that raw text data from clinical notes in an EHR system can be used effectively to define a phenome. This study also validates that clinical text data, including drug data, can be applied to p he was as a complementary approach to a g was and icd9 based p he was. The future of the p he was strategy may not be limited to either clinical text data or ICD9 coding. A potential name for this approach might be called a text wide association study text was. The future of the p he was strategy may rely on multiple structured and unstructured data types. This is particularly relevant as EHR systems become standardized, bio repositories continue to grow and genomic medicine becomes widely applied.
