Motivation: Protein abundance in quantitative proteomics is often based on observed spectral features derived from liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) or lcms ms experiments. Peak intensities are largely non normal in distribution. Furthermore, lcms based proteomics data frequently have large proportions of missing peak intensities due to censoring mechanisms on low abundance spectral features. Recognizing that the observed peak intensities detected with the LC-MS method are all positive, skewed and often left censored we propose using survival methodology to carry out differential expression analysis of proteins. Various standard statistical techniques including non-parametric tests such as the kolmogorov smirnov and wilcoxon mann Whitney rank sum tests, and the parametric survival model and accelerated failure time model with log-normal, log logistic and Weibull distributions were used to detect any differentially expressed proteins. The statistical operating characteristics of each method are explored using both real and simulated datasets. Results: Survival methods generally have greater statistical power than standard differential expression methods when the proportion of missing protein level data is 5% or more. In particular, the AFT models we consider consistently achieve greater statistical power than standard testing procedures, with the discrepancy widening with increasing missing ness in the proportions.

introduction proteomics is a growing field that deals with the determination of gene and cellular function at the protein level (). It is often of interest to the protein researcher to identify as well as quantify the amount of protein in a given biological sample. Several methods and instruments are available for both the identification and quantitation of peptides within proteins, including the bottom up liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) and lcms ms or the tandem mass spectrometry approaches. In the LC-MS approach, proteins are extracted from the biological sample, digested into peptides and ionized (). Following the ionization step, the ionized * To whom correspondence should be addressed. sample is introduced to the mass spectrometer for scanning where the mass to charge (m/z) and observed peak intensities are obtained. Once the peak intensities are obtained, the observed features of the peptides are matched to a database for peptide identification. Following the identification step, the peptide level information is rolled up to the protein level (). In lcms ms a precursor ion is picked after the first MS step for fragmentation prior to the identification step (). It is often of interest to measure the abundance of proteins from the identified peptides in the sample; this is the quantitation step of the analysis. In bottom up ms based quantitation, the estimation of protein abundances in a sample is typically carried out on the basis of one of three quantities (): (i) spectral counts; (ii) label free methods or (iii) isotopic labeling experiments. Spectral counts are simply the number of peak intensities for a given peptide protein. label free intensity based quantitation uses peak intensities (heights or areas under the peaks) to estimate peptide or protein abundance. Other label free methods are based on the unlabeled peak intensities associated with the mass spectrum of the extracted ions. label based methods of quantitation, which are viewed as the gold standard for measuring protein abundance, involve the ratio of the observed peak intensities of two isotopically labeled samples. Once the protein abundances have been obtained, it is often of interest to assess differentially expressed proteins across comparison groups. The goal of differential analysis is to differentiate features across groups which can be subsequently used for biomarker discovery or for providing additional clues for studying the causal pathways of the disease or the biological condition of interest (). One of the characteristics of peak intensity data from LC-MS based proteomics is large quantities of missing data. The missing data patterns are often not independent of the peak intensities of the peptides, which is likely due to censoring of the peak intensities for low abundance peptides proteins (). To assess differentially expressed proteins across treatment groups, the observed peak intensities are often normalized (), imputed () and transformed (;). Various imputation techniques are available for the imputation step. These include the row mean imputation, K nearest neighbor (KNN) (), singular value decomposition (), Bayesian principal components analysis (), Gaussian mixture clustering () and a convex combination of these methods linc mb ()

discussion in quantitative proteomics, it is often of interest to determine how proteins obtained from subjects under various treatment conditions differ. In this article, we focused on various techniques for detecting such differential expressions at the protein level. We recognize the nature of peak intensity data as positive data prone to missing ness due mostly to left censoring. We propose using methods from survival analysis to detect any differences at the protein level. Based on our application of the various techniques to the diabetes data, we find that applying the AFT models under with left censoring had the highest power to detect any group differences. Tests applied under the assumption of left censoring had the highest ability to detect differentially expressed proteins when compared with tests based on the assumption that the missing data are randomly missing. Our simulation study also confirms the benefit of treating the missing data as left censored and applying the AFT models. Overall, we would recommend treating raw peak intensity data as positive and left censored data and apply survival methods such as the AFT model with the log logistic distribution to determine any differentially expressed proteins. many omics technologies will be expected to give rise to censored data to one degree or another. For example, array based data are fluorescence intensity measurements, nuclear magnetic resonance data are spectral intensity measurements, etc; each of these are strictly positive

conclusion in this article, we applied methods from survival analysis to detect differentially expressed proteins based on LC-MS proteomics data. We find that applying the AFT model with left censored data leads to more proteins being considered as differentially expressed when compared with other standard statistical techniques which assume that the missing data are randomly missing.
