Motivation: The limited availability of protein structures often restricts the functional annotation of proteins and the identification of their protein protein interaction sites. Computational methods to identify interaction sites from protein sequences alone are, therefore, required for unraveling the functions of many proteins. This article describes a new method psi ver to predict interaction sites, i.e. residues binding to other proteins, in protein sequences. Only sequence features position specific scoring matrix and predicted accessibility) are used for training a Naïve Bayes classifier (NBC), and conditional probabilities of each sequence feature are estimated using a kernel density estimation method (KDE). Results: The leave one out cross validation of psi ver achieved a Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) of 0.151, an f measure of 35.3%, a precision of 30.6% and a recall of 41.6% on a non-redundant set of 186 protein sequences extracted from 105 heterodimers in the Protein Data Bank (consisting of 36 219 residues, of which 15.2% were known interface residues). Even though the dataset used for training was highly imbalanced, a randomization test demonstrated that the proposed method managed to avoid overfitting. psi ver was also tested on 72 sequences not used in training (consisting of 18 140 residues, of which 10.6% were known interface residues), and achieved an MCC of 0.135, an f measure of 31.5%, a precision of 25.0% and a recall of 46.5%, outperforming other publicly available servers tested on the same dataset. psi ver enables experimental biologists to identify potential interface residues in unknown proteins from sequence information alone, and to mutate those residues selectively in order to unravel protein functions. Availability: Freely available on the web at

introduction identification of protein protein interaction sites is not only critical for understanding how proteins perform their biological functions, but also helpful in developing new drugs (). Experimentally determined protein 3D structures indeed provide important clues * To whom correspondence should be addressed. to identifying interaction sites and understanding protein functions (). However, in spite of significant efforts in determining many protein structures, the number of known 3D structures is still considerably smaller than that of protein sequences [as of February 2010, 514 212 entries in uniprotkb swissprot (release 57.13 statistics) compared with 63 093 in the Protein Data Bank (PDB;. The limited availability of structures often restricts the identification of interaction sites of proteins and their functional annotation. New computational methods are, therefore, needed to identify interface residues from protein sequences alone and to assist experimental studies, which mutate these residues selectively and assess their effects on interaction. Is it possible to predict interaction sites, i.e. residues binding to other proteins, from sequence information alone? of ran and Rost (2003) and have reported that residues involved in interactions tend to form clusters in sequences; within four neighboring residues on either side, 9798% of interface residues have at least one additional interface residue and 7074% have at least four additional interface residues. This analysis indicates that neighboring residues of an actual interface residue have high potential for being interface residues, and also suggests that fragments of sequences (referred to as sub-sequences hereafter) potentially have informative features to discriminate between interaction and non interaction sites. Thus, sequence features contained in sub-sequences are expected to allow us to predict interface residues in sequences used sub-sequences of nine consecutive residues to develop a neural network nn based method using predicted structural features and evolutionary information. In addition, they improved the method by using a post-processing filter to eliminate all the isolated residues that were predicted as interface but had fewer than seven predicted interface residues in a sub-sequence of 11 residues, and achieved over 90% accuracy (ACC; the proportion of correctly predicted residues) in a 3-fold cross validation also used sub-sequences of nine residues to develop a two stage classifier by combining support vector machines (SVMs) and Bayesian network classifiers trained only on surface residues extracted from protein protein hetero complexes and achieved an ACC of 72% and a Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) of 0.30. Both methods used sub-sequences of 9 consecutive residues for the prediction of protein protein interaction sites. Several other computational methods have been reported, to predict residues binding to other proteins in protein sequences, using machine learning techniques such as NNs, SVMs and the random forest method. Zhou and Shan (2001) and[
