Motivation: Aptamers are synthetic nucleic acid molecules that can bind biological targets in virtue of both their sequence and three dimensional structure. Aptamers are selected using SELEX, Systematic Evolution of Ligands by EXponential enrichment, a technique that exploits aptamer target binding affinity. The SELEX procedure, coupled with high throughput sequencing ht selex creates billions of random sequences capable of binding different epitopes on specific targets. Since this technique produces enormous amounts of data, computational analysis represents a critical step to screen and select the most biologically relevant sequences. Results: Here, we present apt ani a computational tool to identify target specific aptamers from ht selex data and secondary structure information. apt ani builds on apta motif algorithm, originally implemented to analyze SELEX data; extends the applicability of apta motif to ht selex data and introduces new functionalities, as the possibility to identify binding motifs, to cluster aptamer families or to compare output results from different ht selex cycles. Tabular and graph-ical representations facilitate the downstream biological interpretation of results. Availability and implementation: apt ani is available at http://aptani.unimore.it.

introduction dna or RNA aptamers are small oligonucleotides (100 nucleotides) that recognize their ligands with an affinity equal or superior to antibodies (). These small molecules are not immunogenic, have a high capacity to penetrate tissues and can be easily modified to regulate their half life or conjugated with drugs (). Aptamers have entered the clinical pipeline with more than nine phase I and II ongoing clinical trials for diseases as macular degeneration, coronary artery bypass graft surgery and various types of cancer (). Aptamers are selected in vitro by the use of an unsupervised iterative method called SELEX (Systematic Evolution of Ligands by exponential enrichment in which aptamers specific for a ligand are selected from an initial pool of random oligonucleotides using counter selection and selection procedures. Historically, a SELEX experiment required multiple (15) rounds of selection with the undesirable effect of amplifying some intrinsic pitfalls, as e.g. the selection of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) artifacts. In recent years, the advent of high throughput sequencing technologies revolutionized the SELEX technique, drastically reducing the number of cycles and, consequently, the possibility of generating artifacts. ht selex (the SELEX procedure, coupled with high throughput sequencing) boosted the use of SELEX technique to identify monoclonal aptamers against different epitopes of a ligand or of a whole cell however the quantity of data derived from a single ht selex experiment requires the development of new computational tools to effectively identify aptamers with elevate binding proprieties. Considering that the binding affinity, of a specific aptamer toward its target, depends on the aptamer secondary structure (), structural properties could be exploited to select those aptamers that more likely interact with a ligand. To date, even though interest in secondary structures is rising (), most of the available algorithms and software that analyze ht selex data do not make use of any structural information but rely solely on the abundance (frequency) of the nucleotide sequences at the various cycles. To fulfill this gap, we developed apt ani a software package to select aptamers from ht selex experiments using both sequence counts and structural motifs. apt ani builds on apta motif algorithm, originally implemented by ho ink a et al.(2012) to analyze SELEX data and extends its applicability to ht selex data. Additionally, apt ani through the integrative analysis of frequency and secondary structure, allows to identify not only those aptamers with the highest binding probability but also their putative binding motifs. Finally, apt ani comprises some additional functionalities as the possibility to cluster aptamer families or to compare output results from different ht selex cycles.
