Motivation: high throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies have made low cost sequencing of large numbers of samples commonplace. An explosion in the type, not just number, of sequencing experiments has also taken place including genome re-sequencing, population scale variation detection, whole transcriptome sequencing and genome wide analysis of protein bound nucleic acids. Results: We present Artemis as a tool for integrated visualization and computational analysis of different types of HTS datasets in the context of a reference genome and its corresponding annotation. Availability: Artemis is freely available (under a GPL licence) for download (for MacOSX, UNIX and Windows) at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute websites:

introduction prior to the advent of high throughput sequencing (HTS), sequencing experiments were limited by cost to the study of a single sample or a small number of important samples. However, the recent advances in DNA sequencing technologies () have made it possible for researchers to quickly and inexpensively sequence very large numbers of samples and to conduct many new types of sequencing based experiments. For example, HTS has been used to study transmission using a large number of isolates of a methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) on both the global and local scale (). It has also been used to show that homologous recombination has led to serotype switching and vaccine escape in a study of 240 isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae PMEN1 (). HTS has made it possible to explore population genetic variation among human populations (1000). We are now increasingly using it to enhance our understanding of how genetic differences affect health and disease (). The aim of projects, such as the UK10K (http://www.uk10k.org), is to construct detailed catalogues of genome variations and identify many more low frequency variants that may be associated with susceptibility to disease and response to pathogens, drugs and vaccines. These applications of HTS require the identification of * To whom correspondence should be addressed. single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) as well as insertions and deletions. In addition to indels, HTS can be used to identify large structural variants, such as large insertions, deletions, inversions and duplications. Structural variations are also likely to make an important contribution to diversity and disease susceptibility (). The study of functional genomics and quantitative gene expression studies has greatly benefited from rnase q experiments, which have refined our understanding of expression and significantly improved annotation (). The sheer size of the datasets from HTS experiments requires tools to visualize, analyse, summarize and interpret these large scale datasets. Many new algorithms and tools have been developed to efficiently process and analyse the data such as those designed to assemble sequences into a consensus, e.g. Velvet (), ABySS (), map or align short reads against a reference sequence e.g. top hat (), BowTie (), BWA () or those designed to identify sequence variations e.g. sam tools g atk (). However an inspection, review and interpretation of the output by an experienced and knowledgeable person is essential to understand the genomic context of these datasets and can be critical to make connections between sequence variation and biological phenomena. This of course complements computational approaches, because a visual examination of the results and underlying data is often the next step in order to confirm a prediction, or assess the potential functional effects in a sequence based experiment. A number of new software applications have been developed for browsing, visualizing and interpreting large scale sequencing datasets. Several of these have been designed specifically for the visualization of genome sequence assemblies, including EagleView (), HawkEye () and Tablet (). Other tools, such as look seq () and bam view () have been developed specifically to visualize short read alignment data. look seq is a javascript based web application that displays data stored in BAM files. bam view is an interactive Java application that can visualize large numbers of read alignments stored in BAM files. However, often researchers need to visualize these read alignments in the context of genome annotation. Genome browsers including Integrative Genome Viewer (IGV,), Integrated Genome Browser i gb and geno viewer (http://www.genoviewer.com), have been page 465 464469

discussion in this article, we have described Artemis, an integrated genome visualization and analysis platform for HTS datasets. We have presented several example datasets and discussed the role of Artemis in their visualization and interpretation. Further examples are available on the Artemis website http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/ software artemis ngs. Artemis has support for various standard file formats including BAM and VCF, in addition to user defined input files. These formats can support data from many different types of sequencing platforms. Therefore, Artemis has the potential to visualize and investigate sequencing data from numerous sequencing technologies. The new views available within Artemis are easily customizable by the user and can be viewed at different levels of resolution. Multiple BAMs and v cfs can be loaded simultaneously for comparison. This allows in depth preliminary analysis and investigations of HTS datasets in the context of the sequence and annotation of a reference to reveal biologically relevant information. Using indexed files (BAM, VCF, BCF and fast a means that Artemis can efficiently manage memory by only needing to load into memory the data that is currently being displayed in the interface. This improves the performance and enables large genomes to be viewed and interpreted along with large HTS datasets.
