Alternative Splicing Effects ASsessment Tools as east is an online tool for the functional annotation of putative proteins encoded by transcripts generated by alternative splicing (AS). When provided with a transcript sequence, as east identifies regions altered by AS events in the putative protein sequence encoded by the transcript. Users can evaluate the predicted function of the putative protein by inspecting whether functional domains are included in the altered regions. Moreover, users can infer the loss of inter-molecular interactions in the protein network according to whether the AS events affect interaction residues observed in the 3D structure of the reference isoform. The information obtained from as east will help to design experimental analyses for the functional significance of novel splice isoforms. Availability: The online tool is freely available at http://as-alps.

introduction in higher eukaryotes, genes often produce alternatively spliced transcripts (AS transcripts). Many AS events have been actively detected with high throughput experimental methods, such as rnase q and microarrays (). However, the functions of putative proteins encoded by AS transcripts (termed 'AS isoforms') have not been experimentally analyzed in many cases. Functional annotation tools for transcripts with novel patterns of splicing are desirable to infer the functional significance of AS isoforms. There are few tools for analyzing AS isoforms translated from novel transcripts queried by users. alt analyze (http://www. alt analyze org identifies AS events using rnase q or microarray data and shows how these events may affect domain composition. However, it does not provide information on the effects of AS on the 3D structures of AS isoforms. maist as () assesses whether user queried AS isoforms are structurally plausible proteins, but explicit functional annotations are not provided. Previously, we developed a pipeline that detects regions altered by AS events (termed 'AS regions') in AS isoforms using genome sequences and full length transcript data (). The pipeline then evaluates the impact of AS events on the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. interactions between the AS isoforms and other molecules by identifying interaction residues from 3D structure data of relevant molecular complexes. All of the data derived from the pipeline are provided in the as alps database (). In this article, we describe as east that annotates and analyzes user uploaded transcript sequences using as alps. as east determines whether the transcript encodes a novel AS isoform and annotates such functional sites in the AS isoform as residues interacting with other molecules. We provide an example: as east predicts that a novel AS isoform of mitogen activated protein kinase 1 (MAPK1) in human skeletal muscle inhibits the signaling pathway by removing residues that interact with ATP and substrate proteins.
