Motivation: In sequencing studies of common diseases and quantitative traits, power to test rare and low frequency variants individually is weak. To improve power, a common approach is to combine statistical evidence from several genetic variants in a region. Major challenges are how to do the combining and which statistical framework to use. General approaches for testing association between rare variants and quantitative traits include aggregating genotypes and trait values, referred to as collapsing, or using a score based variance component test. However, little attention has been paid to alternative models tailored for protein truncating variants. Recent studies have highlighted the important role that protein truncating variants, commonly referred to as loss of function variants, may have on disease susceptibility and quantitative levels of biomarkers. We propose a Bayesian modelling framework for the analysis of protein truncating variants and quantitative traits. Results: Our simulation results show that our models have an advantage over the commonly used methods. We apply our models to sequence and exo me array data and discover strong evidence of association between low plasma triglyceride levels and protein trun-cating variants at APOC3 (Apolipoprotein C3). Availability: Software is available from http://www.well.ox.ac.uk/ rivas mamba Contact:

introduction advances in DNA sequencing and customized exo me arrays are quickly transforming the landscape of genomic studies of diseases and related quantitative traits (). In sequencing studies of common diseases and quantitative traits, power to individually test any rare or low frequency variant is typically weak in attainable sample sizes. Hence, to boost the ability to detect signal, evidence is combined across variants. When designing such an 'aggregation' test, there are three main questions to consider across which biological units should variants be combined which variants mapping within those units should be included which statistical models should be used as for the first question, an obvious choice of biological unit across which to combine variants is the gene, and we focus on this throughout the article, considering all the coding sequence of the gene as the relevant unit. An alternative would be to combine variants across all genes within a pathway, but this adds several complications, not least because of the currently rather imprecise knowledge of biological pathways. Within a gene one could include all observed variants, but this would be likely to include many neutral variants and or variants with opposite direction of effects, both of which can lead to loss of power under many statistical methods. The ideal approach would be to combine only those variants that affect the trait of interest. This is, however, difficult in practice because these will not be known in advance. One approximation would be to include only the variants with functional effects. Even this is challenging with current limited knowledge of the function of coding variants in the human genome: commonly used predictors of the function of non-synonymous variants () can often be unreliable (). One class of variants where functional prediction is much more straightforward is that which truncates the resulting protein product stop gain frameshift coding, splice disrupting). The functional prediction is made based on the translational consequence of a mutation against a reference transcript set, for example, gen code. Protein truncating variants p tvs are typically subject to nonsense mediated decay (NMD), a cellular mechanism that detects nonsense mutations and prevents the expression of truncated proteins, resulting in loss of function of that copy of the protein. To a first approximation, p tvs are thus likely to have the same functional consequence, namely, loss of function *To whom correspondence should be addressed.

DISCUSSION

conclusion we have developed and studied a novel statistical method for assessing the association between p tvs and a quantitative trait. The approach is formulated in a Bayesian statistical framework, and can be used in a Bayesian framework or in providing a test statistic for frequentist application. Bayesian application is recommended in ranking genes for follow-up in a discovery dataset. The frequentist application allows calculation of p values for association, which can be helpful in settings where these are required. We have presented two versions of the method. In the first, SEM, all p tvs are assumed to have effects in the same direction. This would be appropriate, for example, if all p tvs were thought to result in loss of function of that copy of the gene. We also described a more general version of the approach allowing different classes of PTV in terms of their effect on trait values. We see the major application of this more general method in taking a more nuanced view of the consequences of p tvs and distinguishing between those likely to be subjected to NMD and those that escape NMD (e.g. many or all p tvs in the last exon of the gene) and may result in gain of function. As our biological understanding of the NMD mechanism increases, we expect that it will add power to allow potentially different effects for p tvs escaping NMD, for example, by applying gem nmd (in which they may have similar effects or different effects) and SEM (in which their effect on the trait would be the same, even though the molecular consequences of the mutation would be different). Finally, we have established and replicated an association between p tvs in APOC3 and lowering of plasma triglyceride levels.
