Motivation: Membrane proteins are an important class of biological macromolecules involved in many cellular key processes including signalling and transport. They account for one third of genes in the human genome and 450% of current drug targets. Despite their importance , experimental structural data are sparse, resulting in high expectations for computational modelling tools to help fill this gap. However, as many empirical methods have been trained on experimental structural data, which is biased towards soluble globular proteins , their accuracy for transmembrane proteins is often limited. Results: We developed a local model quality estimation method for membrane proteins q mean brane by combining statistical potentials trained on membrane protein structures with a per residue weighting scheme. The increasing number of available experimental membrane protein structures allowed us to train membrane specific statistical potentials that approach statistical saturation. We show that reliable local quality estimation of membrane protein models is possible , thereby extending local quality estimation to these biologically relevant molecules. Availability and implementation: Source code and datasets are available on request.

introduction protein modelling plays a key role in exploring sequence structure relationships when experimental data are missing. Modelling techniques using evolutionary information, in particular homology comparative modelling, developed into standardized pipelines over recent years. An indispensable ingredient of such a pipeline is the accuracy estimation of a protein model, directly providing the user with information regarding the range of its possible applications (). In this context, global model quality assessment tools are important for selecting the best model among a set of alternatives, whereas local model estimates assess the plausibility and likely accuracy of individual amino acids (). Various techniques have been developed to address this question, with consensus methods and knowledge based approaches showing best results in blind assessments (). Consensus approaches require an ensemble of models with structural variety, reflecting alternative conformations (). In contrast, knowledge based methods (such as statistical potentials) can be applied to single models but are in general less accurate than consensus methods and exhibit strong dependency on the structural data they have been trained on. The unique physicochemical properties of biological membranes give rise to interactions that are energetically discouraged in soluble proteins, and vice versa (). However, most scoring functions using knowledge based methods () have been trained on soluble proteins. Thus, they perform poorly when applied to models of membrane proteins. This specific, but highly relevant, important aspect of protein model quality assessment has received only little attention in recent years (). With the growing amount of available high resolution membrane protein structures () the template situation for homology modelling procedures is improving quickly and, even more important for this work, it is gradually becoming possible to adapt knowledge based methods to this class of models. As a result of such efforts, we present q mean brane a combination of statistical potentials targeted at local quality estimation of membrane protein models in their naturally occurring oligomeric state: after identifying the transmembrane region using an implicit solvation model, specifically trained statistical potentials get applied on the different regions of a protein model (Figs 1 and 2). To overcome statistical saturation problems, a novel approach for deriving statistical potentials from sparse training data has been devised. We have benchmarked the performance of the approach on a large heterogeneous test set of models and illustrate the result on the example of alignment errors in a transmembrane model.

conclusion investigating function and interactions in membrane proteins is an active field of research, with modelling techniques as an important tool to bridge the gap when structural data are missing. Comparative modelling methods automatically profit from the increased number of available experimental membrane structures, which can be used to build models for membrane proteins (). However, most knowledge based insertions are marked black, and deletions are marked white. Second bar: shift of the insertion towards the n terminus in front of helix 4, third bar: shift of insertion towards the n terminus in between helices 4 and 5, fourth bar: shift of the insertion towards the c terminus
