assembly tics is a web app for detecting and analyzing variants from a de novo gen-ome assembly aligned to a reference genome. It incorporates a unique anchor filtering approach to increase robustness to repetitive elements, and identifies six classes of variants based on their distinct alignment signatures. assembly tics can be applied both to comparing aberrant genomes, such as human cancers, to a reference, or to identify differences between related species. Multiple interactive visualizations enable in depth explorations of the genomic distributions of variants. Availability and Implementation

introduction de novo genome assembly is becoming increasingly tractable on large genomes due to advances in long read sequencing and mapping. This is leading to a greater quality and quantity of reference genomes across the tree of life (). Researchers can now sequence and assemble the genomes of several related strains or species in order to compare them. This is a vast improvement over more common resequencing approaches where sequencing reads are aligned to a single reference genome, often allowing only SNPs or short indels to be identified. Now that increasing numbers of high quality genome assemblies are available, there is a need to detect the large structural variants that mark important differences between these genomes. For example, there may be more than 10 000 structural variations representing mega bases of genetic diversity present per human genome (see below). assembly tics builds on the innovations of the whole genome alignment suite MUMmer () in order to detect and analyze these variants. maximum adjusted to match the size of the unique sequence anchor. This prevents translocations and complex variants from being interpreted as indels. Variants from multiple alleles are reported independently and tagged with contig of origin illustrates the differences between variant classes. Tandem and repeat expansions are insertions taking place within tandem and repeat sequences, respectively, while tandem and repeat contractions are deletions within these elements. Insertions and deletions are characterized by a defined breakpoint (less than 50bp overlap or gap) on one side. Tandem variants occur between overlapping alignments (over 50 bp). Repeat variants occur within un mappable gaps between alignments. The individual alignments are also scanned to detect insertions or deletions spanned by the alignment. Finally variant classes, size distributions, and genomic coordinates of all variants are summarized through plots and tables, as well as an interactive dot plot of alignments (). Supplementary Note 3 provides more details on the web interface.
