Motivation: Although Genome Wide Association Studies g was genotype a very large number of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), the data are often analyzed one SNP at a time. The low predictive power of single SNPs, coupled with the high significance threshold needed to correct for multiple testing, greatly decreases the power of g was. Results: We propose a procedure in which all the SNPs are analyzed in a multiple generalized linear model, and we show its use for extremely high dimensional datasets. Our method yields p values for assessing significance of single SNPs or groups of SNPs while controlling for all other SNPs and the family wise error rate f wer. Thus, our method tests whether or not a SNP carries any additional information about the phenotype beyond that available by all the other SNPs. This rules out spurious correlations between phenotypes and SNPs that can arise from marginal methods because the spuriously correlated SNP merely happens to be correlated with the truly causal SNP. In addition , the method offers a data driven approach to identifying and refining groups of SNPs that jointly contain informative signals about the phenotype. We demonstrate the value of our method by applying it to the seven diseases analyzed by the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium wtc cc. We show, in particular, that our method is also capable of finding significant SNPs that were not identified in the original wtc cc study, but were replicated in other independent studies. Availability and implementation: Reproducibility of our research is supported by the open source Bioconductor package hier g was
introduction genome wide association studies g was have enjoyed increasing success and popularity in recent years, due mostly to the thousands of genetic variants found to be significantly associated with complex traits (). The two common designs are case control studies, which look for associations between SNPs and disease, and population based studies which focus on finding associations between SNPs and continuous traits (). The larger goal of these studies is to function as hypothesis generating machines, resulting in sets of loci that require further analysis. Thus g was are an important first step in the gene identification process (). The findings from these studies provide preliminary genetic information, which need additional analysis and follow-up experiments to be validated. However, many studies have found only a few common SNPs per trait, and these SNPs have generally low predictive power, explaining only a small percentage of the variance (). Often, SNPs are tested individually for association with the phenotype, using the Armitage Trend Test. Because genome wide scans analyze hundreds of thousands or even millions of markers, the multiple testing issue is resolved by applying a stringent significance threshold most commonly 5  10 8 ()to the p values. This method is successful only if the study is well powered such that the associations are strong enough to pass the stringent threshold. However, even if that is the case, this type of analysis has several limitations, which have been addressed in the literature (). Here we focus on two of them. First, single SNPs tend to have small effect sizes. We can increase the explanatory power by looking at the joint effect of multiple SNPs. Second, when we test a SNP individually, we ignore the effects of all other SNPs. If we analyze marginally two sufficiently correlated SNPs, out of which only one is causal for the disease, both may show an association. This leads to higher false positive rates. Joint modeling of all SNPs is challenging. Since in most g was the number of SNPs is much larger than the number of samples, the data can not be analyzed using standard multivariable approaches. An established method in the field is the genome wide Complex Trait Analysis gct a which is based on linear mixed models () and enables some joint analysis of SNPs. It allows for statistical significance tests of single SNPs (as fixed effects) while all SNPs other than the considered single SNP are built into the model as a simultaneous random effect. We would classify the obtained statistical significance of the SNPs as a hybrid between marginal (with only one or a few SNPs as fixed effects) and joint (since all the SNPs are in the model) modeling. It also enables to assess the combined effect of all SNPs which quantifies the heritable component of phenotype variation explained jointly by all the genotyped SNPs (). Another solution to the high dimensionality of the problem is the use of penalized regression, which constrains the magnitude of the regression coefficients, and allows them to be estimated. The two most widely used penalization methods are the Lasso () and Ridge regression (). The Lasso penalizes the sum of the absolute values of the regression coefficients. It is a sparse estimator, meaning that it sets some regression coefficients to zero, while keeping others non-zero. Ridge regression penalizes the sum of squared regression coefficients, but it does not reduce the number of parameters in the model. in it has been shown in the context of g was that penalization decreases the false positive rate and increases the probability of detecting the causal SNPs. There are several papers which consider a joint analysis. Methods which apply a penalized model include: the Bayesian Lasso (), a two stage procedure using single regression followed by a Lasso selection (), stability selection in the context of g was (), the so called ISIS (Iterative Sure Independence Screening) combined with stability selection to select significant SNPs (), a combination of Lasso and linear mixed models (), Lasso for screening () or ridge regression (). None of the proposals () compute p values for snps aims to control the type I error rate, the approaches using stability selection aim to control the expected number of false positive selections meins hausen and B hl mann 2010), while controls the False Discovery Rate (FDR). Our goal is to construct valid p values for SNPs in a (joint) multiple generalized linear model together with a computationally efficient and powerful way to address the issue of massive multiple statistical hypothesis testing. The problem is challenging due to the complex setting with hundreds of thousands of SNPs. Our method relies on a hierarchical procedure from mando zz i and B hl mann (2015) which we apply here for the first time to g was with very high dimensional datasets. It provides p values for multiple (joint) regression modeling of SNPs in high dimensional settings. We compute p values not only for individual SNPs, but also for groups of SNPs. The idea is to adapt to the strength of the signal present in the data: if the signal is too weak or the SNPs exhibit too high correlation, we might still detect a significant group of SNPs, instead of single SNP markers. Additionally, we compute the explained variance for every such group in a high dimensional generalized linear model. We demonstrate our method on the wtc cc data (The Wellcome Trust Case Control), due to the fact that strong associations have been found for some phenotypes in this dataset, and many of their findings have been replicated in subsequent studies. However, our method's advantages are also evident for phenotypes with weak associations: for biologically distant phenotypic traits, the goal is rather to find regions of the genome that are strongly associated with the phenotype. Our proposed method makes it statistically and computationally possible to assess the significance of the parameters in a multiple (generalized) linear model, for large scale g was problems with millions of SNP markers. The interpretation of the parameters in a multiple (generalized) linear model is markedly different from marginal association and also from gct a (). In fact, under some assumptions, we can link the (joint) multiple linear model to causal inference (see Section 2.1). Thus, it as an important step to perform the statistical inference in a multiple generalized linear model.
