Motivation: genome scale reconstructions and models, as collections of genomic and metabolic information, provide a useful means to compare organisms. Comparison requires that models are similarly notated to pair shared components. Result: Matching and comparison of genome scale reconstructions and models are facilitated by model borg i fier. It reconciles models in light of different annotation schemes, allowing diverse models to become useful for synchronous investigation. Availability and implementation: The model borg i fier toolbox is freely available at http://www.brain-biotech.de/downloads/model borg i fier zip
introduction genomic reconstructions can help develop hypothesis driven discovery, provide a background for high throughput data and provide an in silico sandbox for metabolic engineering (). Because reconstructions are easily interpretable and functionally testable representations of an organism's genome and metabolism, they also provide a means to compare organisms (). Comparing reconstructions allows for conserved metabolic pathways, growth predictions under similar conditions and multi organism communities to be investigated. Importantly, these studies are predicated on the stipulation that the concerned models are semantically compatible, consistently annotated and similarly notated. Ideally, reaction and metabolite entries would use identical naming methods. The increased popularity of genome scale reconstructions and models (GEMs) has sparked the development of markup and semantic standards. Namely, Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) has been adopted as the lingua franca for model exchange (). However, this standard does not define a naming scheme for reactions and metabolites or a generally accepted reference database. Consequently, fully automated comparison of GEMs from diverse sources is currently impossible to rectify this situation, some attempts have been made to create collections of GEMs that use a standard reaction and metabolite nomenclature. This includes the BIGG database () and metrx n (). Although both provide online databases of curated models, users can not submit models. This precludes the spontaneous comparison of additional or novel GEMs, such as those from the model SEED (). Tools do exist to compare and to merge arbitrary SBML formatted regulatory () or biochemical () models. However, these methods are predominantly aimed at combining (sub-) models into larger entities. Here we present, model borg i fier a tool that is specifically aimed at comparing and combining large, curated or automatically generated, organism specific genome scale reconstructions. It is implemented in MATLAB and integrates seamlessly with the popular open cobra Toolbox (). Model comparison uses both greedy and network comparison techniques to find matching reaction and metabolite entries. Merging is done in a semi automated fashion; manual match/ no match decisions are fed to machine learning algorithms to augment auto matching. The resulting composite model provides a framework to compare models, a means to share information between them and a reaction database for in silico metabolic engineering. The original models can be extracted from the composition with mathematical fidelity and add ended information.
