Motivation: In genome wide analyses, the relative age of gene duplications is often estimated by measuring the rate of synonymous substitutions (dS) between paralogous sequences. On the other hand, recent studies have shown the feasibility of inferring, at genomic scales, the relative age of duplication events from the topology of gene family trees. This represents a promising alternative for large surveys requiring an automatic methodology to establish a timeline of duplication events and that are usually limited to the use of dS, which presents known limitations such as a fast saturation of the signal. However, both measures have never been compared in a common framework. Results: topology based placement of duplications on a relative time scale corresponding to periods between speciation events were found to be highly consistent, providing the same placement for 67–84% of a reliable set of gene pairs duplicated in a single event. For recent evolutionary periods, dS and topological measures showed a strong correlation. We conclude that the topology based approach is more appropriate for assigning duplications to temporal scales when analyses need to include ancient events, and that the study of recent duplications may benefit from a combination of dS and topology information.

introduction the level of sequence divergence between two related protein coding genes can be expressed as the corrected number of residue substitutions occurring at the level of their DNA sequences. These substitutions can be classified as non-synonymous or synonymous depending on whether the nucleotide change results in a amino acid substitution in the encoded protein. Since synonymous substitutions are considered relatively free of selective pressures, at least at the protein level, these are often assumed to accumulate with time in a linear fashion that depends on the species generation time and mutation rates. Accordingly, the rate of synonymous * To whom correspondence should be addressed. substitutions between two sequences (dS) is extensively used as a proxy for their relative divergence time. In the particular case of genes that diverged through duplication (paralogs), dS is often used as an estimator for the relative age of the duplication event (i.e. to ascertain which duplications are more recent or ancient with respect to the others, without necessarily assigning a specific date for the duplication). Many recent studies have used this methodology to address the evolution of duplicate genes at a genomic scale (). However, in such studies, the central assumption that dS increments linearly with time in the ranges considered is never tested, possibly due to a lack of appropriate benchmarks. Most importantly, a significant number of the detected duplications are discarded due to saturated dS values, usually applying a threshold that is set around dS  1.5. It must be noted that all these studies were well aware of the effects of dS saturation, and therefore this measure was applied within appropriate limits. However, the implications that the possible sampling effect may have in the generality of their conclusions are usually not discussed. The effect of dS saturation has been described earlier () and constitutes one of the main known limitations of this methodology. Additionally, other necessary assumptions, such as the existence of a molecular clock or the absence of selection at synonymous sites, have been shown to be often violated (). In the light of such caveats, alternative methods, such as assigning duplication events to a relative temporal scale based on the topology of phylogenetic trees, may prove more adequate. Here, we will refer to this methodology as phylogeny based relative dating. phylogeny based relative dating uses the species relationships determined by the gene tree topology to locate speciation and duplication events. This can be done by using a more or less sophisticated algorithm to reconcile the gene tree with a known species tree (see, for instance,) or, alternatively, by simply detecting overlaps in the species content between the daughter branches of a given tree node (). In either approach, the relative age of each duplication is subsequently inferred according to the species found in the post duplication branches of the tree. This is, considering that a duplication event should have preceded all speciation s found in more recent branches, such event is assumed to have occurred prior to the most ancient of the subsequent speciation events. In contrast to dS, phylogeny based relative dating does not provide a continuous scale of time but it only assigns duplications

discussion overall our results show the strengths and caveats of using dS rates or phylogeny based relative dating as a proxy for estimating relative divergence times in genome wide studies. Saturation of dS rates is a well known limitation and, accordingly, all studies use this measure within appropriate limits. However, the extent to which dS saturation is affecting genome wide studies is generally not quantified. Alternative strategies based on phylogeny based relative dating such as the one proposed by us () have shown to be consistent and less prone to saturation, hence being ideal for assigning ancient duplications to relative temporal scales. The use of phylogenetic trees to detect duplication events and provide a relative age has the additional advantage of allowing a better resolution in the detection of paralogy relationships. For instance, phylogenetic trees can differentiate among one to one one to many and many to many relationships, thus better accounting for the complexity of the evolution of large gene families. Moreover, phylogeny based relative dating provides relative age estimates that can be readily associated with specific evolutionary periods. That is, they can be framed within the context of the speciation events observed in the tree. Implementations of this method in large scale phylogenetic analysis tools such as ETE () or MANTiS () will enable its wider use in genome wide analyses aimed at addressing relevant questions such as the content of ancestral genomes or the discovery of functional trends in duplicated genes. It must be noted, however, that there is still room for improvement, since a correct topological mapping relies on the quality of the underlying phylogenetic tree, the absence of horizontal transfer events, the breadth and density of taxonomic sampling and our level of understanding of the phylogeny of the species involved (). In this context, as noted before () and confirmed here, the presence of low coverage genomes may result in largely incorrect phylogeny based relative dating s at affected nodes. In such scenarios, dS relative dating would be more reliable, providing that the affected nodes fall within the non saturated range.

conclusion considering all this, the combination of both strategies may provide best results in the evolutionary analysis of gene duplication. For instance, the use of phylogeny based relative dating can provide a reliable overview of the relative age of the duplications under study as well as establishing the limits of dS saturation. Subsequently, dS can be used to provide a more detailed view on the sequence divergence within the subset of most recent duplications. Being aware of the advantages and limitations of both methodologies, as well as combining them in a sensible manner, will increase our analytical potential and, most importantly, avoid possible misinterpretation of the data.
