

introduction understanding the compositional differences of microbial communities micro biomes is essential in microbial ecology. With the development of next generation sequencing technologies, * To whom correspondence should be addressed. microbio me composition can now be determined by direct DNA sequencing without the need for laborious cultivation (). There has been a great interest in human microbio me studies in different body sites, ranging from skin () to gut () and respiratory tract (). Important insights have been gained from analysis of large scale human microbio me data, including the discovery of entero types () and discovery of the link between diet and these entero types (). Although the meta genomic shotgun approach is potentially more powerful and unbiased, 16S rRNA gene targeted sequencing is routinely performed to determine the taxonomic composition. The generated 16S rRNA sequence tags are usually clustered into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) with a specified amount of variability allowed within each OTU (). At 97% similarity, these OTUs represent 'species'. Downstream analysis is then performed on the OTU abundance data. Two central themes in human microbio me studies are to identify potential biological and environmental factors that are associated with microbio me composition, and to define the relationship between microbio me features and biological or clinical outcomes. The goal is to provide a better understanding of the factors that shape our microbio me and, potentially, contribute to the development of new therapeutic strategies to modulate the microbio me composition and affect human health (). Testing the association of microbio me composition with potential environmental factors using OTU abundances directly is difficult due to high dimensionality, non normality and phylogenetic structure of the OTU data. Instead, distance based non-parametric testing, in which a distance measure is defined between any two microbio me samples, is usually used to achieve this goal (). The power of the distance based test depends on a proper choice of the distance measure. Numerous distance measures have been proposed to compare microbial communities (). Phylogenetic distance measures, which account for the phylogenetic relationship among the species, provide far more power because they exploit the degree of divergence between different sequences. Among these, the uni frac distances are the most popular ones copy edited by manuscript CATEGORY: ORIGINAL PAPER

discussion microbio me data are multivariate count data in their original form and are statistically challenging to analyze due to their high dimensionality, phylogenetic constraints among species otus over dispersion and excessive zeros. To circumvent the difficulty, the data are often summarized in the form of distance matrix. Testing association of microbio me composition with environmental covariates is performed using the distance matrix. We have demonstrated in simulations that the weighted and unweighted uni frac impose large weight either to abundant lineages or to rare lineages; they can be underpowered in detecting change in moderately abundant lineages. Since microbio me composition change could occur in any lineages, our generalized uni frac distances, which unify the weighted and unweighted uni frac in a common framework, enable us to detect a much wider range of biologically relevant changes. Our simulation studies have clearly demonstrated that the generalized uni frac distance d (0.5) is more robust than d W or d U , and its performances are in general comparable to the best uni frac distances among the scenarios we considered. In addition, the generalized uni frac distances are very robust to tree constructing methods. We suggest the use of d (0.5) for testing association of microbio me composition with environmental covariates to avoid missing important findings. Both weighted and unweighted uni frac distances are sensitive to sampling depth (). Inflated distances at a low sampling depth are caused by sampling variation especially for the rare lineages. The generalized uni frac distances are also sensitive to sampling depth (Supplementary). However, as the sampling depth increases, the distance stabilizes. For the gut microbio me dataset, we found a sequencing depth of 1000 reads is sufficient to stabilize the generalized uni frac distances. To overcome the potential adverse effects of uneven sampling, rarefaction is usually used to subsample the samples to the same depth. However, when the sampling depth varies greatly across the samples, rarefaction throws away a significant portion of the 16S reads and increases the sampling variation. We found that rarefaction is not necessary, at least, in the context of testing the association of the microbio me composition with covariates (Supplementary). The power of uni frac variants can also be compared in the context of testing whether two microbial communities differ significantly as in (). Instead of comparing power for detecting the difference between two communities, we focus our evaluations on the performance of uni frac distances for associating microbio me composition to environmental covariates by collecting multiple independent samples. The rational is that as the sequence depth increases, two sample comparison will have increased power to detect differences due to sources that we are not interested in (random noises), such as the individual to individual variability, day today variability, sampling location variability or even technical variability (e.g. sample preparation). Multiple samples from a population coupled with multivariate statistical methods such as the distance based per manova provide powerful design and analysis methods to overcome these potential random noises (). As more and more large scale microbio me datasets are being collected, we expect that our generalized uni frac distances can help to identify important covariates that are associated with the micro biomes that could be missed using the commonly used uni frac distances. In addition to identifying environmental covariates that may be determinants of microbio me composition, our approach would be equally suited to identifying microbio me features associated with biological or clinical outcomes, which is needed to begin to understand the impact of the microbio me on health.
