Motivation: This article extends our recent research on penalized estimation methods in genome wide association studies to the realm of rare variants. Results: The new strategy is tested on both simulated and real data. Our findings on breast cancer data replicate previous results and shed light on variant effects within genes. Availability: Rare variant discovery by group penalized regression is now implemented in the free program Mendel at

introduction genome wide association studies gw ass have enjoyed varying degrees of success in the past decade (). The failure of single nucleotide polymorphism snp based studies to explain a substantial fraction of trait variation is hardly surprising given the tendency of selection to drive even weakly deleterious mutations to extinction. There are several candidates for the missing dark matter of genetic epidemiology. Among these are: (i) copy number variants cn vs (ii) poly genes of small effect; (iii) interactions between genes and between genes and environment; (iv) epigenetic effects; and (v) rare variants. Rare variants are currently attracting the most attention. cn vs are subject to the same selective forces as SNPs. The sole benefit of discovering poly genes of small effect is the insight these provide into biochemical pathways and genetic networks. Detecting interactions is problematic unless they are large or sample sizes are very large. Epigenetic effects and parent of origin effects are clearly important in certain settings and deserve more study. In view of the recent striking advances in large scale sequencing (), the search for rare variants is apt to be the most promising route to disease gene discovery. Statistical methods must evolve to meet the challenges of sequence data. Most current analysis methods are predicated on the common disease common variant cd cv hypothesis, which * To whom correspondence should be addressed postulates that common diseases are caused by common variants of small to modest effect. The competing common disease rare variant cd rv hypothesis postulates that common diseases are caused collectively by multiple rare variants of moderate to large effect. Macular degeneration is cited as an example supporting the cd cv hypothesis (). Because macular degeneration onset is typically late in life, it has a small impact on Darwinian fitness. The cd rv hypothesis receives support from traits such as low plasma levels of HDL cholesterol (), cystic fibrosis (), colorectal adenomas (), familial breast cancer () and schizophrenia (). The distinction between the two hypotheses is less sharp than proponents might suggest in the heat of argument. There is a spectrum of deleterious allele frequencies within many disease genes, and special circumstances of human history may favor one hypothesis over the other, depending on the diseases and populations studied (). It makes good statistical sense to consider all predictors (SNP variants and environmental covariates) in concert. Because rare disease predisposing alleles may be present in only a handful of patients, the traditional variant by variant approach is doomed to low power. A remedy is to group variants by gene or pathway membership. Once this is done, the strongest marginal signal is assessed by a weighted sum test () or by a groupwise test exploiting the multivariate and collapsing strategies of Li and Leal (2008). Multiple testing remains a major concern. The current article extends our recent research on penalized estimation methods in g was () to the realm of rare variants. This approach to association mapping has several advantages: (i) it applies to both ordinary and logistic regression; (ii) it is parsimonious and very fast; (iii) it offers a principled approach to model selection when the number of predictors exceeds the number of study participants; and (iv) it handles interactions gracefully. Our current software relies on lasso penalties and forms part of the Mendel package (). Here, we discuss how to incorporate group penalties that make it easier for related predictors to enter a model once one of the predictors does. For example, one could group all SNPs within a single gene or within several genes in the same pathway. We will argue that a mixture of group penalties and single predictor penalties tends to work best in practice and constitutes a good alternative to forced collapsing. When we pass to penalized estimation, model selection is emphasized over hypothesis testing. The lasso penalty is one of the best continuous variable selection mechanisms known for high dimensional models. The term 'lasso' stands for the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator. Unfortunately, the lasso is too stringent for rare variants. Shifting some of the lasso action to a group Euclidean penalty makes it easier for weak or low frequency predictors to enter a model. Retention of a partial lasso penalty still discourages inclusion of neutral mutations within disease susceptibility genes. The mixed penalty tactic is apt to be most successful when a disease gene harbors a borderline rare variant with substantial risk. Note that there is no reason to omit common variants in the model selection framework. Hence, a strength of mixed penalties is that they can be applied without choosing between the cd cv and cd rv hypotheses. Once the model selection perspective assumes center stage, multiple testing problems recede. They reappear in replication, but in a more benign form because the number of genes and SNPs of interest drop dramatically. This niche at the intersection between statistics and genetics is undergoing rapid evolution. Our prior experiences applying lasso penalized ordinary regression to microarray data () and lasso penalized logistic regression to g was data () were very encouraging. Since we embarked on the current rare variant research, important work has appeared by a number of authors. The recent technical report of introduces a mixture of group and lasso penalties in ordinary regression. earlier considered logistic regression with a pure group penalty. Both of these papers fall outside the arena of g was. The latter paper also employs different algorithms for optimization. cr oiseau and Cordell (2009) applied logistic regression with a pure group penalty to a North American rheumatoid arthritis consortium dataset. However, they treat each SNP as a separate group, whereas we group SNPs by gene or pathway. To our knowledge, there have been no published papers on generalized linear models with mixed group and lasso penalties, certainly none focused on association mapping and rare variants. The remainder of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our statistical approach and optimization algorithms. It introduces the lasso and group Euclidean penalties, and shows how they can be implemented in linear and logistic regression. The coordinate descent algorithms covered are exceptionally quick and permit optimal tuning of the penalty constant by cross validation. Section 2 also presents an efficient method for simulating samples under the cd rv model. Section 3 applies the mixed penalty method to two simulation examples. Section 4 analyzes a breast cancer dataset that is small enough to allow comparison to traditional model selection. The discussion highlights some strengths and weaknesses of model selection with mixed penalties and suggests potentially helpful extensions.

discussion the results of this article suggest that mixed group and lasso penalties outperform lasso penalties alone, especially when both common and rare variants are present. Our simulated examples clearly demonstrate this fact. Our analysis of the breast cancer data is more ambiguous because we do not know the truth that nature hides. In our view, the focus in genetic epidemiology should be on both SNP and gene discovery. The connections between penalized regression and Bayesian analysis are obvious. One could argue the case for passing to a full Bayesian assault on association testing. This has already been accomplished for marginal analysis of SNPs (Wellcome Trust). Although it is tempting to construct multi predictor Bayesian methods, the computational costs are apt to be high. Penalized estimation and model selection achieve many of the same goals at a fraction of the computational cost mixed penalties help us sort through the confusion of causal genes and neutral variants within them. Even though mixed penalties improve both false positive and false negative rates, we are not suggesting that mixed penalties are a panacea. However, the gradual accumulation of incremental improvements in statistical methods will make a substantial difference. The statistical tools showcased here form part of the next release of the Mendel statistical genetics package. Mendel is available for free in Linux, MacOS and Windows versions at http://www.genetics.ucla.edu/software. It takes 5 s on a standard desktop computer to complete all single SNP analyses and lasso estimation on the family cancer registry data. Our companion paper zhou h. et al., unpublished data) discusses Mendel syntax and output conventions. Geneticists and statisticians wanting to judge for themselves the virtues of mixed penalties are welcome to use Mendel on their own data.
