a stream an r statistical software package for the curation and identification of feature peaks extracted from liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC/MS) metabolomics data, is described. a stream detects isotopic, fragment and adduct patterns by identifying feature pairs that fulfill expected relational patterns. Data reduction by a stream allows compounds to be identified reliably and subsequently linked to metabolite databases. a stream provides researchers with a fast, reliable tool for summarizing meta bolo mic data, notably reducing curation time and increasing consistency of results. Availability: The a stream R package and a study example can be freely accessed at

introduction recent improvements in chromatographic technologies and spectrometry analysis techniques have increased the use of metabolomics for disease diagnosis and in systems biology (). Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC/MS) is a powerful and widely used method for identifying and quantifying metabolites in biological samples. After applying a data pre-processing algorithm, a large set of feature peaks is usually obtained for each sample; each feature is characterized by a particular retention time, mass to charge (m/z) value and an intensity measurement that is correlated with the relative concentration of the particular metabolite. Bioinformatic methods such as x cms () can perform these complex pre-processing steps. However, once the set of feature peaks is obtained, a time consuming and error prone manual curation step is required, particularly when an untargeted meta bolo mic analysis needs to be performed. The main objectives of the curation step are to reduce redundancy between the various chemical forms detected in one compound (e.g. carbon isotopes, adducts, fragments) and to identify characteristics with a higher probability of being true biological features rather than being generated by noise artifacts or potential sample contamination. * To whom correspondence should be addressed a stream has been developed in order to facilitate the curation step of the analytical flow of meta bolo mic experiments. Using robust measures from relational patterns, a stream quickly identifies the set of metabolites that most reliably represents the meta bolo mic profile of each sample page 1340 13391340
