Motivation: Macromolecular crystal structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) are a key source of structural insight into biological processes. These structures, some 30 years old, were constructed with methods of their era. With pdb redo we aim to automatically optimize these structures to better fit their corresponding experimental data, passing the benefits of new methods in crystallography on to a wide base of non crystallogr ap her structure users. Results: We developed new algorithms to allow automatic rebuilding and remodeling of main chain peptide bonds and side chains in crystallographic electron density maps, and incorporated these and further enhancements in the pdb redo procedure. Applying the updated pdb redo to the oldest, but also to some of the newest models in the PDB, corrects existing modeling errors and brings these models to a higher quality, as judged by standard validation methods. Availability and Implementation: The pdb redo database and links to all software are available at http://www.cmbi.ru.nl/pdb_redo.

introduction the Protein Data Bank () makes experimentally derived models of proteins and other macromolecules available to a multidisciplinary community all the way from structural biologists, bioinformatic ians and molecular biologists of all flavors to high school teachers and even the general public. The vast majority of macromolecular models in the PDB are derived by X-ray crystallography. Over decades, a diverse community of crystallogr a phers has optimized these models to fit the experimental data using the software and computers available at their time. Building an initial model in the electron density (ED) map has been automated to a significant extent, with software like arp warp (), Resolve (), Buccaneer () and others, but the final steps in model building and refinement are typically left to the user. Due to lack of attention and time, and also sometimes because of simple ignorance or even incompetence, some models that are submitted in the PDB are of lower quality than what could be expected given the advent of crystallographic methods and the outstanding tools that are available. At the same time, older structure models start to lag behind in structure quality, since the current software was not available at the time of their deposition. To overcome these effects, we built the pdb redo () pipeline which, employing the structure refinement software REFMAC (), can automatically optimize most of the existing structures to derive improved, up-to-date structure models based on the original experimental data that were deposited with the atomic coordinates in the PDB. The first version of the pdb redo pipeline merely optimized coordinates, 'B factors' and other model parameters within the convergence radius of the REFMAC refinement engine, but would not correct modeling errors, which would typically require human intervention. A wealth of validation algorithms [e.g. in pro check (), what check (), mol probity () or Coot (exists, all using in various ways our increasing knowledge of macromolecular structure to extract quality criteria, which enable to pinpoint likely errors in macromolecular models. The pdb report databank (), for example, shows that there exist 70 000 unusual peptide bond conformations and 200 000 unusual side chain rotamer s. All these algorithms suggest that many features of models already in the PDB are likely wrong, but no automated mechanism currently exists to decide if a better modeling of specific areas would be better consistent with the validation criteria, correct these errors where applicable and make the new, corrected models available to the user community. Granted the task of a well trained crystallogr ap her correcting such errors with the help of interactive graphics programs such as Coot and O (), guided by the model validation software, is rather trivial. However, no matter how trivial correcting these errors might be, it is extremely unlikely that the authors of the tens of thousands of models in the PDB keep correcting them as better validation, building and refinement methods are developed. At the same time, providing the same tools to current day practicing crystallogr a phers can help correcting errors prior to deposition.
