Motivation: Image analysis, machine learning and statistical modeling have become well established for the automatic recognition and comparison of the subcellular locations of proteins in microscope images. By using a comprehensive set of features describing static images, major subcellular patterns can be distinguished with near perfect accuracy. We now extend this work to time series images, which contain both spatial and temporal information. The goal is to use temporal features to improve recognition of protein patterns that are not fully distinguishable by their static features alone. Results: We have adopted and designed five sets of features for capturing temporal behavior in 2D time series images, based on object tracking, temporal texture, normal flow, Fourier transforms and autoregression. Classification accuracy on an image collection for 12 fluorescently tagged proteins was increased when temporal features were used in addition to static features. Temporal texture, normal flow and Fourier transform features were most effective at increasing classification accuracy. We therefore extended these three feature sets to 3D time series images, but observed no significant improvement over results for 2D images. The methods for 2D and 3D temporal pattern analysis do not require segmentation of images into single cell regions, and are suitable for automated high throughput microscopy applications. Availability: Images, source code and results will be available upon publication at

introduction subcellular distribution is an important characteristic of a protein because location is intimately related to its function. The most common method used to find a protein's subcellular location is to fluorescently tag the protein, take images by microscopy and then visually analyze the images. Previous work has shown that automatic image analysis can outperform visual examination, providing higher * To whom correspondence should be addressed. sensitivity to subtle differences (). Proteins from major subcellular locations can be differentiated from each other with over 90% accuracy (). However, previous work has been done using static images and the challenge now is to extend these approaches to time series images that better reflect protein behavior in living cells. One objective is to distinguish proteins that have similar static but different temporal patterns. This is of obvious biological importance since many proteins change their location over time in order to carry out their functions. For example, helicases localize to the nucleus during the G 1 phase of the cell cycle to repair endogenous DNA damage, and exit the nucleus during S phase (). For automated analysis of protein subcellular locations, machine learning tools for classification and clustering are well established (). A key component is feature design: good features are numerical representations of the patterns that capture the differences between classes or clusters. The goal for temporal pattern analysis is therefore to design good features from time series images that distinguish different protein movements. Automated analysis of biological time series images has received significant attention in recent years, but most movies are of low resolution at the organ or cell level (), and only a few deal with high resolution microscopy images that record protein movement within a single cell (). We have carefully studied applicable theories and algorithms from the computer vision field and adopted designed five sets of temporal features for application to subcellular pattern analysis for microscopy images. The first, and perhaps most straightforward, approach to characterizing temporal behavior is to track individual objects in a cell and calculate features to describe these tracks. For example, speed, the most common numerical description of movement, requires measuring the total distance the object travels along its way. However, some proteins do not form rigid objects and it is therefore unclear what the targets for tracking should be. The best example is cytoplasmic proteins: even when they show changing fluorescence distributions, there is typically no easily characterized movement of objects. Such 'complex and nonrigid' motion that has statistical regularity was defined as 'temporal texture' (). In that work, the normal flow on each pixel was used
