Motivation: Our recent work introduced a generic method to construct the design space of biochemical systems: a representation of the relationships between system parameters, environmental variables and phenotypic behavior. In design space, the qualitatively distinct phenotypes of a biochemical system can be identified, counted, analyzed and compared. Boundaries in design space indicate a transition between phenotypic behaviors and can be used to measure a systems tolerance to large changes in parameters. Moreover, the relative size and arrangement of such phenotypic regions can suggest or confirm global properties of the system. Results: Our work here demonstrates that the construction and analysis of design space can be automated. We present a formal description of design space and a detailed explanation of its construction. We also extend the notion to include variable kinetic orders. We describe algorithms that automate common steps of design space construction and analysis, introduce new analyses that are made possible by such automation and discuss challenges of implementation and scaling. In the end, we demonstrate the techniques using software we have created. Availability: The Design Space Toolbox for MATLAB is freely available at

introduction we are awash in a sea of genomic data. Since DNA sequencing was first introduced (), we have witnessed the sequencing of the entire human genome () and over one thousand prokaryotic genomes (NCBI). Thanks to next generation sequencing technologies (), expectations have grown and audacious efforts are underway to sequence one thousand individual human genomes, one thousand plant genomes and ten thousand vertebrate genomes (1000 Genomes, 1KP and Genome 10K projects). Despite the flood of genomic data, a major unsolved problem remains: relating the known genotypes to phenotypes. Even at the level of biochemical systems, drawing a connection between genotypic data and system behavior is difficult. First, we must represent the genotypic data with a model, a challenging task in itself. Then, assuming an adequate model exists, its phenotypic responses must be characterized. Because the parameters * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of the model usually vary, as with environmental change or parameter uncertainty, a direct approach would be to empirically sample many parameter combinations and observe the resulting model behavior. However, the size of the task can quickly grow unreasonable. For example, 10 parameters, each sampled at 20 points, imply an astronomical 10 20 trials, and could still miss a point of interest. Furthermore, classification of the behavior is arbitrary. Each trial may exhibit a slightly different phenotype, but without guidance for what constitutes a significant change. To address the issues, our recent work has demonstrated the generic construction of a system design space that represents the relationship between system parameters, environmental variables and phenotypic behavior (). Boundaries in design space are mathematically defined, based on inherent properties of the model, and naturally separate qualitatively distinct phenotypes of the system, allowing them to be counted and compared. The approach has been successfully applied to various biochemical systems of interest (). Nevertheless, the process of constructing design space has largely been explained by example. Here, we present a formal description of design space and its construction. For the first time, we extend the notion to include variable kinetic orders. We then describe algorithms to automatically construct design space and perform common analyses in the context of design space. We also describe new analyses that are made possible by such automation. Throughout the description, we discuss challenges of implementation and scaling to larger systems. In the end, we present an implementation of the algorithms in software, the Design Space Toolbox for MATLAB, and demonstrate the software with abstract and biological examples.
