Motivation: Oscillating signals produced by biological systems have shapes, described by their Fourier spectra, that can potentially reveal the mechanisms that generate them. Extracting this information from measured signals is interesting for the validation of theoretical models, discovery and classification of interaction types, and for optimal experiment design. Results: An automated workflow is described for the analysis of oscillating signals. A software package is developed to match signal shapes to hundreds of a priori viable model structures defined by a class of first order differential equations. The package computes parameter values for each model by exploiting the mode decomposition of oscillating signals and formulating the matching problem in terms of systems of simultaneous polynomial equations. On the basis of the computed parameter values, the software returns a list of models consistent with the data. In validation tests with synthetic datasets, it not only shortlists those model structures used to generate the data but also shows that excellent fits can sometimes be achieved with alternative equations. The listing of all consistent equations is indicative of how further invalidation might be achieved with additional information. When applied to data from a microarray experiment on mice, the procedure finds several candidate model structures to describe interactions related to the circadian rhythm. This shows that experimental data on oscillators is indeed rich in information about gene regulation mechanisms. Availability: The software package is available at

introduction oscillations are observed in biological systems at various levels ranging from molecular through cellular to population (). Such signals offer a means to collect non-redundant data from single systems and thereby present opportunities for studying generating mechanisms. Indeed, it has recently been argued that analysis of oscillatory gene expression profile shapes can distinguish between, i.e. validate or invalidate, candidate theoretical models (). It is not unreasonable, therefore, to hope for gaining sufficient understanding of the processes involved to predict their behavior under novel circumstances, which may be useful for example for synthetic biology. These observations provide motivation for developing techniques and software tools to facilitate and to automate the analysis of such signals. A well known technique for analyzing oscillating signals is Fourier analysis [e.g. (. Two of its main results state that an oscillating signal with base frequency  can be expressed as a sum of sine and cosine modes with frequencies , 2, 3, etc. and that the amplitudes of each of these components can be computed from the signal's time series using an efficient algorithm. In practice, only a small number of these amplitudes need be known to describe a typical signal, and they can be estimated with good accuracy if the signal time series has a large number of points. These properties have previously been applied in several engineering applications, [e.g. (. In the context of bioinformatics, fourier based techniques have been used for the identification of genes showing oscillatory behavior in microarray data () and for their subsequent clustering analysis (). Many theoretical models proposed in the literature to describe biological oscillators contain non-linear equations (). Such equations produce signals with distinctive patterns of harmonic components in their Fourier spectra. Detection of these patterns in experimental data can, therefore, be used to distinguish between different candidate models. On this basis, a particular pattern of mode amplitudes in a dataset on circadian oscillations () was recently argued to be inconsistent with two model structures (). The invalidation was performed despite that both models were able to produce periodic waveforms of the observed base frequency. The aim of this work is to generalize and systematize the model validation and invalidation approach based on the frequency domain. That is, the goal is to develop a method for suggesting mathematical descriptions for time series given a set of observed signals. The method should not only determine whether a proposed model structure is consistent with observations, but also scan a number of alternative models. In general, the problem of ab initio identification of mathematical descriptions for time series is a very difficult one (). Two main reasons for this are as follows: (i) there is a need to specify the type of page 962 961967
