As a common post-translational modification, protein gly-cosylation plays an important role in many biological processes, and it is known to be associated with human diseases. Mass spectrometry ms based gly comic profiling techniques have been developed to measure the abundances of glycans in complex biological samples and applied to the discovery of putative glycan biomarkers. To automate the annotation of gly comic profiles in the liquid chromatography ms (LC–MS) data, we present here a user friendly software tool, multi glycan implemented in C# on Windows systems. We tested multi glycan by using several gly comic profiling datasets acquired using LC–MS under different preparations and show that multi glycan executes fast and generates robust and reliable results. Availability: multi glycan can be freely downloaded at http://darwin. informatics indiana edu multi glycan
introduction glycosylation is one of the most common post-translational modifications of proteins, in which glycans are covalently linked to the side chain of Asn (i.e. n linked glycosylation s or ser thr (i.e. o linked glycosylation s residues. The alteration of protein glycosylation is known to be associated with various biological processes and human diseases. Because of high sensitivity and throughput, mass spectrometry (MS) is routinely used to identify and quantify glycans derived from a complex biological sample. Several studies show that differences in gly comic profiles (in both n linked and o linked glycans) are observed between disease and healthy human individuals (). To automate the application of gly comics to the discovery of putative glycan biomarkers, several software tools have been developed to annotate glycans in a mass spectrum by matching the measured mass to charge values (m/z) of glycans to theoretical values. Cartoonist () can assign glycans from a list of 2800 n glycan candidates (derived from glycan synthetic pathways) to peaks in a matrix assisted laser desorption ionization time of flight maldi tof spectrum based on their masses that are calibrated using linear models. glyco workbench () provides an interface for users to draw glycan structures that can be subsequently used to match the peaks in maldi tof spectra. Both Cartoonist and glyco workbench can incorporate fragment ions from tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) to achieve higher confidence in glycan assignment. Recent advancement in gly comic profiling techniques incorporate electro-spray ionization (ESI), wherein native or derivatized glycans are chromatographic ally separated using hydrophilic interaction chromatography, reversed phase chromatography () or porous graph it ized carbon column before online e sims analyses. Enhanced ESI sensitivity is observed with derivatization, such as per methylation of glycans, which can be efficiently separated by reversed phase chromatography. gly cre soft () is a recently published software tool for annotation of multiple charged glycan ions in liquid chromatography lce sims data. However, gly cre soft is limited to only one adduct type and requires previous data processing using deconvolution software, Decon2Ls (). Here, we present a new tool multi glycan that can annotate a user defined list of glycans observed in maldi tof or lce sims data. For maldi tof multi glycan works by matching experimental isotopic envelopes with the theoretical envelopes of glycans. Using a mixture model, multi glycan can also account for overlapping glycan isotopic distributions. multi glycan esi which we will focus on here, links together envelopes using the mass of a specified adduct, or multiple (including ammonia, sodium, potassium or other defined by the user) adducts simultaneously, leading to more confident glycan annotation. Users can tackle specific glycan targets by providing a selected set of monosaccharide compositions, or conduct a blind search of glycans without specifying the compositions. The program will report abundances of annotated glycans based on the total ion intensities of the glycan carrying various charges and adducts within consecutive MS scans glycans that are generated by using the synthetic pathways of n linked glycans in human (). Alternatively, users can choose to build their own N-or o linked glycan list in a comma separated values (CSV) file. For lce sims data, after retrieving the ions from the input data, multi glycan matches these ions with a set of glycan masses and adducts from a built in or user defined list. In the final report, multi glycan automatically merges the same glycan across consecutive MS scans. multi glycan also provides an intuitive quantitation measure. Each output associated with a glycan is the summation of peaks with and without adducts in the whole isotope envelope in the spectrum, and then summed within an elution window. These results can be directly used in large scale gly comics studies.
