Motivation: cryo electron tomography allows the imaging of macro-molecular complexes in near living conditions. To enhance the nominal resolution of a structure it is necessary to align and average individual sub to mo grams each containing identical complexes. However, if the sample of complexes is heterogeneous, it is necessary to first classify sub to mo grams into groups of identical complexes. This task becomes challenging when to mo grams contain mixtures of unknown complexes extracted from a crowded environment. Two main challenges must be overcome d First, classification of sub to mo grams must be performed without knowledge of template structures. However, most alignment methods are too slow to perform reference free classification of a large number of (e.g. tens of thousands) of sub to mo grams. Second, sub to mo grams extracted from crowded cellular environments, contain often fragments of other structures besides the target complex. However, alignment methods generally assume that each sub tomogr am only contains one complex. Automatic methods are needed to identify the target complexes in a sub tomogr am even when its shape is unknown. Results: In this article, we propose an automatic and systematic method for the isolation and masking of target complexes in sub to mo grams extracted from crowded environments. Moreover, we also propose a fast alignment method using fast rotational matching in real space. Our experiments show that, compared with our previously proposed fast alignment method in reciprocal space, our new method significantly improves the alignment accuracy for highly distorted and especially crowded sub to mo grams. Such improvements are important for achieving successful and unbiased high throughput reference free structural classification of complexes inside whole-cell to mo grams
introduction cryo electron tomography enables the 3D imaging of macromolecular complexes at nanometer scale resolution in near native conditions (). to mo grams of individual cells are essentially 3D representations of the entire proteome providing a snapshot of the distributions of protein complexes (). However, comprehensive detection of individual complexes in cell to mo grams is challenging because of the inherent low signal to noise ratio (SNR), missing data, non isotropic resolution and the fact that individual macromolecules are difficult to recognize in a highly crowded environment (). Most methods for detecting complexes in cell to mo grams rely on a template structure, which serves as a reference in searching for a similar pattern in the tomogr am (e.g.). However, for an unbiased detection and classification of all the different complexes in a cellular tomogr am template free methods are needed (). Such an analysis is challenging and relies on three main steps: First, the locations of potential complexes are detected by using particle picking methods and a subregion surrounding the potential complex is extracted (i.e. the sub tomogr am. Second, the sub tomogr am regions corresponding only to the target complex must be detected, which allows masking out all background regions, which in turn contain noise and in case of crowded sub to mo grams also fragments of surrounding structures. Third, reference free structural classification of the masked sub to mo grams is performed, which is typically based on an iterative process of sub tomogr am alignments, classifications and averaging (e.g.). Finally, the averaging of aligned sub to mo grams of the same complexes will enhance the nominal resolution of the resulting density maps. In this article, we address two main challenges in reference free sub tomogr am classifications. First, we propose an automatic method for adaptive masking of target regions in crowded sub to mo grams without the knowledge of the shape of the complex. Such a method is particularly important for sub to mo grams extracted from crowded environments, such as the cell cytoplasm. In such a case, sub to mo grams will also contain fragmental regions of other complexes owing to the high particle density in the tomogr am. Masking out these regions is of great importance in the subsequent classification process. Unlike automatic masking methods based on voxel weighting () or dimension reduction methods such as Principle Component Analysis (), our method is highly scalable because it is independent of the classification process and does not involve iterative processing of a large number of sub to mo grams. Second, we propose a new method for fast rotational matching of sub to mo grams in real space. The 3D sub tomogr am alignment is computationally the most intensive step in the classification process. Currently, most alignment methods are based on maximizing the overlap similarity of two sub to mo grams through exhaustive search over all rigid transforms (rotation and *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals permission soup com translation) of one sub tomogr am with respect to the other (e.g.). Such methods scan exhaustively through each rotational angle, and find the best corresponding translation using Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) (e.g.). These methods are computationally intensive, which limits their applicability in reference free classifications. To increase alignment accuracy, local search methods have been developed to refine initial alignments (e.g.). To increase computational efficiencies, two approximate alignment methods have been developed, which separate the translational from the rotational sub tomogr am alignments (). These methods are based on similarity scores defined in the reciprocal space (i.e. Fourier space). To separate translational and rotational search, these methods use an approximate score that introduces translational invariance by eliminating the phase information of the complex coefficients in the reciprocal space and use only the magnitude of the Fourier coefficients (). By expressing the structural information in Spherical Harmonics (SH) Expansion, it is possible to formulate the rotational alignment as a fast rotational matching, which simultaneously calculates alignment scores of all rotations using FFT. This procedure significantly increases the alignment speed. For example, our previously published method () achieved between hundreds to thousands fold speed up (depending on sub to mo grams size and rotational angle interval) compared with the standard scanning based alignment method (Forster) by using a translational invariance approximation of a similarity score equivalent to a popular score proposed by (Forster). However, formulating the fast rotational matching in reciprocal space has some limitations. In reciprocal space, the majority of informative signals of a complex is usually contained in a relatively small amount of high magnitude Fourier coefficients (). These coefficients are often occupying relatively few voxels in the reciprocal space located within a small region centered at the origin. Therefore, the SH expansion in the fast rotational matching may be hampered by interpolation errors, which reduces the accuracy in the alignment process. In contrast, in real space, the signal covers a wider area within a sub tomogr am and the SH expansion is expected to be more accurate. It is therefore beneficial to formulate fast rotational matching in real space. In addition, real space fast rotational matching uses the full constrained alignment score instead of a translation invariant approximation when the method is expressed in reciprocal space (). Here, we devise an improved alignment method, which formulates the fast rotational matching of sub to mo grams in real space. To achieve this goal, we first identify a key point in the target complex whose relative location is invariant to rigid transformations and serves as the center of rotation in the fast rotational matching of the two sub to mo grams. A natural choice is the center of mass of a complex. However, detection of the center of mass is not trivial and can not be approximated by the geometrical or mass density center of the sub tomogr am. The reason for this complication is that to mo grams are images of the crowded cellular environment (), and a sub tomogr am contains not necessarily mass density of only one single complex. When a potential complex is detected and its sub tomogr am extracted as a rectangular cube then this sub tomogr am typically contains also fragments of other surrounding structures that occupy parts of the sub tomogr am. Then, the center of mass estimation and sub tomogr am alignment are affected by the existence of the additional mass density in the sub tomogr am. It is necessary to focus only on the regions that contain the actual target complex. Even when a sub tomogr am does not contain any surrounding structures, its mean intensity is often close to background intensity owing to the suppression of low frequency signal owing to the Contrast Transfer Function (CTF) effect, which also makes the estimation of the center of mass of the complex inaccurate. Applying our automatic target complex segmentation method, it is possible to estimate a center of mass based only on the target complex regions in the sub tomogr am (i.e. the constrained center of mass). Once the constrained center of mass is detected, we design a fast sub tomogr am alignment method that uses real space signals and takes into account missing wedge corrections using reciprocal space signals. Moreover, the alignment focuses exclusively on the target complex regions in each sub tomogr am which significantly decreases the influence of background noise and surrounding structures to the alignment process. Our experiments show that our new approach significantly increases the alignment accuracy compared with our previous proposed fast alignment method () for highly distorted sub to mo grams. Most importantly, the new method is highly robust to the influence of surrounding structures inside crowded sub to mo grams
