It has been argued that the missing heritability in common diseases may be in part due to rare variants and gene gene effects. Haplotype analyses provide more power for rare variants and joint analyses across genes can address multi-gene effects. Currently, methods are lacking to perform joint multi-locus association analyses across more than one gene region. Here, we present a haplotype mining gene gene analysis method, which considers multi-locus data for two genes regions simultaneously. This approach extends our single region haplotype mining algorithm, hap constructor to two genes regions. It allows construction of multi-locus SNP sets at both genes and tests joint gene gene effects and interactions between single variants or haplotype combinations. A Monte Carlo framework is used to provide statistical significance assessment of the joint and interaction statistics, thus the method can also be used with related individuals. This tool provides a flexible data mining approach to identifying gene gene effects that otherwise is currently unavailable.

introduction haplotype and gene gene analyses have been suggested as strategies to identify disease loci that single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) approaches may have missed (). Haplotypes have the potential for improved characterization of variation across the locus set (). Yet, it is usually unclear which haplotypes to test and how to model them. Numerous methods consider all haplotypes spanning the entire locus set, with attempts to reduce the degrees of freedom that this approach otherwise confers (). Other techniques have been designed to analyze contiguous and non-contiguous locus subsets (). It has been hypothesized (), and in some cases shown (), that genetic factors at one gene can modify the effects of another gene on disease susceptibility. If such biological interaction exists, the association may only be evident by considering both genes simultaneously. gene gene studies are complicated by issues surrounding what constitutes a gene gene * To whom correspondence should be addressed. interaction. For example, some approaches for testing interactions focus on association between two unlinked loci (), which do not provide any measure of departure from additivity as a statistical interaction is classically defined. Most often haplotype analyses are performed for a single region and gene gene studies concentrate on single SNPs in each region. Methods that consider multi-locus data at more than one gene would be desirable to maximize the ability to detect association evidence. One such method exists to test specific haplotype interactions at unlinked regions (). However, both haplotype and gene gene analyses can result in high dimensionality and how to combine them is therefore a challenging problem. To address these challenges, we have extended our single region haplotype mining approach () to consider multilocus data at two genes and test for association and interaction. We concentrate on a broad set of tests that considers both joint effects and interaction effects. In our gene gene mining process, data considered at each gene can be single or multi-locus. We anticipate that this gene gene mining approach will be most useful for hypothesis generation. However, if required, haplotype testing can also be performed using an empirical correction for multiple testing. case control and case only designs are available, in addition to statistics to test joint and interaction effects. The method is implemented in a Monte Carlo (MC) testing framework and empirical construction wide significance assessment is available for hypothesis testing.
