Motivation: A bacterial polysaccharide utilization locus (PUL) is a set of physically linked genes that orchestrate the breakdown of a specific glycan. PULs are prevalent in the bac teroid etes phy-lum and are key to the digestion of complex carbohydrates, notably by the human gut microbiota. A given bac teroid etes genome can encode dozens of different PULs whose boundaries and precise gene content are difficult to predict. Results: Here, we present a fully automated approach for PUL prediction using genomic context and domain annotation alone. By combining the detection of a pair of marker genes with operon prediction using intergenic distances, and queries to the carbohydrate active enzymes database www ca zy org our predictor achieved above 86% accuracy in two Bacteroides species with extensive experimental PUL characterization. Availability and implementation: PUL predictions in 67 bac teroid etes genomes from the human gut microbiota and two additional species, from the canine oral sphere and from the environment, are presented in our database accessible at wwwcazyorgpuldb index php
introduction glycans are exceptionally diverse molecules whose roles notably include energy storage (starch in plants, glycogen in metazoans and fungi), structure (cellulose, hemicellulose s and pectins of plant cell walls, chitin of arthropod exoskeletons), cell communication and host pathogen interactions. Simple monosaccharides can be assembled via a and b glycosidic bounds into macromolecules of enormous diversity. It has been estimated that 10 12 hexa saccharides could be built using only d hexoses (). Even though not all possible glycan structures exist in nature, the breakdown of such complex molecules requires a plethora of carbohydrate active enzymes (, for which the ca zy database available at www ca zy org offers a continuously updated sequence based family classification (). Organisms that feed on complex glycans have thus evolved large ca zyme repertoires. The human diet includes a large amount of carbohydrates, ranging from simple disaccharides, such as sucrose and lactose, to storage polysaccharides, typically glycogen and starch, and the multitude of complex structures found in the cell walls of cereals, fruits, vegetables and in the mammalian extracellular matrix. However, the human genome only encodes digestive ca zymes that break down sucrose, lactose and the readily digestible component of starch (). All other carbohydrates, often termed dietary fiber, enter the large bowel where a dense microbial community comprising trillions of bacteria, the microbiota, breaks down these structures, as well as host derived (mucosal) glycans the monosaccharides generated are fermented by the microbiota to generate short chain fatty acids, which can provide up to 10% of our daily caloric needs (). With the recent advances in DNA sequencing techniques, many meta genomic studies have focused on the relationship between dietary fiber and the microbiota, to gain insights into how the nutrition of this microbial ecosystem influences the physiology of the human host see for a review. Despite species level variability, it has been found that two bacterial phyla usually represent the majority of the sequenced 16S rRNA derived from the human gut microbiota: the gram positive Firmicutes and the gram negative bac teroid etes (). As gram negative bacteria, bac teroid etes species are characterized by a periplasmic space located between two lipid bilayer cellular membranes. This compartment enabled these bacteria to evolve a specific strategy for carbohydrate breakdown, which are encoded by physically linked and functionally related genes known as polysaccharide utilization loci (PULs). Each PUL encodes co regulated proteins that (i) bind to polysaccharides on the surface of the bacterium, (ii) mediate limited cleavage of the targeted polysaccharides on the outer membrane, (iii) import oligosaccharides generated on the bacterial surface to the periplasm, (iv) catalyze the final sac char ification of the imported oligosaccharides to monosaccharides in the periplasmic space and (v) sense degradation products to regulate PUL expression. Through duplication and neo functionalization bac teroid etes have largely inherited and exchanged PULs via vertical and horizontal transfer. As a consequence, extant bac teroid etes species now exhibit dozens of PULs that encode different enzyme consortia that are tailored to degrade specific glycans. PUL diversity may contribute to the evolutionary success of bac teroid etes by providing a general glycan utilization strategy, optimized to cat abo lize the extensive repertoire of complex carbohydrates presented to the mammalian large bowel. The PUL system is not restricted to mammalian gut bac teroid etes as this phylum is also common in other body sites, other animals as well as in the environment (). The PUL paradigm was initially defined for the starch utilization system (Sus) of the human gut commensal Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron. This PUL consists of eight genes, sus ag and s usr including three genes that encode ca zymes. On the outer cell surface, sus def bind components of starch, while a amylase sus g binds and cleaves the polysaccharide to oligosaccharides, which are se quest rated by SusC into the periplasmic space of the bacterium. Imported oligosaccharides, which are sensed by s usr leading to upregulation of the PUL, are de polymerized to glucose by neo pull a nase SusA and a glucosidase s usb. The functional characterization of each Sus PUL member has been performed independently (). More recently characterized all eight ca zymes of a 12-gene PUL of Bacteroides ovat us dedicated to xyloglucan degradation. Such comprehensive approaches are expected to become more widespread as the understanding of PUL function requires the elucidation of the synergistic interactions between all components of the glycan metabolizing apparatus orchestrated by these loci (). In this context, it is critical that all the proteins encoded by specific PULs are identified and, when appropriate, are correctly assigned to families in the ca zy database, which in turn provides insights into the possible function of these ca zymes. An ideal approach would be the exhaustive screening of gene expression of a target species in response to a large variety of carbohydrate substrates, as done by for b thetaiotaomicron by for bo vat us and by for Bacteroides cellu los i lytic us. However, the large number of bac teroid etes species, the difficulty in accessing all the possible glycans in a purified and highly defined form impure glycans can give highly misleading gene expression data (), precludes the systematic identification of PULs based solely on gene expression. An alternative, and more tractable, strategy is the development of an automatic prediction method to identify these loci from genome sequence alone, thereby avoiding the need for bacterial cultivation and extensive gene expression studies. Here, we present a bioinformatics approach for PUL prediction in bac teroid etes species. We evaluate the performance of our approach against experimentally characterized or predicted PULs, available for two bac teroid etes species of the human gut microbiota. We have applied this predictor to 67 genomes of bac teroid etes species of the human gut to offer a perspective on the general characteristics of PULs and to allow inter genome comparisons. These predictions are made accessible through a web interface, which also includes, for comparison purposes, two other bac teroid etes the environmental Flavobacterium johnson iae () and the canine oral sphere bacterium cap no cytophaga can i mors us ().

conclusion by combining observed PUL structures derived from experimental investigations of two bac teroid etes species, we were able to develop a tool for the automatic prediction of PULs solely based on genome sequence. The percentage of correctly predicted PULs was 87% in b thetaiotaomicron and 91% in bo vat us with only a few false predictions that represent 8% of the true positives. We applied our approach to compute 3745 PUL predictions for 67 bac teroid etes species from the human gut microbiota. Varying numbers of PULs (from 1 to 117) were observed in the different species, with a majority of PULs containing at least two gh encoding genes, and around equal proportions of the two considered regulator types. The results are accessible to the scientific community via the interactive web interface pul db at wwwcazyorgpuldb index php. Because our method is based solely on genomic information, the accuracy of the PUL delineation depends on the quality of the genome assemblies and gene predictions. With appropriately assembled genomes, our method can provide high throughput prediction of classical PULs in species without expression data, or in non cultivated species subject to single cell sequencing. We expect that experimental studies will benefit from these predicted PULs for the investigation of the targeted substrates, and the evolutionary analysis of glycan breakdown in a wide range of species. Iteratively, our automatic pul prediction strategy will be refined by integrating additional knowledge of the PUL paradigm. In addition, a human curation step by the ca zy team is planned to correct any erroneous predictions that would appear following the experimental characterization of a PUL. Finally, future developments will also include bac teroid etes from environmental species to explore the genetic architecture and function of the PULs in these organisms.
