Motivation: The hallmarks of cancer have become highly influential in cancer research. They reduce the complexity of cancer into 10 principles (e.g. resisting cell death and sustaining prolifera-tive signaling) that explain the biological capabilities acquired during the development of human tumors. Since new research depends crucially on existing knowledge, technology for semantic classification of scientific literature according to the hallmarks of cancer could greatly support literature review, knowledge discovery and applications in cancer research. Results: We present the first step toward the development of such technology. We introduce a corpus of 1499 PubMed abstracts annotated according to the scientific evidence they provide for the 10 currently known hallmarks of cancer. We use this corpus to train a system that classifies PubMed literature according to the hallmarks. The system uses supervised machine learning and rich features largely based on biomedical text mining. We report good performance in both intrinsic and extrinsic evaluations, demonstrating both the accuracy of the methodology and its potential in supporting practical cancer research. We discuss how this approach could be developed and applied further in the future. Availability and implementation: The corpus of hallmark annotated PubMed abstracts and the software for classification are available at:

introduction cancer figures among the leading causes of mortality worldwide, with c. 14M new cases and 8.2M cancer related deaths reported in 2012 (). The number of new cases is expected to rise by c. 70% over the next two decades, making it more important than ever to develop effective tools for prevention, detection and treatment of this disease. New research into cancer draws on existing knowledge reported in scientific literature. Relevant literature has grown rapidly in both size and complexity. There are over 3M citations related to 'cancer' in PubMed www ncbi nlm. nih gov pubmed. As many as 151 872 were added over the past year. The high number of potentially relevant articles is a valuable source on to which new research can build but at the same time poses a challenge for scientists. While applications such as Google Scholar scholar googlecom and PubMed Advanced Search (www. ncbi nlm nih gov pubmed advanced can be of help, they fall short in providing all and only the information of interest. To collect relevant articles, keyword based queries are the most common approach for literature retrieval. However, because of the complexity of scientific data in cancer research, the massive number of keywords, their synonyms and combinations exceeds what researchers can realistically handle. For example, a cancer researcher would not find all the literature about 'sustaining proliferative signaling' by searching for 'proliferative signaling'. Rather, the use of hundreds of search terms eg. 'growth factors', 'growth factor receptors' and 'cell cycle') would be required, along with manual filtering of the search results. It is an extremely time consuming task for researchers to read, interpret, select and structure data in an organized manner. Text mining (TM) can provide more targeted methodology for identifying relevant information in scientific literature. Past decades have seen a great development in biomedical TM that has made large scale information extraction (IE) and knowledge discovery from literature possible and yielded impressive results in real life tasks (). To date, the main emphasis of cancer centric TM work has been on tasks such as text classification and IE [e.g. named entity recognition (NER), relation and event extraction] (). Although only some of this work has been evaluated in context of real life cancer research, its enormous promises are evidenced by studies which have revealed new scientific knowledge in text mined information that are not observable by informal data inspection (). In this article, we introduce a TM technique for supporting semantic classification of scientific literature for cancer research. Our classification is based on the hallmarks of cancer. First introduced by Hanahan and Weinberg in an article that has been cited over 20 000 times () (), hallmarks are now widely employed in cancer research. A complex disease, cancer involves genetic and epigenetic alterations that affect a large number of genes, proteins and signaling networks during tumor progression (). Ten characteristics (i.e. hallmarks) of normal cells required for malignant growth have been proposed that provide an organizing principle to simplify the diversity of the biological processes leading to cancer. These include (i) sustaining proliferative signaling, (ii) evading growth suppressors, (iii) enabling replicative immortality, (iv) activating invasion and metastasis, (v) inducing angiogenesis, (vi) resisting cell death, (vii) deregulating cellular energetics, (viii) avoiding immune destruction, (ix) genome instability and mutation and (x) tumor promoting inflammation) (). Rationalizing the complexity in the underlying biological processes, hallmarks can help researchers gain a better understanding of the cellular events leading to cancer. The ability to identify important pathways within one or several hallmarks may also lead to the development of e.g. more effective cancer drugs (). Within the bioinformatics community, hallmarks have inspired harvesting interactions between genes and proteins and relations between environment and cancer from high throughput omics data and scientific literature. The latter work has led into the development of ontology tools [e.g. on co cl () and on co search (for discovery of information related to specific proteins, genes or cancers. Within biomedical TM, some research has been conducted on identifying hallmark based processes (i.e. events) in biomedical literature (). This work has been based on the initial hallmark classification of, and it has focused on a set of events known to be relevant for the cancer genetics domain. Since hallmarks involve complex processes, relevant scientific data are diverse and difficult to harvest using standard search techniques. What is ideally needed is powerful technology, which categorizes and ranks data in literature on the basis of their relevance for hallmarks. Exploration of the resulting semantically structured data could help scientists find relevant information faster, make links between otherwise unconnected articles and create summaries and novel hypotheses from the scientific literature. We present here a TM technique capable of such large scale semantic classification of PubMed literature according to the current 10 hallmarks of cancer (). We first introduce a corpus of 1499 cancer related PubMed abstracts, which we have annotated according to the evidence they provide for hallmarks. We show that the annotations are accurate and that the corpus is representative. We then report experiments where the corpus is used as training and test data for automatic hallmark classification of literature. Our machine learning approach is based on support vector machines (SVM) and employs a rich set of features based on natural language processing (NLP) and existing resources. We present direct and task based evaluation of the classification which demonstrates both the accuracy of the approach and its usefulness in supporting cancer research. We discuss future development and applications of our methodology.

discussion the evaluation reported above demonstrates the accuracy and the practical potential of hallmark based text classification. We report here further analysis to gain insight into the errors made by the classifier and how to improve our approach in the future. We first looked into multi labeling. As listed in, 40% of the abstracts in our annotated corpus are multi labeled displays the proportion of abstracts in the corpus according to the percentage of matched hallmark labels for a given abstract in the classifier output; 63.3% of abstracts have 100% of their labels correctly predicted by the classifier, while 14.8% have no matches (0% of their labels). The high percentage of 100% matched and 0% matched can be attributed to 60% of the abstracts having a single label. We next examined the actual hallmark pair co occurrences (i) in the annotated corpus (where the diagonal line shows the number of occurrences for a given hallmark in the corpus independent of other co occurring hallmarks) and (ii) as predicted by the classifier (). Looking at, hallmarks that most often co occur with each other include 'sustaining proliferative signaling (PS)', 'resisting cell death (CD)' and 'evading growth suppressors (GS)', with 165 abstracts labeled as PS and CD and 120 abstracts labeled as PS and GS. These co occurrences could be explained by the fact that they are all related to cell cycle regulation. For example, in the sentence: 'Moreover, har mine not only induced endothelial cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, but also suppressed endothelial cell migration and tube formation as well as induction of neo vascularity in a mouse corneal micro pocket assay', the phrase: 'cell cycle arrest' is a good indicator of PS and GS, and the word 'apoptosis' is a good indicator of CD. This might be explained by overlapping capabilities (e.g. cell growth) and is likely to be the main reason for the lower classifier performance figures for these three hallmarks in. Looking at, for many hallmarks, the predicted co occurrences are well correlated with those in the annotated corpus. For example, PS and CD are co classified 154 times which is relatively comparable to their 165 co occurrences in the corpus. Similar observations can be made with regard to PS and GS. Our current approach is based on training 10 independent, binary classifiers to predict whether an abstract belongs to a given hallmark category. We could also experiment with models that allow the classifiers to work together, e.g. models based on joint inference () or joint learning (). This type of methodology, which has been successfully applied to similar NLP tasks, is likely to improve performance as it provides the means to capture dependencies and interactions between co occurring hallmarks. The first two case studies provide additional evidence that our system correctly classifies literature over the hallmarks of cancer. The automatic system rapidly generated profiles that would have been difficult and very time consuming to produce manually, which would facilitate overviews of scientific literature. In the future, the approach may be further developed to support the detection of novel patterns and research hypotheses in literature. The last two case studies show that our approach can support information retrieval in comparison with a search string intersection query where the goal is to identify documents for a given topic, as well as articles that relate specifically to certain hallmarks. Our approach generally identifies more documents and has a smaller percentage of false positives than standard keyword based search. This can perhaps be explained by the latent nature of the hallmarks in texts the fact that they are rarely stated explicitly but rather via indirect correlation of terms that describe relevant biological processes, and therefore are not easily found by basic keyword search. Our case studies also demonstrate that experts selecting the wrong set of search terms may result in a high number of false positives and that our classifiers are not susceptible to this problem since they are trained on a large number of features and not on the occurrence of a single search term. Our analysis also suggests that many hallmarks could be subdivided, e.g. according to the established pathways involved in. The distribution of all abstracts according to the percentage of their correctly predicted hallmarks. Hallmark co occurrence distribution in the annotated corpus tumor development. During cancer development, aberrant ly regulated intracellular signaling pathways tend to rearrange networks regulating cancer cells and the networks themselves can be divided into sub circuits which regulate certain capabilities of cancer cells, e.g. viability circuit. We are currently developing such an enriched classification of hallmarks, so as to help cancer researchers navigate more easily to the literature of their specific interest. However, whether the more subtle differences between subcategories of hallmarks can be captured by machine learning is yet to be known, and we plan to investigate that in due time.
