Motivation: Modern lipid omics is largely dependent upon structural ontologies because of the great diversity exhibited in the lipid ome but no automated lipid classification exists to facilitate this partitioning. The size of the putative lipid ome far exceeds the number currently classified, despite a decade of work. Automated classification would benefit ongoing classification efforts by decreasing the time needed and increasing the accuracy of classification while providing classifications for mass spectral identification algorithms. Results: We introduce a tool that automates classification into the LIPID MAPS ontology of known lipids with 95% accuracy and novel lipids with 63% accuracy. The classification is based upon simple chemical characteristics and modern machine learning algorithms. The decision trees produced are intelligible and can be used to clarify implicit assumptions about the current LIPID MAPS classification scheme. These characteristics and decision trees are made available to facilitate alternative implementations. We also discovered many hundreds of lipids that are currently misclassi-fied in the LIPID MAPS database, strongly underscoring the need for automated classification. Availability and implementation: Source code and chemical characteristic lists as SMARTS search strings are available under an open source license at https://www.github.com/princelab/lipid_ classifier.

introduction lipids are a fundamental component of biological systems and perform diverse roles in many cellular pathways. They comprise several thousands of structurally distinct species whose diversity is preserved by dedicated cellular systems (). The lipid composition of a cell is linked to its function; hence lipids are excellent subjects for gaining insight into biological systems and predicting abnormalities (). Indeed, lipids are known to play a major role in diverse diseases afflicting millions, including obesity (), diabetes (), asthma (), hypertension (), arthritis () and cancers (). lipid omics the analysis of the lipid composition, localization and activity of a cellular or physiological system is a burgeoning field of research (). One major difficulty in studying lipids is dealing with their great structural diversity. To help address this challenge, the LIPID MAPS Consortium has created and is refining the LIPID MAPS Lipid Classification System lm lcs which has become the de facto ontology used in lipid research. With this ontology, the lipid research community is able to discuss predicted lipid properties and cellular functions in ways that would otherwise be impossible indeed classification of biomolecules is a prerequisite to any systems biology approach (). This is particularly true in the area of mass spectrometry identification, where theoretical fragmentation spectra (used for matching with each experimental spectrum) are generated by different sets of rules based on a biomolecule's type (protein, metabolite, etc.). The principle holds true for lipids: nearly all existing identification approaches require that a lipid be classified (although sometimes implicitly) to generate a theoretical spectrum from a lipid's structure (). Classification makes possible restricted search space structural comparisons and even fundamental tasks such as representing lipids in a systematic fashion (). The benefits resulting from classification are definite, but these benefits are currently inaccessible to lipids, which have not been previously classified. In an enormous feat, LIPID MAPS has classified over 38 000 lipids over the last 15 years. Still, there are more than 120 000 lipid species () and probably more when considering oxidative modifications, yet undiscovered natural products and unanticipated future synthetic modifications. And, although automatic classification tools have been alluded to (), currently there is no publicly available software for the automated classification of lipids. Although classification can be performed manually, manual classification can not be used in any automated software pipelines, does not scale well and may not always be accurate (). We present an approach to generate a classifier trained on the lm lcs which can be used to classify novel lipids automatically and assist in manual classification workflows.

Discussion
