As sequencing becomes cheaper and more widely available, there is a greater need to quickly and effectively analyze large scale genomic data. While the functionality of a via v1.0, whose implementation was based on an novar was comparable with other annotation web ser-vers, a via v2.0 represents an enhanced web based server that extends genomic annotations to cell specific transcripts and protein level functional annotations. With avi as improved interface, users can better visualize their data, perform comprehensive searches and categorize both coding and non-coding variants. Availability and implementation: a via is freely available through the web at http://avia.abcc. nc if crf gov
introduction exo me sequencing has become the most popular means to evaluate variants in the context of disease. Many clinical panels focus on specific known genes associated with specific diseases or pathways. Accessing all available data about a given mutation can be difficult; from comprehending each database or algorithm to obtaining the computational power to annotate, filter and prioritize lists of variants. To this end, an updated version of the Annotation, Visualization and Impact Analysis web server a via v.2.0) is presented, which incorporates features to help users understand processes within a cell as it relates to disease. a via v2.0 is a unique annotation portal in that it incorporates information from 40 annotation databases and allows for custom annotations. The new features of a via v.2.0 increase its applicability as a hub for genomics, gene, and protein annotations.

conclusion as the number of databases and tools become more abundant, it becomes increasingly time consuming for researchers to leverage all of the available tools and resources. Since very little is known about many genes and their role in the context of disease, our approach is to provide users with the most comprehensive, up-to-date data available. This would promote exploratory analysis and pathway visualization and help highlight biological dysfunction and increase the understanding of cellular processes as they relate to disease. Together, the extra functionalities detailed here help a via v2.0 mature as a hub for genomics, gene and protein annotations by integrating several different types of databases and applications in a fast, comprehensive and significant manner.
