Motivation: The plethora of information that emerges from large scale genome characterization studies has triggered the development of computational frameworks and tools for efficient analysis, interpretation and visualization of genomic data. Functional annotation of gen-omic variations and the ability to visualize the data in the context of whole genome and or multiple genomes has remained a challenging task. We have developed an interactive web based tool, a via (Annotation, Visualization and Impact Analysis), to explore and interpret large sets of genomic variations (single nucleotide variations and insertion deletions and to help guide and summarize genomic experiments. The annotation, summary plots and tables are packaged and can be downloaded by the user from the email link provided. Availability and implementation: http://avia.abcc.ncifcrf.gov.

introduction with the advances of next generation sequencing technology, many laboratories and research groups generate huge amounts of sequencing data and face common challenges of identification, managing and interpretation of genomic variations. Recent surveys () of software tools supporting basic computational steps of variation analysis present a comprehensive picture of the different options for analysis and help to identify the best practices in the field. The variety of the variation analysis pipelines is indicative of how each research group incorporates its own goals and expertise. Some of these pipelines are available as web based applications wan novar (), VARIANT (), interpret ome (), CRAVAT () and snp eff () and can be used by a wider research community to facilitate genomic research. We have developed an interactive web based tool, a via (Annotation, Visualization and Impact Analysis), to explore and interpret large sets of genomic variations generated by high throughput genomic experiments such as exo me capture, whole genome sequencing and targeted re-sequencing projects. a via was implemented by adopting the an novar () framework and circo s () visualization options, with an emphasis on interactive annotation and visualization capabilities and a modularized structure that allows facile extension of the pipelines with new tools and databases as they become available. a via provides a basic functional impact assessment of small indels and single nucleotide variations based on their protein coding capacity and or position associated ability to affect known non-coding regulatory elements and genomic features. Several of avi as workflows allow functional annotation and variant filtering options, tumor normal comparisons and identification of population specific variants. Interactive features of avi as interface permit exploratory analysis that can focus on selected gene sets or whole genome data, with flexible visualization options and resubmission of a previously established workflow for the analysis of new datasets. A comprehensive tutorial posted on the a via site (http://avia.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/apps/site/tutorials) can guide users from a 'Quick-start' example to more rigorous analytical options.
