Gibberellic acids (GAs) are key plant hormones, regulating various aspects of growth and development, which have been at the center of the green revolution. GRAS family proteins, the primary players in GA signaling pathways, remain poorly understood. Using sequence profile searches, structural comparisons and phylogenetic analysis, we establish that the GRAS family first emerged in bacteria and belongs to the Rossmann fold methyltransferase superfamily. All bacterial and a subset of plant GRAS proteins are likely to function as small molecule methylase s. The remaining plant versions have lost one or more AdoMet sam binding residues while preserving their substrate binding residues. We predict that GRAS proteins might either modify or bind small molecules such as GAs or their derivatives.

introduction gibberellic acids (GAs) are a large family of di terpene molecules that are currently known to be synthesized by plants, fungi and bacteria (). In plants they are key hormones that regulate various aspects of development such as seed germination, stem elongation, leaf expansion, flower development and asymmetric cell division in roots. The major plant players implicated in GA response are GRAS family proteins, which include diverse members such as GA insensitive (GAI) (), Repressor of GA1-3 (RGA1/DELLA) (), short root (), Scarecrow (SCR) () and Nodulation Signal Pathway 1 and 2 (NSP1 and NSP2) (). While the GRAS family has been studied intensely for more than a decade as the so called 'green revolution' genes (), there is little clarity about their actual mode of action in GA pathways. Genetic and molecular studies have suggested that at least 23 members of the GRAS family have functions related to GA signaling in Arabidopsis (). Of these, GAI and RGA1 help in establishing repressive chromatin as the default state at promoters of genes that are regulated by GA (). The presence of GA results in recruitment of GAI1 to the GA receptor, a protein of the / hydrolase superfamily, which in turn results in the GAI1 being targeted for proteasomal destruction via ubiquitination by a fbox skp complex (). Thus, ga sensitive genes are de repressed in the presence of a GA signal. In contrast, several GRAS members such as SCL3 appear to act as positive regulators downstream of GA by removing the block imposed by the negative regulators such as GAI and RGA1 (). Consistent with their opposing roles in GA signaling, mutations in certain members of this superfamily result in dwarfing of plants, others result in overgrowth and on rare occasions different alleles of the same gene cause either dwarfing or overgrowth (). Additionally, application of external GA is able to rescue the effects of loss of function mutations in another member of the GRAS family, SCR, in relation to asymmetric cell division during root development to restore normal development of endoderm is middle cortex and cortex cells. GRAS proteins have been localized in the nucleus and are implicated in transcription related functions that are not clearly understood in terms of mechanisms (). In large part this lack of understanding of the GRAS family functions stems from a previously published sequence analysis study that erroneously reported a relationship between them and metazoan STAT proteins (). Other erroneous relationships have also been reported for the GRAS family and include the purported presence of a leucine zipper or a SH2 domain (). These erroneous relationships have contributed to unsupported assumptions that they must be conventional transcription factors. Indeed, there have been several experimental studies that have built on this and attempted to show DNA binding for certain GRAS proteins, although this can not be confirmed for other related proteins (). Thus, a unified mechanism for the action of the GRAS proteins could considerably help in understanding their apparently opposite roles with respect to GA signaling. Through sequence profile searches, structural comparisons and phylogenetic analysis, we establish that the GRAS family belongs to the Rossmann fold methyltransferase superfamily that first emerged in bacteria. We further show that ancestral bacterial GRAS proteins are likely to function as active small molecule methylase s. In contrast, the majority of plant GRAS domains show disruptions of their AdoMet sam binding residues while preserving their substrate binding residues, suggesting that they might function as small molecule binding domains. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.

conclusion in this work, we falsify the previously published relationships that were proposed for the GRAS domain and highlight the presence of bacterial versions. We show that the GRAS domain contains a version of the Rossmann fold methyltransferase, which is likely to bind or modify GA or derivative molecules. The evolutionary history of the GRAS family parallels that of the gid1 like / hydrolases, which also appear to have been horizontally transferred from bacteria to plants close to the origin of land plants. In a more general sense, these findings are in line with our recent studies that suggest that several components of eukaryotic regulatory systems have their ultimate origins in bacterial small molecule metabolism systems which have been repeatedly acquired by eukaryotes at different points in their evolutionary history (). Importantly, our finding provide a new way of looking at this group of plant regulatory proteins that have been often described as being at the heart of the 'Green revolution'.
