Motivation: Upstream open reading frames u orfs are often found in the 5 untranslated regions of eukaryotic messenger RNAs. Some u orfs have been shown to encode functional peptides involved in the translational regulation of the downstream main ORFs. Comparative genomic approaches have been used in genome wide searches for u orfs encoding bioactive peptides, and by comparing u orf sequences between a few selected species or among a small group of species, u orfs with conserved amino acid sequences uc ass have been identified in plants, mammals and insects. Regulatory regions within u orf encoded peptides that are involved in translational control are typically 10–20 amino acids long. Detection of homology between such short regions largely depends on the selection of species for comparison. To maximize the chances of identifying uc ass with short conserved regions, we devised a novel algorithm for homology search among a large number of species and the automatic selection of u orfs conserved in a wide range of species. Results: In this study, we developed the bai ucas blast based algorithm for identification of uc ass method and identified 18 novel Arabidopsis u orfs whose amino acid sequences are conserved across diverse eu dicot species, which include u orfs not found in previous comparative genomic studies due to low sequence conservation among species. Therefore, bai ucas is a powerful method for the identification of uc ass and it is particularly useful for the detection of u orfs with a small number of conserved amino acid residues.

introduction upstream open reading frames u orfs are small ORFs located in the 5 untranslated regions (5-UTRs) of many eukaryotic mRNAs. Recent genome wide analyses revealed that 1050% of eukaryotic genes contain one or more u orfs (; * To whom correspondence should be addressed.). The presence of a u orf can modulate the translational efficiency of the downstream main ORF (mORF) (). Regulatory roles of u orfs have been demonstrated in processes such as the stress response and feedback regulation of biosynthesis (). Although the effects of most u orfs seem to be independent of their amino acid sequence, several u orfs have been shown to affect the translation of the mORF in an amino acid sequence dependent manner (). For example, in the translational feedback regulation of the Neurospora crassa arg-2 gene, which encodes the small subunit of arginine specific carbamoyl phosphate synthetase, the 24 residue nascent peptide encoded by the arg-2 u orf causes ribosome stalling at the stop codon of the u orf in response to arginine, resulting in translational repression of the mORF (). In plants, u orfs with conserved amino acid sequences uc ass have been reported to be involved in the translational regulation of four Arabidopsis thaliana genes (), and the importance of u orf encoded amino acid sequences has been demonstrated in the translational regulation of the SAMDC1 and bZIP11 genes (). Although u orfs present only in a limited number of species can have a regulatory role, it is more likely that evolutionarily conserved u orfs have a regulatory function. Therefore, to identify u orfs with potential regulatory roles, genome wide searches for conserved u orfs have been conducted using comparative genomic approaches in various organisms, including mammals (), yeasts (), plants (), insects () and fungi (). Some of these studies searched for uc ass to identify peptide sequence dependent regulatory u orfs. In plants, Hayden and Jorgensen identified 19 groups of uc ass by comparing u orf sequences between orthologous genes of A. thaliana and rice. Additionally, they found seven groups of uc ass by comparing A. thaliana paralogous genes. These uc ass were referred to as conserved peptide u orfs (CPUs) (). In mammals, u orf sequences were compared

discussion in this study, we developed bai ucas a novel algorithm to identify uc ass and identified 18 novel uc ass in A. thaliana using bai ucas. The main feature of bai ucas is the comparison of u orf sequences with EST sequences from a large number of species and the selection of u orfs conserved across multiple taxonomic categories. This feature increases the chances of identifying uc ass compared with conventional comparative genomic approaches in which the u orf sequences are compared between a few selected species, because bai ucas can identify a UCAS even if it is not conserved in certain species. In fact, conserved u orfs corresponding to some of the uc ass were not found in certain taxonomic groups. For example, although the AT4G12790 UCAS is conserved in dicots and monocots, corresponding conserved u orfs were only found in Solanales among aster ids which is one of two large eu dicot groups. In addition, although the AT1G30270 UCAS is conserved in angiosperms and gymnosperms, no corresponding conserved u orf was found in homologous genes of monocots. This feature of bai ucas is considered particularly advantageous for the identification of conserved u orfs with only a small number of conserved amino acid residues, because detection of the homology of such u orfs is largely dependent on the selection of species for comparison. In fact, we identified uc ass such as AT1G30270 and AT3G55050, with relatively short conserved sequences. In addition, we identified uc ass such as AT2G42880 and AT5G46590, with relatively low sequence conservation in A. thaliana and only a small number of conserved amino acid residues (). In this study, we tested two selection criteria in the fourth step of bai ucas and demonstrated that, by using different selection criteria regarding taxonomic categories, bai ucas can extract u orfs conserved among different ranges of taxonomic groups. Although the selection of u orfs conserved among smaller taxonomic groups [i.e. categories (i) and ii increased the risk of extracting u orfs whose sequences are retained at the nucleotide level, such a selection led us to identify uc ass more comprehensively. The uc ass identified in this study can be classified into the following two groups according to sequence conservation patterns: (I) u orfs with highly conserved c terminal regions and perfectly conserved stop codon positions and (II) u orfs in which the entire sequences or the n terminal and middle regions are conserved. Group I is composed of 10 groups of uc ass (, F, G, H, L, K, M, N, O and P), whereas Group II consists of seven uc ass (, C, D, E, I, J and Q). In contrast to the Group I uc ass the position of the stop codons is not perfectly conserved in the Group II uc ass and differences in several codons of the stop codon positions are observed among species. The features of the Group I uc ass are consistent with those of previously reported sequence dependent regulatory u orfs in some of which the importance of the c terminal amino acid sequence for translational regulation has been experimentally demonstrated (). For two of these regulatory u orfs cryo electron microscopy analyses have shown that the c terminal regions of the u orf encoded nascent peptides interact with the ribosomal exit tunnel when ribosome stalling occurs (). To assess whether the amino acid sequences of the uc ass identified in this study indeed have a regulatory function, experimental validation is necessary. For example, this can be validated by comparing the effects of amino acid sequence alterations and synonymous codon changes of u orfs on translation of the m orfs. In addition to the identification of the 18 uc ass we also demonstrated that bai ucas could extract 43 of the previously identified CPUs. Taking these CPUs into account, bai ucas could extract 61 A. thaliana uc ass which are classified into 38 homology groups. Although bai ucas failed to extract 15 of the 58 CPUs, the reason why five of these were not extracted is that they did not fit one of our conditions that the amino acid sequence and the stop codon position of a u orf must be conserved in the multiple eu dicot categories. Additionally, two of the CPUs were eliminated because of the condition that a u orf must not be within an mORF of a splice variant. In the sixth step, two of the CPUs were not extracted because of low conservation in the n terminal region of the morf encoded protein. In this study, to assess whether A. thaliana u orfs and their tblastn hit ESTs are derived from homologous genes, we directly compared A. thaliana protein sequences and amino acid sequences encoded by putative partial m orfs within the EST sequences. If the protein database expands to include a greater variety of plant species in the future, an alternative approach would be possible, in which full length protein sequences corresponding to partial m orfs within the ESTs are compared with A. thaliana protein sequences. Such an approach may increase the number of conserved u orfs that are identifiable by bai ucas. In conclusion, this study demonstrated that bai ucas is a powerful method for the identification of uc ass that makes it possible to more comprehensively identify conserved u orfs than conventional comparative genomic approaches. Because bai ucas is particularly useful for the identification of conserved u orfs with a small number of conserved amino acid residues, the algorithms used in bai ucas can be applied to the identification of short bioactive peptides besides u orf encoded peptides, such as peptide hormones.).
