Motivation: Post-translational modifications are vital to the function of proteins, but are hard to study, especially since several modified isoforms of a protein may be present simultaneously. Mass spectrometers are a great tool for investigating modified proteins, but the data they provide is often incomplete, ambiguous and difficult to interpret. Combining data from multiple experimental techniques especially bottom up and top down mass spectrometry provides complementary information. When integrated with background knowledge this allows a human expert to interpret what modifications are present and where on a protein they are located. However, the process is arduous and for high throughput applications needs to be automated. Results: This article explores a data integration methodology based on Markov chain Monte Carlo and simulated annealing. Our software, the Protein Inference Engine (the PIE) applies these algorithms using a modular approach, allowing multiple types of data to be considered simultaneously and for new data types to be added as needed. Even for complicated data representing multiple modifications and several isoforms, the PIE generates accurate modification predictions, including location. When applied to experimental data collected on the L7/L12 ribosomal protein the PIE was able to make predictions consistent with manual interpretation for several different L7/L12 isoforms using a combination of bottom up data with experimentally identified intact masses. Availability: Software, demo projects and source can be downloaded from http://pie.giddingslab.org/ Contact: morgan giddings labor g
introduction a cell needs to modify proteins with post-translational adducts for the same reason that an automobile needs gears: without them the operational range is severely limited. If cells relied on fixed proteins, biological reaction times would be on the order of minutes and only a limited set of functional groups would be available to * To whom correspondence should be addressed. build an active protein. Cells use  300 known post-translational modifications (PTMs) () to allow dynamic 'functional shifting', providing for rapid and flexible responses to changing local conditions. These PTMs affect protein functions in many ways, including inducing conformation changes (), modifying protein protein interactions (), and affecting lifespan (). When PTM regulation breaks down, it is much like a broken transmission in a car proteins become non-functional (). Teasing apart where PTMs occur, when they are used, and how they are modulated is of great interest in biological and biomedical research. Studying PTMs requires examining proteins, but without the equivalent of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification techniques, proteomics methods are significantly more difficult and indirect than genomic methods. Mass spectrometry (MS) is the star player in the proteomics field, and with the advent of new instrumentation such as orbit rap mass analyzers () combined with the continued maturation of established techniques such as electrospray ionization (), it is an excellent tool for the investigation of PTMs. Current MS methods measure protein or peptide mass with such accuracy that it is possible to differentiate between two distinct modification states (isoforms) of a protein based only on a mass shift. For example, methylation adds +14.0 Da to the total mass of the protein. If it is possible to measure the intact mass of that protein within 1 Da or less, then this methylation can be readily detected. However, in practice, PTM analysis is not simple. Even putting aside sample preparations issues (), analytical difficulties remain, including: (i) achieving sufficient accuracy to determine PTMs for large proteins; (ii) working with obstinate, insoluble proteins (); (iii) decoding isobaric masses, when multiple combinations of PTMs give the same mass shift (e.g. both one acetylation and three methylation s cause a 42.0 Da mass shift); and (iv) determining precise positioning of PTMs. Several approaches have been devised that address these challenges, including bottom up top down and combined methods. We briefly describe these here; more detailed reviews are available (e.g.). bottom up MS uses a divide and conquer strategy that reduces proteins to constituent, short peptides that are more readily page 845 844852

discussion to investigate the feasibility of m cmcsa based data integration, we sought answers to questions such as: Could we avoid being lost in endless sea of equal mass answers, particularly given only incomplete data? Can the system handle datasets that have dependencies, errors or contradictions? Because McMC and SA are computationally intensive, can we find answers in a reasonable time? Can we develop the approach into a practical and modular program that works well now, but can readily accommodate additional data types in the future? Data integration in proteomics is difficult because data are usually incomplete and the solution space is ambiguous, especially when proteins have multiple modifications. Given the results obtained above, McMC and SA appear to be a useful way to approach this problem. Predictions for simply modified proteins are easy to obtain. For data representing a single protein isoform with only one or two If not there, the second best scoring guess places it on a lysine aligned with a missing peptide (see Supplementary Material for specifics). Here, the effect of the prior data module implementing the AA preference of modifications can be seen, as lysine is the most commonly acetylated modification, as well as the effect of the peptide data model, since peptides provide information that any covered lysine is probably not modified. Unfortunately, no other information is available to distinguish between these three positions, so there are three different equally likely predictions made as the second best guess. Other less likely answers include different positions for the acetyl modification, a tetra-methyl species, and a dimethyl + formyl species. Two rare, bad guesses suggest methyl + acetyl + hydroxyl + myr is to yl along with a cleavage of 1 n term and 2 c term amino acids, but even these rare guesses are in agreement with the intact mass data. They are approximately isobaric to the best guess, but score much lower due to multiple conflicts with peptide, MS/MS and prior data modules.

conclusion the current version of the PIE is only the first step in creating a tool that can integrate MS data and predict PTMs, but already it shows great promise. Using SA allows the PIE to explore the un fathom ably large solution space of all possible modifications of a protein, and find the consistent answers. It is surprisingly robust, capable of decomposing an intact mass into a likely combination of modifications, and with the addition of MS/MS data, even a complex mixture of overlapping and conflicting peptides from several isoforms can be used to obtain specific modifications localizations.
