Motivation: web based workflow systems have gained considerable momentum in sequence oriented bioinformatics. In structural bio-informatics, however, such systems are still relatively rare; while commercial stand-alone workflow applications are common in the pharmaceutical industry, academic researchers often still rely on command line scripting to glue individual tools together. Results: In this work, we address the problem of building a web based system for workflows in structural bioinformatics. For the underlying molecular modelling engine, we opted for the BALL framework because of its extensive and well tested functionality in the field of structural bioinformatics. The large number of molecular data structures and algorithms implemented in BALL allows for elegant and sophisticated development of new approaches in the field. We hence connected the versatile BALL library and its visualization and editing front end ball view with the Galaxy workflow framework. The result, which we call ball a xy enables the user to simply and intuitively create sophisticated pipelines for applications in structure based computational biology, integrated into a standard tool for molecular modelling. Availability and implementation: ball a xy consists of three parts: some minor modifications to the Galaxy system, a collection of tools and an integration into the BALL framework and the ball view application for molecular modelling. Modifications to Galaxy will be submitted to the Galaxy project, and the BALL and ball view integrations will be integrated in the next major BALL release. After acceptance of the modifications into the Galaxy project, we will publish all ball a xy tools via the Galaxy toolshed. In the meantime, all three components are available from http://www.ball-project.org/ballaxy. Also, docker images for ball a xy are available at https://registry.hub.docker.

introduction workflow systems have become increasingly popular in many areas of computational biology. In addition to the creation and sharing of powerful workflows that can be seen as a modern alternative to shell based scripting, such systems foster the reproducibility of results in computational science and offer benefits with respect to the deployment and configuration of software packages. This latter part is particularly clear for systems that offer a web based user interface that can be accessed using a standard web browser with its commonly accepted set of interface metaphors. Installation and maintenance of such systems can be centralized, although parameter settings and special combinations of tools into processing chains can be stored per user and manipulated through the browser. One important example is the popular Galaxy system (). In structural bioinformatics, the number of workflow enabled portals appears to be smaller than in computational genomics, for instance. One prominent example of such a system for computational chemistry is the mos grid (Molecular Simulation Grid) portal (), which offers predefined workflows for quantum calculations, molecular dynamics and docking, based on UNICORE and wsp grade g use technologies (). Although many typical use cases are well covered, it remains difficult for novice users to modify or extend the existing mos grid workflow. One reason for the relative scarcity of easily extensible structure based workflow systems is the difficulty of supporting much of the functionality of an inherently 3D discipline through the confines of a typically 2D workspace of a workflow toolkit, such as the one offered by the browser connected to a Galaxy instance. While sequence based tools mainly require text based visualization and 2D plots, sophisticated molecular structure manipulation demands versatile tools that interact with a 3D molecular system. Hence, a web based workflow system for structural computational biology would, at present, require constant switching between tools: from the commonly locally installed molecular modelling application to the web service, and vice versa. Recurrent data transfer causes repeated up and downloads, which are cumbersome and can be time consuming. In this work, we present an approach to combine web based workflow management with a classical powerful molecular modelling interface. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com
