bam view is an interactive Java application for visualizing the large amounts of data stored for sequence reads which are aligned against a reference genome sequence. It supports the BAM (Binary alignment map format. It can be used in a number of contexts including SNP calling and structural annotation. bam view has also been integrated into Artemis so that the reads can be viewed in the context of the nucleotide sequence and genomic features. Availability: bam view and Artemis are freely available (under a GPL licence) for download (for MacOSX, UNIX and Windows) at: http://bamview.sourceforge.net/

introduction second generation sequencing produces large volumes of short read sequence data. In common applications of the technology, such as resequencing or transcriptome sequencing, reads are mapped against a reference genome. In many cases, bases in a reference are covered with alignment depths varying by orders of magnitude and therefore present a challenge for visualization. SAM (Sequence alignment map and BAM (Binary alignment map formats are emerging as a standard representation for read alignments. It is therefore important to have visualization software for this format. BAM files contain the same information as SAM. As BAM format is compressed it provides an efficient means to store the data and enables fast retrieval of regions and so this format has been adopted here. sam tools () includes a very simple text alignment viewer using the GNU ncurses library giving a detailed view at the nucleotide resolution level. look seq () is a perl cgi application used to display, in a web browser, reads mapped against a reference. It can read the data either directly from BAM files or from a relational database to display reads and plots paired read positions against their inferred size. Alignment tools can be used to produce BAM format files. For instance, s saha () now supports SAM format () and Maq output () can be converted to samba m using sam tools. bam view can be used as a stand-alone Java application or displayed in Artemis (,) in conjunction with the reference sequence and annotation. * To whom correspondence should be addressed b artemis is a freely available genome browser and annotation tool. bam view in Artemis provides the annotator with an extra level of information that can inform them about structural annotation. bam view not only displays the look seq type of view (plotting against the paired reads inferred size) but also has other types of views that are described below. It does not require a web server and reads the data from an indexed BAM file.
