Although de novo assembly graphs contain assembled contigs (nodes), the connections between those contigs (edges) are difficult for users to access. Bandage (a Bioinformatics Application for Navigating De novo Assembly Graphs Easily) is a tool for visualizing assembly graphs with connections. Users can zoom in to specific areas of the graph and interact with it by moving nodes, adding labels, changing colors and extracting sequences. BLAST searches can be performed within the Bandage graphical user interface and the hits are displayed as highlights in the graph. By displaying connections between contigs, Bandage presents new possibilities for analyzing de novo assemblies that are not possible through investigation of contigs alone. Availability and implementation: Source code and binaries are freely available at https://github. com rr wick bandage. Bandage is implemented in Cþþ and supported on Linux, OS X and Windows. A full feature list and screenshots are available at http://rrwick.github.io/Bandage. Contact:

introduction current de novo genome assemblers use graphs, most typically a de Bruijn graph. An ideal graph would contain one distinct path for each underlying sequence, but complexities such as repeated sequences usually prevent this. Instead, assembly graphs contain branching structures, where one node may lead into multiple others. The longest sequences in the graph that can be determined unambiguously are saved as contigs, which are often the final result of de novo assembly (). However, an assembly graph contains more information because it also has connections between sequences. It can therefore be advantageous to work with assembly graphs instead of contigs. Bandage facilitates interaction with de Bruijn graphs made by de novo assemblers such as Velvet (), SPAdes () and Trinity (). It displays the graph in a graphical user interface (GUI) using a simple, comprehensible representation. The program is interactive, allowing users to zoom, pan and manually move nodes to focus on areas of interest.

conclusion by visualizing both nodes and edges, Bandage gives users easy, fast access to the connection information contained in assembly graphs. This is particularly useful when the assembly contains many short contigs as is often the case when assembling short reads and empowers users to examine and assess their assembly graphs in greater detail than when viewing contigs alone.
