Mononucleotide repeats mn rs are abundant in eukaryotic genomes and exhibit a high degree of length variability due to insertion and deletion events. However, the relationship between these repeats and mutation rates in surrounding sequences has not been systematically investigated. We have analyzed the frequency of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at positions close to and within mn rs in the human genome. Overall, we find a 2 to 4-fold increase in the SNP frequency at positions immediately adjacent to the boundaries of mn rs relative to that at more distant bases. This relationship exhibits a strong asymmetry between 3 and 5 ends of repeat tracts and is dependent upon the repeat motif, length and orientation of surrounding repeats. Our analysis suggests that the incorporation or exclusion of bases adjacent to the boundary of the repeat through substitutions, in which these nucleotides mutate towards or away from the base present within the repeat, respectively, may be another mechanism by which mn rs expand and contract in the human genome.

introduction tandem repeats of short sequence motifs are common in the genomes of eukaryotic species (estimated that microsatellites with repeat motifs between 1 and 6 bp account for at least 3% of the human genome. Mononucleotide repeats mn rs repeats of a single base, are the most abundant class of microsatellites in the human genome (). However, this class of repeats has been frequently overlooked in studies of microsatellite evolution and variation. One of the most salient characteristics of short tandem repeats is the high variability in length exhibited by these sequences within populations due to the insertion or deletion of repeat units, most likely reflecting difficulties in replication and repair (). This variability has led to the widespread use of these sequences as polymorphic markers (). For mn rs this type of instability is an important characteristic of some tumors, in particular, mismatch repair deficient cancers of the gut and ovary (). Alterations in the rate and spectrum of point mutations have also been reported in sequences surrounding microsatellites. Several studies considering small numbers of di and trinucleotide repeats have found evidence of an increase in the mutation rate near the repeat (). However, there is a lack of consensus regarding this trend with other publications proposing that the frequency of mutations decreases toward microsatellites (), or remains stable (). In this article, we have investigated the relationship between mn rs and mutation rates in the human genome. Using data from the dbSNP database, we took the number of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the region surrounding mn rs as a measure of the propensity of a particular site to be affected by mutations. We hypothesized that any variation in the frequency of SNPs is likely to be strongest at positions closest to the repeat, as homo polymeric regions are more likely to be subject to errors during replication which could result in the mis incorporation of a base at adjacent positions (). The boundaries of mn rs can also be more easily and clearly defined than those of repeats with longer motifs since sources of ambiguity such as adjacent truncated motifs do not occur. Therefore, by using mn rs we were able to focus in particular on positions immediately adjacent to the repeat in order to discern, with greater accuracy, the extent to which any change in mutation rate is specific to the bases at the boundary between repetitive and unique sequence.
