Motivation: RNA folding is a complicated kinetic process. The minimum free energy structure provides only a static view of the most stable conformational state of the system. It is insufficient to give detailed insights into the dynamic behavior of RNAs. A sufficiently sophisticated analysis of the folding free energy landscape, however, can provide the relevant information. Results: We introduce the Basin Hopping Graph (BHG) as a novel coarse grained model of folding landscapes. Each vertex of the BHG is a local minimum, which represents the corresponding basin in the landscape. Its edges connect basins when the direct transitions between them are energetically favorable. Edge weights end code the corresponding saddle heights and thus measure the difficulties of these favorable transitions. b hgs can be approximated accurately and efficiently for RNA molecules well beyond the length range accessible to enumerative algorithms. Availability and implementation: The algorithms described here are implemented in Cþþ as standalone programs. Its source code and supplemental material can be freely downloaded from http://www.tbi.

introduction much of RNA's functional complexity is rooted not only in the details of its intricate 3D structure but also in its ability to adaptively acquire distinct conformations on its own or in response to specific cellular signals including the recognition of proteins, nucleic acids, metal ions, metabolites, vitamins, changes in temperature and even RNA biosynthesis itself. These conformational transitions are spatially and temporally tuned to achieve a variety of functions. The most obvious examples are ribo switches () and RNA thermometers (). The intricate structures of RNAs are typically modeled to a reasonable approximation in terms of secondary structures (). This is because the thermal melting data (thermodynamic free energy model) of secondary structures have been interpreted by a nearest neighbor model () and form the basis for widely used structure prediction algorithms that predict secondary structure with reasonable accuracy (). In particular, the partition function of the Boltzmann ensemble of secondary structures for a given RNA sequence can be computed in cubic time using a well known dynamic programming approach (). Thus, a stochastic backtracking algorithm () can be used to produce representative structures and to generate boltzmann weighted samples to assess complex structural features like base pair probabilities. The inclusion of pseudo knots and other tertiary contacts into RNA structure prediction remains time consuming and technically challenging (). In its most general form, the problem is np complete (). Furthermore, free energy models for pseudo knots are based on sparse experimental data and hence are crude at best. Nevertheless, secondary structures with pseudo knots can be important for the dynamics of folding (). Owing to the journal's length restrictions, we focus on the Boltzmann ensemble of secondary structures in the main text and relegate the extension to structures with pseudo knots to Supplementary Material Part H. For brevity, we will speak of the 'energy' instead of 'free energy' of a secondary structure. The kinetic process of RNA folding can be described as a dynamic process in the molecule's energy landscape (). The energy landscape is a particular network whose vertices represent all the possible structures and whose edges connect structures that can be inter converted by elementary rearrangements, typically the opening or closing of individual base pairs. For each structure as a vertex in the landscape, its energy is evaluated based on the thermodynamic energy model () for characterizing its dynamical state. *To whom correspondence should be addressed. Thus, the transition rates between adjacent secondary structures can be estimated by the Metropolis rule (). In this setting, the RNA folding process is viewed as a Markov chain, and the transition rates between two adjacent structures in the landscape are related with their energy differences. Typically, different structural transitions are of different rates as observed by, which is consistent with the thermodynamic picture: the equilibrium distribution of this Markov process coincides with the Boltzmann distribution of the secondary structures. The number of different secondary structures, however, makes it impossible to enumerate the entire landscape except for short sequences, so that one has to resort to coarse grained approximations. The barrier tree of the landscape,, encodes the local minima and their connecting energy barriers. The idea to elucidate the basin structure of a landscape by means of a barrier tree has been developed independently in different contexts, including potential energy surfaces for protein folding (), spin glasses () and molecular clusters (). The exact computation of barrier trees in general requires the enumeration of the landscape. For RNA secondary structures, a modification of the backtracking step in the dynamic programming folding algorithm can be used to enumerate only the lowest lying fraction of the landscapes (). However, even within this favorable setting, barrier trees are accessible only for RNA molecules with up to $100 nt. An alternative to the exact construction of barrier trees is the use of heuristic approaches. For example adopted computational techniques for motion planning in robotics to obtain an approximated representation of the RNA folding landscape. A different type of coarse graining can be obtained by conditioning the folding algorithms on the distances from two reference points, resulting in a kind of 2D 'projection' of the landscape (). Heuristic methods are also used to (locally) navigate the optimal folding path between two given structures. For instance, find path () is a fast algorithm that produces excellent quality direct pathways based on the morgan higgs algorithm (). Furthermore, rna tabu path () and its related web server, rna pathfinder used a tabu semi greedy heuristic to determine nearly optimal folding pathways between two given secondary structures developed a heuristic algorithm PathFinder based on their 2D 'projection' of the landscape. The difficult part in computing coarse graining models such as barrier trees is to determine the saddle points. The local minima, on the other hand, can be obtained efficiently by means of modified dynamic programming algorithms. This was demonstrated first by with respect to the nuss i nov jacobson energy model and later extended to the Turner energy model by Lorenz and clot e (2011). Their extension of mccaskill s algorithm can be used to generate boltzmann weighted samples of local minima. Empirically, they find that the number of local optima is roughly the square root of the number of secondary structures, i.e. it grows exponentially with chain length. Exact combinatorial results have been derived by f us y and clot e (2012) for the base stacking energy model, which is a variant of the nuss i nov model, where each stacked base pair contributes 1 toward the energy of the structure. Hence, for large RNAs, one still has to resort to sampling. boltzmann weighted samples are not necessarily the most efficient way to explore the basin structure of the landscape because they are strongly biased toward usually small fraction of low energy structures. Sahoo and Albrecht (2012) thus considered a stochastic sampling method to obtain local minima within a prescribed distance of a reference structure: random structures are iteratively improved by gradient (down-hill) walks until local minima are reached. Such samples can be used to estimate the total number of local minima following the arguments of Garnier and kalle l (2000). The remainder of this contribution is organized as follows. In Sections 2.1 and 2.2, we first introduce the basic concepts and existing results in the field of RNA folding landscapes. In Section 2.3, we introduce the 'Basin Hopping Graph' (BHG) as a new coarse graining model of the energy landscape and then describe algorithms for its construction. In Section 3, we present and discuss our experimental results. Section 4 summarizes the article and suggests directions for future work.
