Live Cell Array (LCA) technology allows the acquisition of high resolution time course profiles of bacterial gene expression by the systematic assessment of fluorescence in living cells carrying either transcriptional or translational fluorescent protein fusion. However, the direct estimation of promoter activities by time dependent derivation of the fluorescence datasets generates high levels of noise. Here, we present bas yli ca a user friendly open source interface and database dedicated to the automatic storage and standardized treatment of LCA data. Data quality reports are generated automatically. Growth rates and promoter activities are calculated by tunable discrete Kalman filters that can be set to incorporate data from biological replicates, significantly reducing the impact of noise measurement in activity estimations. Availability: The bas yli ca software and the related documentation are available at

introduction despite recent developments in transcript omic technologies, direct RNA sequencing and tiling array approaches require tedious sample preparations. For this reason, they are not suitable for transcriptional high resolution time courses that require one microarray and or messenger RNA (mRNA) extraction per time point. An alternative approach is to measure the transcriptional activity of promoters using reporter genes. In the last decade, fluorescent proteins, in particular Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP), have become widely used (). Major advances have come from the characterization and development of fast folding GFP monomer variants (). Fluorescent reporters allow the high temporal resolution measurement of promoter activity in living cells (). Live Cell Array (LCA) technology involves the generation of a large collection of strains that harbour transcriptional fusions with fast folding fluorescent proteins and monitoring their accumulation under the appropriate conditions. The promoter activity profiles of up to 96 individual 'gfp' fusions in cells grown in microtiter plates can be obtained at once at very high resolution by determining the difference in fluorescence levels at successive time points. Promoter activation or deactivation can be easily detected by an increase or a decrease in the fluorescence accumulation rate. This high throughput technology was proven to be an accurate and versatile method of determining gene expression in 2000 Escherichia coli promoters subjected to a glucose lactose di aux ic shift experiment (). We previously described the development of the plasmid pba sys bio ii constructed within the framework of the eu funded ba sys bio systems biology program (http://www. ba sys bio eu for use in the LCA analysis of gene expression in Bacillus subtilis (). However, no tools have been developed to facilitate the analysis of the quickly growing bacterial LCA datasets. Here, we report the development of a user friendly software, bas yli ca for the storage and analysis of LCA data. bas yli ca is dedicated to wet lab biologists for the analysis of large amounts of LCA data in microplates. As a proof of concept, we produced and analysed LCA data for several promoters using B. subtilis as a model bacterium and the newly developed pba sys bio ii plasmid (see Supplementary Information).
