Motivation: Identification of genomic regions of interest in chips eq data, commonly referred to as peak calling aims to find the locations of transcription factor binding sites, modified histones or nucleosomes. The bayes peak algorithm was developed to model the data structure using Bayesian statistical techniques and was shown to be a reliable method, but did not have a full genome implementation. Results: In this note we present bayes peak an R package for genome wide peak calling that provides a flexible implementation of the bayes peak algorithm and is compatible with downstream BioConductor packages. The bayes peak package introduces a new method for summarizing posterior probability output, along with methods for handling overfitting and support for parallel processing. We briefly compare the package with other common peak callers. Availability: Available as part of BioConductor version 2.6. URL:

introduction chromatin ImmunoPrecipitation (ChIP) experiments produce short DNA fragments, preferentially selected to identify the locations of protein binding sites, histone modifications or nucleosome positions. In the chips eq protocol, as described in, the 5-end of one strand of each fragment is sequenced, obtaining a 'read', and then aligned to a reference genome. These aligned reads form peaks localized regions of high read density along the genome. Determining the locations and magnitudes of these peaks is an active area of research, and a number of tools exist for the so called peak calling using a variety of methodologies. The algorithm described intakes a Bayesian approach to modelling aligned reads from chips eq data. Many peak callers model read counts with the Poisson distribution, and thus do not allow for the over dispersion seen in practice. bayes peak addresses this issue by using the negative binomial distribution page 714 713714. A schematic representation of a hypothetical peak region, with bins labelled by genomic order. Supposing that each bin has an associated PP value above a threshold (by default 0.5), we would merge these six bins into a peak from 1100 to 1450, with an associated PP value as calculated in Section 2.1. are collected. Where two adjacent jobs call the exact same bin, the maximal PP value is used this is a rare occurrence under default settings.

discussion bayes peak provides a Bayesian analysis, with advantages including allowance for over dispersion in read counts and a competitive genome wide specificity and sensitivity. By anticipating peak structure, bayes peak does not call peaks based on sheer numbers of reads without appropriate read formation. Careful selection of job regions may improve the analysis. For example, we can use prior knowledge to partition jobs in a manner that avoids analysing the centromeres and telomeres, which usually contain no reads. This will prevent unnecessary computation, and may also improve results in the surrounding regions. There is scope for adapting the bayes peak approach to other forms of peak calling. For example, some histone mark data consist of regions of enrichment containing many peaks and, in brdu seq data, peaks are much broader than those in transcription factor data.
