Motivation: Deep sequencing of clinical samples is now an established tool for the detection of infectious pathogens, with direct medical applications. The large amount of data generated produces an opportunity to detect species even at very low levels, provided that computational tools can effectively profile the relevant meta genomic communities. Data interpretation is complicated by the fact that short sequencing reads can match multiple organisms and by the lack of completeness of existing databases, in particular for viral pathogens. Here we present meta mix a Bayesian mixture model framework for resolving complex meta genomic mixtures. We show that the use of parallel Monte Carlo Markov chains for the exploration of the species space enables the identification of the set of species most likely to contribute to the mixture. Results: We demonstrate the greater accuracy of meta mix compared with relevant methods, particularly for profiling complex communities consisting of several related species. We designed meta mix specifically for the analysis of deep transcriptome sequencing datasets, with a focus on viral pathogen detection; however, the principles are generally applicable to all types of meta genomic mixtures. Availability and implementation: meta mix is implemented as a user friendly R package, freely available on CRAN: http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/metaMix Contact: sofia.morfopoulou.

introduction meta genomics can be defined as the study of DNA sequences from environmental or community samples, while meta transcript omics is the analysis of RNA sequence data from such samples. The scope of meta genomics meta transcript omics is broad and includes the analysis of a diverse set of samples such as gut microbio me (), environmental () or clinical () samples. Among these applications, the discovery of viral pathogens is clearly relevant for clinical practice (). The traditional process of characterizing a virus through potentially difficult and time consuming culture techniques is being revolutionized by advances in high throughput sequencing. Potential benefits of sequence driven methodologies include a more rapid turnaround time (), combined with a largely unbiased approach in species detection, including the opportunity for unexpected discoveries. The analysis of shotgun sequencing data from meta genomic mixtures raises complex computational challenges. Part of the difficulty stems from the read length limitation of existing deep dna sequencing technologies, an issue compounded by the extensive level of homology across viral and bacterial species. Another complication is the divergence of the microbial DNA sequences from the publicly available references. As a consequence, the assignment of a sequencing read to a database organism is often unclear. Last, the number of reads originating from a disease causing pathogen can be low (). The pathogen contribution to the mixture depends on the biological context, the timing of sample extraction V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.
