Motivation: In biomedical research a growing number of platforms and technologies are used to measure diverse but related information, and the task of clustering a set of objects based on multiple sources of data arises in several applications. Most current approaches to multi-source clustering either independently determine a separate clustering for each data source or determine a single joint clustering for all data sources. There is a need for more flexible approaches that simultaneously model the dependence and the heterogeneity of the data sources. Results: We propose an integrative statistical model that permits a separate clustering of the objects for each data source. These separate clusterings adhere loosely to an overall consensus clustering, and hence they are not independent. We describe a computationally scal-able Bayesian framework for simultaneous estimation of both the consensus clustering and the source specific clusterings. We demonstrate that this flexible approach is more robust than joint clustering of all data sources, and is more powerful than clustering each data source independently. We present an application to subtype identification of breast cancer tumor samples using publicly available data from The Cancer Genome Atlas. Availability: R code with instructions and examples is available at

INTRODUCTION

discussion this work was motivated by the perceived need for a general, flexible and computationally scalable approach to clustering multisource biomedical data. We propose BCC, which models both an overall clustering and a clustering specific to each data source. We view BCC as a form of consensus clustering, with advantages over traditional methods in terms of modeling uncertainty and the ability to borrow information across sources. The BCC model assumes a simple and general dependence between data sources. When an overall clustering is not sought, or when such a clustering does not make sense as an assumption, a more general model of cluster dependence (such as MDI) may be more appropriate. Furthermore, a context specific approach may be necessary when more is known about the underlying dependence of the data. For example, Nguyen and Gelfand (2011) exploit functional covariance models for time course data to determine overall and time specific clusters. Our implementation of BCC assumes the data are normally distributed with cluster specific mean and variance parameters. It is straightforward to extend this approach to more complex clustering models. In particular, models that assume clusters exist on a sparse feature set () or allow for more general covariance structure () are growing in popularity. While we focus on multisource biomedical data, the applications of BCC are potentially widespread. In addition to multisource data, BCC may be used to compare clusterings from different statistical models for a single homogeneous dataset note Summary data includes 5 year survival probabilities using the kaplan meier estimator, with 95% confidence interval; mean fraction of the genome altered (FGA) using threshold T  0:5, with 95% confidence interval; receptor status for estrogen (ER), prog ester on (PR) and human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2); and copy number status for amplification at sites 8p11 and 8q23 and deletion at sites 5q13 and 16q23.
