Motivation: Disease state prediction from biomarker profiling studies is an important problem because more accurate classification models will potentially lead to the discovery of better, more discriminative markers. Data mining methods are routinely applied to such analyses of biomedical datasets generated from high throughput omic technologies applied to clinical samples from tissues or bodily fluids. Past work has demonstrated that rule models can be successfully applied to this problem, since they can produce understandable models that facilitate review of discriminative biomarkers by biomedical scientists. While many rule based methods produce rules that make predictions under uncertainty, they typically do not quantify the uncertainty in the validity of the rule itself. This article describes an approach that uses a Bayesian score to evaluate rule models. Results: We have combined the expressiveness of rules with the mathematical rigor of Bayesian networks (BNs) to develop and evaluate a Bayesian rule learning (BRL) system. This system utilizes a novel variant of the K2 algorithm for building BNs from the training data to provide probabilistic scores for if antecedent then consequent rules using heuristic best first search. We then apply rule based inference to evaluate the learned models during 10-fold cross validation performed two times. The BRL system is evaluated on 24 published omic datasets, and on average it performs on par or better than other readily available rule learning methods. Moreover, BRL produces models that contain on average 70% fewer variables, which means that the biomarker panels for disease prediction contain fewer markers for further verification and validation by bench scientists.

introduction high throughput 'omic' data that measure biomarkers in bodily fluids or tissues are accumulating at a rapid pace, and such data have the potential for the discovery of biomarkers for early diagnosis, monitoring and treatment of diseases such as cancer. Data mining methods that learn models from high dimensional data are being increasingly used for the multivariate analyses of such biomedical datasets. Together with statistical univariate analyses, some insights into predictive biomarkers of disease states can be gleaned, though * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the results may not generalize due to the small sizes of available training data, typically less than 200 samples. Due to the large imbalance between variable dimensionality (several thousand) and the sample size (a few hundred), there is a need for data mining methods that can discover significant and robust biomarkers from high dimensional data. Rule learning is a useful data mining technique for the discovery of biomarkers from high dimensional biomedical data. We have previously developed and applied rule learning methods to analyze 'omic' data successfully (). Rules have several advantages, including that they are easy for humans to interpret, represent knowledge modularly and can be applied using tractable inference procedures. In this article, we develop and evaluate a novel probabilistic method for learning rules called the Bayesian rule learning (BRL) algorithm. This algorithm learns a particular form of a Bayesian network (BN) from data that optimizes a Bayesian score, and then translates the BN into a set of probabilistic rules. The use of the Bayesian approach allows prior knowledge (as probabilities) to be incorporated into the learning process in a mathematically coherent fashion. The possibility of over-fitting is attenuated by the incorporation of prior probabilities into the rule discovery process. BRL outputs the predictive rule model with the best Bayesian score, which represents the probability that the model is valid given the data. The remainder of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the BRL algorithm and briefly reviews other popular rule learning methods. Section 3 describes the datasets and the experimental setup to evaluate BRL. Section 4 presents the results of applying BRL to 24 published 'omic' datasets, and compares its performance with multiple rule learning algorithms. Section 5 presents our conclusions.

discussion there are several advantages that accrue from BRL that are not available in current rule learning algorithms. BRL allows for the evaluation of the entire rule set using a Bayesian score. Using such a score results in a whole model evaluation instead of a per rule (or local) evaluation, which often occurs with Ripper and C4.5. The Bayesian score allows us to capture the uncertainty about the validity of a rule set. BRL currently uses this score only for model selection. However, the score could be utilized in extensions to BRL for performing inference when rule sets can be weighted by this score, which would be a form of Bayesian model averaging. A Bayesian approach allows incorporation of both structure and parameter priors. When training data are scarce, such as in 'omic' data analysis, it is useful to incorporate prior knowledge to improve the accuracy of learned models. For example, a scientist could define all of the variable relationships using either a knowledge base or restrict the possible variables with which to build the model (). In a Bayesian approach, a scientist might provide prior knowledge specifying conditional in dependencies among variables, constraining or even fully specifying the network structure of the BN. In addition to providing such structure priors, the scientist might also specify knowledge in the form of prior distributions over the parameter values of the model. Structure priors are arguably the most useful, however, because in our experience scientists are often more confident about structural relationships than about parameter values. We have not explored informative priors in this article. We used uniform parameter and uniform structure priors. Exploring informative structure priors in this domain is a direction for future research. There are different ways of representing non informativeness of parameters using the Dirichlet priors. We have explored one approach, it would be useful to explore other approaches as well. An interesting open problem is to investigate methods for BRL rule ordering and pruning within a set of rules. For example, pruning a set of BRL rules based on using local structure and scores () would be worth investigating. A major advantage of BRL is that it can find models with fewer variables (markers) that have equivalent or greater classification performance than those obtained from several other rule learning methods. Fewer variables mean fewer markers for biological verification and subsequent validation. This is important in biomarker discovery and validation studies that have to be designed carefully and under tight resource constraints.
