Motivation Biochemical reactions in cells are made of several types of biological circuits. In current systems biology, making differential equation (DE) models simula table in silico has been an appealing, general approach to uncover a complex world of biochemical reaction dynamics. Despite of a need for simulation aided studies, our research field has yet provided no clear answers: how to specify kinetic values in models that are difficult to measure from experimental theoretical analyses on biochemical kinetics. Results: We present a novel non-parametric Bayesian approach to this problem. The key idea lies in the development of a Dirichlet process (DP) prior distribution, called Bayesian experts, which reflects substantive knowledge on reaction mechanisms inherent in given models and experimentally observable kinetic evidences to the subsequent parameter search. The DP prior identifies significant local regions of unknown parameter space before proceeding to the posterior analyses. This article reports that a Bayesian expert inducing stochastic search can effectively explore unknown parameters of in silico transcription circuits such that solutions of DEs reproduce transcript omic time course profiles. Availability: A sample source code is available at the URL

introduction cells can sense many different environmental signals, and respond to extraneous stimuli by switching activation inactivation of specific molecules, such as transcription factors, via several types of biological circuits. Kinetic biochemical modelling of such reaction circuits (often called biochemical reaction networks) using DEs realizes experiments in silico to enhance our understanding of the complex dynamic systems (). It enables us to test a plausibility of current knowledge and hypothetical models on biological circuits and to create new further models when inconsistencies arise in simulation, domain knowledge and experimentally observed quantitative data (). Despite of a growing need for simulation aided studies on bio pathways some fundamental issues prevent us from drawing their full potentials. One critical issue addressed here is related to uncertainty in specified kinetic parameters of models: in many cases, we have no clear answer on how to specify kinetic values and initial conditions on simulations because biochemical reaction kinetics differ depending on a cell by cell * To whom correspondence should be addressed. basis and intra extracellular environments such as temperatures, presence absence of biochemical components in specific tissues. With the aim to explore kinetic parameters in in silico biological circuits that make solutions of DEs fit experimental data, a range of advanced technologies have appeared in the last several years of computational systems biology, involving genetic algorithm (GA;), sequential Monte Carlo (SMC;), mcmc driven parameter search methods () and also gradient descent algorithms (). Quantitative data, such as transcript omic profiles and protein expression values, are usually measured over times. In general, a Bayesian statistical method involves all the preceding methods as a unified framework: any estimation tasks are treated as evaluations of posterior distributions in which prior distributions embodying our prior belief on reaction kinetics are adapted to experimental data using likelihood functions. As demonstrated later, however, the practical relevance of the existing approaches remains far below what practical analyses require. Our view on this is that such a low performance depends highly on the lack of effective biochemical kinetic priors. This article presents a previously unexplored class of prior distributions, called Bayesian experts on biochemical reaction kinetics. The key notion of our approach can be found in the construction of Dirichlet process (DP) prior distribution () whose base measure G 0 () is modelled by a mixture of m Gibbs distributions with mixing rates  i (i = 1, ..., m), temperature T  0 and partition functions Z i. The m potential functions  i () defined on unknown parameters  reflect substantive knowledge on reaction kinetics for a given model such that regions of interest in the parameter space are prescribed prior to a posterior analysis. In many applications, we are able to collect several kinetic evidences on such local regions by observing temporal patterns of experimental data. For instance, rates of increasing and or decreasing to which DE solutions have to match can be guessed in advance by observing steepness of relevant local patterns of given time course data. Alternatively, maximum and minimum levels of gene expression data provide a helpful clue to determinations of steady state levels to which a transcription circuit model reaches in equilibrium. The gibbs ian mixture distribution, enabling Bayesian expert system in kinetic explorations, aggregates such m constraint conditions on the kinetic parameters that are induced automatically in light of experimental data and reaction speeds inherent in given models.

application an example in kinetic search of a circadian clock transcriptional circuit illustrates the practical relevance of the Bayesian expert systems, and we make a comparison to the non expert approach using a conventional SMC (). Our model considered here is an extended version of the gene regulatory model developed in where among several studies used in evaluating relevance of various parameter search algorithms (). The original model describes a reaction circuit of 12 endogenous variables, involving five mRNAs, five translated proteins and two protein complexes, which constitute an interlock of several types of positive and negative feedback loops. We here added, to the previous model, seven clock related variables and their regulatory mechanisms, reflecting in part the recent discoveries (). The newly constructed DE i593 model its mathematical form is available in the Supplementary material contains 116 unknown parameters in total, consisting of 97 kinetic parameters and 19 initial conditions on x (0). The search methods were applied to time course gene expression indices from GeneChip mouse genome micro r rays (). Of the 19 variables, temporal expression changes of the seven mRNAs were measured along 12 time points equally spaced on 44 h (http://sirius.cdb.riken.jp/MouseSCN/ mouse scnccg020707html. A much detailed information on the specified prior distributions values for , temperature and conventional Gaussian priors used in combinations is accessible from the Supplementary web site, as well as the lisd as code that can reproduce the subsequent numerical analyses with a default configuration file displays simulation trajectories of the 19 endogenous variables, where the identified kinetic parameters and initial state variables were defined as the  i exhibiting the best fit in terms of P(Y | i ). The DEs were solved using the Euler discretization with 700 time steps equally spaced on the entire time interval. CPU time required for the execution of lisd as was 40 min (Intel Core2 Quad processor, 2.66 GHz) for the particles of size k = 510 5. Compared with the very poor results of the non expert SMC method using only the conventional Gaussian priors, the lisd as could capture the underlying circadian rhythm inherent in the observed data with much better degree of fitness. Note that the applied search procedure is almost the same as a random search. The particles were all drawn from G 0 , and then the best fit value was merely chosen. Therefore, the good performance arose from only the added Bayesian expert system. To the best of our knowledge, the methods being able to estimate such many parameters have never appeared in the related research field, while so far, our previous study () and the GA of could draw reasonably good performances in analyses of a transcription model and in silico signal transduction pathway, containing, 44 and 84 unknown parameters respectively.
