A non-parametric Bayesian factor model is proposed for joint analysis of multi-platform genomics data. The approach is based on factor izing the latent space (feature space) into a shared component and a data specific component with the dimensionality of these components (spaces) inferred via a beta bernoulli process. The proposed approach is demonstrated by jointly analyzing gene expression/ copy number variations and gene expression methylation data for ovarian cancer patients, showing that the proposed model can potentially uncover key drivers related to cancer. Availability and implementation: The source code for this model is written in MATLAB and has been made publicly available at https:// sites googlecom site joint genomics
introduction gene expression profiles are commonly used in the study of cancer biology (). However, human cancers are highly heterogeneous because of the combined effects of genetic instabilities and epigenetic alterations. Hence, it is notoriously difficult to gain understanding of the mechanisms of cancer progression from gene expression data alone. The root cause of cancer is due to several possible events. For instance, copy number variations cn vs under selective pressure change the dosage of key tumor inducing and tumor suppressing genes, which thereby affect mRNA transcription and neoplastic cell proliferation (). On the other hand, the mechanism of epigenetic alteration is more complicated. DNA methylation patterns are globally disrupted in tumor cells, characterized by both global hypo methylation and region specific hypermethylation at CpG islands (). There is a recent explosion in the availability of cancer datasets of multiple heterogeneous data types from sources like the Cancer Genome Atlas project (TCGA; cancer genome nih gov. It is hoped that the availability of simultaneous measurements of multiple biological features such as gene expression, DNA copy number change, DNA methylation and others will offer an increased insight into the root causes of cancer phenotypes. These insights have the potential to distinguish genetic epigenetic changes that promote cancer progression (driver mutation) from those with no selective advantage (passenger mutation) (), which could revolutionize the treatment of cancer by suggesting novel targets for cancer therapeutics and by developing biomarkers to identify the patients who will most benefit from such therapeutics (). There are numerous publications on combining different types of DNA modifications with gene expression. Perhaps the most natural of these are the brute force methods such as expression quantitative trait loci e qtl analysis (). Joint analysis of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data with gene expression data by expression quantitative trait loci involves testing every gene single nucleotide polymorphism pair for association with a t test and then correcting for multiple hypothesis testing. cname t () defines a similar approach to relate gene expression changes with either copy number change or DNA methylation. Other approaches use well established models for each of the individual data types, and then combine the results into a statistic that addresses the problem of interest. The approach of is an example of this for the identification of genes that are regulated by DNA methylation. A shortcoming of all of these approaches is that they do not reduce the dimension of the individual datasets through an accounting of their respective correlation structures. In, the authors used kernel functions predefined for each data type, and mapped to the same vector space, which allows joint analysis in the common range of the kernels. Copy number and expression in cancer () has been proposed as a Bayesian scoring function that measures how well a set of candidate gene regulators correlates with the expression of gene modules (groups of genes that are correlated with each other). Another approach () uses a sparse factor (SF) model to describe the correlation structure of the gene expression data but uses post hoc hypothesis tests to draw connections between gene expression and copy number data. These approaches allow for effective dimension reduction but do not use correlation structure in one dataset to inform the estimations of correlation in the others. Zheng and extended this approach by the development of a two sf model using aneuploidy and gene expression as an example. It assumes some factors are shared by two data where *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors. z The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the last two authors should be regarded as Joint Last Authors. there is a statistical correlation, and some factors are unique to each dataset. The common factors are further linked by sampling gene expression factors centered on the CNV factors with some Gaussian noise, thereby preventing the difference in data size from overwhelming the information available on associations between them. However, it is difficult to check model assumptions in high dimension by specifying different numbers of factors. In the recent years, model based integration approach has become popular for analyzing TCGA data proposed a three node Bayesian graphical model to represent the dependence structure of cn vs methylation and gene expression. This method identifies the mRNA regulatory event separately for each candidate gene but does not consider gene modules as a whole. i bag () specifies gene methylation effect and other regulatory module controlled effect and then uses a two component regression model to identify gene biomarkers that are associated with clinical outcomes (e.g. survival time, tumor stage and other demographic variables). In this way, it assumes linear and independent effects between gene expression and methylation as well as patient survival and gene expression. However, given the complexity of epigenetic regulatory mechanisms, more flexible Bayesian non-parametric models may be preferred. For jointly modeling heterogeneous data, Bayesian and semi bayesian latent variable models have been developed to factorize the latent space into a shared and data specific part (). However, in these approaches the number of latent factors is chosen a priori. Alternatively, one may consider multiple factor models, each with a different number of factors, and perform model selection based on information criteria such as Akaike information criterion (AIC) () or Bayesian information criterion (BIC) (). However, as stated earlier, it is often challenging to check modeling assumptions in high dimensions. Hence, a non-parametric or semiparametric model is desirable. In this article, we propose a non-parametric Bayesian factor analysis approach for integrating heterogeneous genomics data, with the number of factors inferred from the available data. Our proposed approach is based on factoring the latent space into shared and data specific components, using a beta bernoulli process (;) to infer the dimension of these latent spaces. We demonstrate the proposed approach on the joint analysis of genomics data for ovarian cancer patients, including three different data types: gene expression, CNV and DNA methylation data. We demonstrate that the joint analysis of gene expression cnv and gene expression dna methylation levels can potentially identify genomic and epi genomic regulators influencing cancer pathophysiology outcomes. The remainder of the article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the proposed hierarchical Bayesian model for jointly analyzing heterogeneous genomics data. In Section 3, we discuss priors on factor loadings and factor scores. Section 4 outlines an MCMC inference algorithm. Section 5 provides experimental results for the proposed model on the analysis of multiple genomics data. Finally, we provide concluding remarks in Section 6.

conclusion a non-parametric joint factor analysis method is introduced for modeling multiple disparate but statistically related data. The proposed approach was demonstrated on the joint analysis of heterogeneous genomics data related to ovarian cancer. The proposed model uncovered key drivers of cancer, some of which have been previously reported in literature as well as some new genomic causes of cancer (potentially). In this article, we have focused on integrating multiple heterogeneous but statistically correlated datasets, via a joint factor analysis approach, where the latent space is factorized into a shared component and data specific components. The joint factor analysis model allows enough flexibility to incorporate additional information into the model. For example, we could alternatively use a Gaussian process prior or a sticky hmm prior () on the loadings of cn vs to incorporate spacial dependence structure in the model. Hence, more refined regional peaks may be recovered. We plan to investigate such priors in our future work. Besides, we assume data specific linear mappings between the latent space and the observation space. However, the assumption that the data lie in or close to a low dimensional subspace is restrictive and a better assumption is that the data lie on a manifold. In the future, we wish to relax the linearity assumption of our joint factor model via a mixture of factor analyzers approach.. Loadings from factor 12 with strong correlations between methylation (A) and gene expression (B) at many different loci. The gray denotes odd numbered chromosomes and the black denotes even numbered chromosomes. Diamond markers denote loci where the absolute value of loadings are 40.5, and gene expressions are significantly associated with adjacent methylation sites, detailed in supplementary gene identified in the loadings peak from factor 5 of the joint factor model fit to DNA methylation (A) and gene expression (B) data. The gray denotes odd numbered chromosomes and the black denotes even numbered chromosomes
