Motivation: Network marker selection on genome scale networks plays an important role in the understanding of biological mechanisms and disease pathologies. Recently, a Bayesian nonparamet-ric mixture model has been developed and successfully applied for selecting genes and gene sub-networks. Hence, extending this method to a unified approach for network based feature selection on general large scale networks and creating an easy to use software package is on demand. Results: We extended the method and developed an R package, the Bayesian network feature finder (BANFF), providing a package of posterior inference, model comparison and graphical illustration of model fitting. The model was extended to a more general form, and a parallel computing algorithm for the Markov chain Monte carlo based posterior inference and an expectation maximization based algorithm for posterior approximation were added. Based on simulation studies , we demonstrate the use of BANFF on analyzing gene expression on a protein protein interaction network.

introduction feature selection over genome scale networks has become a very important research question motivated by the needs of incorporating existing knowledge in the analysis of big data in a broad range of biological and biomedical applications. Commonly used genome scale networks include protein protein interaction (PPI) network (), transcriptional regulatory network (), signal transduction network (), meta bolo mic network (), etc. Jointly analyzing high throughput data with the networks can yield robust network markers, i.e. sub-networks critically related to the disease and deeper insights into disease mechanisms. A Bayesian nonparametric mixture model () has been successfully applied to select genes and gene sub-networks under the large scale simultaneous hypothesis testing framework (). This method provides a general framework and can be applied to a wide range of biomedical applications. However, its model is relatively restrictive and the computation is not efficient enough on large scale networks containing tens of thousands of nodes. For improving and implementing this method, we develop an computational time compared to the R code provided by (). BANFF is very user friendly with a well written document for illustration of the software. It provides a full package of R functions for data preprocessing, efficient Bayesian model fitting with diagnostics, quantitatively and graphically summarizing posterior samples of parameters, along with tutorial examples for the analysis of simulated data and real data.

conclusion in summary, BANFF implements a Bayesian nonparametric approach for large scale multiple hypothesis testing over the network, motivated by the need for network marker selection on genome scale networks. Compared to the existing software, BANFF achieves a high feature selection accuracy, controls the false discovery rate very well, and is computationally efficient for large scale network. It has a broad range of applications in biomedical sciences.
