Motivation: It has recently become possible to build reliable de novo models of proteins if a multiple sequence alignment (MSA) of at least 1000 homologous sequences can be built. Methods of global statistical network analysis can explain the observed correlations between columns in the MSA by a small set of directly coupled pairs of columns. Strong couplings are indicative of residue residue contacts, and from the predicted contacts a structure can be computed. Here, we exploit the structural regularity of paired b strands that leads to characteristic patterns in the noisy matrices of couplings. The b–b contacts should be detected more reliably than single contacts, reducing the required number of sequences in the MSAs. Results: bb contacts predicts b–b contacts by detecting these characteristic patterns in the 2D map of coupling scores using two hidden Markov models (HMMs), one for parallel and one for antiparal-lel contacts. b bulges are modelled as in del states. In contrast to existing methods, bb contacts uses predicted instead of true secondary structure. On a standard set of 916 test proteins, 34% of which have MSAs with  1000 sequences, bb contacts achieves 50% precision for contacting b–b residue pairs at 50% recall using predicted secondary structure and 64% precision at 64% recall using true secondary structure, while existing tools achieve around 45% precision at 45% recall using true secondary structure. Availability and implementation: bb contacts is open source software (GNU Affero GPL v3) available at https://bitbucket.org/soedinglab/bbcontacts Contact

introduction methods for protein structure prediction can be classified into template based and de novo methods. The first group model the structure for a query protein based on a sequence alignment with a homologous template protein of known structure. This class of methods is by far the most widely used for its speed and reliability. Many protein families lack a 3D template, and therefore much effort has been invested into developing methods for de novo protein structure prediction. The most successful de novo prediction methods, such as ROSETTA (), are based on complex, knowledge based scoring functions and structural fragment assembly. Even though in roughly a quarter of the cases the top methods can produce models with the correct fold (), their practical usefulness is severely limited by the difficulty of predicting which models are correct. An alternative de novo approach relies on the observation that correlated mutations between pairs of multiple sequence alignment (MSA) columns could predict physical contacts between residues (). Furthermore, it was realized that only few correctly predicted residue residue contacts ($10% of the number of residues) are sufficient to predict the correct protein fold (V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals permission soup. However, it was only recently that statistical methods were applied to the MSAs that could distinguish direct couplings between MSA columns from mere transitive correlations (). This allowed for the first time the reliable de novo prediction of structures for proteins with many homologs (). In the past few years, these methods have been further improved by applying different approaches of direct coupling analysis (). Yet, obtaining reliable structural models requires large numbers of homologous sequences, still severely limiting the scope of these methods. Here, our goal is to increase the reliability of contact predictions by detecting patterns in the matrix of predicted couplings corresponding to interactions between secondary structure elements. We focus on the case of bb contacts because of their strongly constrained spatial arrangement. b sheets are composed of regularly arranged pairs of interacting b strands. The interaction between two extended b strands is defined on the basis of regular patterns of hydrogen bonds, connecting residues in two different strands in either a parallel or an antiparallel fashion (). The prediction of contacts between b residues has applications in protein design (), in the study of folding characteristics () and in de novo protein structure prediction (). According to a recent study, while direct contact predictions have similar average precision for mainly a and mainly b proteins, the structural models obtained using these predictions as restraints are more accurate for mainly a proteins (). A variety of methods have been developed for the prediction of bb contacts. An early method used statistical potentials for pairs of interacting b strand residues ().were the first to predict bb contacts with neural networks. Cheng and introduced the important idea of exploiting the topology of b sheets in their beta pro method by filtering out the solutions incompatible with the specific geometry of b sheets. In MLN and MLN-2S, Lippi and Frasconi (2009) used Markov logic networks to incorporate structure based constraints directly into the learning process. Two recent methods use correlated mutation signatures to predict b sheets. CMM () integrates these with a b topology model. b cov () processes predicted coupling scores with integer programming to enforce topological constraints. CMM, b cov and MLN-2S display the best bb contact prediction performances so far (). Finally, some methods aiming to predict all protein contacts (not only bb contacts) also use topological information, in particular related to b sheet organization: cmap pro (), phy cmap (), PconsC2 (). PconsC2 reports the highest contact prediction accuracies to date. It takes direct coupling scores from the pc on sc meta predictor as input and trains random forests on local 11  11 windows in the coupling matrix to predict the contact state of the central cell. Existing bb contact prediction methods have used known instead of predicted secondary structure. It is unclear, however, how they would perform in practice when substituting true with predicted secondary structure. Here, we describe a method to predict bb contacts that, even though it makes use of predicted instead of true secondary structure, achieves better performance than previous methods. We designed two hidden Markov models (HMMs) for parallel and antiparallel bb contacts that integrate signals from the predicted couplings and the predicted secondary structure.

conclusion bb contacts is the first predictor of bb contacts that does not require known secondary structure from DSSP and that therefore can be used in practice. Having to use predicted instead of true secondary structure makes bb contact prediction a much more challenging problem. In particular, we can no longer rely on the knowledge of the exact b strand positions. Analyzing the contributions of different terms in bb contacts shows that the choices that have a strong impact on psi pred based predictions do not affect dssp based results to the same extent (compare for instance with Supplementary). This underlines the importance of specifically designing methods to deal with predicted secondary structure. bb contacts also illustrates that HMMs are an attractive approach for statistical modelling of variable length bb contacts based on the detection of specific patterns in the coupling matrices. The use of a local Viterbi algorithm enables the detection of local patterns. In addition, bb contacts can pick up signal in a number of alignments with relatively few homologous sequences. Another interesting feature is that it provides a score for each predicted b strand contact, which expresses the reliability of the prediction. Finally, bb contacts is provided as free and open source software with few dependencies. The runtimes on a single core of an Intel Xeon E52650 processor are typically under one minute for proteins up to 500 residues, and up to a few minutes when PSM gets triggered (Supplementary). This makes bb contacts easily applicable to a variety of situations, including predictions for large proteins and large scale b contact prediction. Another possible application for bb contacts would be the case of inter-chain b sheets provided enough homologs are available for both chains. bb contacts could be further improved by including additional information in the HMM emissions, such as amino acid profiles and solvent accessibility predictions, or other input sources complementing ccmp red for instance psi cov (). Further planned work involves incorporating input from predictors such as cmap pro () or phy cmap () which do not use direct coupling analysis and perform better than ccmp red or PconsC2 when few homologous sequences are available (). One advantage of our approach in this respect is that it can handle new sources of input in a probabilistic manner, through the addition of new terms in the emission probabilities. Also, one could improve the use of topological constraints by calculating posterior probabilities for all b strand topologies that can be built from the list of best Viterbi paths. Finally, the approach developed in this study can be generalized to detect patterns of other interacting secondary structure elements such as helix helix and helix strand interactions and thus points to a promising avenue for future research.
