Motivation: Prediction of protein residue contacts, even at the coarse grain level, can help in finding solutions to the protein structure prediction problem. Unlike a helices that are locally stabilized, b sheets result from pairwise hydrogen bonding of two or more disjoint regions of the protein backbone. The problem of predicting contacts among b strands in proteins has been addressed by several supervised computational approaches. Recently, prediction of residue contacts based on correlated mutations has been greatly improved and finally allows the prediction of 3D structures of the proteins. Results: In this article, we describe b cov which is the first unsuper-vised method to predict the b sheet topology starting from the protein sequence and its secondary structure. b cov takes advantage of the sparse inverse covariance estimation to define b strand partner scores. Then an optimization based on integer programming is carried out to predict the b sheet connectivity. When tested on the prediction of b strand pairing, b cov scores with average values of Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC) and F1 equal to 0.56 and 0.61, respectively , on a non-redundant dataset of 916 protein chains known with atomic resolution. Our approach well compares with the state of the art methods trained so far for this specific task. Availability and implementation: The method is freely available under General Public License at http://biocomp.unibo.it/savojard/ bcov/bcov-1.0.tar.gz. The new dataset beta sheet 1452 can be down-loaded at

introduction b sheets are widespread motifs of local structure found in over 80% of the protein structures presently available in the Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/home/home.do). b sheets are generated by the pairing of two or more b strands held together by characteristic patterns of hydrogen bonds running in a parallel or antiparallel fashion (). Prediction of the b sheet topology from the covalent structure of the protein is useful for predicting its tertiary structure, for designing new proteins and for understanding folding pathways. The first method to predict b strand pairing was based on a statistical potential approach (). Prediction of b residue contacts was addressed by using an elaborate method based on neural networks. Steward and Thornton (2002) adopted an information theoretic approach to predict b residue pairwise interaction. Cheng and pioneered the idea of predicting b sheet topologies when the protein secondary structure is known and set the standard for this type of task. Their method beta pro is based on a 2d recursive neural network () trained to predict pairing probabilities of inter strand b residue pairs. Then an algorithm finds alignments between all pairs of b strands and a weighted graph matching algorithm predicts the b sheet topologies introduced an alternative approach based on Markov logic networks mln s. This approach exploits b sheet structural constraints defined as logical formulas whose weights can be learned from examples (). The prediction of b residue contacts was also applied to the problem of predicting the 3D structure of proteins using integer linear optimization ().combined beta pro outputs with a Bayesian approach and tested it on subsets of the Cheng and Baldi benchmark set (). Recently, a new method to predict protein b sheet contacts using a maximum entropy based correlated mutation measure (CMM) has been introduced and compared with the state of the art methods (). CMM achieves performances similar to beta pro and mln s (). In recent years, the main breakthroughs in residue contact prediction have concerned improvements in the exploitation of information from multiple sequence alignments (MSA). The degree of coevolution of pair of sites in the MSA can be used to infer the closeness of the corresponding residues in the 3D structure. Different approaches have been described to elucidate the coevolution of columns in an MSA, including standard correlated mutations analysis () and information theoretic measures (). Recently some powerful methods based on the extraction of direct coupling information from MSAs have been introduced to predict protein contacts both in globular () and membrane proteins (). These new contact prediction methods are not only improved with respect the previous approaches but also finally allow to predict 3D structures of the proteins (for review see de in this article, we describe b cov a new approach for b sheet topology prediction based on sparse inverse covariance estimation and integer programming. b cov is the first unsupervised method that addresses this task. We use the residue contact propensities provided by the Protein Sparse Inverse COVariance psi cov method () to compute the scores of the b strand pairings. We selected psi cov because it is freely available and does not require proprietary software to run. Then we apply an integer programming optimization to assign the b sheet topology. b cov well compares with the performances of the state of the art algorithms beta pro CMMs and mln s that integrate supervised techniques to address the same task.
