Biodiversity studies are relying increasingly on primary biodiversity records (PBRs) for modelling and analysis. Because biodiversity data are frequently harvested ie. not collected by the researcher for that particular study, but obtained from data aggregators such as the Global Biodiversity Information facility researchers need to be aware of strengths and weaknesses of their data before they venture into further analysis. R is becoming a lingua franca of data exploration and analysis. Here, we describe an R package, bdv is which facilitates efforts to understand the gaps and strengths of PBR data with quick and useful visualization functions. Availability and Implementation: The full code of the R package bdv is along with instructions on how to install and use it, is available via CRAN – The Comprehensive R Archive Network

introduction biodiversity studies are in focus because of the perceived risk of mass extinction due to rapid environmental changes in recent years. Most studies rely on primary biodiversity records (PBR) (), which are basically records of species' occurrences in a specific place at a specific time. PBR are being used to study almost every aspect of human endeavor, from basic needs like food and shelter to science and politics (). Publications citing data served by the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF), currently the most preeminent network of PBR institutions, cover diverse areas like invasive alien species, climate change effects, conservation, human health, agriculture, etc. (http://www.gbif.org/mendeley), which illustrates broad relevance of PBRs. Informatics tools are becoming essential in biodiversity science for improved management, exploration, discovery, analysis and presentation of biological and ecological information (Sober on and), challenges that are collectively referred to as biodiversity informatics. This is a relatively young, but rapidly growing, field whose aim is to leverage current computational techniques and information technologies to solve biodiversity problems. The solutions to many of the key challenges rely on availability of sets of large and good enough information. More and more PBRs are being made available through aggregators or networks like GBIF and vert net at global scale; on regional scales portals like bio case bio case org and Indian Biodiversity Portal india biodiversity org are actively serving PBR. GBIF currently serves more than 560 million PBRs. Major citizen science initiatives like e bird e bird org and i naturalist i naturalist org have joined the venture, and have greatly fueled the growth of GBIF in recent years. However, due to the distributed nature of these huge data aggregators, spatial, taxonomic and temporal gaps may arise when collating the different sources they comprise. The package helps in identifying the gaps. Visualizing data is a powerful technique in the biodiversity informatics domain, useful to quickly identify the strengths and weaknesses of a dataset, especially in terms of geo-spatial, temporal and taxonomic gaps (). These assessments help (i) data rights holders, to efficiently invest in improvement of the quality of their dataset, and (ii) users, to better understand the existing gaps in the data (). The R language (http://www.r-project.org/) is rapidly becoming the preferred tool for all kinds of data analysis. The package ecosystem supported by R is very effective in making reusable functions available to users. R has numerous packages that serve an increasing range of purposes, several of which are useful for various biodiversity informatics related tasks like the packages rinat (http://cran.r-project. org packager in at rgb if (http://cran.r-project.org/packagergbif), or dis mo (http://cran.r-project.org/packagedismo). However, there is a lack of integrative tools for performing gap analysis on biodiversity data. In this paper, we briefly introduce the bdv is package, a tool that aims to bridge that gap.
