Motivation: next generation sequencing technology allows the detection of genomic structural variations, novel genes and transcript isoforms from the analysis of high throughput data. In this work, we propose a new framework for the detection of fusion transcripts through short paired end reads which integrates splicing driven alignment and abundance estimation analysis, producing a more accurate set of reads supporting the junction discovery and taking into account also not annotated transcripts. bellerophon tes performs a selection of putative junctions on the basis of a match to an accurate gene fusion model. Results: We report the fusion genes discovered by the proposed framework on experimentally validated biological samples of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) and on public NCBI datasets, for which bellerophon tes is able to detect the exact junction sequence. With respect to state of art approaches, bellerophon tes detects the same experimentally validated fusions, however, it is more selective on the total number of detected fusions and provides a more accurate set of spanning reads supporting the junctions. We finally report the fusions involving non annotated transcripts found in CML samples.

introduction the analysis of rnase q data revealed to be particularly effective for the detection of fused genes, which have been shown to be involved in several diseases. By applying rnase q short reads, novel fusion genes and in particular the VAPB-IKZF3 chimera have been found to play a key role in the survival in breast cancer cells (). In, the analysis of single long reads has been performed to reveal novel fusion junctions. However, the application of short paired end reads has been recently demonstrated to provide higher dynamic range and sensitivity in supporting fusion transcripts (). In paired end * To whom correspondence should be addressed reads both the forward and reverse template strands of each DNA fragment are sequenced. The two sequenced ends, also known as the two 'mate' reads, are spaced by a gap of unknown nucleotides, whose size is approximately known. The nature of the paired end reads and the way they map on a gene fusion boundary offer the opportunity to detect possible chimeric candidates shows a schematic representation of how the paired end reads map on two fused genes. According to the reads arrangement over the fusion junction, two scenarios might occur as follows (i) each mate of the read encompasses the junction and maps on a different gene of the fused gene couple. The read is considered as a read 'encompassing' the fusion boundary; (ii) alternatively, a single mate of the read overlaps the fusion junction while the corresponding paired end mate matches one of the two genes involved in the fusion. In this case, the read is considered as 'spanning' the fusion junction. Encompassing reads can be used to find a first list of gene fusion candidates, while spanning reads are used to detect the exact boundary sequence. Since in the case of spanning reads the mate overlapping the junction breakpoint is discarded by conventional short reads aligners, these reads must be searched on the set of initially unmapped mates. These reads are then mapped on an artificially constructed putative fusion junction from candidate gene pairs previously detected through encompassing reads analysis. In this work, we propose a new framework for the detection of fusion transcripts through short paired end reads. With respect to currently available solutions, bellerophon tes provides the following contributions: @BULLET To improve the quality and selectivity of fusion discovery, bellerophon tes selects those fusions matching an accurate, aimed at overcoming rnase q challenges concerning multiple read alignment, novel transcript discovery and accounting for alternative splicing. In addition, it exploits recent researches about the pattern of reads mapping across fusion breakpoints (), enabling a more accurate model of the fusion junction. On this concern, bellerophon tes presents distinguishing features with respect to fusion detection tools proposed in the last year () http://tophat-fusion.sourceforge.net, in that it integrates these new instruments in a fusion detection software framework. In this article, we report the fusion genes discovered by the proposed framework on experimentally validated biological samples of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) (), and on public NCBI datasets of validated fusions. We also performed a comparative analysis with an alternative state of art approach () on the same datasets. The results highlight that bellerophon tes while recognizing the validated fusions, reduced the final set of predictions and includes fusions involving non annotated genes.
