Biomedical entity relationship eXplorer be rex is a new biomedical knowledge integration, search and exploration tool. be rex integrates eight popular databases (STRING, drug bank KEGG, pham gkb bio grid GO, HPRD and msi gdb and delineates an integrated network by combining the information available from these databases. Users search the integrated network by entering key words, and be rex returns a sub-network matching the key words. The resulting graph can be explored interactively. be rex allows users to find the shortest paths between two remote nodes, find the most relevant drugs, diseases, pathways and so on related to the current network, expand the network by particular types of entities and relations and modify the network by removing or adding selected nodes. be rex is implemented as a standalone Java application. Availability and implementation: be rex and a detailed user guide are available for download at our project Web site (http://infos.korea.ac. kr be rex
introduction there is a good deal of biomedical databases, many of which become community resources. However, each database has its own limitations. First, each database covers only a small vertical domain. For example, STRING () covers only protein protein interactions, drug bank () and pham gkb () mainly focus on drugs and diseases, STITCH () covers only proteins and chemicals and KEGG () covers pathways but the coverage is small. To comprehend a complex relation spanning over the different domains, users have to manually integrate the pieces of information obtained from each database. Second, their query capabilities are limited. For example, PharmGKB and drug bank provide only a single result per query, and thus users have to manually combine the results from multiple queries to understand the interactions. Last, the existing databases produce a static query result, and thus users are not able to customize the result. To address these problems, we developed a user friendly database integration, search and exploration tool called be rex (Biomedical entity relationship eXplorer). be rex has the following advantages 3 Interactive exploration: be rex visualizes the results from a query as a graph. Users can interactively navigate through the relations and expand modify the network. For example, users can find the shortest paths between two remote nodes; find the most relevant drugs, diseases, pathways and so on related to the current network; expand the network by particular types of entities and relations; and modify the network by removing or adding selected nodes 4 Generating new hypothesis: be rex provides an environment for allowing a user driven approach to automatically generate plausible and or unexpected relationships from the derived integrated network. These plausible relationships describe potential interactions or mechanisms of action between query entities and may be used to generate a new testable hypothesis between query genes.
