Motivation: single cell rna sequencing technology allows detection of gene expression at the single cell level. One typical feature of the data is a bi modality in the cellular distribution even for highly expressed genes, primarily caused by a proportion of non expressing cells. The standard and the over dispersed gamma poisson models that are commonly used in bulk cell rna sequencing are not able to capture this property. Results: We introduce a beta poisson mixture model that can capture the bi modality of the single cell gene expression distribution. We further integrate the model into the generalized linear model framework in order to perform differential expression analyses. The whole analytical procedure is called b psc. The results from several real single cell rnase q datasets indicate that $90% of the transcripts are well characterized by the beta poisson model; the model fit from b psc is better than the fit of the standard gamma poisson model in  80% of the transcripts. Moreover, in differential expression analyses of simulated and real datasets, b psc performs well against edgeR, a conventional method widely used in bulk cell rna sequencing data, and against sc de and MAST, two recent methods specifically designed for single cell rnase q data.

introduction gene expression at single cell level is a stochastic process affected by extrinsic and intrinsic noise. The extrinsic noise comes from the environment outside the cell such as hormones or drugs. The intrinsic noise involves intra-cellular factors such as transcription rate (burst frequency), the number of mRNAs (burst size) and degradation rate (). Previous studies () have introduced different models to capture the stochastic process due to the intrinsic noise. In general there are two main approaches to measure expression of genes in a single cell (i) targeted and (ii) whole transcriptome based. The former eg. using qPCR or immunohistochemistry is used to is the integration of gene expression from multiple single cells; the distribution is commonly modelled by the gamma poisson mixture model, or equivalently, the negative binomial distribution. This model can not capture the bi modality of gene expression in single cell data (). recently briefly introduced the beta poisson model to capture the bi modality as well as the long tailed behavior in the distribution. As an attractive feature, unlike the purely empirical gamma poisson model for bulk rna the beta poisson model parameters introduce one biological interpretation in terms of burst size and burst frequency of the cell level expression. However, due to computational problems with the beta poisson model, Wills et al. used an alternative discrete Poisson mixture, a less parameterized version of the beta poisson model, to extract the information of the burst size and frequency. The model was applied for modelling of gene level expression in qpcr based datasets. Furthermore, no details of evaluation of modeling performance were reported. Another attempt of using the beta distribution to capture bi modality property of single cell gene expression was introduced in the bat bayes model (). However, in this approach, instead of integrating it with the Poisson distribution, the beta distribution was combined with binomial distribution to mimic the partitioning process of RNA molecules into transcripts. Here we develop b psc an analysis tool based on the beta poisson model for the single cell gene expression data, and implement and apply it to several scrn a seq datasets. b psc addresses practical and realistic issues such as non integer expression values or low expression values. Theoretically it is suitable for both transcript level and gene level expression, which is usually higher than the transcript level expression. It is worth noting that the term 'transcript' herein includes both isoform and other types of splicing variants. The beta poisson model allows for control of the expression drop off caused by technical noises or sequencing sensitivity. b psc includes a generalized linear model (GLM) based on the beta poisson model to perform differential expression analyses of single cell rnase q data. Experiments using simulated and real datasets show that b psc performs well against edgeR, an established method for bulk cell rnase q and against MAST and sc de two recent differential expression analysis methods designed for single cell rnase q
