Motivation: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are involved in an abundant class of post-transcriptional regulation activated through binding to the 3 untranslated region (UTR) of mRNAs. The current wealth of mammalian miRNA genes results mostly from genomic duplication events. Many of these events are located within introns of transcriptional units. In order to better understand the genomic expansion of miRNA genes, we investigated the distribution of intronic miRNAs. Results: We observe that miRNA genes are hosted within introns of short genes much larger than expected by chance. Implementation: We explore several explanations for this phenomenon and conclude that miRNA integration into short genes might be evolutionary favorable due to interaction with the pre mrna splicing mechanism.

introduction micrornas (miRNAs) are short 22 nt RNAs that bind to complementary sequences in the mRNA's 3 untranslated region (UTR) in order to regulate gene expression through translational silencing, mRNA degradation or cleavage (). miRNA regulation is an abundant mode of post-transcriptional regulation as each miRNA targets a multitude of mRNAs (). miRNAs were found to be involved in many cellular processes such as growth, differentiation and cell death (). The current wealth of miRNA genes results mostly from genomic episodes dominated by large duplication events () in addition to local expansions (e.g. see). These events can be located in either intergenic or intronic regions, namely, within introns of transcriptional units (). In order to better understand the genomic expansion of miRNA genes, we investigated the genome wide distribution of intronic miRNAs. We observe, like others, that miRNA genes are on average more frequently hosted in introns of long genes, though we also notice that their presence within introns of short genes is much larger than expected by chance. We discuss several explanations for this phenomenon and link this observation to differential pre mrna splicing of short versus long introns.
