Deep tissue imaging is increasingly used for non-destructive interrogation of intact organs and small model organisms. An intuitive approach to increase the imaging depth by almost a factor of 2 is to record a sample from two sides and fuse both image stacks. However, imperfect three dimensional alignment of both stacks presents a computational challenge. We have developed a FIJI plugin, called bid if use which merges bi-directionally recorded image stacks via 3D rigid transformations. The method is broadly applicable, considering its compatibility with all optical sectioning microscopes and does not rely on fiducial markers for image registration.

introduction increasing interest in microscopic visualization of intact biological specimens has fueled a surge of methodological developments in recent years, including tissue clearing and optical sectioning microscopy. Parallel to the continuous improvements of tissue clearing methods aimed at increasing optical penetration depth (, the evolution of optical sectioning techniques, such as confocal, two photon and, in particular light sheet microscopy (), have enabled rapid, non-destructive imaging of thick tissue specimen. Despite the tremendous impact these methods have had in extending imaging depth, various constraints still exist, including the limited working distance of microscope objectives, the variable clearing performance between different tissue types, and the inevitable loss of signal quality in deeper tissue layers. A simple method to increase the imaging depth is to record the sample from opposite sides. As this action involves flipping and relocation of the sample, a method is required to computationally fuse both image stacks and generate a single stack with comparable image quality at the top and bottom. We present a method, called bid if use which is based on 3D rigid transformations to register corresponding landmark points in both image stacks (). This is the first open source implementation that is compatible with all fluorescent labels, and is independent of the optical sectioning method used for image acquisition.
