Given the rapid increase of species with a sequenced genome, the need to identify orthologous genes between them has emerged as a central bioinformatics task. Many different methods exist for orthology detection, which makes it difficult to decide which one to choose for a particular application. Here, we review the latest developments and issues in the orthology field, and summarize the most recent results reported at the third Quest for Orthologs meeting. We focus on community efforts such as the adoption of reference proteomes, standard file formats and benchmarking. Progress in these areas is good, and they are already beneficial to both orthology consumers and providers. However, a major current issue is that the massive increase in complete prote-omes poses computational challenges to many of the ortholog database providers, as most orthology inference algorithms scale at least quadratically with the number of proteomes. The Quest for Orthologs consortium is an open community with a number of working groups that join efforts to enhance various aspects of orthology analysis, such as defining standard formats and datasets, documenting community resources and benchmarking. Availability and implementation: All such materials are available at

introduction orthologs are defined as genes in different species that descend by speciation from the same gene in the last common ancestor (). Because of this, they are likely to perform equivalent functions, and even if they have diverged since the speciation event, they are more likely to be functional counterparts in different species than other types of homologs ga bald on and). The probable functional equivalence of orthologs has made them attractive for genome annotation, and a range of approaches have been developed to identify orthologs, which has resulted in a number of repositories for precomputed orthology relationships. In fact, there are currently at least 37 different ortholog databases (reviewed in). Besides their importance for genome annotation and functional inference, finding orthologs is a necessary step to build species phylogenies and to perform comparative genomics analyses (e.g. anchoring chromosome alignments, reconstructing ancestral proteomes). An unfortunate effect of the wide interest in orthology is that many different formats and datasets exist, and it is far from trivial to integrate or compare orthologs from different sources. As a forum to discuss orthology analysis, standards and ways to coordinate and compare ortholog inferences, the orthology community started a workshop series called 'Quest for Orthologs' which held its third event in July 2013 in Lausanne, Switzerland. We here review the latest developments and trends in the orthology field, including unpublished results presented at the latest workshop. The rapidly increasing number of genomes sequenced creates acute computational challenges. As we discuss below, because most orthology prediction methods have at least quadratic scaling with the number of included species (e.g. owing to all against all sequence comparison), computation times have become a bottleneck. Computing orthologs between all complete proteomes has recently gone from typically a matter of cpu weeks to hundreds of cpu years and new, faster algorithms and methods are called for. Other areas we discuss that have received attention recently include 'domain orthology', i.e. orthology analysis at the protein domain level, and x enology or horizontal gene transfer (HGT), which in some cases may instead be the result of contaminating sequences in poorly curated genomes. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
