Motivation: Transcription factors (TFs) are a class of dna binding proteins that have a central role in regulating gene expression. To reveal mechanisms of transcriptional regulation, a number of computational tools have been proposed for predicting tf dna interaction sites. Recent studies have shown that genome wide sequencing data on open chromatin sites from a DNase I hypersensitivity experiments dnase seq has a great potential to map putative binding sites of all transcription factors in a single experiment. Thus, computational methods for analysing dnase seq to accurately map tf dna interaction sites are highly needed. Results: Here, we introduce a novel discriminative algorithm, bin dnase for predicting tf dna interaction sites using dnase seq data. bin dnase implements an efficient method for selecting and extracting informative features from DNase I signal for each TF, either at single nucleotide resolution or for larger regions. The method is applied to 57 transcription factors in cell line K562 and 31 transcription factors in cell line HepG2 using data from the ENCODE project. First, we show that bin dnase compares favourably to other supervised and unsupervised methods developed for tf dna interaction prediction using dnase seq data. We demonstrate the importance to model each TF with a separate prediction model, reflecting tf specific DNA accessibility around the tf dna interaction site. We also show that a highly standardised dnase seq data (pre)processing is a requisite for accurate TF binding predictions and that sequencing depth has on average only a moderate effect on prediction accuracy. Finally, bin dnase s binding predictions generalise to other cell types, thus making bin dnase a versatile tool for accurate TF binding prediction.

introduction transcriptional regulation is largely controlled by transcription factors (TFs) that bind short DNA sequence motifs in gene promoters, enhancers and other regulatory sites. Many TFs bind DNA in a sequence specific manner and understanding TF binding is integral to understanding gene regulatory networks. Moreover, changes in the genomic DNA, such as SNPs, at tf dna interaction sites can affect TF binding and can contribute to phenotypic differences, including gene expression (), but can also contribute to various diseases (). Determining the locations of tf binding sites is therefore of high importance. Commonly used computational strategies for predicting tf binding include DNA motif based prediction of TF binding sites() and simultaneous analysis of DNA motifs and histone modification data (e.g. ()) or DNase I hypersensitivity experiments followed by sequencing dnase seq (). The current state of art method for genome wide profiling of tf binding is chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing chips eq. chips eq can however map the positions of only one TF per experiment and requires a specific, chip grade antibody for the protein of interest. On the contrary, dnase seq detects signal at open chromatin sites genome wide. Consequently, dnase seq is increasingly used to complement chips eq experiments because a single dnase seq experiment can provide valuable information about putative tf dna interaction sites for all TFs. genome wide maps of putative regulatory sites in selected cell types detected using dnase seq data have already been created e.g. in the ENCODE project (). Currently the exact locations of tf binding events are pinpointed by finding stereotypic DNase I footprints. These footprints are short genomic locations of low DNase I cleavage activity immediately flanked by high DNase activity. An illustration of such regulatory site is shown in where the ATF1 motif locations within chips eq peaks are characterised with low DNase activity and the flanking regions exhibit high DNase activity. Finding stereotypic DNase I footprints does not require any information about the DNase I signal at the true binding sites, and therefore many methods using this definition of a TF footprint are unsupervised methods. It should also be acknowledged that these algorithms are transcription factor agnostic as they can only predict whether any TF is bound to a given site. It has however been reported in (), that for some proteins nucleotides in the middle of tf dna interface are exposed to DNase I cleavage. Therefore, treating all the nucleotides as protected in the tf dna interface might not be adequate. The exposed nucleotides differ between TFs and this high resolution information might be useful for making more accurate predictions and distinguishing which TFs actually occupy the sites. Most of the currently used methods developed for identifying footprints use the canonical definition of DNase footprints of low DNase activity flanked by high activity. These methods can be supervised (MILLIPEDE) (), in which the predictions are made using models trained on training data, or unsupervised (), which rely on giving TFs binding scores according to a model devised without training data. Some unsupervised methods, such as CENTIPEDE and PIQ, include nucleotide resolution information (). On the other hand, a recent paper shows that the nucleotide resolution DNase I cleavage pattern is partly caused by the intrinsic sequence bias of the DNase molecule () suggesting that the nucleotide resolution dnase seq signal at the tf dna interaction site does not necessarily provide predictive power to distinguish real binding sites. Moreover, DNase I footprint signal at individual genomic locations are noisy as illustrated in. It is therefore difficult to tell which signals in the dnase seq data are informative about TF binding and which signals are either noise or caused by the intrinsic sequence bias. Consequently, carefully designed computational methods are needed for dnase seq data processing. Having the aforementioned characteristics of dnase seq data in mind, here we study the use of high resolution dnase seq data for predicting TF binding sites. We chose to treat the TF binding prediction problem as a supervised classification task, because this approach lets us utilize the true differences in the DNase signal between the bound and unbound sites in the model training. We develop a method, bin dnase which for each TF automatically extracts features from the dnase seq data which maximally discriminate bound and unbound genomic locations. By comparing bin dnase with state of the art TF binding prediction methods we show that bin dnase provides more accurate predictions than other methods. Although this study focuses on making predictions with dnase seq data, the method is readily applicable to other data types such as faire seq () or at a cseq ().
