Transcription factor binding events are frequently associated with a pattern of nucleosome occupancy changes in which nucleosomes flanking the binding site increase in occupancy, while those in the vicinity of the binding site itself are displaced. genome wide information on enhancer proximal nucleosome occupancy can be readily acquired using chips eq targeting enhancer related histone modifications such as H3K4me2. Here, we present a software package, bin och that allows biologists to use such data to infer the identity of key transcription factors that regulate the response of a cell to a stimulus or determine a program of differentiation. Availability: The bin och open source Python package is freely available at http://liulab.dfci.harvard.edu/BINOCh under the FreeBSD

introduction although transcription factors are known to have a high affinity for specific DNA sequences, binding is often cell type and condition specific, therefore DNA sequence alone is a poor predictor of in vivo genome wide binding locations (). When the relevant transcription factors are known and suitable antibodies are available, chip chip and chips eq technologies enable us to map their genome wide binding locations. In many cases, however, the transcription factors governing a regulatory response are not known or antibodies suitable for chips eq are not available. Without transcription factor specific antibodies, it is nevertheless possible to infer transcription factor binding events based on two observations. First, transcription factor binding sites are often associated with certain types of post-translational histone modifications, in particular histone H3 lysine 4 mono-(H3K4me) and di methylation (H3K4me2) (). Second, transcription factor binding is frequently associated with a pattern of nucleosome occupancy changes in which nucleosomes flanking the binding site increase in occupancy, while those in the vicinity of the binding site itself are displaced (). Transcription factor (TF) binding events can therefore be inferred by comparing nucleosome resolution H3K4me1/2 chips eq data under treatment * To whom correspondence should be addressed and control conditions. We present a software package, bin och to allow biologists to carry out an analysis of nucleosome occupancy data to discover stimulus induced transcription factor binding.
