We present bio blend a unified API in a high level language (python) that wraps the functionality of Galaxy and cloud man APIs. bio blend makes it easy for bioinformatic ians to automate end to end large data analysis, from scratch, in a way that is highly accessible to collaborators, by allowing them to both provide the required infrastructure and automate complex analyses over large datasets within the familiar Galaxy environment. Availability and implementation: http://bioblend.readthedocs.org/.

introduction with the continuous influx of high throughput genomic sequencing data, automation of complex analyses has become essential to reduce repetitive effort by researchers. Genomics increasingly involves running computationally intensive analyses, each of which may take days, over large numbers of samples. These analyses use a broad landscape of tools and usually require the skills of both biologists and bioinformatic ians. Galaxy () is a popular application for bioinformatics analysis. It provides a web based interface that allows interactive analysis and visualization of large complex data while automatically tracking all the analysis steps. It is thus an excellent tool for designing analyses, recording provenance and facilitating collaboration between bioinformatic ians and biologists. However, the graphical point and click interface is less than ideal for the execution of the resulting pipelines over large numbers of samples, or for handling complex, sample dependent workflow logic. To remedy this, Galaxy also offers a programmatic API. This makes it possible to (i) use Galaxy to design an analysis in a visual and integrated setting; (ii) automate reuse of the created pipeline in a flexible scripted manner; and (iii) retain all of the results in galaxy s interactive environment. In addition to a framework for composing pipelines, there is a need for computational infrastructure capable of doing the processing and data storage in a scalable manner. Galaxy supports the notion of executing entirely within a cloud computing environment via the cloud man platform (). The cloud man platform enables a complete deployment of Galaxy, including the Galaxy application itself, the underlying bioinformatics command line tools and the reference data, to be easily provisioned and managed on a cloud infrastructure (). cloud man works with Amazon, open stack open nebula and eucalyptus based clouds and can be used with applications other than Galaxy. cloud man also exposes an API through which it can be programmatically manipulated, allowing provisioning and scaling of the compute platform for automated parallelized pipeline processing. Currently, the Galaxy and cloud man APIs are available as http based REST interfaces, which are arguably difficult for bioinformatic ians to discover and interact with. Most bioinformatic ians are comfortable writing automation scripts in a high level scripting language. They are typically much less interested in writing direct HTTP requests or using low level constructs with that in mind, we have developed a Python library for Galaxy and cloud man called bio blend that provides a high level interface for interacting with the two applications. This promotes faster interaction with those applications, facilitates reuse and sharing of scripts and eases collaboration between bioinformatic ians and biologists. Extensive API documentation is provided for the library while the source code repository contains specific examples.
