We here present bio circo sjs an interactive and lightweight JavaScript library especially for biological data interactive visualization. bio circo sjs facilitates the development of web based applications for circular visualization of various biological data, such as genomic features, genetic variations, gene expression and biomolecular interactions. Availability and implementation: bio circo sjs and its manual are freely available online at http://bio info ibpaccnbiocircos
introduction multifaceted and complex biological data increasingly require visualization and sophisticated analyses. However, suitable visualization tools are not always available to come readily at hand. Furthermore, many biological visualization tools are desktop applications that may be difficult to install and configure. circo s () is a powerful perl based tool for illustrating genomic features, and is widely used in biological research. However, the graphical files it outputs are not interactive and users can thus not obtained further details by moving a mouse pointer over the data points. Alternatives to circo s such as circo let to (), CIRCUS () and r circo s (), are also not interactive, whereas j circo s (), though interactive, is a desktop software. Web visualization applications have the advantage of generating interactive images in which all elements are interactive with mouse over explanations and clickable buttons, and are thus far more user friendly and provide more easily accessible information. As circo s and its alternatives do not function well on web applications, an interactive cir cos like tool for web applications would greatly facilitate visualization of biological data. Based on the powerful D3 data driven Documents) () and the j query JavaScript library, we have developed bio circo sjs an interactive and lightweight JavaScript library especially adapted for interactive visualization of biological data on web applications. bio circo sjs thus facilitates the development of web applications for visualization of biological data in a circular format similar to that of circo s
