bio clipse a graphical workbench for the life sciences, provides functionality for managing and visualizing life science data. We introduce bio clips er which integrates bio clipse and the statistical programming language R. The synergy between bio clipse and R is demonstrated by the construction of a decision support system for anticancer drug screening and mutagenicity prediction, which shows how bio clips er can be used to perform complex tasks from within a single software system. Availability and implementation: bio clips er is implemented as a set of Java plug-ins for bio clipse based on the r package rj. Source code and binary packages are available from https://github.com/bioclipse and http://www.bioclipse.net/bioclipse-r, respectively.

introduction bio clipse () and R (R Development Core) are free and open source software systems for the life sciences and for statistics, respectively. Although bio clipse has excellent functionality for managing, editing and visualizing chemical and biological information, it lacks data analytical capabilities. R, on the other hand, is outstanding for statistics and data analysis, but does not provide functionality for interactively reading, editing and visualizing chemical structures or protein sequences. In this applications note, we describe and demonstrate bio clips er a set of bio clipse plug-ins that link bio clipse to R and provide access to R methods from within bio clipse. The Bioconductor project () has equipped R with tailor made functionality for biology. However, Bioconductor is primarily targeted at genomics and has no functionality for chemistry. The R package rcd k adds core cheminformatics functionality to R but is not focused on providing a rich graphical user experience with functionality for editing and visualizing chemical data in 2D and 3D. Other tools for integrating R in graphical user interfaces with applications in biology and chemistry include the workflow tools Konstanz Information Miner kni me () and Taverna (). These provide nodes in a workflow that are capable of containing R code, but they are focused on constructing reproducible workflows and do not expose R in a workbench environment where it can be used programmatically and in combination with other tools in a more investigative fashion. In contrast to these tools, bio clips er integrates R with the rich client bio clipse and, thus, provides cross fertilization between R and all other functionality in bio clipse for example, advanced visualizations, help systems and semantic data management (). We demonstrate the synergy between bio clipse and R by constructing a decision support system for virtual screening and mutagenicity testing of new cancer drugs. Constructing this system without the integration between bio clipse and R would require extensive efforts of copying data between various software tools and file formats, but is almost trivial with bio clips er. Here, we outline the basic steps of the demonstration and refer to http://bioclipse.net/bioclipse-r for a detailed step by step description. The operations can be performed both in the bio clipse Scripting Language (BSL) and in bio clipse graphical user interface.
