The Biological General Repository for Interaction Datasets bio grid representational state transfer (REST) service allows full url based access to curated protein and genetic interaction data at the bio grid database. Appending URL parameters allows filtering of data by various attributes including gene names and identifiers, PubMed ID and evidence type. We also describe two visualization tools that interface with the REST service, the BiogridPlugin2 for Cytoscape and the bio grid web graph. Availability and implementation: bio grid data and applications are completely free for commercial and non-commercial use. http://webservice.thebiogrid.org/resources/interactions (REST Service), http://wiki.thebiogrid.org/doku.php/biogridrest(REST Service parameter list and help), http://webservice.thebiogrid.org/ resources application wa dl rest Service wa dl http://thebiogrid org download php (BiogridPlugin2, v2.1 download), http://wiki .

introduction the aim of the Biological General Repository for Interaction Datasets bio grid http://thebiogrid.org) is to curate and distribute comprehensive collections of physical and genetic interactions from all major model organisms, including human (). bio grid currently houses 362 355 interactions, categorized by evidence code and supplemented with annotation such as modifications and phenotypes. bio grid data are accessible through a searchable web interface, the Osprey network visualization tool () and partner databases such as Saccharomyces Genome Database (). Downloadable data files in tab delimited or psi mi 2.5 XML () formats are available for off-line data analysis. However, since these files are often large and or complex, full utilization of the data can require specialized scripts to be written. From release 3.0.64 (), bio grid has been made available in mi tab format (), a tab delimited format, with bio grid evidence codes mapped to psi mi ontology * To whom correspondence should be addressed. terms. The psi c quic web service has been established by the IMEx consortium (http://imex.sourceforge.net) providing federated access to multiple interaction databases, including bio grid in mi tab format (). Although access via psi c quic provides all available interactions in bio grid it is not ideal for provision of bio grid data as it does not contain original bio grid evidence codes, post-translational modifications, phenotypes or freetext qualifiers. Here, we describe a new representational state transfer (REST) web service allowing access to full bio grid data, and two visualization tools that programmatically access it. Example use cases for all components are provided in Supplementary File 1.
