Motivation: non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States. Targeted tyrosine kinase inhibi-tors tk is directed against the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have been widely and successfully used in treating NSCLC patients with activating EGFR mutations. Unfortunately, the duration of response is short lived and all patients eventually relapse by acquiring resistance mechanisms. Result: We performed an integrative systems biology approach to determine essential kinases that drive egfr tki resistance in cancer cell lines. We used a series of bioinformatics methods to analyze and integrate the functional genetics screen and rnase q data to identify a set of kinases that are critical in survival and proliferation in these tki resistant lines. By connecting the essential kinases to compounds using a novel kinase connectivity map k map we identified and validated bos uti nib as an effective compound that could inhibit proliferation and induce apoptosis in tki resistant lines. A rational combination of bos uti nib and gefitinib showed additive and synergistic effects in cancer cell lines resistant to EGFR TKI alone. Conclusions: We have demonstrated a bioinformatics driven discovery roadmap for drug repurposing and development in overcoming resistance in egfr mutant NSCLC, which could be generalized to other cancer types in the era of personalized medicine. Availability and implementation: k map can be accessible at: http://

introduction genomic medicine has dramatically increased our knowledge of the molecular changes that underpin disease states. Understanding alterations in gene expression can identify proteins and signaling pathways, which might serve as therapeutic targets. Moreover, recent technologic advances in next generation sequencing facilitate the rapid assessment of gene expression changes in specific patients, allowing for individualized treatment. Although personalized genomics heralds the age of precision medicine, the comprehensive datasets obtained through sequencing require sophisticated bioinformatics tools to identify the critical genes that influence disease. Once these critical genes are identified, the next challenge is to predict what drugs would be useful in reversing the disease states. The connectivity map represents the first attempt to provide a computational framework to connect genes, drugs and diseases based on gene expression signatures (). This method assumes gene expression changes could be used as a 'universal language' to connect distinct biological states (e.g. diseases), allowing for the successful repurposing of compounds (). In short, drugs known to be effective in one disease can serve as candidates for use in other diseases marked by similar gene expression changes. The power of this method has inspired other related work (with the goal of improving the utility of the connectivity map in drug repurposing and development. non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) serves as an ideal disease for a connectivity map based approach. NSCLC accounts for $85% of lung cancers, and is the leading cause of cancer related death in the United States () and worldwide. Comprehensive characterization of cancer genomes have increased our understanding of cancer biology and moved NSCLC beyond standard clinico-pathologic classifications and staging to include molecular characterization based on newly identified oncogenic drivers, such as the mutant epidermal growth factor receptor gene (EGFR) (). Although therapies directed against EGFR, such as gefitinib (), have revolutionized NSCLC care, the duration of response is short lived and all patients eventually relapse through acquired resistance mechanisms *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the last two authors should be regarded as Joint Last Authors.(). Identification of new targeted therapeutics is a priority, yet the ability to translate genomic datasets into new drugs has been limited. We devised an integrative systems biology approach using a functional screen combined with rnase q expression data to determine essential kinases other than EGFR that drive proliferation and survival in egfr mutant NSCLC. We performed an initial focused, functional genetic screen using short hairpin RNAs shrna s that target the kino me ($600 kinases) in the H1650 lung cancer cell line. This line harbors an EGFR mutation, yet is intrinsically resistant to EGFR tk is. We used Bioinformatics for next generation Sequencing! bing s (), a novel bioinformatics pipeline to analyze and interpret functional genomic screening data by next generation sequencing to identify essential kinases that drive the survival and proliferation signaling pathways of this egfr mutant line. Next, we determined the differentially expressed kinases in this cancer cell line by next generation sequencing rnase q. Integrative analysis was performed to identify kinases that were essential and dysregulated, and the list of essential and functional kinases was connected to explore therapeutic opportunities using the kinase connectivity map k map (). The efficacy of the k map prediction of kinase inhibitors was then validated in vitro ().
