rule based models are analyzed with specialized simulators, such as those provided by the bionet gen and nfs im open source software packages. Here, we present bionet fit a general purpose fitting tool that is compatible with bionet gen and nfs im. bionet fit is designed to take advantage of distributed computing resources. This feature facilitates fitting (i.e. optimization of parameter values for consistency with data) when simulations are computationally expensive. Availability and implementation: bionet fit can be used on stand-alone Mac, windows cygwin and Linux platforms and on linux based clusters running slur m torque pbs or SGE. The bionet fit source code (Perl) is freely available (http://bionetfit.nau.edu).

introduction biomolecular interactions can be represented by formalized rules (). Collections of rules form rule based models, which provide concise representations of biomolecular interaction networks and can be analyzed to obtain insights into how system level behavior emerges from biomolecular interactions (). rule based models must be analyzed with specialized algorithms and software tools (), such as bionet gen (), which interprets models encoded in the bionet gen language b ngl and provides deterministic, stochastic and hybrid forward simulation capabilities (). To date, other critical methods of analysis, such as fitting (parameter estimation), have typically been applied ad hoc (e.g. by writing problem specific programs), as in the study of or which leads to duplication of effort and hinders the ability to reproduce results. Although many algorithms and software implementations are available for analysis of models specified in traditional forms (), such as that of ordinary differential equations (ODEs), standard techniques are not easily applied to rule based models except for those rule based models that can be recast into a traditional model form. Translating a set of rules into a reaction network (i.e. a list of reactions) or the corresponding ODEs for the mass action kinetics of the network, a capability provided by bionet gen is expensive and sometimes impracticable. In such cases, direct simulation methods), which is compatible with b ngl specified models, expand the range of biomolecular interaction networks that can be studied, because the cost of network free simulation scales with the number of rules in a model, not the number of reactions implied by the rules (). Software that provides a general purpose fitting capability and that interfaces with a network free simulator has not hitherto been available. Here, we present bionet fit a general purpose fitting program for rule based models that is compatible with bionet gen and nfs im. Because of the potentially high cost of network free simulation (), bionet fit has been designed to be used on clusters. It can also be used on stand-alone computers. bionet fit implements a genetic algorithm (). Below, we provide an overview of bionet fit and a demonstration of its capabilities.
