Motivation: Ions are essential component of the cell and frequently are found bound to various macromolecules, in particular to proteins. A binding of an ion to a protein greatly affects proteins biophysical characteristics and needs to be taken into account in any modeling approach. However, ions bounded positions can not be easily revealed experimentally, especially if they are loosely bound to macromolecular surface. Results: Here, we report a web server, the BION web server, which addresses the demand for tools of predicting surface bound ions, for which specific interactions are not crucial; thus, they are difficult to predict. The BION is easy to use web server that requires only coordinate file to be inputted, and the user is provided with various, but easy to navigate, options. The coordinate file with predicted bound ions is displayed on the output and is available for download.

introduction ions are important component for all living cells, and they are involved in different physiological processes, such as maintaining the osmotic balance () and the general ionic environment () of the cells, participating in signal transduction () and many others. Because of that predicting ion's positions is important for understanding various biological reactions. The need for predictions is dictated by the difficulties different experimental techniques experience in determining surface bound ions, as the residential time and the occupancy may not be large; thus, the signal could be weak. Although there are many approaches for predicting specifically bound ions as methods that are based on coordination numbers of ions (), geometries (), binding site preferences (), typical valence of metal ions () and many others, to the best of our knowledge, there is no web server for non specifically bound surface ions predictions. Here, we report such a web server, which is based on our new methodology using Delphi () and calculates the electrostatic potential map in conjunction with an in house clustering algorithm to predict non-specific ion binding sites (). This method is implemented into a web server, the BION web server, which allows predicting non-specific bound ions on the surface of proteins. It is easy to use and intuitive for broad range of users. As result of calculations the user receives a file in Protein Data Base (PDB) format of protein with predicted ions position ranked according to the confidence of the predictions.
