bionet gen is an open source software package for rule based modeling of complex biochemical systems. Version 2.2 of the software introduces numerous new features for both model specification and simulation. Here, we report on these additions, discussing how they facilitate the construction, simulation and analysis of larger and more complex models than previously possible. Availability and Implementation: Stable bionet gen releases (Linux, Mac OS/X and Windows), with documentation, are available at

introduction rule based modeling is an approach for addressing combinatorial complexity in models of biochemical systems (). Instead of manually enumerating all possible species and reactions that can exist within a system, a rule based model defines only the reactive motifs within macromolecular complexes and the interactions and modifications that involve those motifs. bionet gen is an open source software package for constructing and simulating rule based models (). It has been used to model a variety of biological processes, including cell signaling, gene regulation and metabolism (, and references therein; see also bionet gen org index php model examples. Models are written in a human readable text based modeling language known as b ngl bionet gen language). Numerous user specified actions can be added to a b ngl model file, including generating a reaction network and performing deterministic or stochastic simulations. Models can also be exported to different formats, such as SBML () and MATLAB language (The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA). Furthermore, bionet gen interfaces with nfs im (), a network free simulator that avoids enumeration of species and reactions, which may be intractable for large models. rule bender is a). Taken together, the bionet gen nfs im rule bender suite of tools () provides powerful capabilities for rule based modeling and simulation. Until recently, however, there were several significant shortcomings: (i) b ngl models were limited to mass action kinetics; (ii) network based stochastic simulations were limited to computationally expensive 'exact' methods; (iii) network free simulations were limited to fewer than a few million particles due to high memory load; (iv) there was no facility for importing models from SBML format. Each of these shortcomings has been addressed in the recent bionet gen 2.2.x series of releases, as described below. Additional information can be found in extensive online documentation at http://bionetgen.org/index.php/Documentation (see Supplementary Information for specific links).

conclusion bionet gen is an active, open source project that highly encourages contributions from interested members of the modeling community. Contact information, as well as numerous links to online documentation, is provided in the Supplementary Information. Ongoing development efforts include interfacing with spatial simulators (), free energy based modeling (), and improved support for community standards (e.g. sbml multi sed ml. Recent independent efforts that leverage the bionet gen framework include a standard for annotation of rule based models () specified in b ngl or Kappa (), another widely used rule based modeling language and bionet fit (), a parameter estimation tool for models simulated using either bionet gen or nfs im
