Development of effective tools such as oligo microarrays and next generation sequencing methods for monitoring gene expression on a large scale has resulted in the discovery of gene signatures with prognostic predictive value in various malignant neoplastic diseases. However, with the exponential growth of gene expression databases , biologists are faced with the challenge of extracting useful information from these repositories. Here, we present a software package , bio plat (Biomarkers Platform), which allows biologists to identify novel prognostic and predictive cancer biomarkers based on the data mining of gene expression signatures and gene expression profiling databases. bio plat has been designed as an easy to use and flexible desktop software application, which provides a set of analytical tools related to data extraction, preprocessing, filtering, gene expression signature calculation, in silico validation, feature selection and annotation that leverage the integration and reuse of gene expression signatures in the context of follow-up data.

introduction human cancer transcriptome s have been extensively profiled over the past decade, allowing the identification of different cancer molecular subtypes and the development of prognostic and predictive gene expression signatures. Gene expression signatures have been curated from the literature and collected into publicly available databases such as msi gdb 3.0 and genesi gdb 4.0, with 410 000 gene signatures related to human diseases (). On the other hand, databases such as GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus) and AE array express are the primary repositories for the raw data from functional genomic studies (). A central focus on translational cancer research is that patient diagnosis and prognosis can be improved by stratification of patients based on functional genomics data beside relevant follow-up data. Therefore, we developed bio plat (Biomarkers Platform), a user friendly bioinformatics resource, which provides a set of analytical tools for the in silico identification of novel prognostic and predictive cancer biomarkers. It encompasses all the stages of data mining and analysis of the vast number of gene expression signatures and profiling data, including data extraction, preprocessing, filtering, in silico validation and feature selection. Currently, there exists a myriad of applications and software focused on the integration and analysis of on co genomics and clinicopathological data (e.g. on co mine it taca PAPAyA, into gene Cancer Genomics Browser, MeV, gene pattern. However, the salient feature that makes bio plat unique is that it allows the direct and easy integration of gene expression signatures and gene expression profiling data to further perform survival analysis. Moreover, bio plat implements features that are not included in other biomarker discovery tools. These features include statistic methods to measure the performance of prediction models and also algorithms to perform feature selection. Although several of these statistical tests and algorithms are mostly available in R packages, our software provides a unified framework that facilitates the use of these components.
