Motivation: BioPAX is a standard language for representing and exchanging models of biological processes at the molecular and cellular levels. It is widely used by different pathway databases and genomics data analysis software. Currently, the primary source of BioPAX data is direct exports from the curated pathway databases. It is still uncommon for wet lab biologists to share and exchange pathway knowledge using BioPAX. Instead, pathways are usually represented as informal diagrams in the literature. In order to encourage formal representation of pathways, we describe a software package that allows users to create pathway diagrams using cell designer a user friendly graphical pathway editing tool and save the pathway data in BioPAX Level 3 format.

introduction recent efforts to standardize pathway data have greatly facilitated the interpretation, exchange and integration of pathway knowledge in a rigorous and unambiguous way. The efforts have led to the creation of several widely accepted complementary community standards systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) (), Biological Pathway Exchange (BioPAX) () and Systems Biology Graphical Notation s bgn (). Both SBML and BioPAX are machine readable formats for representing cellular processes. The former is concentrated on mathematical modeling, while the latter is focused on qualitative pathway knowledge. s bgn is a standard for graphical representation of pathways and can be used for visualizing both SBML and BioPAX models. BioPAX Level 3 covers a large spectrum of qualitative information in the literature including metabolic and signaling pathways as well as molecular and genetic interactions. As a result, BioPAX is currently supported by 40 different pathway database resources (http://www.pathguide.org/), including MetaCyc (), PANTHER (), * To whom correspondence should be addressed. PID () and Reactome (). Most of these resources generate biopax compliant exchange files from the pathway data that are curated by highly trained curators using specialized curation software. It is still rare for wet lab biologists to create and exchange pathway data using such standards. This creates a bottleneck for pathway knowledge accumulation as the database groups can only curate a fraction of the enormous amount of knowledge that is being generated. Extending the usage of formal machine readable models, such as BioPAX, to the wider biological community would significantly alleviate this problem and help pathway databases to cope up with the load (). Furthermore, wet lab biologists are the end users of the pathway databases, and thus the enrichment of pathway database content will ultimately benefit their research. The major obstacle so far is the lack of software tools that can allow biologists to easily transcribe the pathway knowledge to BioPAX format. Cytoscape BioPAX plug-in allows users to load and graphically render BioPAX files for visualization. It has been used by a number of software to import or export BioPAX files. The plug-in does not support BioPAX Level 3 yet. cell designer () is a graphical, intuitive pathway editing software, which uses controlled graphical notations for visual representation of the pathway and supports both SBML and s bgn standard (). It is used in the research community for generating pathway diagrams with controlled graphical notations for both wet lab and systems biologists. Both cell designer and BioPAX describes pathway in terms of biochemical reaction and process, which is equivalent to s bgn Process Description sb gnpd standard (). The data structures in cell designer and BioPAX are similar but not identical, and we have developed a mapping between the two. Here, we describe a software package that allows users to draw or open a pathway diagram in cell designer and save the data accurately in BioPAX format. Thus, the software provides the connection between SBML, sb gnpd and BioPAX.
