bio text quest combines automated discovery of significant terms in article clusters with structured knowledge annotation, via Named Entity Recognition services, offering interactive user friendly visualization. A tag cloud based illustration of terms labeling each document cluster are semantically annotated according to the biological entity, and a list of document titles enable users to simultaneously compare terms and documents of each cluster, facilitating concept association and hypothesis generation. bio text quest allows customization of analysis parameters, e.g. clustering stemming algorithms, exclusion of documents significant terms, to better match the biological question addressed. Availability: http://biotextquest.

introduction several information retrieval tools are available to the scientific community, each attempting to analyze the large amount of biomedical information from a different perspective (). Most of the currently available literature mining systems are based on Natural Language Processing, supervised machine learning or their combination (). An alternative approach is the summarizing of large query outputs by document clustering, where similar documents are grouped on the basis of particular, meaningful terms (). It is an unsupervised technique, thus its success does not depend on prior knowledge or domain expertise (). Existing biomedical literature clustering systems include cluster med (http://demos vivisimo com cluster med and pure dmc l (). cluster med is a commercial software whose free version supports the clustering of at most 100 abstracts. pure dmc l is a downloadable collection of Perl and R scripts, mostly addressing expert users (). With bio text quest our aim has been to provide researchers with a user friendly web application that enables online queries for defining corpora of biomedical abstracts followed by document clustering and visualization. bio text quest is an application that offers an array of visualization tools for efficient navigation among biomedical records, and concept extraction. It also supports the depiction of term associations within clusters and can be easily customized. In the following sections, we describe the bio text quest architecture and demonstrate its functionality, based on a reworked query example of a Drosophila developmental pattern presented in the original text quest publication ().

conclusion we describe bio text quest an online text mining system, enabling concept discovery from the biomedical literature recorded in PubMed via a clustering based procedure. Further exploration of literature information is facilitated by intuitive graphical depictions of biologically relevant terms and interactive re sub clustering capabilities. bio text quest is designed with simplicity for end users while advanced options enable further analyses.
