The iterative process of finding relevant information in biomedical literature and performing bioinformatics analyses might result in an endless loop for an inexperienced user, considering the exponential growth of scientific corpora and the plethora of tools designed to mine PubMed V R and related biological databases. Herein, we describe bio text quest + , a web based interactive knowledge exploration platform with significant advances to its predecessor bio text quest aiming to bridge processes such as bio entity recognition , functional annotation, document clustering and data integration towards literature mining and concept discovery. bio text quest + enables PubMed and OMIM querying, retrieval of abstracts related to a targeted request and optimal detection of genes, proteins, molecular functions, pathways and biological processes within the retrieved documents. The front end interface facilitates the browsing of document clustering per subject, the analysis of term co occurrence the generation of tag clouds containing highly represented terms per cluster and at a glance popup windows with information about relevant genes and proteins. Moreover, to support experimental research, bio text quest + addresses integration of its primary functionality with biological repositories and software tools able to deliver further bio-informatics services. The google like interface extends beyond simple use by offering a range of advanced parameterization for expert users. We demonstrate the functionality of bio text quest + through several exemplary research scenarios including author disambiguation, functional term enrichment, knowledge acquisition and concept discovery linking major human diseases, such as obesity and ageing. Availability: The service is accessible at http://bioinformatics.med.

introduction the tremendous growth of biomedical literature and biological data repositories has become a true challenge for researchers who wish to follow in detail the developments in rapidly growing fields (). Currently, PubMed contains 422 million publications and information about biological entities, such as genes, proteins, pathways and sequences, which is stored and distributed by several repositories worldwide. Therefore, targeted information retrieval from literature and other data collections often becomes a complicated and tedious task when searching with available engines () as it regularly results to hundreds or thousands of records, typically not sorted by relevance and often changing on parameterization or query rephrasing. Despite the plethora of proposed tools aiming to make document searching easier, more efficient and targeted, literature mining is still an open area of research () Tools designed to tackle this problem can be classified in five categories: (i) tools for ranking search results, (ii) tools for document clustering in several topics, (iii) tools for semantic annotation and display, (iv) tools for predicting relations between bio entities and or concepts and (v) tools extending PubMed functionality by improving the search interface. Notable tools for result ranking include quer tle (), medline ranker (), caip irini (), *To whom correspondence should be addressed.

discussion the field of text mining in life and health sciences expands rapidly, considering the exponential growth of biomedical literature. While techniques such as NER, information extraction, co occurrence analysis have become more mature, the field is still in its infancy, as most of these approaches have only been used for pubmed based abstract centric searches. Currently, a limited number of tools succeed in automatically bridging literature mining, information extraction, integration with external repositories and implementation of workflows for further bioinformatics analysis. Herein, we present bio text quest + , a platform principally developed to bridge the gaps between these complementary areas. With PubMed and OMIM repositories as starting points, bio text quest + currently offers automated literature extraction, identification of significant bio entity terms, term based document clustering, co occurrence analysis as well as integration with a rich collection of biological databases and automated bioinformatics analysis. While initial versions of this platform focused only on document clustering (), bio text quest + adds a significant set of novel features (Supplementary). A description of the most salient characteristics of established tools in the field are presented in Supplementary Table S2 and a thorough comparison of bio text quest + with these tools is summarized in Supplementary Table S3. We do believe that a gold standard benchmark dataset or process is largely missing to objectively measure the performance of any such tool. It is worth stressing that this is a significant challenge, partly because different text mining tools are built to address different questions. Evidently, the bio creative challenge () or similar community driven initiatives may become the proper forum for designing and implementing such a gold standard benchmark process. bio text quest + can thus serve as a powerful tool in the fields of biomedical literature mining and data integration by aiding users in concept discovery and new hypothesis generation, enhancing our arsenal in the efforts to tackle the complexity of biological text.
