bir gh pc a bootable Linux Live CD has been developed to create high performance clusters for bioinformatics and molecular dynamics studies using any Local Area Network lan networked computers. bir gh pc features automated hardware and slots detection as well as provides a simple job submission interface. The latest versions of GROMACS, NAMD, mpi blast and clustalw mpi can be run in parallel by simply booting the bir gh pc CD or flash drive from the head node, which immediately positions the rest of the PCs on the network as computing nodes. Thus, a temporary, affordable, scalable and high performance computing environment can be built by non computing based researchers using low cost commodity hardware. Availability: The bir gh pc Live CD and relevant user guide are available for free at http://birg1.fbb.utm.my/birghpc. Contacts:

introduction the beowulf class computing cluster was a breakthrough in cluster computing because it enabled parallel computing to be performed utilizing low cost commodity hardware and standard software components compared to other supercomputing solutions (). Typical requirements for building a beowulf class cluster involve setting up the number of desired personal computers (PCs) and interconnecting them on the same Local Area Network (LAN), preferably using gigabit ethernet. A similar operating system (OS) and software are then installed on each PC (node) and additional setup is performed for the head node, which is one of the PCs designated to control the computing cluster by taking job submissions and monitoring tasks. While the hardware setup required to build a beowulf class computing cluster is rather straightforward, the software setup is challenging to inexperienced researchers and engineers. A unix like OS is often chosen as the main OS because they make the implementation of software, such as message passing interface (MPI) libraries, easier. In addition to the OS installation, the configuration of parallel specific software * To whom correspondence should be addressed. is also difficult for beginners and non computing based researchers, especially those involving the three famous steps: configure, make and make install. OS and software installations are simplified by using the Linux Live CD method. A Live CD, or its image, can be booted on any PC without affecting the existing users' previously installed OS or data. Several Live CD distributions are currently available with Knoppix () arguably being the most well known. Although early versions of Live CDs were intended for use on a single PC, recent distributions, such as pelican hpc (successor to ParallelKnoppix) () and ClusterKnoppix clusterknoppix sw be introduced parallel computing capability. Encouraged by the Live CD's simplicity, a number of bioinformatics based Linux distributions were developed, including vig ya an (www.vigyaancd.org), bios lax www bios lax com bio linux Quantian (), Open Discovery and DNALinux (). The bioinformatics software included in these distributions are GROMACS (version 3.2.1 in vig ya an version 3.2.2 in Quantian and version 3.3 in Open Discovery v2) (), ncbi s BLAST, ClustalW and others. Only a few bioinformatics based programs are provided in a Live CD format and are parallel computing ready, namely Quantian, open discovery v3 and Knoppix for interpro scan 4.1 high throughput Edition (). Open Discovery v2 supports parallel computing but only in the context of a single machine with a multicore processor. However, Quantian supports parallel computing on multiple machines by means of an obsolete OpenMosix kernel. While Open Discovery v3 now provides parallel computing capability, it is not freely available. We present bir gh pc a Live CD distribution with updated versions of GROMACS, NAMD (), mpi blast () and clustalw mpi () that implements a parallel computing capability using open mpi and MPICH2, a feature missing from most bioinformatics based Live CDs. Our release, bir gh pc is an improved version of pelican hpc a live CD that provides Octave parallel computing capability (). pelican hpc implements only open mpi and requires users to manually define the number of machine slots to utilize the nodes fully, which is time consuming because it requires the user to work with Media Access Control (MAC) addresses in a heterogeneous hardware environment. bir gh pc accounts for these shortcomings by including a job submission interface, automatic slot detection and a MPICH2 parallel environment capability.

discussion the main feature of bir gh pc is its ability to convert PCs on the same LAN into a high performance computing cluster. PCs in computer labs are often found idle after office hours and during holidays. These untapped resources can be converted within minutes into a computing cluster by booting bir gh pc and following the general cluster creation work flow (i.e. setup the head node then the computing nodes). For a PC to act as the head node, it must be able to boot from a CD bir gh pc image) and have a monitor, a mouse and a keyboard. To act as computing nodes, the other PCs need to be bootable from the network. The bir gh pc setup script is executed upon the first cluster configuration. When additional nodes are added or removed from the existing cluster, the bir g restart hpc script is executed. Node statuses can be monitored using the included Ganglia Monitoring System. After the final configuration, users are able to run jobs by placing their files in the home user directory, which is shared across the nodes using the network file system (NFS). bir gh pc includes a job submission script usr bin jobs h which provides users with an interface to run GROMACS, NAMD, mpi blast and clustalw mpi jobs. The amount of RAM available is a concern because everything is loaded into RAM. While all the files in the home user folder are erased from RAM when the head node is rebooted (as is common with many Live CDs), a solution has been implemented in bir gh pc which automatically detects and mounts an external storage device as /home (e.g. a flash drive formatted in ext3 with a bir g label). Testing of bir gh pc has been conducted with standard benchmark files and its performance is on par with the normal hard disk installed computing clusters ().

conclusion the Linux Live CD, bir gh pc is an improvement over pelican hpc and Debian Live because bir gh pc incorporates capabilities for automatic slot detection, the use of a MPICH2 environment and a job submission interface. The ability of bir gh pc to convert lan connected PCs into a high performance computing cluster allows researchers to instantly utilize otherwise idle PCs in laboratories to conduct bioinformatics and molecular dynamics studies with minimal effort. bir gh pc is the only freely available,
