In the last years there has been an increasing effort to computationally model and predict the influence of regulators (transcription factors, miRNAs) on gene expression. Here we introduce biRte as a computationally attractive approach combining Bayesian inference of regulator activities with network reverse engineering. biRte integrates target gene predictions with different omics data entities (e.g. miRNA and mRNA data) into a joint probabilistic framework. The utility of our method is tested in extensive simulation studies and demonstrated with applications from prostate cancer and Escherichia coli growth control. The resulting regulatory networks generally show a good agreement with the biological literature. Availability and implementation: biRte is available on Bioconductor

introduction gene regulation is one of the most important biological processes in the living cell. Its malfunctioning is directly associated with many human diseases. Transcription factors (TFs) are one of the most relevant drivers of mRNA expression. In addition, miRNAs can degrade or inhibit translation of target mRNAs on the post-transcriptional level. Thus both, TFs and miRNAs, influence mRNA concentration jointly together in complex networks. Based on existing TF and miRNA target gene prediction methods during the last years there has been an increasing effort to computationally model regulatory networks and draw conclusions about context specific regulator activities ().also considered statistical interactions between regulators, which they depicted as networks. In our earlier publication we devised birt a as a method, which combines miRNA and mRNA expression data into a joint probabilistic model to infer condition specific activities of TFs and miRNAs (). birt a is formulated in a Bayesian regression framework and uses a so called spike and slab prior () to infer probabilities of activation for transcription factors and miRNAs in a sparse manner. birt a does not support statistical interactions between regulators. Independent of the question to predict context specific regulator activities, structure learning of gene regulatory networks directly from expression data has been widely studied (). In this article, we introduce biRte as a combined approach to estimate context specific regulator activities and networks between these regulators. biRte first uses a significant improvement of birt a to infer activities of regulators and their statistical interactions from expression data and target gene predictions. A key difference to birt a is a computationally efficient analytical marginalization of regression coefficients, which yields far better prediction performance and 1015 fold less computation time. After estimation of active regulators, biRte employs Nested Effects Model (NEM) () structure learning to infer the associated transcriptional network. A key difference to many existing methods at this point is that our approach does not rely on direct mRNA measurements of regulators, but employs information of differential expression of downstream target genes. V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com
conclusion birte combines inference of regulator activities with network reverse engineering. For inference of regulator activities we rely on an extension of our previous birt a method (). The most significant difference is the analytical and computationally efficient marginalization of regression coefficients, which results in 1015 fold faster computation time. Furthermore, our simulations indicate that biRte not only outperforms birt a but also a hypergeometric test () and the lasso based ge mula () with respect to prediction of active regulators and regulator regulator interactions. biRte performs post hoc inference of networks between active regulators via NEM structure learning, which infers subset relationships of differentially expressed target genes. According to our simulations the approach yields far more reliable network reconstructions than typical methods that use observational expression data of regulators. Application of biRte to a gene expression data measuring response to different growth conditions in E.coli as well as to a combined mRNA and miRNA dataset from prostate cancer patients demonstrated the principal agreement with the biological literature. We thus think that biRte could be a useful contribution to decipher biological context specific regulatory networks. Conflict of Interest: none declared.
