Biological sequence databases are integral to efforts to characterize and understand biological molecules and share biological data. However, when analyzing these data, scientists are often left holding disparate biological currency molecular identifiers from different databases. For downstream applications that require converting the identifiers themselves, there are many resources available, but analyzing associated loci and variants can be cumbersome if data is not given in a form amenable to particular analyses. Here we present BISQUE, a web server and cus-tomizable command line tool for converting molecular identifiers and their contained loci and variants between different database conventions. BISQUE uses a graph traversal algorithm to generalize the conversion process for residues in the human genome, genes, transcripts and proteins, allowing for conversion across classes of molecules and in all directions through an intuitive web interface and a url based web service. Availability and implementation: BISQUE is freely available via the web using any major web browser (http://bisque.yulab.org/). Source code is available in a public git hub repository (https:// github.com/hyulab/BISQUE).

introduction the proliferation of genomic and proteomic databases has helped us organize and understand biological molecules and phenomena, but has left the scientific community using many different naming conventions for the same, or intrinsically related biological entities: genes, proteins and transcripts (). While there are many tools to convert the identifiers themselves, there are insufficient resources to convert loci and variants annotated in reference to these identifiers (Supplementary). Due to pervasive sequencing and variant annotation, this has led to a routine burden on biologists to convert from one naming convention to another, and may lead to errors when building upon other labs' research (). Here we present BISQUE (The Biological Sequence Exchange), a multi interface utility for converting human genomic, transcript omic and proteomic loci and variants from their reported form into forms useful for downstream research. BISQUE is an extensible conversion framework deployed as a web server (http://bisque. yu labor g for user friendly conversion among the most popular human database identifiers. It is also available as a programmatic web service, downloadable as a customizable standalone application V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com (http://github.com/hyulab/bisque), and importable as a Python module.

discussion while there are some tools available to perform limited conversion of positions and variants associated with database identifiers (Supplementary), these often exist as coupled conversion analysis tools, which lack the all to all conversion capability of BISQUE. Furthermore, variant conversion is typically coupled with much more computationally expensive functions, such as variant annotation. What is lacking in these tools is modularity a core design principle of complex systems that allows functional components to be repurposed for other tasks. BISQUE embraces modularity in its own internal structure through a generalized conversion framework, which enables the expansion of its conversion capability. BISQUE is also a module itself, with the ability to perform multiple conversions for a scripting task or to act as the conversion engine for a database or analysis tool. In this way, BISQUE will be very valuable to the scientific community as it publicizes vital biological infrastructure.
