Motivation: When processing gene expression profiles or other biological data, it is often required to assign measurements to distinct categories (e.g. high and low and possibly intermediate). Subsequent analyses strongly depend on the results of this quantization. Poor quantization will have potentially misleading effects on further investigations. We propose the bi trina package that integrates different multiscale algorithms for bin a rization and for trina rization of one dimensional data with methods for quality assessment and visualization of the results. By identifying measurements that show large variations over different time points or conditions, this quality assessment can determine candidates that are related to the specific experimental setting. Availability and implementation: bi trina is freely available on CRAN.

introduction in the context of analyzing biological data, such as gene expression profiles, it is often necessary to identify those genes, transcripts or proteins that display prominent variations over time or across different experimental conditions. This can be required to preselect more interesting candidates for subsequent analyses or to reveal data applicable for further approaches, such as Boolean network modeling. This can be achieved by categorizing the data to a small number of distinct groups and assigning valid ities to this categorization. For simplicity, we will focus in the following on bin a rization schemes and mention trina rization as their extension in the next section. bin a rization is the process of partitioning data into two groups and assigning a single value to each. It can be seen as a special case of discretizing a continuous signal into a k valued signal with x 1 . ..  x k , for k  2 (and k  3 for trina rization (). The most common approach is to bin a rize measurements according to a threshold, such as the mean value (), a quantile () or more elaborate estimation techniques as described by or hop fen sitz et al. (2012). A threshold can also be learned from external information (). One commonly assigns the value 0 to the data points below the threshold ('low') and 1 to those above ('high'). The aim of any such bin a rization method is to find the most appropriate threshold. bin a rization is often part of data preprocessing on which further analyses strongly depend. For example, gene expression data from time series must be bin a rized for the reconstruction and simulation of Boolean networks (see, e.g.,). Only then can these networks model gene regulation by representing each gene as a binary variable illustrating the two states 'active' and 'inactive'. In addition to being an important prerequisite to various analyses, bin a rization and trina rization can also be used independently to extract information. It can, for example, serve as an unsupervised method to reveal patterns showed that bin a rized signals can be utilized for prototype based classification. Tuna and Niranjan (2010) demonstrated that the generalization ability of support vector machines is not declined by bin a rized gene expression profiles. However, knowledge about data, which can not be reasonably represented by two groups (i.e. data that is 'not well bin a rize able can give valuable hints about the processes that lead to it, like noise or gradients. Nevertheless current implementations of available bin a rization algorithms (e.g.) regardless ly impose an inappropriate separation into two groups and are not able to identify this additional 'don't know group'. We propose the R package bi trina which is the first to provide multiscale approaches for bin a rization trina rization and reliability assessment.

application the following illustrates the application of the bi trina package and its statistical tests on gene expression data. We bin a rized and trina rized a dataset containing gene expression measurements (4028 genes, 67 time points) of the developmental stages (embryonic, larval, pupal and adult) of Drosophila melanogaster (). We utilized the BASC B algorithm. After correction for multiple testing (FDR  0.05), 252 of the 4028 genes are statistically significant according to basc s test for bin a rize ability. A heat map of the bin a rized signals can be found in. As an example illustrates the bin a rization of the Rhodopsin 3 gene, which is a photoreceptor of the eye. It can be observed that expression remains low throughout the first three developmental stages but then peaks in the adult stage. This is properly reflected by the bin a rization which achieves a highly significant p value of P  10 10 for this gene. An interesting question with respect to this illustration might be whether the statistical assessment of bin a rize ability can provide an indication which of the measured genes are involved in the developmental process. That is, can the statistical test identify genes whose bin a rized measurements somehow reflect the known developmental phases? Statistical evidence indeed suggests that there is a significant association between the concordance of measurements with the developmental stages and their bin a rize ability (see Supplementary Material). This shows the practical relevance of the proposed quality assessment for the identification of potentially interesting candidate genes for further investigation. We also performed cross validation classification experiments on the bin a rize able and trina riz able signals that indicate that indeed the quantized information is sufficient for the categorization of the developmental stages (). The mean accuracy of a linear support vector machine () only declined by about 0.71% for BASC A and the TASC algorithms, and 2.24% for BASC B while utilizing only 27.94% (BASC A), 5.74% (BASC B) and 56.71% (TASC A), 18.18% (TASC B) of all features. In terms of accuracy they outperformed the k means algorithm (10 restarts) that achieved a maximum mean accuracy of 93.58%, with utilizing only 0.41% of all available features.

conclusion many analyses require a quantization of data and thus depend heavily on this procedure's results. However, not all data are well bin a rize able or trina riz able and current implementations do not include methods to assess the applicability of the original data for such a method. Our R package bi trina integrates statistical testing procedures that are capable of assessing the bin a rize ability and trina riz ability and consequently the quality of discretizing of biological data. As such, the approaches can be used to identify candidate measurements that may be relevant for further analyses note The mean accuracy of a linear support vector machine one versus one, majority vote) and the mean percentage of bin a rize able features together with their absolute numbers are shown (FDR  0.05, best values in bold).
