Motivation: Electrostatic calculations are an important tool for deciphering many functional mechanisms in proteins. Generalized Born (GB) models offer a fast and convenient computational approximation over other implicit solvent based electrostatic models. Here we present a novel gb based web server, using the program blu ues to calculate numerous electrostatic features including pka values and surface potentials. The output is organized allowing both experts and beginners to rapidly sift the data. A novel feature of the blu ues server is that it explicitly allows to find electrostatic differences between wild type and mutant structures. Availability: The blu ues server, examples and extensive help files are available for non-commercial use at URL: http://protein.bio. unipd.it/bluues/.

introduction the structure, function (), stability (), protein protein interaction () and small molecule binding () of a protein is largely dependent on its electrostatics. Electrostatics calculations are computationally impractical when modeling the solvent explicitly, e.g. by analyzing trajectories of a large number of solvent molecules in molecular dynamics simulations. Continuum solvent implicit models based on the poisson boltzmann (PB) equation have been widely used () and calculations are computationally achievable but are often very slow, especially for large molecules. When self and interaction energies and forces are desired, the most widely used approach is based on the Generalized Born (GB) model (). GB approaches are a further approximation to PB methods but are considerably faster with calculations available in reasonable time, even for large molecules. Often the GB approach is benchmarked compared with PB methods due to the improved accuracy of the latter.). The blu ues server produces graphical and downloadable files, described online. The image above only shows the graphical aspects of blu ues. Both wild type and mutated protein are shown in JMOL with the residue under mutation highlighted in black and actions implemented as buttons. Tables producing sorted pKa and potential are provided with corresponding distance to mutation (e.g. the E66 carboxylic group has the greatest positive pKa shift of 0.49). The corresponding titration curve can be examined for each pKa shift. Charge and ph dependent folding free energy as a function of pH are also provided successful for mutation (). Only residues in the PDB file which have a relative solvent accessibility, calculated by DSSP (), above 40% are allowed to be mutated. This restriction was chosen because mutating buried residues may lead to unfolding (). The server can analyze the effect of a particular mutation of interest with a very good accuracy, compared with more approximate methods (). After mutation both wild type and mutant structures are converted to PQR format using the program PDB2PQR using CHARMM force field () and then processed with the blu ues algorithm. The output files are similar to those mentioned previously, except they are provided for both wild type and mutant. In addition, user defined wild type and mutant can be uploaded to the server (PDB or PQR). This type of input could be useful, for example, in a setting where the user would prefer to perform a more comprehensive self-made mutant and wild type model [e.g. homology modeling (. An important characteristic of the mutation output interface are the delta values provided between the wild type and mutant. These simply subtract the wild type electrostatic features from the mutant ones. They are sorted in order of largest positive difference and may provide clues as to the most relevant electrostatic changes due to the mutation relative to the wild type. Examples of delta values include pka values for ionizable groups and surface potential. Moreover, atom distance from the mutation C atom is incorporated since long range effects from the mutation may indicate important residues (), especially if they can be found to be conserved. In other words effects nearby the mutation site are expected while distant shifts may indicate an 'Electrostatic domino' effect highlighting distantly coupled residues.
