Motivation: photo activatable ribonucleoside enhanced cross-linking and immunoprecipitation par clip is an experimental method based on next generation sequencing for identifying the RNA interaction sites of a given protein. The method deliberately inserts t toc substitutions at the rna protein interaction sites, which provides a second layer of evidence compared with other CLIP methods. However, the experiment includes several sources of noise which cause both low frequency errors and spurious high frequency alterations. Therefore, rigorous statistical analysis is required in order to separate true t toc base changes, following cross-linking, from noise. So far, most of the existing par clip data analysis methods focus on discarding the low frequency errors and rely on high frequency substitutions to report binding sites, not taking into account the possibility of high frequency false positive substitutions. Results: Here, we introduce b mix a new probabilistic method which explicitly accounts for the sources of noise in par clip data and distinguishes cross-link induced t toc substitutions from low and high frequency erroneous alterations. We demonstrate the superior speed and accuracy of our method compared with existing approaches on both simulated and real, publicly available human datasets. Availability and implementation: The model is freely accessible within the b mix toolbox at www. cbgbs see thz ch software b mix available for Matlab and R.

introduction rna molecules interact with proteins and form ribonucleoprotein complexes actively involved in a plethora of essential biological processes such as translational regulation, alternative splicing or RNA transport (). A well known example of rna binding proteins r bps consists of members of the argonaut e family, components of the rna induced silencing complex (RISC), which bind to diverse small RNA molecules and regulate gene silencing ().report 1542 r bps in humans, many of these having been found dysregulated in diseases including cancer (). Therefore, characterizing the interactions between RNA and r bps represents an important step towards understanding RNA function. high throughput sequencing technology allows querying the binding sites of a specific RBP in a transcriptome wide fashion (). One of the recently developed high throughput sequencing based experimental V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com protocols aiming to identify the binding sites of r bps throughout the transcriptome is photo activatable ribonucleoside enhanced Crosslinking and Immunoprecipitation par clip (). According to this method (), a synthetic photo activatable ribonucleoside such as 4S U 4thio uridine or, less commonly, 6S G 6thio guanosine is integrated into the RNA of cultured cells. Upon exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light, cross-linking of r bps to RNA occurs. The cross-linked rna rbp pairs are subsequently isolated using immunoprecipitation with an antibody targeting the protein of interest, and the RNA fragment is retrieved upon protein digestion. A complementary DNA (cDNA) sequencing library is generated by reverse complementing the RNA fragments. Due to the incorporated nucleoside, systematic t toc (for 4S U) or gto a (for 6S G) substitutions appear in the cDNA library at the interaction sites (). Therefore, par clip brings the advantage of having an additional layer of evidence by introducing specific base changes at the binding sites. par clip data are characterized by prevalent t toc substitutions observed at different mismatch frequencies (). However, compared with rnase q par clip has been observed to also introduce a large number of other substitutions, different from t toc notably at low and high mismatch frequency (see Section 3). This indicates the presence of noise and contamination in the par clip procedure which can as well introduce erroneous t toc substitutions, with high potential to be mistaken for true cross-link alterations. Therefore, of great importance in par clip data analysis is discarding the low frequency sequencing errors, as well as high frequency spurious substitutions. Currently, there is a handful of methods available for analyzing par clip data, trying to identify the rna rbp binding sites using various techniques, such as kernel density estimation (), non-parametric mixture models (), Bayesian hidden Markov models () and binomial tests (). Some of the available methods focus on analyzing data from one specific type of RBP, such as, e.g. AGO2 par clip data (). However, the non crosslink high frequency substitutions are usually reported within high confidence binding sites by most of these methods. To the best of our knowledge, only one of the currently existing par clip analysis methods, namely wav cluster (), accounts for these substitutions show that cross-link loci reside in moderately altered sites and, within the wav cluster package, use a mixture model based on the relative substitution frequencies to exclude sites with too low or high nucleotide substitution rates. However, the method is not widely used due to complex implementation and long execution time. Additionally, the approach underlying the wav cluster package does not explicitly model read counts within the genome and eventually uses a fixed cut off of the substitution frequencies to select high confidence t toc alterations, which leads to a higher error rate, especially in low coverage regions. Here, we present a novel probabilistic approach, based on a constrained three component binomial mixture, to explicitly describe substitution counts observed in par clip data. The method, coined b mix uses a maximum likelihood approach to estimate the substitution rates induced by par clip and separates both low and high frequency erroneous t toc alterations from the true cross-link substitutions (). We perform an exhaustive comparison of b mix to existing approaches and show its increased performance in terms of speed, accuracy and consistency on synthetic and real data.
