Motivation: Transmembrane β barrel proteins t mbs are found in the outer membrane of gram negative bacteria, chloroplast and mitochondria. They play a major role in the translocation machinery, pore formation, membrane anchoring and ion exchange. t mbs are also promising targets for antimicrobial drugs and vaccines. Given the difficulty in membrane protein structure determination, computational methods to identify t mbs and predict the topology of t mbs are important. Results: Here, we present b octopus an improved method for the topology prediction of t mbs by employing a combination of support vector machines (SVMs) and Hidden Markov Models (HMMs). The SVMs and HMMs account for local and global residue preferences, respectively. Based on a 10-fold cross validation test, b octopus performs better than all existing methods, reaching a Q3 accuracy of 87%. Further, b octopus predicted the correct number of strands for 83% proteins in the dataset. b octopus might also help in reliable identification of t mbs by using it as an additional filter to methods specialized in this task. Availability: b octopus is freely available as a web server at: http://boctopus.cbr.su.se/. The datasets used for training and evaluations are also available from this site.

introduction two types of transmembrane proteins are known to exist, -helical membrane proteins and transmembrane  barrel proteins t mbs. The former class has been the major focus of computational methods, as they are known to constitute 2030% of a typical proteome (). However, t mbs are worthy of attention as they play an important role in the translocation machinery of both inner and outer membrane proteins in bacteria, chloroplast and mitochondria. Moreover, t mbs are involved in transport of molecules, voltage gating, membrane anchoring, pore formation and are also candidate molecular targets for development of antimicrobial drugs and vaccines (). However, the number * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of solved TMB structures in PDB is limited, since they are difficult to crystal ize consequently, better computational methods for the topology prediction of t mbs are needed. Such a predicted topology can function as a template for experimental investigations and can further aid in elucidating the structure and function of putative t mbs. t mbs typically consist of a central pore region made up of anti-parallel  strands and residues in the  strands follow a strict dyad repeat pattern (). The general construction principles of t mbs () have been employed for the topology prediction and genome wide identification of t mbs. However, the low number of known TMB structures and a less prominent hydrophobicity profile pose problems in the development of computational methods for the identification and topology prediction of t mbs. The computational methods in the realm of t mbs can be divided into two parts (i) methods that aim to identify t mbs from genomic data and (ii) methods that predict the TMB topology assuming that the given sequence is a putative TMB. The first group consists of a variety of methods including methods that combine statistical propensities and c terminal pattern identification (), empirical scores (), k nearest neighbor methods (), SVMs (), Neural Networks (), Hidden Markov Models (HMM) (), amino acid composition () and secondary structure element alignments (). The hh omp method for the identification of t mbs employs hmm profile comparison and is based on the observation that almost all -barrel OMP have a common ancestry (). Methods aiming at the prediction of topologies include hmm based methods such as pre dtm bb (), tmb hmm () and prof tmb (), svm based methods such as tm beta pred rbf (), neural network based methods such as tmb pro () and methods based on statistical potentials such as trans fold (). prof tmb (), tm beta net () and pre dtm bb () also predict the topology of the identified t mbs. A comparison and evaluation carried out indicated that hmm based methods outperform methods based on other types of machine learning (). Here, we present an improved topology predictor for t mbs named b octopus. b octopus is based on the ideas used in two page 517 516522
