Motivation: Cell migration is a complex process that is controlled through the time sequential feedback regulation of protein signalling and gene regulation. Based on prior knowledge and own experimental data, we developed a large scale dynamic network describing the onset and maintenance of hepatocyte growth factor induced migration of primary human keratinocytes. We applied Boolean logic to capture the qualitative behaviour as well as short and long term dynamics of the complex signalling network involved in this process, comprising protein signalling, gene regulation and autocrine feedback. Results: A Boolean model has been compiled from time resolved transcriptome data and literature mining, incorporating the main pathways involved in migration from initial stimulation to phenotype progress. steady state analysis under different inhibition and stimulation conditions of known key molecules reproduces existing data and predicts novel interactions based on our own experiments. Model simulations highlight for the first time the necessity of a temporal sequence of initial, transient MET receptor (met proto-oncogene, hepatocyte growth factor receptor) and subsequent, continuous epidermal growth factor integrin signalling to trigger and sustain migration by autocrine signalling that is integrated through the Focal adhesion kinase protein. We predicted in silico and verified in vitro that long term cell migration is stopped if any of the two feedback loops are inhibited.

introduction cell migration and wound healing are complex cellular processes that involve keratinocytes, fibroblasts, blood vessels and inflammatory cells (). Keratinocyte migration plays an important role in re epithelial ization and wound healing (), which is a multistep cellular process by the  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the last two authors should be regarded as joint Last Authors. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. coordination of extra and intracellular signals (). The precise regulation of cell migration in its temporal sequence, activation and de-activation is crucial for tissue homeostasis. In its aberrant form, it can lead to scar formation () and has critical implications to cancer metastasis formation (). Different growth factors such as hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), transforming growth factor beta (TGF-), keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) that activate and regulate cell migration have been extensively studied in many cell types (). These growth factors have been found to overlap with mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways (). HGF interacts and activates MET receptor () to induce context dependent several cellular processes such as proliferation, cell movement or morphogenic differentiation (). Herein, we focus on hgf induced migration of primary normal human keratinocytes (NHK). Although there is vast literature concerning hgf induced keratinocyte migration and MET receptor dynamics, the dynamic interplay of initial MET receptor regulation and subsequent autocrine regulation that initiate, sustain and control cell migration remain poorly understood. Based on time resolved transcriptome data of NHK after HGF stimulation, we have previously inferred a gene regulatory model describing the decision process of NHK cells towards migration (). From the model analysis it was evident that several pathways coordinate their action to initiate and sustain cell migration upon initial HGF stimulation: migration is started through the AP-1 system and maintained after MET receptor internalization () by autocrine signalling through EGF receptor (EGFR) and urokinase plasminogen activator surface receptor up ar (). The model predicted qualitatively how the temporal sequence of transient MET receptor activation and subsequent long term EGF receptor activity sustained the migratory phenotype. However, as the model was based on transcriptome data alone, there was no mechanistic explanation of the observed processes. A model combining transcriptome data with mechanistic protein signalling has been missing so far. A major obstacle in building such a model lies in the different time scales involved in the process of cell migration. In general, the transcriptome response changes over several hours, while protein signalling pathways become active within minutes upon receptor of the hgf induced keratinocyte migration. Nodes are connected by directed edges, where black and red connections denote activating and inhibitory interactions, respectively. Red nodes represent transcriptionally regulated proteins, yellow nodes are endpoints of the network. 'AND' 'gates are denoted by blue dots and 'OR' gates are found where more than one edge connects to single node. Dashed edges denote interactions that have not been considered, when calculating the steady state and are shown for completeness stimulation (). Capturing all necessary and sufficient events on the protein signalling level, including kinetic parameters, is close to impossible by current biological technology. To link our prior transcriptome based model with protein signalling pathways, we present a Boolean network model of hgf induced keratinocyte migration. The Boolean approach allows to derive important functional properties and predictions without the need for detailed quantitative kinetic data and parameters. In the past, the approach has been successfully applied for diverse systems such as gene regulatory networks (), models of floral morphogenesis (), mammalian cell cycle (), EGFR signalling () or apoptosis (). To our knowledge, this is the first model for hgf induced keratinocyte migration that incorporates protein signalling, gene regulation and autocrine feedback, following cellular dynamics from initial stimulation to the execution of the phenotype. To obtain the dynamical behaviour reproducing literature knowledge and our own experimental data, we include several time scales in the model mimicking the fast activation of downstream signalling of MET, map kerk and p38/JNK pathways, as well as the slow transcriptome response and subsequent autocrine activation of EGFR and up a receptors, all of which are necessary to sustain cell migration after MET receptor internalization. Specifically, from a logical steady state analysis, we show that priming of the HGF MET receptor system is necessary for continued autocrine regulation i496
