Motivation: In recent years, several biomedical event extraction (EE) systems have been developed. However, the nature of the annotated training corpora, as well as the training process itself, can limit the performance levels of the trained EE systems. In particular, most event annotated corpora do not deal adequately with coreference. This impacts on the trained systems ability to recognize biomedical entities, thus affecting their performance in extracting events accurately. Additionally, the fact that most EE systems are trained on a single annotated corpus further restricts their coverage. Results: We have enhanced our existing EE system, event mine in two ways. First, we developed a new coreference resolution (CR) system and integrated it with event mine. The standalone performance of our CR system in resolving anaphoric references to proteins is considerably higher than the best ranked system in the core f subtask of the BioNLP11 Shared Task. Secondly, the improved event mine incorporates domain adaptation (DA) methods, which extend EE coverage by allowing several different annotated corpora to be used during training. Combined with a novel set of methods to increase the generality and efficiency of event mine the integration of both CR and DA have resulted in significant improvements in EE, ranging between 0.5% and 3.4% f score. The enhanced event mine outperforms the highest ranked systems from the BioNLP09 shared task, and from the GENIA and Infectious Diseases subtasks of the BioNLP11 shared task.

introduction the focus of text mining systems in biomedicine has recently shifted from extracting named entities of biological relevance to recognizing relations and events. Biomedical event extraction (EE) systems have already been integrated with a number of applications, such as semantic search, association mining for knowledge discovery, bioprocess extraction and pathway reconstruction (). The increasing requirement for high performance EE systems has motivated the development of several event annotated * To whom correspondence should be addressed. corpora to facilitate their training [e.g. GENIA (), bio infer (), GREC (), bio nlp Shared Tasks 2009 (ST09) () and 2011 (ST11) (. Events are structured descriptions of biological processes involving complex relationships (e.g. angiogenesis, metabolism and reactions) between biomedical entities, and are highly dependent on context. Events usually consist of triggers, which are often verbs (e.g. inhibit) or nominal izations (e.g. inhibition), and their typed arguments, which can be biomedical entities (e.g. gene) or other events (e.g. Regulation). Typically, EE systems find both triggers and associated arguments, which can present a number of challenges. Triggers are expressed in diverse ways and their exact interpretation can depend upon context, e.g. 'expression of' is an event of type Gene Expression, but 'expression of' is of type Transcription. Furthermore, event arguments can be difficult to detect; since triggers are sublanguage dependent, their exact syntactic arguments are dictated by the domain. EE systems are thus highly dependent on the availability of training sets and external resources (e.g. dictionaries) that can expand the trigger candidates in the training set with semantically similar alternatives. Generally, machine learning methods are applied to syntactic parse results to disambiguate event types according to their surrounding contexts and to identify relations between the syntactic and semantic arguments of triggers. There are two important issues that are scarcely dealt with by existing EE systems. First, the usual method of training on only a single annotated corpus can limit the coverage and scalability of the system. Secondly, coreference resolution (CR) is required for the correct interpretation of certain event arguments. This is illustrated in, in which there are two co referential links. The first link involves the mention this gene and its antecedent jun b whereas the second concerns the mention that and its antecedent expression. There are two gene expression events in the sentence, i.e. jun b expression and jun c expression, which can only be correctly recognized if these co referential links are identified and resolved. This article reports on two enhancements that have been made to an existing EE system, event mine (), to address the issues outlined above. First, we constructed a new CR system, whose performance in resolving anaphoric references to. Events are represented as dotted rectangles with event types. Within events, solid rectangles represent participants, whereas trigger expressions are shown with a white background, argument roles with a grey background and arguments with a black background. The oval denotes an event modification, in this case speculation genes and proteins considerably exceeds that of the best participating system in the Protein Coreference task core f of ST11, which focussed on protein gene name CR. Subsequent integration of our new CR system with event mine clearly demonstrates an improvement in state of the art EE performance on several event corpora. Secondly, our incorporation of domain adaptation (DA) methods into event mine which make it possible to use information from multiple annotated corpora when training the system, have been shown to further boost EE performance. The enhanced version of event mine incorporating both CR and DA, outperforms the highest ranked systems participating in ST09, and the GENIA and Infectious Diseases (ID) subtasks of ST11.

conclusion this article has reported on a number of enhancements to the event mine EE system. First, several methods were incorporated to increase both the generality and efficiency of the system. Secondly, a newly constructed, rule based CR system was integrated into event mine and DA methods were applied to utilize information from multiple annotated corpora. The CR system considerably outperformed systems that participated in the GE11 core f task. The incorporation of CR and DA into the EE process significantly improved the performance of event mine on four different event annotated corpora, demonstrating the adaptable nature of the system. The results surpass those of systems that participated in the GE09 task of ST09 and the GE11 and ID tasks of ST11. As future work, we will explore further novel ways of integrating external resources, by reducing the effect of differences among corpora. We will also investigate how event mine can be embedded into other applications, e.g. semantic search engines and pathway curation and reconstruction systems.
