The explosion of interest in non-coding RNAs, together with improvements in RNA X-ray crystallography, has led to a rapid increase in RNA structures at atomic resolution from 847 in 2005 to 1900 in 2010. The success of whole genome sequencing has led to an explosive growth of unaligned homologous sequences. Consequently, there is a compelling and urgent need for user friendly tools for producing structure informed RNA alignments. Most alignment software considers the primary sequence alone; some specialized alignment software can also include watson crick base pairs, but none adequately addresses the needs introduced by the rapid influx of both sequence and structural data. Therefore, we have developed the Boulder ALignment Editor (ALE), which is a web based RNA alignment editor, designed for editing and assessing alignments using structural information. Some features of boulder ale include the annotation and evaluation of an alignment based on is oster i city of watson crick and non watson crick base pairs, along with the collapsing (horizontally and vertically) of the alignment, while maintaining the ability to edit the alignment.

introduction the rna alignment Ontology () provides several key recommendations that are essential for the development of a user friendly editor of alignments of a few dozen to a few hundred sequences, consisting of a few hundred base pairs. These are: (i) the incorporation of concepts introduced by the RNA Ontology, in particular the leon tis westhof classification system for non watson crick base pairs (), which are the building blocks of tertiary motifs (); (ii) the annotation of specific regions within the structures (e.g. the P4 helix of RNase P), which can be used to support alternative notions of correspondence (sequence level versus structure level), including homology; and (iii) the ability to perform both horizontal and vertical collapsing of the alignment, allowing the user to focus on specific sequences or on specific regions of the alignment. Several additional considerations that are especially useful for curating large databases of structured RNAs such as rf am (), the RNase P database () and the tRNA database () are (i) the functionality to dynamically score an alignment plotted. This workflow is illustrated in. Finally, features can be mapped onto the alignment, and boulder ale allows the alignment to be vertically or horizontally collapsed to focus the user's attention on specific tax a or regions of the sequence. In practice, it is often useful to do this iteratively, cleaning up a particular region of the alignment in each of several closely related groups of sequences, then aligning the groups of sequences to each other to reveal higher level correspondences that rely more on structure than on sequence.
