Branch is a web application that provides users with the ability to interact directly with large biomedical datasets. The interaction is mediated through a collaborative graphical user interface for building and evaluating decision trees. These trees can be used to compose and test sophisticated hypotheses and to develop predictive models. Decision trees are built and evaluated based on a library of imported datasets and can be stored in a collective area for sharing and re-use. Availability and implementation: Branch is hosted at http://biobranch.org/ and the open source code is available at http://bitbucket.org/sulab/biobranch/.

introduction scientific advances based on large datasets often involve a cycle of interactions between experts in computation ('data scientists') and experts in the domain of inquiry. Typically, computational scientists will need to adapt scripts for data analysis and presentation at each step, limiting the number of potential iterations and resulting in relatively little feedback from the subject matter expert. Graphical interfaces for data exploration can empower domain experts with the ability to engage with data directly, increasing their capacity to rapidly define and answer questions leading to new insights (). Given a dataset with many features (e.g. gene expression measurements, clinical attributes) and nominal class values for each sample (e.g. breast cancer relapse status), a decision tree can provide a visual representation of a sophisticated logic function linking selected input features to an output class. Decision trees are often induced automatically from training data and applied to classify new samples. They can also be constructed manually, with the intent to either incorporate domain expertise into their structure to improve generalizability () or to test specific hypotheses. As one example of the latter process, a researcher may ask whether a dataset supports her hypothesis that breast cancer relapse will be associated with high levels of PSRC1 expression or a combination of low levels of PSCR1 and high levels of BRCA1. This hypothesis can be represented as a decision tree rooted in a feature for PSRC1 gene expression with a leaf node predicting relapse for high PSCR1 and a secondary split under low PSCR1 on BRCA1 expression (). The extent to which this decision tree fits the dataset, measured by e.g. its predictive accuracy or a statistical test of association between samples in leaf nodes and their actual class values (), indicates the extent to which the data supports the hypothesis. Here we introduce an interactive, collaborative Web application, called Branch, that allows domain experts to rapidly and easily build, evaluate and share decision trees based on large biomedical datasets.
