We developed break pointer a fast algorithm to locate breakpoints of structural variants (SVs) from single end reads produced by next generation sequencing. By taking advantage of local non-uniform read distribution and misalignments created by SVs, break pointer scans the alignment of single end reads to identify regions containing potential breakpoints. The detection of such breakpoints can indicate insertions longer than the read length and SVs located in re petit ve regions which might be miss d by other methods. Thus, break pointer complements existing methods to locate SVs from single end reads. Availability: https://github.com/ruping/Breakpointer

introduction identifying structural variants (SVs) from short sequencing reads remains challenging. Existing next generation sequencing ngs based methods for SV detection are primarily based on the analysis of paired end reads (PE) assuming that deviations from the expected mapping distance are caused by SVs (). Alternatively, to characterize SVs from single end reads (SE), split read methods can be adopted to generate pseudo PE (). However, the short length of the artificial PE limits the mapp ability and the size of detectable insertions (up to medium size). Alternative se based methods are needed to facilitate the discovery of breakpoints of longer insertions and SVs located in repetitive regions. SVs usually cause specific mapping artifacts in the vicinity of the SV boundaries. Reads slightly crossing the breakpoint of an SV can be mapped only if they contain a few bases of the variant (depending on the allowed edit distance). This case usually leads to consistent misalignments next to the breakpoint. Such misalignments have already been used to clean SNP calls () or to determine the regions for local realignment (). In contrast, reads spanning the breakpoint will be un mappable. Consequently, on the left or right side of the SV boundary, fewer read alignments will start or end, respectively (and Supplementary). Our tool break pointer locates SV breakpoints by analyzing both * To whom correspondence should be addressed. misalignment artifacts and local non-uniform read distribution created by SVs.
