Motivation: Biological reality can in silico only be comprehensively represented in multi scaled models. To this end, cell behavioural models addressing the multi-cellular level have to be semantically linked with mechanistic molecular models. These requirements have to be met by flexible software workflows solving the issues of different time scales, inter model variable referencing and flexible sub-model embedding. Results: We developed a novel software workflow epi sim for the semantic integration of Systems Biology Markup Language sbml based quantitative models in multi scaled tissue models and simulations. This workflow allows to import and access sbml based models. SBML model species, reactions and parameters are semantically integrated in cell behavioural models (CBM) represented by graphical process diagrams. By this, cellular states like proliferation and differentiation can be flexibly linked to gene regulatory or biochemical reaction networks. For a multi-scale agent based tissue simulation executable code is automatically generated where different time scales of imported SBML models and CBM have been mapped. We demonstrate the capabilities of the novel software workflow by integrating Tysons cell cycle model in our model of human epidermal tissue homeostasis. Finally, we show the semantic interplay of the different biological scales during tissue simulation. Availability: The epi sim platform is available as binary executables for Windows, Linux and Mac OS X at

introduction many systems biological models have been developed in the past years. The vast majority of these models focus exclusively on the sub-cellular or the cellular level, whereas only a minority are really multi scaled (). However, semantic linking of systems biological scales with models on sub-cellular, cellular and tissue level is a We previously introduced the epi sim platform as a graphical cell behavioural modelling and tissue simulation workflow (). Here, we extend our work towards a platform allowing direct semantic integration of sbml based sub-cellular and graphical cell behavioural models. (i) We implemented an SBML model importer for our graphical modelling system (GMS). (ii) The GMS was moreover extended by a graphical editor for SBML model species, parameters and reactions. Any SBML model item can be directly referenced and manipulated in a graphical cell behavioural model (CBM). This allows building a conceptual semantic model link between the biological scales. (iii) To realize the according technical link, we built a code generator for automatic generation of a model connector software component (MCC). MCC connects a cell's multiagent based CBM simulation with an imported SBML model's time course simulation. MCC handles multi-directional data flow and mapping of the different model time scales. (iv) copas i was integrated in our simulation environment (SE) for time course simulation of imported quantitative sbml based models. We demonstrate the capabilities of the new software workflow by importing and semantically integrating Tyson's cell cycle model () in our model of human epidermal tissue homeostasis (). We directly link cellular states like proliferation and differentiation to the behaviour of Tyson's model. Finally, we show the semantic interplay between the sub-cellular and the cell behavioural model in the tissue simulation.

discussion we developed and introduced the first entirely graphical multi-scale cell behavioural modelling and simulation software workflow that semantically links the sub-cellular and cellular level in tissue simulations. Semantic linking comprises flexible mapping of time scales, enabling of bi-directional model variable access and by this linking of general cellular states like proliferation and differentiation to molecular processes and vice versa. Cellular behaviour is graphically modelled with process diagrams. An unlimited number of quantitative sbml based models can be imported with the GMS. This enables a semantic integration of sub-cellular in cell behavioural models. We integrated copas i in the SE for calculating deterministic time course simulations of the imported SBML models for each individual cell. An automatically generated MCC handles the data flow between sub-cellular and cell behavioural models during tissue simulation. Time course simulation states can be stored together with the overall tissue simulation state in a simulation snapshot. Based on such snapshot, a tissue simulation can be fully resumed. Moreover, this enables archiving, re-using and exchanging of tissue simulation results among users of the SE. Simulation snapshots allow re running a published tissue simulation that goes far beyond the information conveyed by a simulation movie. However, the lack of a commonly accepted standard for representing cell based models as well as the according simulation results hinders the exchange of both, models and results, between different existing modelling and simulation environments. Such a standard is in our view the prerequisite for realizing re-usable and ready to run multi-scale models in a fashion that is comparable with sub-cellular models using SBML. To demonstrate the applicability of our software workflow, we imported the SBML version of Tyson's well known 2 variable cell cycle model with the GMS. In our model of epidermal homeostasis, we linked the imported sub-cellular model with the cellular states proliferation and differentiation. Cell division in proliferating keratinocytes is controlled by the active MPF concentration modelled on the sub-cellular level. In turn, the behaviour of Tyson's model is coupled to a keratinocyte's differentiation stage on the cellular level. By this, we were able to demonstrate a bi-directional semantic link between the sub-cellular and cellular modelling and simulation level. Additionally, we demonstrated the automatic elimination of namespace conflicts by importing the 6 variable version of Tyson's. For both model versions, the SBML model time units could be successfully mapped to the required CBM time steps. This shows that with the developed workflow, SBML models can be re-used in a context requiring a different time scale without re parameterizing the SBML model. One might argue that such a mapping of semantically equivalent periods should not be necessary. But actually, the necessity of directly manipulating parameters of an ode based model would contradict our initial requirement of re-usability of SBML models. Moreover, we see time mapping as a valuable technique for model synchronization and simpler multi-scale model integration. Finally, we demonstrated that the SE is able to administer time course simulations the monitored TA cell differentiates to an early spin o sum cell after one cell division (2). This corresponds on the sub-cellular level to a transition of Tyson's cell cycle model from oscillating to steady state behaviour of multiple imported quantitative SBML models. The SE successfully handled 49000 individual time course simulations per tissue simulation step in the 3D simulation. The computation time per simulation step increases linearly for increasing cell numbers independent of optimization by the modeller. Moreover, this indicates the power of the epi sim code generator and the approach of automatically translating graphical CBMs into highly efficient and optimized executable code sutter lin. Our software workflow allows graphically building multi scaled models without any coding. This is a unique approach compared with other available systems (). The available model elements (Supplements S2) of the graphical modelling language allow deterministic, stochastic or hybrid modelling. Even continuous models can be manually integrated (Supplements S3). All control structures of a programming language like branching based on conditions or values are available. Loops are automatically induced when neighbouring cells are referenced. Graphical CBMs are linked to a hard coded biomechanical model provided by the SE. This modularization into biomechanical and cell behavioural models is not necessarily a limitation. Moreover, it allows re-using one and the same CBM in 2D and 3D as demonstrated. The integration of new biomechanical models in the SE is explicitly intended. Furthermore, the GMS could be adopted and connected to other simulation environments like CompuCell3D with manageable workload. The GMS as well as the SE hides to a large extent the technical complexity of modelling and simulating cellular behaviour in a tissue context. Furthermore, the separation of technical complexity and systems biological model complexity is in our view a key requirement for building highly complex multi-scale models. This is the main lesson learned from the field of software engineering where model driven architectures are analogous. This complexity separation fosters the creation of more complex truly multi scaled models by not computer but rather biologically skilled scientists. Public databases like bio models provide complete ready to run SBML models huck a and le nov re, 2010). With our novel software workflow, we established a link to this large and up to now unexploited potential for building multi-scale models in a multi-cellular context. To come up with more realistic and consequently more complex biological models, it is inevitable to rely on an existing, ready to use model base, instead of starting from scratch solely based on literature. However, this requires that increasingly sub-cellular models are developed with a focus on the functional, behavioural change of cells. Such models could be models of cell decision for proliferation, differentiation, migration or apoptosis. This currently in literature underrepresented aspect is in our view an essential prerequisite for building higher complexity models. In this context, our multi-scale workflow motivates the integration of existing models or the creation of novel ones. In consequence, we expect this to be the route to more holistic models of larger biological systems.
