Motivation: Bisulfite sequencing bs seq has emerged as the gold standard to study genome wide DNA methylation at single nucleotide resolution. Quality control (QC) is a critical step in the analysis pipeline to ensure that bs seq data are of high quality and suitable for subsequent analysis. Although several QC tools are available for next generation sequencing data, most of them were not designed to handle QC issues specific to bs seq protocols. Therefore, there is a strong need for a dedicated QC tool to evaluate and remove potential technical biases in bs seq experiments. Results: We developed a package named bse qc to comprehensively evaluate the quality of bs seq experiments and automatically trim nucleotides with potential technical biases that may result in inaccurate methylation estimation. bse qc takes standard SAM/ BAM files as input and generates bias free samba m files for downstream analysis. Evaluation based on real bs seq data indicates that the use of the bias free samba m file substantially improves the quantification of methylation level. Availability and implementation: bse qc is freely available at: http:// code googlecom
introduction dna methylation, an epigenetic modification affecting the organization and function of the genome, plays an important role in several key biological processes, including transcriptional regulation, x chromosome inactivation, genomic imprinting, silencing of repetitive elements and chromatin structure (). Bisulfite conversion followed by next generation sequencing bs seq has emerged as a powerful technique for detecting genome wide DNA methylation at single nucleotide resolution (). Ideally, bs seq experiment should be able to directly and exactly quantify the methylation level of every cytosine in the genome. However, current bs seq protocols possess several intrinsic technical biases, which may impact methylation level estimation. These biases include overhang end repair 5 0 bisulfite conversion failure, sequencing into the adaptor and 3 0 low sequencing quality (). Although the last two biases are also present in other next generation sequencing data, the first two biases, i.e. end repair and 5 0 bisulfite conversion failure, are highly specific to bs seq protocols. bs seq reads with the first two biases can be perfectly mapped to the reference genome; however, they will result in biased methylation estimation. First, after sonication, the overhangs of DNA fragments are normally end repaired with unmethylated cytosine s to restore the double stranded DNA (Illumina w gbs for Methylation Analysis Guide). This may introduce artificially low methylation rates at both ends of the DNA fragments. Second, bisulfite conversion failure is known to be enriched at the 5 0 end of reads, most likely caused by the re annealing of sequences adjacent to the methylated adapters in bisulfite conversion (). This may bring in artificially high methylation rates at the 5 0 end of reads. Most quality control (QC) tools, such as ht seq tools () and fast qc (), only focus on the general sequence quality and adaptor trimming, or other next generation sequencing applications such as rnase q (). To the best of our knowledge, b smooth and bis snp are the only two tools that support QC specific to bs seq (). However, their QC functions are highly limited. The QC model in b smooth was designed to work with its own alignment and analysis pipeline, and thus can not take standard bams am files as input. Furthermore, b smooth can detect but not correct the biases. bis snp only supports the correction of 5 0 bisulfite conversion failure. Because bs seq experiments are widely used and the resulting data will continue to grow exponentially in the near future, there is a strong need for a dedicated QC tool to assess and improve the quality of bs seq experiments. bse qc the tool we developed, is focused on the technical biases specific to bs seq experiments. bse qc can automatically evaluate and remove the biases based on a user defined statistical cut off. Evaluation based on real bs seq data indicates that, after bias removal, the quantification of methylation level is significantly improved.
