Motivation: The ultimate goal of abbreviation management is to disambiguate every occurrence of an abbreviation into its expanded form (concept or sense). To collect expanded forms for abbreviations, previous studies have recognized abbreviations and their expanded forms in parenthetical expressions of bio-medical texts. However, expanded forms extracted by abbreviation recognition are mixtures of concepts senses and their term variations. Consequently, a list of expanded forms should be structured into a sense inventory, which provides possible concepts or senses for abbreviation disambiguation. Results: A sense inventory is a key to robust management of abbreviations. Therefore, we present a supervised approach for clustering expanded forms. The experimental result reports 0.915 F1 score in clustering expanded forms. We then investigate the possibility of conflicts of protein and gene names with abbreviations. Finally, an experiment of abbreviation disambiguation on the sense inventory yielded 0.984 accuracy and 0.986 F1 score using the dataset obtained from MEDLINE abstracts. Availability: The sense inventory and disambig u at or of abbreviations are accessible at

introduction abbreviations substitute for fully expanded terms (e.g. computed tomography) through the use of shortened term forms (e.g. CT). In the bio-medical literature, abbreviations are used for various important terms including: genes, proteins, diseases and chemical names (). Results of our experiment (Section 3.2) show that 32.0% of UniProt entries include abbreviations in description and gene name fields reported that abbreviations are used more frequently than expanded forms. Abbreviations present two major challenges to bio-medical text mining: term variation and ambiguity. We consider an information retrieval system that collects documents referring to polymerase chain reaction. Because polymerase chain reaction might be abbreviated as PCR, the system is expected to retrieve documents in * To whom correspondence should be addressed.

conclusion in this article, we described an approach for building a sense inventory of abbreviations. Results showed that single link clustering with the ml based similarity measure contributed to abbreviation disambiguation. The proposed method obtained 0.984 accuracy and 0.986 F1 score on the training and test sets obtained from MEDLINE. Although the performance figure of abbreviation disambiguation is roughly comparable to the previous work, we specially demonstrated the quality of the sense inventory on which abbreviations are disambiguated into concepts or senses. Results also show that broader contexts (e.g. abstracts and sentences) were more useful than local contexts (e.g. neighbor words) for abbreviation disambiguation. A future direction of this study is to apply the methodology of abbreviation management for MEDLINE abstracts to full paper articles. Because the proposed method can handle variation and ambiguity problems of abbreviations, we plan to explore the impact of abbreviation disambiguation to other text mining tasks such as information retrieval, named entity recognition and co-reference resolution.
