BigWig files are a compressed, indexed, binary format for genome wide signal data for calculations (e.g. GC percent) or experiments (e.g. chips eq rnase q read depth). bw tool is a tool designed to read bigWig files rapidly and efficiently, providing functionality for extracting data and summarizing it in several ways, globally or at specific regions. Additionally, the tool enables the conversion of the positions of signal data from one genome assembly to another, also known as lifting. We believe bw tool can be useful for the analyst frequently working with bigWig data, which is becoming a standard format to represent functional signals along genomes. The article includes supplementary examples of running the software. Availability and implementation: The C source code is freely available under the GNU public license v3 at

introduction for many laboratories, it has become an everyday task to generate or to analyze genome wide data such as chips eq read depth. To facilitate visualization of these data with tools such as the UCSC Genome Browser () or ENSEMBL (), or for further processing, it is common to use the wiggle (WIG) file format. This format is not without a few disadvantages, principally that the files can become large, particularly when care is not taken to store the data at a minimally necessary decimal precision. Another disadvantage is that wiggles exist in three different forms, the choice of which depends on the sparseness of the data. Programs that expect WIG data do not always allow all three formats interchangeably. The bigWig format () was created as a means for the UCSC Genome Browser to access real valued signal data remotely hosted on http ftp servers worldwide. The format is binary, compressed, indexed and allows random access to directly query a subset of the larger dataset. In general, programs designed to read bigWig files should treat remote URLs of bigWigs the same as they would treat URLs local to that computer. BigWig uses an indexing strategy similar to other binary/ indexed formats such as big bed (), binary SAM (BAM) () and tab ix based formats (), but unlike BAM or tab ix based formats, bigWig is specific to numerical data. WIG and BAM are both common data formats and are used by many applications, e.g. model based analysis of chips eq (MACS) () and Mixture of Isoforms (MISO) (), respectively, but, to date, there are not many applications that accommodate bigWig data. We have created command line software under the UNIX operating system called bw tool in a similar spirit to bed tools () or sam tools () that offers the possibility to carry out a number of diverse operations on bigWigs in a convenient way. Until now, the common procedure to access the data within bigWig files has been to use the tools available from UCSC: bigwig to wig bigwig summary bigwig average over Bed, bigwig merge bigwig correlate or bigwig info. These offer some basic usability for bigWigs. bigwig info provides instant information about a bigWig file and is useful for glancing at the overall mean and standard deviation as well as seeing how many bases are covered by the signal. bigwig to wig is indispensible, as it is occasionally necessary to convert a bigWig into the original WIG to use legacy software. Beyond those two, bw tool provides additional features and flexibility not found in other software.

description the bw tool program is designed to rapidly collect summary statistics and do common wiggle manipulations. The program is a collection of utilities (the names of which are in bold), which allow for the following features aggregate data by averaging it over a series of given intervals with respect to central bases. This common aggregation procedure is used to produce plots showing enrichment, but has a tendency to be problematic, particularly when centering on genomic features without a known strand or directionality (). For this reason, simple k means functionality is built in to group regions with similar profiles demonstrates the aggregate program on data collected from the ENCODE project (). 'Lift', i.e. project data from one genome assembly to another using a lift over chain' file, available from the UCSC Genome Browser utilities page (). Lifting data often results in a small percentage of data loss, so care must be taken to ensure that the only lifted data analyzed is that which is within regions lifting correctly. Options are available to catalog all of the problematic regions involved quickly find regions in the bigWig exhibiting local minima/ maxima, or above below specified thresholds. Extract equally sized intervals of data as a matrix or as a sliding window at adjustable steps and sizes. Again, clustering *To whom correspondence should be addressed is available as an option when extracting data as a matrix. A random matrix of data can also be produced, with the ability to exclude specific regions in the genome. Unequally sized intervals can be also extracted with the extract utility.
