The current methods available to detect chromosomal abnormalities from DNA microarray expression data are cumbersome and inflexible. CAFE has been developed to alleviate these issues. It is implemented as an R package that analyzes Affymetrix *.CEL files and comes with flexible plotting functions, easing visualization of chromo-somal abnormalities. Availability and implementation: CAFE is available from https://bit bucket orgcob87icw6zcafe as both source and compiled packages for Linux and Windows. It is released under the GPL version 3 license. CAFE will also be freely available from Bioconductor.

introduction gross chromosomal abnormalities are a hallmark of cancers () and are frequently acquired by cultured cells as an adaptation to cell culture conditions (). Recently, it has been recognized that induced pluripotent stem cells often feature gross chromosomal duplications or deletions (). Various methods exist to detect chromosomal gains or losses. Traditional karyotyping relies on careful examination of giemsa stained metaphase chromosomes. Newer techniques like spectral karyotyping have increased ease of analysis but nevertheless feature low resolution. For high throughput and high resolution analysis of gross chromosomal abnormalities, array based Comparative Genomic Hybridization a cgh is often used. This a cgh approach is based on the detection of a quantitative difference of DNA content. whole genome and snp based sequencing approaches have also been developed. Although not initially developed for this purpose, it is possible to use gene expression microarray data for the detection of copy number abnormalities. This approach is not based on the measurements of DNA content but rather on mRNA expression levels. A protocol to use expression microarrays to 'karyotype' samples was recently published by ben venis ty and coworkers but requires the manual use of different tools (). Here, we present cafe chromosomal Aberration Finder in Expression data as an R package for the detection of gross chromosomal gains and losses from expression microarrays, with a resolution up to cytoband level. CAFE follows the expression based karyotyping workflow e karyotyping and greatly simplifies and speeds up the detection analysis of chromosomal aberrations from expression DNA microarrays.
