With the emergence of large scale Cap Analysis of Gene Expression (CAGE) datasets from individual labs and the FANTOM consortium, one can now analyze the cis regulatory regions associated with gene transcription at an unprecedented level of refinement. By coupling transcription factor binding site (TFBS) enrichment analysis with cage derived genomic regions, caged opossum can identify TFs that act as key regulators of genes involved in specific mammalian cell and tissue types. The web tool allows for the analysis of cage derived transcription start sites tss s either provided by the user or selected from $1300 mammalian samples from the FANTOM5 project with pre-computed TFBS predicted with JASPAR TF binding profiles. The tool helps power insights into the regulation of genes through the study of the specific usage of tss s within specific cell types and or under specific conditions. Availability and Implementation: The cage dopo sum web tool is implemented in Perl, MySQL and Apache and is available at

introduction the Cap Analysis of Gene Expression (CAGE) technology () has revolutionized our capacity to analyze the promoter and enhancer regions the cis regulatory regions that are active in cell types and tissues at specific time points. Over 1  10 6 human and 6  10 5 mouse CAGE peaks were identified through the FANTOM5 project (), providing both the precise location of transcription start sites tss s and a quantitative measure of transcriptional activity in the studied samples. It provides the scientific community with an unprecedented opportunity to analyze the cis regulatory regions acting upon the transcription of RNAs from the identified tss st fs acting upon them (for instance, gene promoter regions). Specifically, the tools look for the enrichment of motifs in a set of foreground sequences compared to a set of background ones. By combining sample specific cage derived tss s with TF binding profile enrichment analysis, it now becomes possible to predict the TFs that are likely involved in the regulation of active genes associated with tss s. We hereby introduce the caged opossum tool to perform TF binding profile enrichment analysis from genomic regions derived from CAGE data. This work is part of the FANTOM5 project. Data downloads, genomic tools and co published manuscripts are summarized here http://fantom.gsc.riken.jp/5/.
