cal mate calibrates preprocessed allele specific copy number estimates as cns from DNA microarrays by controlling for single nucleotide polymorphism specific allelic crosstalk. The resulting as cns are on average more accurate, which increases the power of segmentation methods for detecting changes between copy number states in tumor studies including copy neutral loss of heterozygosity. cal mate applies to any as cns regardless of preprocessing method and microarray technology, e.g. Affymetrix and Illumina. Availability: The method is available on CRAN (http://cran.r-project. org/) in the open source R package cal mate which also includes an add-on to the Aroma Project framework (http://www.aroma-project. org/).

introduction several analytical pipelines for identifying total copy number (TCN) events from DNA microarrays are available. However, certain types of genomic alterations can not be detected from t cns e.g. copy neutral LOH events. The identification of such events can be key to our biological understanding of cancer development and our ability to set up a personalized treatment plan (). Genotyping microarrays () quantify not only t cns but also allele specific copy numbers as cns which are necessary to identify CN states such as copy neutral loss of heterozygosity LOH. as cns are the CN estimates of each allele variant (here A and B) at a particular bi allelic single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP). For the purpose of displaying as cns along the genome and also for detecting CN changes, as cns are often represented by their t cns and b allele fractions b afs (). For instance, for diploid SNPs in a * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  All authors contributed equally normal region, the expected TCN is 2 and expected b afs are 0 (AA), 1/2 (AB) or 1 (BB). In a region of copy neutral LOH, the expected TCN is 2 and the expected b afs are 0 or 1. For a single copy gain, expected TCN is 3 and expected b afs are 0, 1/3, 2/3 and 1. In, observed t cns and b afs are displayed along the genome for a normal region, a gain and a region of copy neutral LOH. Based on these type of data, segmentation methods () identify regions of constant CN state. Their performances depend greatly on the signal to noise ratios (SNRs) of TCN and BAF (), which in turn depend on the preprocessing method used, e.g. d chip (), CN5 (), crm a v2 (), ACNE (Ortiz) and 'Illumina' (). Some of these
