Motivation: Cancer encompasses various diseases associated with loss of cell cycle control, leading to uncontrolled cell proliferation and or reduced apoptosis. Cancer is usually caused by malfunction(s) in the cellular signaling pathways. Malfunctions occur in different ways and at different locations in a pathway. Consequently, therapy design should first identify the location and type of malfunction to arrive at a suitable drug combination. Results: We consider the growth factor (GF) signaling pathways, widely studied in the context of cancer. Interactions between different pathway components are modeled using Boolean logic gates. All possible single malfunctions in the resulting circuit are enumerated and responses of the different malfunctioning circuits to a test input are used to group the malfunctions into classes. Effects of different drugs, targeting different parts of the Boolean circuit, are taken into account in deciding drug efficacy, thereby mapping each malfunction to an appropriate set of drugs. Contact:

introduction in eukaryotic multicellular organisms, life is sustained by a systematic coordination between different cells and all extracellular signals. Each cell has its own functionality and its future is determined by various intrinsic and extrinsic biological signals. For instance, a cell's proliferation, differentiation or induction of apoptosis are determined by a number of different signals. From the time of a cell's birth (by division of its parent cell), the cell's state is tightly controlled by different biological regulations. Cell signaling is a form of communication between different cells. These signals can be chemical or electrical impulses. Communication via electrical impulses is typically associated with nerve cells (neurons), which are attached to each other and the action potential transmits from neuron to neuron. For general somatic cells, proteins are usually the signaling molecules used for communication. The interactions between the different signaling molecules are multivariate in nature and hence difficult to study. As a result, historically biologists have focussed on studying the marginal interaction between the signaling molecules, leading to what is called pathway information. Although pathway knowledge can not provide the complete multivariate picture of the overall cellular signal transduction, it is clear that one has to have a mechanism for incorporating this prior information into any signal transduction model that one develops. A procedure * To whom correspondence should be addressed. to do precisely that was recently developed in. In that paper, tools from digital system design were used to generate Boolean networks consistent with given pathway information. Furthermore, it was shown using a specific biological example that a network designed using that approach could replicate relevant experimentally observed behavior from the published literature. In this article, our goal is to go a few steps further. Here, we are not content with just producing a Boolean network model from given pathway information. Instead our objective is to utilize such a model to (i) enumerate all the possible fault scenarios; (ii) use the response of the model to a test input to determine which fault or class of faults has occurred; and (iii) finally use this information to prescribe an appropriate therapeutic action. To keep the discussion biologically focussed, we will consider the specific case of growth factor (GF) signaling pathways. The article is organized as follows. In Section 2, pathways and networks are defined in a formal way. In Section 3, cancer is modeled as faults in the underlying signaling network. In Section 4, drug therapies are modeled as interventions to alter aberrant network behavior emanating from a fault. Section 5 gives a biological example showing the power of our methodology. Specifically, fault classification and intervention results for our example are presented. Finally, Section 6 contains some concluding remarks.
