Motivation: Versatile and efficient variant calling tools are needed to analyze large scale sequenc-ing datasets. In particular, identification of copy number changes remains a challenging task due to their complexity, susceptibility to sequencing biases, variation in coverage data and dependence on genome wide sample properties, such as tumor polyploidy or polyclonal ity in cancer samples. Results: We have developed a new tool, Canvas, for identification of copy number changes from diverse sequencing experiments including whole genome matched tumor normal and single sample normal re-sequencing, as well as whole exo me matched and unmatched tumor normal studies. In addition to variant calling, Canvas infers genome wide parameters such as cancer ploidy, purity and heterogeneity. It provides fast and easy to run workflows that can scale to thousands of samples and can be easily incorporated into variant calling pipelines. Availability and Implementation: Canvas is distributed under an open source license and can be downloaded from https://github.com/Illumina/canvas.

introduction the increased throughput of sequencing studies has created high demand for versatile and scalable tools to detect somatic and germline copy number changes. Increasingly complex experimental designs require accurate characterization not only of individual copy number variants cn vs but also of global genome and sample properties, such as ploidy, normal contamination and polyclonal ity (frequently present in cancer samples,). The interaction of these factors creates an array of different somatic genome architectures that confounds optimization of CNV calling algorithms given an often limited availability of training data. While a number of methods for CNV identification have been introduced, most of them harbor shortcomings when it comes to scalability and throughput. First, many tools rely on external segmentation software that complicates workflow management and version control. Second, model parameters to infer global genome and sample properties are often hard-coded and difficult to optimize for individual projects. Finally, many tools require the user to provide pre-specified sample specific parameter values that might not be known prior to CNV detection. For example, TITAN () and free c (), while inferring heterogeneity and normal contamination respectively, require genome wide ploidy values as an input, which incorporates a manual step in the variant calling workflow and complicates automation. We have developed a new tool for CNV calling, Canvas, to address the aforementioned limitations of existing solutions. It fully implements all steps of the variant calling workflow and requires only aligned sequence data and related reference genome files as input. Canvas offers inference of global tumor genome and sample characteristics, including ploidy, contamination and heterogeneity,
