Motivation: Caspases and granzyme B (GrB) are important proteases involved in fundamental cellular processes and play essential roles in programmed cell death, necrosis and inflammation. Although a number of substrates for both types have been experimentally identified, the complete repertoire of caspases and granzyme B substrates remained to be fully characterized. Accordingly, systematic bioinformatics studies of known cleavage sites may provide important insights into their sub-strate specificity and facilitate the discovery of novel substrates. Results: We develop a new bioinformatics tool, termed casc leave 2.0, which builds on previous success of the casc leave tool for predicting generic caspase cleavage sites. It can be efficiently used to predict potential caspase specific cleavage sites for the human caspase 1 3, 6, 7, 8 and GrB. In particular, we integrate heterogeneous sequence and protein functional information from various sources to improve the prediction accuracy of casc leave 2.0. During classification , we use both maximum relevance minimum redundancy and forward feature selection techniques to quantify the relative contribution of each feature to prediction and thus remove redundant as well as irrelevant features. A systematic evaluation of casc leave 2.0 using the benchmark data and comparison with other state of the art tools using independent test data indicate that casc leave 2.0 outperforms other tools on protease specific cleavage site prediction of caspase 1 3, 6, 7 and GrB. casc leave 2.0 is anticipated to be used as a powerful tool for identifying novel substrates and cleavage sites of caspases and GrB and help understand the functional roles of these important proteases in human proteolytic cascades. Availability and implementation: http://www.structbioinfor.org/ cascleave2/.

introduction proteases are proteolytic enzymes that catalyze the breakdown of protein or peptide substrates by hydrolysis of peptide bonds. They represent $2% (at least 500600 proteases) of all gene products in human and are involved in the functional regulation of a large number of important physiological processes such as cell cycle, cell proliferation, programmed cell death, DNA replication, tissue remodeling and immune response (). Most proteases carry out either highly or moderately selective cleavage of the sc is sile bonds within the cleavage site of their substrates, with the substrate specificity ranging from preferences for a number of specific amino acids at defined positions to more generic sites with limited or no discrimination at one position (). We are particularly interested in bioinformatic studies of the substrate specificity of human caspases and the proapoptotic protease granzyme B (GrB), a family of cysteine and serine proteases that are key regulators of apoptosis initiation and execution (). Both types are involved in a number of fundamental cellular processes and play a key role in apoptotic cell death. They also are involved in other cellular processes, including cell cycle, cell proliferation, development, cell migration and receptor internalization (). Caspases are known to have restricted substrate specificity for an aspartic acid residue (D) at position P1 of the target substrate. This primary specificity is similar with that of the serine protease GrB, which is delivered by natural killer cells into virally infected and tumor cells (). To date, at least 15 mammalian caspases have been identified () and they can be categorized into three groups based on their substrate specificities: group I caspases caspase 1 4, 5 and 13) prefer bulky hydrophobic amino acids at the P4 site and cleave the peptide sequence wle hd group II caspases (capspase-2, 3 and 7) preferentially cleave the sequence motif de xd whereas group III caspase 6 8, 9 and 10) cleaves the motif iv le htd. In contrast to the caspases, GrB prefers to cleave the sequence motif ie xd. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.

conclusion in summary, we provided a novel approach, termed casc leave 2.0, which has significantly improved the prediction of protease specific substrate cleavage sites for caspase 1 3, 6, 7, 8 and granzyme B, by integrating heterogeneous sequence and functional features from multiple sources. It uses a two step integrative framework to characterize protein sequence and functional features that are important for determining the substrate specificity of different proteases. Benchmarking experiments indicate that casc leave 2.0 is able to provide a performance that is better than or competitive with other existing tools. Prioritization and dissection of novel protease substrate interactions will likely benefit from the development of caspase specific bioinformatic tools such as casc leave 2.0. To the best of our knowledge, this study represents the first systematic effort to scrutinize and select more relevant features that make a significant contribution to the prediction of caspase and GrB cleavage sites based on feature selection, in contrast to previous studies few of which have used feature selection methods to address this important task. Moreover, the high confidence predicted substrates and their cleavage sites produced in this study also provide a rich knowledge base for follow-up hypothesis driven experiments in the field of protease biology.
