Motivation: The caspase family of cysteine proteases play essential roles in key biological processes such as programmed cell death, differentiation, proliferation, necrosis and inflammation. The complete repertoire of caspase substrates remains to be fully characterized. Accordingly, systematic computational screening studies of caspase substrate cleavage sites may provide insight into the substrate specificity of caspases and further facilitating the discovery of putative novel substrates. Results: In this article we develop an approach (termed casc leave to predict both classical (i.e. following a P 1 Asp) and non typical caspase cleavage sites. When using local sequence derived profiles, casc leave successfully predicted 82.2% of the known substrate cleavage sites, with a Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) of 0.667. We found that prediction performance could be further improved by incorporating information such as predicted solvent accessibility and whether a cleavage sequence lies in a region that is most likely natively unstructured. Novel bi profile Bayesian signatures were found to significantly improve the prediction performance and yielded the best performance with an overall accuracy of 87.6% and a MCC of 0.747, which is higher accuracy than published methods that essentially rely on amino acid sequence alone. It is anticipated that casc leave will be a powerful tool for predicting novel substrate cleavage sites of caspases and shedding new insights on the unknown caspase substrate interactivity relationship.

introduction to date 14 mammalian caspases have been identified; these molecules function in signaling cascades that control critical processes such as apoptosis, necrosis, inflammation, migration proliferation and differentiation (). Caspases cleave substrates that generally contain a highly conserved aspartate (d) at the P 1 position (). However, in addition to the P 1 Asp, the amino acids at the P 1 and P 4 P 2 positions contain important additional determinants of specificity that can dramatically affect cleavage efficiency. Accordingly, mammalian caspases can be divided into three groups (). Group I caspases caspase 145 and 13 prefer bulky hydrophobic amino acids at the P 4 site and recognize peptide sequence wle hd group II caspases caspase 23 and 7 preferentially cleave the de xd motif, while group III caspases caspase 689 and 10 recognize the sequence iv le htd. In contrast to the other caspases, caspase 14 is expressed and activated mainly in the epidermis and exhibits cleavage preference for the we hd or i etd motif (). The study of apoptotic pathways predominantly mediated by caspases has important implications for the development of therapies for cancer treatment, there is significant interest in gaining a better understanding of caspase substrate specificity (). Even though almost 400 caspase substrates have been reported to date, there are likely to be hundreds of new caspase substrates that remain to be discovered (). Experimental identification and characterization of protease substrates is often difficult and time consuming (). Hence, computational prediction of caspase substrate specificity may provide useful and experimentally testable information in regards to novel potential cleavage sites or candidate substrates. Several computational approaches have been developed to predict caspase cleavage site specificity. PeptideCutter utilized a limited experimental dataset and was initially used to predict the substrate cleavage sites for a variety of protease families including several page 753 752760

discussion caspases have central roles in apoptotic cell death processes by catalysing a multitude of proteolytic events, such as activating pro survival or anti-apoptotic proteins and activating anti survival or pro-apoptotic proteins (). The key to understanding the physiological role of caspases is to identify their natural substrates. Caspases have the ability to cleave multiple proteins in different physiological compartments and produce polypeptide products with potentially new functional activities (), with cleavage preference influenced by various factors such as substrate sequence, substrate conformation and accessibility. Knowledge about the substrate specificity of caspases can dramatically improve our ability to predict target protein substrates; however, this information can not at present be readily derived from experimental approaches. Solving this problem is fundamental for both understanding caspase biology and the development of therapeutics that target specific caspase mediated apoptotic pathways. The recent proliferation of large scale in vitro peptide cleavage libraries and proteome wide global profiling platforms offers promising prospects of identifying specific caspase substrates in combination with computer based screening of genome sequences (). The advantage of machine learning techniques such as SVR make them particularly appealing in solving the difficult problem of caspase substrate specificity prediction, as they can be effectively applied to better describe the complex non-linear relationships underlying the caspase substrate interactivity by using the kernel functions to build the predictive models (). To address this problem, we developed a novel bioinformatic approach based on SVR to make testable predictions on the substrate specificity of caspases. Considering that caspase cleavage sites show preferences for predicted secondary structure, solvent accessibility and natively unstructured regions, we used a bi profile Bayesian feature extraction approach to derive these profiles and train the SVR models. The efficiency of the resulting casc leave predictors for predicting caspase cleavage sites has been demonstrated by comparing to one of the most accurate existing algorithms ca svm () and multi-factor ca svm (). The predictive performance of casc leave was further showcased by predicting four caspase substrates for which the cleavage sites have been experimentally validated. The results indicate that sequence scanning using casc leave should be very useful for identifying the putative caspase cleavage sites. In this study, our goal was to predict all the potential cleavage sites, irrespective of the spatiotemporal environments or conformation changes that a substrate may be subject to. The features used as input to the casc leave predictor are derived from primary sequences and the input data does not contain specific information about the order of sequential cleavage events in proteolytic cascades. In these exceptional cases, there is a chance that the predictor will fail as a purely statistical model. The predicted solvent exposure and native disorder features are a supplement to the primary sequence, and in cases where the primary sequence alone contains a strong consensus indicating a cleavage site, we hope these amino acid sequence encoding features are overriding. For example, in ras gap (Uniprot ID: P20936) there is a correctly predicted cleavage site deg dsl dg by casc leave which shows low probability of being solvent exposure and natively disordered (Supplementary). In the specific cases where a sequential proteolytic cascade occurs, features based on primary sequence alone are unlikely to be sufficient. Training based on features from the 3D structure of the substrate protein may help in this regards, although this is not amenable to a general predictor since the 3D structures of many substrates, in their intact or cleaved form mid cascades are generally not known. There are a number of additional measures with potential to further increase the accuracy of prediction in the future. The first approach is to use either the accurate 3D structure of the substrate or the structure of a protease in complex with a substrate, instead of the predicted structural information to build the predictive models. This will allow us to ascertain whether the high resolution crystal structure of a protease substrate complex can be used to derive specificity information. The second is to incorporate other informative and complementary features, such as sequence order dependent context that can better describe the sequential neighborhood surrounding the substrate cleavage sites (). The third is to investigate how to effectively represent the negatives non cleavage sites) that are true negatives and are non cleavable under any cellular or physiological conditions, and how to better discriminate these absolute negatives from those that are cleavable under a given physiological condition. Thus the precise detection of the true negatives is more likely to contribute to an improvement of the prediction accuracy, based on which characteristic feature sets regarding positives and negative samples can be more accurately represented and established. Further improvement can be also achieved by using refined training and testing datasets with high quality coverage of the cleavage sites, identified by high throughput proteome wide techniques.

conclusion in summary, we have proposed a novel approach to predict cleavage sites from the flanking amino acid sequences of caspase substrates. We analyzed the structural determinants of caspase substrate specificity based on a well curated database from multiple resources. We built the casc leave models using the bi profile Bayesian approach that takes into account the characteristic sequential and structural profiles in the vicinity of cleavage and non cleavage sites. This provides a quantitative evaluation of caspase substrate specificity. The results showed that our approach is more accurate than the ca svm and multi-factor ca svm methods, demonstrating its usefulness for describing the complex sequence structure relationships and predicting caspase cleavage sites. It is anticipated that casc leave will be a powerful tool for predicting novel substrate cleavage sites of caspases and shedding new insights on the unknown caspase substrate interactivity.
