Motivation: The extraction of the set of features most relevant to function from classified biological sequence sets is still a challenging problem. A central issue is the determination of expected counts for higher order features so that artifact features may be screened. Results: Cascade detection (CD), a new algorithm for the extraction of localized features from sequence sets, is introduced. CD is a natural extension of the proportional modeling techniques used in contingency table analysis into the domain of feature detection. The algorithm is successfully tested on synthetic data and then applied to feature detection problems from two different domains to demonstrate its broad utility. An analysis of HIV-1 protease specificity reveals patterns of strong first order features that group hydrophobic residues by side chain geometry and exhibit substantial symmetry about the cleavage site. Higher order results suggest that favorable cooperativity is weak by comparison and broadly distributed, but indicate possible synergies between negative charge and hydrophobicity in the substrate. structure function results for the schell man loop, a helix capping motif in proteins, contain strong first order features and also show statistically significant cooper a tivities that provide new insights into the design of the motif. These include a new hydrophobic staple and multiple amphipathic and electrostatic pair features. CD should prove useful not only for sequence analysis, but also for the detection of multifactor synergies in cross classified data from clinical studies or other sources.

introduction a localized sequence feature is defined here as a set of one or more sequence elements, such as amino acids, which occur at particular sequence positions in a set of equal length sequences classified and aligned with respect to some biological function. Such a sequence set might represent a set of peptides recognized and cleaved by a particular protease, or a set of peptides that correspond to a particular structural motif in proteins. A first order feature specifies an element at a single position, whereas a 'higher order' feature specifies a set of two or more elements occurring together in a sequence at particular positions. A first order feature that is significantly overrepresented in a sequence set may indicate the presence of an important physical effect in the relevant biological system involving the feature's element, such as a preference for a negatively charged amino acid near a cleavage site. A significantly overrepresented higher order feature may represent an important cooperativity in the system, such as an electrostatic or hydrophobic interaction between two or more amino acid side chains. Algorithms have been developed for feature selection in sequence sets which utilize correlation scans, artificial neural networks, genetic algorithms, support vector machines, decision trees, Markov methods and other techniques. For reviews, see and Fogel (2008). A number of these techniques have been judged effective at the task of feature selection for sequence classification, but less progress has been made in the area of optimal feature detection for the purpose of analysis of the important effects in the data. A central problem which remains is the determination of the abundance that should be expected for a feature in a sequence set that may contain other significant features as well as random variation. If expected feature counts are not known, then it is not possible to determine whether an abundant feature represents an important effect, occurs by chance, or is an artifact which appears because it shares elements with the features that are responsible for the generation of function. Artifacts provide less than optimally accurate representations of the physical effects in the data: artifacts which are of lower order than the generator features which produce them can cause underestimation of complexity, whereas artifacts that combine elements of generator features masquerade as synergies. A method of screening out artifacts and accurately recovering generator features of all orders must be developed before structure function datasets can contribute fully to accurate biochemical model building and efficient experimental design. Although researchers are now explicitly addressing the issue of dependencies in multivariate data (see e.g.), slow progress on the separation of higher order features from artifacts in sequence sets may have delayed experimental work directed toward the detection of cooperative interactions. The present work introduces a new algorithm, cascade detection (CD), which computes expected feature counts, screens artifacts and identifies statistically significant localized features of all orders in sets of short sequences, or features of orders up to a specified maximum in longer sequences. The method detects first order features that are either overrepresented or underrepresented and higher order features that are overrepresented. The algorithm
