We present cas designer a user friendly program to aid researchers in choosing appropriate target sites in a gene of interest for type II crisp rcas derived rna guided endonucleases, which are now widely used for biomedical research and biotechnology. cas designer rapidly provides the list of all possible guide RNA sequences in a given input DNA sequence and their potential off target sites including bulge type sites in a genome of choice. In addition, the program assigns an out of frame score to each target site to help users choose appropriate sites for gene knockout. cas designer shows the results in an interactive table and provides user friendly filter functions. Availability and implementation: Free access at

introduction targeted genome editing based on the type II clustered regularly inter spaced short palindromic repeats crisp r and crisp r associated (Cas) protein system from the prokaryotic adaptive immune response is now widely used for biomedical research and biotechnology (). crisp r rna guided endonucleases r gens consist of the Cas9 protein and guide RNAs grn as which are provided as two small RNAs sequence variable c rrna and in variable trans activating crisp r RNA trac rrna or as single chain grn as in which essential portions of c rrna and trac rrna are linked. r gens cleave target DNA in a sequence dependent manner; the repair of the resulting double strand breaks (DSBs) by endogenous mechanisms gives rise to targeted genome modifications in cells and whole organisms. In addition to the base pairing between grn as and target DNA, Cas9 also contributes to RGEN specificity by recognizing a proto spacer adjacent motif (PAM) downstream of the grn a target sequence. Cas9 proteins derived from different organisms recognize distinct PAM sequences. However, r gens can also cleave off target DNA sites with several mismatches () or with missing or additional nucleotides (), compared to grn a sequences. We and others have presented computer programs that help researchers choose appropriate target sites for Cas9 nucleases (). To the best of our knowledge, however, there is no web based tool for providing the list of all possible grn as in a given input DNA sequence with their potential off target sites with a DNA or RNA bulge in a genome of choice and with customizable PAM sequences appropriate for Cas9 derived from species other than S. pyogenes. Here we present cas designer a quick grn a designing tool for various type II Cas9 nucleases, which lists all possible grn a sequences from a given input DNA sequence along with their potential off target sites in a genome of interest. Notably, cas designer rapidly searches for potential off target sites with a DNA or RNA bulge (). Furthermore, cas designer provides an out of frame score () for each grn a to help choose appropriate sites for gene knockout. cas designer is available as a command line program or at our website.
