Motivation: crisp r derived RNA guided endonucleases r gens have been widely used for both gene knockout and knock-in at the level of single or multiple genes. r gens are now available for forward genetic screens at genome scale, but single guide RNA sg rna selection at this scale is difficult. Results: We develop an online tool, cas database a genome wide grn a library design tool for Cas9 nucleases from Streptococcus pyogenes (SpCas9). With an easy to use web interface, cas database allows users to select optimal target sequences simply by changing the filtering conditions. Furthermore, it provides a powerful way to select multiple optimal target sequences from thousands of genes at once for the creation of a genome wide library. cas database also provides a web application programming interface (web API) for advanced bioinformatics users. Availability and implementation: Free access at

introduction rna guided endonucleases r gens derived from the Type II clustered regularly inter spaced short palindromic repeats crisp rcas crisp r associated) system, an adaptive immune response in bacteria and archaea, have been usefully harnessed in many genome engineering applications such as gene knockout and knock-in in various organisms (). Recently, a few groups have undertaken genome wide cas9 mediated genetic screens () in human and other mammalian cells. The selection of target sequences is an initial, rate limiting step in RGEN applications. We and other groups have developed a number of web based online tools or command line programs for single guide RNA sg rna design or off target site identification (). Although they are very useful for choosing sg rnas that target one gene, selection of sg rnas at the genome scale is still challenging. Previously, two genome wide databases for SpCas9 design () have been built conceptually. However, although they are useful for selecting sg rnas that target a small number of genes, neither offers an easy way to select optimal target sequences at once from thousands of genes for genome wide library construction in a variety of organisms. Here we describe cas database a web based genome wide grn a design tool for SpCas9 nucleases for genome scale screening V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.
