The Type II clustered regularly inter spaced short palin-dromic repeats crisp rcas system is an adaptive immune response in prokaryotes, protecting host cells against invading phages or plasmids by cleaving these foreign DNA species in a targeted manner. crisp rcas derived rna guided engineered nucleases r gens enable genome editing in cultured cells, animals and plants, but are limited by off target mutations. Here, we present a novel algorithm termed cas of finder that searches for potential off target sites in a given genome or user defined sequences. Unlike other algorithms currently available for identification of RGEN off target sites, cas of finder is not limited by the number of mismatches and allows variations in proto spacer adjacent motif sequences recognized by Cas9, the essential protein component in r gens. cas of finder is available as a command line program or accessible via our website. Availability and implementation: cas of finder free access at

introduction genome editing with engineered nucleases is broadly useful for biomedical research, biotechnology and medicine. Engineered nucleases cleave chromosomal DNA in a targeted manner, and the repair of the resulting double strand breaks by endogenous systems gives rise to targeted genome modifications in cultured cells, animals and plants. We and others have developed three different types of engineered nucleases: zinc finger nucleases z fns (), transcription activator like effector nucleases (TALENs) () and rna guided engineered nucleases r gens () derived from the Type II clustered regularly inter spaced short palindromic repeats crisp rcris pr associated (Cas) system, an adaptive immune response in bacteria and archaea. Unlike z fns and TALENs whose DNA specificities are determined by dna binding proteins, r gens use complementary base pairing to recognize target sites. r gens consist of (i) dual RNA components comprising sequence invariant trac rrna and sequence variable guide RNA termed c rrna [or single chain guide RNA sg rna constructed by linking essential portions of trac rrna and c rrna (and (ii) a fixed protein component, Cas9, that recognizes the proto spacer adjacent motif (PAM) downstream of target DNA sequences corresponding to guide RNA. custom designed r gens are produced simply by replacing guide RNAs, making this system easy to access. Unfortunately, r gens cleave not only on target sites but also off target sites that differ by up to several nucleotides from the on target sites (), causing unwanted off target mutations and chromosomal rearrangements. These undesired off target effects raise significant concerns for using r gens as genome editing tools in diverse applications. To address this issue, researchers must be able to search for potential off target sites in the genome. Sequence alignment tools such as tags can (), Bowtie () or gp gpu enabled cu shaw () can be used to find potential off target sites, but are limited by the number of mismatched bases allowed and a requirement for a fixed PAM sequence. Here we introduce a fast and highly versatile off target searching tool, cas of finder. Importantly, cas of finder is written in open cl an open standard language for parallel programming in heterogeneous environments, enabling operation in diverse platforms such as central processing units (CPUs), graphics processing units (GPUs) and digital signal processors (DSPs).
