Motivation: Secondary metabolites (SM) are structurally diverse natural products of high pharmaceutical importance. Genes involved in their biosynthesis are often organized in clusters, i.e., are co-localized and co-expressed. In silico cluster prediction in eukaryotic genomes remains problematic mainly due to the high variability of the clusters content and lack of other distinguishing sequence features. Results: We present Cluster Assignment by Islands of Sites (CASSIS), a method for SM cluster prediction in eukaryotic genomes, and Secondary Metabolites by interpro scan s mips a tool for genome wide detection of SM key enzymes (anchor genes): polyketide synthases, non ribosomal peptide synthetases and dimethyl allyl tryptophan synthases. Unlike other tools based on protein similarity, CASSIS exploits the idea of co regulation of the cluster genes, which assumes the existence of common regulatory patterns in the cluster promoters. The method searches for islands of enriched cluster specific motifs in the vicinity of anchor genes. It was validated in a series of cross validation experiments and showed high sensitivity and specificity. Availability and implementation: CASSIS and s mips are freely available at https://sbi.hki-jena.de/

introduction secondary metabolites (SM), also often referred as natural products, are substances with outstanding diversity of biological activities, including pharmaceutically important ones, e.g. antibiotic, toxic, immunosuppressant. They are produced primarily by microorganisms (fungi, bacteria, algae). Genes responsible for SM biosynthesis and also for modifications, transport, regulation, etc., are often organized in clusters (). Here, we define clusters as sets of co-localized and co regulated genes, the products of which are presumably functionally connected. In fungi, SM clusters typically have modest sizes (normally up to 20 genes), are characterized by tight co-localization of successive genes and are often regulated by a cluster specific transcription factor cst f which can be a part of the respective cluster (). In many cases, also not cst f can regulate SM clusters (). Recently, an example of cross cluster regulation was described in fungi: activation of the cst f of a cluster led to upregulation of another cluster on a different chromosome; in addition to the own cluster (). In this example, elucidation of the cluster specific motif helped to understand the mode of regulation of the second cluster. Two SM classes of particular importance are synthesized by multi modular mega synthases polyketide synthases (PKS) and non ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS) or pks nrps hybrids. In eukaryotes, in particular in fungi, these enzymes are characterized by specific multidomain structure and large size, which makes them easy to detect in the genomes. The other cluster members, however, are more difficult to identify since the clusters' content varies greatly and there are no stable cluster markers (i.e. genes that would always accompany a mega synthase. This constitutes the first challenge for computational prediction of clusters. The second challenge is the scarcity of the experimental data. The main body of experimental evidence for SMs and their biosynthetic pathways comes from bacteria and is not always applicable to eukaryotes. For instance, amino acid specificity of adenyl ation domains is quite well predictable from NRPS structure () in bacteria but the same models do not work for fungi (). Fungal data are rather scanty, in total 40 clusters are fully described so far (collected in this study, see Supplementary). Most cluster prediction tools developed heretofore depend on domain homology, e.g. anti smash (), SMURF (), cl use an () or clust scan (). These tools rely on collections of protein domains found in known clusters and predict new clusters by searching for these domains. This approach works well for similar clusters but has difficulties when encountering new cluster members (i.e. the proteins with new functions, with domains unknown to the system). Besides, it is known that not all successive genes in a cluster region belong to the cluster, e.g. at least four genes within the aflatoxin cluster are 'gap' genes that are not conserved and not assigned to the aflatoxin or steri gma to cyst in biosynthesis (). Consideration of domains of the gap genes leads to erroneous predictions. All these problems together with the limited number of eukaryotic 'template' clusters make similarity based methods error prone and tending to overestimate the clusters' lengths, when applied to eukaryotes. Homology limitations might be bypassed by applying other approaches, such as window averaged DNA curvature profiles () or methods relying on expression data, like microarrays, etc. (). But these methods are limited in their applications. The former is restricted to la ea like regulated clusters, the latter require expression data, which can be problematic because most fungal clusters are silent under laboratory conditions () and their induction is a challenging task. Of all existing cluster predicting tools, anti smash is the most prominent, reliable and very much recommendable to use. Nonetheless, there is one type of useful information that is ignored by the similarity approach that is utilized by anti smash the information about common TF binding sites that characterize the clusters. Since the cluster genes are co regulated their promoters should share the transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) for the common regulator. Taking into account this additional layer of information can improve the cluster prediction and supply with additional useful characteristics, such as the shared regulatory pattern and the nature of the regulating cst f. Recently, we suggested an approach to detect eukaryotic gene clusters by estimating the density of binding motifs for cst f. The density must be higher within the clusters and lower, although not completely abolished, in other parts of the genome. The method, and the tool based on the method, is called Motif Density Method (MDM,). MDM showed high specificity and sensitivity and was able to solve difficult problems like distinguishing closely located clusters (separated by just several genes), the task unsolvable for similarity based tools (). After having solved the main problem the usage of promoter information for cluster prediction we wanted to improve the method making the algorithm more transparent and the tool easier to handle. Here, we present 'Cluster Assignment by Islands of Sites' (CASSIS), the further development and improvement of MDM. We made several changes, most importantly in the prediction algorithm, which are described in detail in the 'Methods' section. In short, instead of estimating the motifs' density in a sliding window, we applied a set of rules to identify the borders of the motif 'islands' around the anchor gene. The introduced changes improved the performance and made the algorithm simpler and more straightforward. The CASSIS method is implemented in a tool with the same name. An online version as well as downloads for Windows and Linux is available. Besides, we added a small tool called 'Secondary Metabolites by interpro scan s mips for the fast and easy genome wide detection of SM anchor genes, e.g. PKS, NRPS and dimethyl allyl tryptophan synthases d mats. s mips results can be directly sent to the CASSIS tool or used separately to describe the SM biosynthetic potential of a species.

discussion clustering of genes implies their co-localization, co regulation and assignment to the same process. In the case of SM, this is a biosynthetic pathway and or further processing of the product. Most of the approaches developed for the genome wide cluster prediction rely on protein domain similarity. Thus, they use the first and last properties of the clusters but ignore the co-expression (or co regulation. Our approach is in this sense complementary, as it ignores the functional features of the proteins but considers the promoter information. This constitutes both an advantage and a disadvantage of the approach. The advantage is the consideration of a new, yet unused layer of information (promoters, motifs, sites), which is, moreover, the key feature of the cluster definition. The disadvantage is the neglect of the remaining information, but this can be seen as a specialization. Indeed, the similarity based tools exist and at least one of them, anti smash gives very good, although not perfect, predictions. Our aim is not to compete with anti smash or to substitute it. We suppose that the optimal predictions can be achieved by application of both tools simultaneously: anti smash is more sensitive but CASSIS is more precise, and each of them supplies with specific information about the discovered clusters (see Supplementary). Motifs that are shared by the cluster genes (and form in this way the basis of the cluster prediction) have their own value as the potential TFBS of the cluster's presumable regulator. CASSIS provides the option to retrieve the motifs corresponding to the detected clusters moreover as the motifs' occurrences are scanned genome wide it is possible to find sub clusters (also called super-clusters), which are groups of genes regulated by the same TF, simultaneously with the 'main' cluster, but located in another part of the genome. If a sub cluster is large enough (more than three genes), it can be detected quite easily. In the next versions of CASSIS we plan to implement such a feature. Like MDM, CASSIS is not restricted to the prediction of SM clusters. Other types of gene clusters can be represented by different anchor genes, depending on the pathway or process, for which the genes are clustered. As CASSIS does not consider the properties of genes, the nature of the anchor gene does not matter. Being based on the de novo motif discovery, CASSIS is quite sensitive to the quality of the genome assembly. Two features are important: the length of contigs (scaffolds) and the information quality of the sequence. The former feature is, actually, important for any cluster prediction tool, since clusters are lengthy stretches of genomic sequence, which should be preferably uninterrupted. The information quality becomes important for genomes with low complexity at rich regions, since it is hard to predict significant motifs in such sequences.
