Motivation: Recent technological advances revealed that an unexpected large number of proteins interact with transcripts even if the rna binding domains are not annotated. We introduce cat rapid signature to identify ribonucleoproteins based on physico-chemical features instead of sequence similarity searches. The algorithm, trained on human proteins and tested on model organisms , calculates the overall rna binding propensity followed by the prediction of rna binding regions. cat rapid signature outperforms other algorithms in the identification of rna binding proteins and detection of non-classical rna binding regions. Results are visualized on a web page and can be downloaded or forwarded to cat rapid omics for predictions of RNA targets. Availability and implementation: cat rapid signature can be accessed at

introduction rna binding proteins r bps use rna binding domains (RDs) to recognize target RNAs and to regulate co posttranscriptional processes. Examples of classical RDs include rna recognition motif (RRM), double stranded rna binding domain dsr rm k homology (KH), RGG box and the pumilio fbf (PUM) domain (). In addition to classical RDs, recent experimental studies on HeLa (), HEK298 () and me sc () cells, indicate that a number of rna interacting proteins contain non-classical RDs nc rds for which annotation is not yet available. Discovery of new RDs is a challenging task: domain detection tools, such as HMMER () and BLAST () rely on sequence similarity searches to identify annotated RDs and fail to recognize newly discovered r bps. Similarly, other methods such as rna pred () predict rna binding ability using features of annotated RDs that might be different in nc rds. Alternatives to identify rna binding regions include bind n (), p print () and rna bin dr (), but the algorithms have been trained to identify single amino acids and not contiguous regions. cat rapid signature overcomes these limitations by (i) predicting the propensity of a protein to interact with RNA and (ii) identifying rna binding regions through physico-chemical properties instead of sequence patterns. The algorithm is an extension of the cat rapid approach () to predict protein rna interactions and the clever suite algorithm () to classify protein groups using physico-chemical features.
