Here we introduce cat rapid omics, a server for large scale calculations of protein rna interactions. Our web server allows (i) predictions at proteomic and transcript omic level; (ii) use of protein and RNA sequences without size restriction; (iii) analysis of nucleic acid binding regions in proteins; and (iv) detection of RNA motifs involved in protein recognition. Results: We developed a web server to allow fast calculation of ribonucleoprotein associations in Caenorhabditis elegans, Danio rerio, Drosophila melanogaster, Homo sapiens, Mus musculus, Rattus norvegicus, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Xenopus tropicalis (custom libraries can be also generated). The cat rapid omics was benchmarked on the recently published RNA interactome s of Serine/ arginine rich splicing factor 1 (SRSF1), histone lysine n methyltransferase EZH2 (EZH2), TAR dna binding protein 43 (TDP43) and rna binding protein f us f us as well as on the protein interactome s of U1/U2 small nucleolar RNAs, X inactive specific transcript (Xist) repeat A region rep a and Crumbs homolog 3 (CRB3) 3 0 untranslated region RNAs. Our predictions are highly significant (P50.05) and will help the experimentalist to identify candidates for further validation. Availability: cat rapid omics can be freely accessed on the Web at

introduction increasing evidence indicates that ribonucleoprotein interactions are fundamental for cellular regulation (). Moreover, several studies highlighted the involvement of RNA molecules in the onset and progression of human diseases including neurological disorders (). To our knowledge, there are two sequence based methods for prediction of protein rna interactions: cat rapid () and rpi seq (). The cat rapid algorithm exploits predictions of secondary structure, hydrogen bonding and van der Waals' contributions to estimate the binding propensity of protein and RNA molecules. rpi seq is based on support vector machine (SVM) and random forest (RF) models predicting protein rna interactions from primary structure alone (). Both methods show remarkable performances, but cat rapid discriminates positive and negative cases with higher accuracy () and has been tested on long non-coding RNAs (). Here we introduce cat rapid omics to perform high throughput predictions of protein rna interactions using the information on protein and RNA domains involved in macromolecular recognition.
