To address the impending need for exploring rapidly increased transcript omics data generated for non model organisms, we developed c browse an ajax based web browser for visualizing and analyzing transcriptome assemblies and contigs. Designed in a standard three tier architecture with a data pre-processing pipeline, c browse is essentially a Rich Internet Application that offers many seamlessly integrated web interfaces and allows users to navigate, sort, filter, search and visualize data smoothly. The pre-processing pipeline takes the contig sequence file in fast a format and its relevant samba m file as the input; detects putative polymorphisms, simple sequence repeats and sequencing errors in contigs and generates image, JSON and database compatible CSV text files that are directly utilized by different web interfaces. c bows e is a generic visu-alization and analysis tool that facilitates close examination of assembly quality, genetic polymorphisms, sequence repeats and or sequencing errors in transcriptome sequencing projects.

introduction web based genome browsers, such as GBrowse () and UCSC Genome Browser (), are widely utilized for visualizing genomes and their sequence features to facilitate various data analyses that address interesting biological questions. For non model organisms without sequenced genomes, transcriptome sequencing is definitely the most efficient way to explore the transcribed portions of genomes and determine their dynamics (). Many bioinformatics programs have been developed improved to address the challenges in transcriptome assembly, especially de novo assembly without a reference genome, using complementary DNA cdna messenger RNA (mRNA) data from next generation sequencing and Sanger sequencing (). So far, there is no open source web based contig browser yet that allows users to navigate transcript assembly, visualize contigs and examine genetic polymorphisms, simple sequence repeats and sequencing errors embedded in the assembly. To address the impending need for exploring rapidly increased transcript omics data for non model organisms, we developed c browse (contig browser), an ajax based web browser to visualize and analyze transcriptome assemblies and their individual contigs.

conclusion similar to GBrowse 2.0 (http://gmod.org/wiki/GBrowse), x map (), Genome Projector () and j browse (), c browse essentially is an ajax based Rich Internet Application that decouples interactions with users from interactions with the server. Such decoupling empowers web applications with rich graphic user interface (GUI) characteristics such as desktop application, enables a asynchronous client server communication and offers faster and smoother user experience by partial updates in web pages. Different from these genome browsers, c browse is designed for analyzing and visualizing transcriptome assembly and contigs, with unique functionality such as seamlessly integrated data grid viewer, alignment viewer and sequence viewer that allow users to navigate, sort, filter, search and visualize transcriptome data efficiently. As an open source project, our web based c browse can be utilized by the research community to disseminate and release transcriptome data over the Internet.
