Here we introduce cc sol omics, a web server for large scale calculations of protein solubility. Our method allows (i) proteome wide predictions; (ii) identification of soluble fragments within each sequences; (iii) exhaustive single point mutation analysis. Results: Using coil disorder hydrophobicity, hydrophilicity sheet and helix propensities, we built a predictor of protein solubility. Our approach shows an accuracy of 79% on the training set (36 990 Target Track entries). Validation on three independent sets indicates that cc sol omics discriminates soluble and insoluble proteins with an accuracy of 74% on 31 760 proteins sharing 530% sequence similarity. Availability and implementation: cc sol omics can be freely ac-cessed on the web at

introduction algorithms for prediction of protein solubility () and aggregation () provide a solid basis to investigate physico-chemical determinants of amyloid fibril formation and associated diseases (). In the past years, an in vitro reconstituted translation system allowed the large scale investigation of Escherichia coli proteins solubility (), thus providing the opportunity for the development of predictive methods such as cc sol (). In cc sol coil disorder hydrophobicity, hydrophilicity sheet and helical propensities are combined together into a solubility propensity score that is useful to investigate protein expression () as well as bacterial evolution (). Other methods have been developed to predict protein solubility based on amino acid characteristics. For instance, pro so II () exploits occurrence of mono peptides and dipeptides to estimate heterologous expression in E.coli. pro so II was trained on the pep cdb database [now Target Track ()] that stores target and protocol information provided by Protein Structure Initiative centers. Both cc sol and pro so II perform accurate predictions when used to respectively predict endogenous or heterologous soluble expressions cc sol 76% accuracy; pro so II: 75% accuracy (. We found that the experimental status of several Target Track entries (http://sbkb.org/tt/) has been recently updated and new data are available to train predictive methods (see Supplementary Material). Here, we introduce a novel implementation of the cc sol method, called cc sol omics, to perform large scale predictions of endogenous and heterologous expression in E.coli. Our algorithm has been trained on non-redundant Target Track entries to identify soluble and insoluble regions within protein sequences. We envisage that cc sol omics will be useful for protein engineering studies, as it allows the investigation of sequence variants in large datasets.
