Motivation: cdd app is a Cytoscape extension that supports the annotation of protein networks with information about domains and specific functional sites from the National Center for Biotechnology Informations conserved domain database (CDD). CDD information is loaded for nodes annotated with NCBI numbers or UniProt identifiers and (optionally) Protein Data Bank structures. cdd app integrates with the Cytoscape apps structure viz2 and enhanced graphics. Together, these three apps provide powerful tools to annotate nodes with CDD domain and site information and visualize that information in both network and structural contexts. Availability and implementation: cdd app is written in Java and freely available for download from the Cytoscape app store (http://apps. cytoscape org. Documentation is provided at

introduction the functional annotation of proteins is critical to understanding biology. In most proteins, units of biological function are domains that contain key active sites, critical structural components or interaction sites. A single protein may contain one or more domains, and the acquisition of domains can provide new interaction partners or new functions. One approach to inferring basic protein function is to characterize the functional domains that the protein contains. The National Center for Bioinformatics Information's (NCBI) conserved domain database (CDD) () is a repository of manually curated and computationally derived protein domain family models that are searchable through a Web interface or Web services. The conserved domains (CDs) in the CDD database are organized into families of CDs related by common evolutionary ancestry. Structurally and functionally important regions of the domain are annotated based on literature and structural evidence wherever possible in each of the CD. This resource is a valuable tool for researchers looking to identify or assign functions of individual proteins. Another commonly used tool for inference and analysis of biological function is Cytoscape (). Cytoscape is an open source desktop application for the visualization and analysis of biological networks, including pathways, protein protein interaction networks and protein protein similarity networks. Cytoscape includes an extension mechanism that allows developers to add 'apps' to Cytoscape that enhance its analytical or visualization capabilities (). Cytoscape and the CDD are complementary, but no mechanism exists to allow using these tools together. We embarked on a collaborative effort to link cytoscape s network visualization and analysis features with the CDD domain annotations to support researchers interested in exploring functional annotation of proteins in a network context. will only appear if the structure viz2 () app is also loaded. The CDD Domains panel also has checkboxes to use the enhanced graphics app, if loaded, to paint pie charts for domains and features onto nodes. All CDD annotations are stored in cytoscape s default node table and are saved as part of the session.
