cd hit is a widely used program for clustering biological sequences to reduce sequence redundancy and improve the performance of other sequence analyses. In response to the rapid increase in the amount of sequencing data produced by the next generation sequencing technologies, we have developed a new cd hit program accelerated with a novel parallelization strategy and some other techniques to allow efficient clustering of such datasets. Our tests demonstrated very good speed up derived from the parallelization for up to $24 cores and a quasi-linear speed up for up to $8 cores. The enhanced cd hit is capable of handling very large datasets in much shorter time than previous versions. Availability: http://cd-hit.org.

introduction sequence analysis has played a crucial role in computational biology. With the advancement of the next generation sequencing technologies, the amount of available sequencing data is growing exponentially. Removing redundancy from such data by clustering could be crucial for reducing storage space, computational time and noise interference in some analysis methods, etc. cd hit was originally developed to cluster protein sequences to create reference databases with reduced redundancy () and was then extended to support clustering nucleotide sequences (). Since its release, cd hit has become very widely used for a large variety of applications ranging from non-redundant dataset creation (), protein family classifications (), artifact identification (), meta genomics annotation (), RNA analysis (), to various prediction studies (). With sequencing data rapidly growing in public data repositories as well as in individual laboratories, there has been strong demand for an enhanced cd hit with greater efficiency. In response to such demand, we have developed this enhanced and parallelized version of cd hit to exploit the fact that multi-core machines have become very common in ordinary laboratories. A computer cluster based parallelization procedure for cd hit has been proposed in, though not fully parallelized, this procedure provides good speed up using computer cluster. Since computer clusters are not as easily available as multi-core machines, here we propose an alternative parallelization technique, which assumes shared memory model and works well on multi-core machines.
