Motivation: An important problem in synthetic biology is to design a nucleotide sequence of an mRNA that confers a desirable expression level of a target protein. The secondary structure of protein coding sequences (CDSs) is one potential factor that could have both positive and negative effects on protein production. To elucidate the role of secondary structure in CDSs, algorithms for manipulating secondary structure should be developed. Results: We developed an algorithm for designing a CDS with the most stable secondary structure among all possible ones translated into the same protein, and implemented it as the program cds fold. The algorithm runs the Zuker algorithm under the constraint of a given amino acid sequence. The time and space complexity is O(L 3) and O(L 2), respectively, where L is the length of the CDS to be designed. Although our algorithm is slower than the original Zuker algorithm, it could design a relatively long (2.7-kb) CDS in approximately 1 h. Availability and implementation: The cds fold program is freely available for non-commercial users as stand-alone and web based software from

introduction protein expression levels are reportedly affected by various types of mRNA features, such as codon usage (), rare codon clusters (), secondary structures in untranslated regions () and protein coding sequences (CDSs; see below), Kozak motif () and shine dalgarno sequence (). Among them, secondary structure is difficult to handle because of the need to consider base pair interactions between distant nucleotides and complex energy parameters assigned to each part of the secondary structure. This may be one of the reasons that some recent methods for designing CDSs do not consider secondary structural features (). The secondary structure of CDSs, however, can have substantial effects on protein production as described below, although the mechanisms by which secondary structure affects protein production are not understood fully, especially in eukaryotes. Previous studies have found that secondary structures near the start codon tend to be unstable in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes (), suggesting that secondary structures have negative effects on protein expression levels. Indeed, in prokaryotes, it was shown that a stable secondary structure around the start codon reduced protein expression levels, possibly by blocking the access of the ribosome to the ribosome binding site (). Also, in eukaryotes, a previous study demonstrated that the secondary structure around the start codon strongly reduced protein expression levels (). This was confirmed by a recent study based on the large scale measurements of protein abundance for over 2000 sequence variants in yeast (). Therefore, it may be possible to decrease protein expression levels by artificially inserting a stable secondary structure near the start codon in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Secondary structures far downstream of the start codon may also have effects on protein production. It is commonly believed that the secondary structures in CDSs impede translation elongation, resulting in a reduction of protein production. It has, however, been pointed out that slow elongation may not result in decreased protein production as long as there is sufficient space between elongating ribosomes (). Moreover, it has been suggested that slow elongation can assist in proper co translational protein folding (). Therefore, slow elongation does not necessarily decrease protein expression levels. Moreover, it can not be ruled out that the secondary structures in CDSs have positive, rather than negative, effects on protein production by protecting mRNAs from various types of negative factors such as RNase digestion, down-regulation by microRNAs, and unintended interactions with other mRNA molecules. Interestingly, recent studies based on genome wide measurements of RNA secondary structure in yeast (), found a high correlation between secondary structure and protein expression levels (); mRNAs of strongly expressed genes tend to form a more stable secondary structure. Although still arguable, these studies suggest a causal relationship between protein expression levels and the stability of the secondary structures of CDSs. Therefore, it is worth investigating whether (and to what degree) artificially stabilized secondary structures in CDSs decrease or enhance protein expression levels. To elucidate the effect of secondary structures in CDSs as well as utilize the features of secondary structures to control protein expression levels, algorithms for handling the secondary structures of CDSs should be developed. Currently, however, there are very few tools for stabilizing the secondary structures of CDSs. Gaspar et al. recently developed the mRNA optimiser (), which is based on a simulated annealing algorithm. Although the method was intended to remove secondary structures from CDSs, it can also be used to stabilize the secondary structures. Here, we developed a different approach that was based on a dynamic programming algorithm. It designs the CDS with the most stable secondary structure among all possible ones translated into the same protein. In our algorithm, the Zuker algorithm () is executed under the constraint of a given amino acid sequence. Although our algorithm uses larger DP matrices than the original Zuker algorithm, the fundamental procedure of both algorithms is the same. Therefore, as with the Zuker algorithm, the time and space complexity of our algorithm is O(L 3 ) and O(L 2 ), respectively, where L is the length of the CDS to be designed.

conclusion we developed an algorithm for designing a CDS with the most stable secondary structure in terms of the Turner energy model. It was shown that cds fold can design CDSs of most genes within 1 h. It was also shown that our algorithm can design CDSs with a more stable secondary structure than the method based on simulated annealing, especially when a CDS is long. The algorithm is useful for investigating the effect of the secondary structure of a CDS as well as utilizing features of the secondary structure to control protein expression levels. Note that, by changing the secondary structure of a CDS, potential binding sites for other regulatory proteins or factors might be also changed, which might be responsible for the change in expression level. Therefore, the effect of the secondary structure should be investigated using at least several different proteins.
