Identification of domains in protein sequences allows their assigning to biological functions. Several web servers exist for identification of protein domains using similarity searches against various databases of protein domain models. However, none of them provides comprehensive domain coverage while allowing bulk querying and their visualization schemes can be improved. To address these issues, we developed cd vist (a comprehensive domain visualization tool), which combines the best available search algorithms and databases into a user friendly framework. First, a given protein sequence is matched to domain models using high specificity tools and only then unmatched segments are subjected to more sensitive algorithms resulting in a best possible comprehensive coverage. Bulk querying and rich visualization and download options provide improved functionality to domain architecture analysis. Availability and implementation: Freely available on the web at http://cdvist.

introduction the identification of protein domains is a key feature of protein sequence analysis. Several databases, notably Pfam (), Simple Modular Architecture Research Tool (SMART) (), Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG) (), Conserved Domain Database (CDD) () and others, develop and maintain domain models. Searching tools such as rps blast (), HMMER3 () and hhp red hh search () are used to match sequences to domain models present in a given database. The size of the protein sequence database grows dramatically, whereas its coverage by pre-computed domain models increases very slowly (). Consequently, sensitive domain searches of sequences in bulk are necessary to improve computational coverage of the current and future protein sequence space. Despite the overwhelming success of the current state of the art domain searching resources, three areas require further improvements: (i) combining tools with high specificity and tools with high sensitivity in a single framework, (ii) multiple query searches using highly sensitive (e.g. profile to profile methods, (iii) visualization of most relevant information in a responsive and interactive way. To address these issues, we have developed the Comprehensive Domain Visualization Tool cd vist a domain searching web server specialized in maximizing domain coverage of multidomain protein sequences with emphasis on visualization.
