high throughput microscopy data require a diversity of analytical approaches. However, the construction of workflows that use algorithms from different software packages is difficult owing to a lack of interoperability. To overcome this limitation, we present cell h5 an HDF5 data format for cell based assays in high throughput microscopy, which stores high dimensional image data along with inter object relations in graphs. cell h5 browser an interactive gallery image browser, demonstrates the versatility and performance of the file format on live imaging data of dividing human cells. cell h5 provides new opportunities for integrated data analysis by multiple software platforms. Availability: Source code is freely available at www.github.com/cellh5 under the GPL license and at www bioconductor org packages release biochtmlrhdf5html under the artistic 20 license. Demo data-sets and the cell h5 browser are available at www.cellh5.org. A Fiji importer for cell h5 will be released soon.

introduction recent advancements in microscope automation enable high content screening at unprecedented throughput and spatio-temporal resolution. cell based assays typically involve segmentation of individual objects (cells) within the imaging field, followed by quantification of cell morphologies (). Powerful algorithms have been developed for learning based segmentation () and quantification and classification of cell morphologies (). Application of any of these methods to large scale biological data requires sophisticated workflow management and efficient batch processing, for which different software platforms have been developed (). In practice, the analysis often asks for the combination of methods that are available in distinct software platforms. Integration by re-implementation into a single platform is inefficient and error prone. A preferable approach is integration by interoperability of tools. Here, we propose a versatile data format for serialization, disk based storage and exchange of high content screening data and processing results. This provides a flexible and sustainable solution for the development of integrated analysis pipelines based on multiple software platforms. To facilitate the exchange of microscopy image data, the Open Microscopy Environment project (OME) has developed a standardized file format, ome tiff (), which can store raw microscopy images along with experimental meta-information (Supplementary). Semantically typed data hypercubes () have been proposed to store multi-dimensional high content screening data in a hierarchical fashion based on Extensible Markup Language and the HDF5 data model, which is optimized for efficient storage and rapid access of large scale multi-dimensional data. However, complex object relationships, as, for example, lineage trees of dividing cell populations that can comprise millions of cell objects, can not be efficiently processed when stored in textual data formats such as Extensible Markup Language used in ome tiff and semantically typed data hypercubes. Object relations are represented by network graphs, following standard formats such as graph ml () and GraphViz (). These text based formats, however, are designed mainly for visualization of graphs and can not be efficiently enriched with high dimensional binary data. An integrated data format representing both machine readable graph structures and multivariate object features has not been reported in the field of bioimaging. With cell h5 we introduce an efficient mechanism, representing both object relations in graphs along with high dimensional object data.
