Motivation: The Cellular Phenotype Database (CPD) is a repository for data derived from high throughput systems microscopy studies. The aims of this resource are: (i) to provide easy access to cellular phenotype and molecular localization data for the broader research community; (ii) to facilitate integration of independent phenotypic studies by means of data aggregation techniques, including use of an ontology and (iii) to facilitate development of analytical methods in this field. Results: In this article we present CPD, its data structure and user interface, propose a minimal set of information describing RNA interference experiments, and suggest a generic schema for management and aggregation of outputs from phenotypic or molecular localization experiments. The database has a flexible structure for management of data from heterogeneous sources of systems microscopy experimental outputs generated by a variety of protocols and technologies and can be queried by gene, reagent, gene attribute, study keywords, phenotype or ontology terms. Availability and implementation: CPD is developed as part of the Systems Microscopy Network of Excellence and is accessible at

introduction a novel 'systems microscopy' research strategy has emerged during the last decade that exploits recent developments in automated microscopy, cell microarrays, image analysis, data mining, statistics and modelling (). A wide range of methodologies is available to the scientific community for the characterization of cellular processes like mitosis or cell migration. For example, RNA interference (RNAi) screening approaches deliver diverse sets of cell loss of function phenotypes, assigned manually or automatically using various methodologies and processing pipelines. As part of the Systems Microscopy Network of Excellence project, we have developed the Cellular Phenotype Database (CPD) for management of data derived from high throughput phenotypic studies. Reference studies like mi to check () and cell morph () provided use cases and initial datasets for CPD development. In total, data from 10 studies have been loaded into the database (). The database has been released to the public. Across these studies we have observed high phenotypic heterogeneity both in terms of the criteria used to assign phenotypes (via manual or automatic annotation), and the terminology used for phenotypic annotations. Phenotypes observed can be specific to a given study or common across several studies. In the latter case terms used to describe phenotypes can be harmonized via a common ontology. To achieve this, the Cellular Microscopy Phenotype Ontology cm po
