The codon equivalent multiple alignment suite begins conservation al analysis for poly-merase chain reaction primer design at the protein level, allowing the user to design consensus primers capable of detecting homologous coding sequences even when low to moderate sequence information is available. This package also condenses the wealth of information associated with multiple sequence alignments and presents them in an intuitive manner, allowing the user to quickly and effectively address degenerate primer design considerations. Availability and implementation: https://sourceforge.net/projects/cemasuite/.

introduction in many polymerase chain reaction (PCR) applications, it is desirable to design PCR primers, which can amplify across similar targeted DNA fragments. Some examples include genetic screening to detect homologous genes across multiple organisms and working with highly variable sequences, such as in viral strains. Primers can be designed within a conserved region of the target sequences in such a way that the annealing properties of the primers remain relatively unchanged across multiple templates. Minor variations in the sequences can be accounted for by introducing degenerate positions into the primers. However, increasing the degeneracy of a primer also increases the likelihood of stable sites outside of the target region, leading to an increased risk of by product formation. by product formation is undesirable in PCR as it can lead to false type results (by out competing and or having similar product sizes as the amplicon) and or additional purification steps for downstream cloning applications. In this work, we present cema suite (https://sourceforge.net/pro jects cema suite an open source java based application with the ability to (i) construct a codon equivalent multiple alignment (CEMA) from a protein multiple sequence alignment (MSA) file, (ii) generate and score each consensus DNA sequence position using multiple algorithms, (iii) design single degeneracy primer backbones using primer 3 () and (iv) estimate the stability of degenerate primers on each of the coding sequences (CDSs) within the CEMA. The goal of cema suite is to aid in the design of degenerate primer sets which are robust enough for the assay at hand yet retain as much specificity and product homology as possible cema suite begins the conservation al analysis for primer design on the protein level, where R  20, as opposed to coding DNA, where R  4. A CEMA is generated by obtaining the primary CDSs of proteins in an extant MSA and expanding each position within the protein MSA to the observed codon representing each amino acid. Since many primer design applications can account for positional quality in their objective functions, each position within a consensus sequence for a CEMA is scored by one of four algorithms. These algorithms are detailed in the user manual. Briefly, the Percent Identity algorithm scores each position based on the normalized frequency of the consensus nucleotide. Identity Runs scores positions on identity, then adjusts the value based on the number of consecutive completely conserved positions in the locale. Potential Degeneracy scores positions on identity and then adjusts the value based on the potential degeneracy of the consensus codon positions according to one of 18 translation tables. The final algorithm, Runs  Degeneracy, scores values sequentially using logic from each of the three methods described above. The location of a primer within a CEMA is considered to be the region with the least total number of mismatches throughout all sequences. For cases where there are equal numbers of mismatches, the algorithm returns the index with mismatches occurring mostly on the 5'-end. Simulated hybridization of the primers to each template is performed by iterating through all possible permutations of a degenerate primer and estimating its most stable conformation when bound to the respective location of the template. Each simulated hybridization event returns a Gibbs free energy value estimated using nearest neighbor thermodynamics which is corrected using one of two entropic correction formulas (detailed in user manual).

conclusion because cema suite begins conservation al analysis at the protein level, the primers obtained through this application will have a high likelihood of successful amplification even when the template that the user would like to flag as " likely to fail amplification " are highlighted if they possess an individual primer less stable than the user input Individual Primer Warning threshold (yellow) and or the sum of the stability values of both primers is less stable than the Primer Set Warning threshold (red). Selective addition of degeneracy via the popup menu is shown in the forward primer input region (Color version of this figure is available at Bioinformatics online cema suite sequence information is unknown (e.g. PCR amplification of a novel environmental isolate). Additionally, because actual CDS information is used and degeneracy can be added as needed, users are free to balance the specificity and sensitivity of a PCR primer set. It is important to note that even though cema suite incorporates primer 3 functionality, the scoring algorithms and output graphics significantly speed up the process of primer design by inspection for those with moderate primer design experience. We expect cema suite to be a valuable assay design tool for applications such as genetic environmental screening, working with highly variable sequences and DNA quality control via PCR. An active open source community dedicated to improving the degenerate PCR primer design process is the goal of this project, and the participation of those whom are interested is encouraged. This application is released under public licensing (GNU GPL v3).
