Coarse grain (CG) models allow long scale simulations with a much lower computational cost than that of all atom simulations. However, the absence of atomistic detail impedes the analysis of specific atomic interactions that are determinant in most interesting biomolecular processes. In order to study these phenomena, it is necessary to reconstruct the atomistic structure from the CG representation. This structure can be analyzed by itself or be used as an onset for atomistic molecular dynamics simulations. In this work, we present a computer program that accurately reconstructs the atomistic structure from a CG model for proteins, using a simple geometrical algorithm. Availability and implementation: The software is free and available online at

introduction in the context of molecular dynamics (MDs), coarse grain (CG) models define particles by grouping several atoms into one bead. This process reduces the number of particles used to describe the system, allowing longer scale (either temporal, spatial or both) simulations in exchange of detail (). Furthermore, the possibility of reconstructing (or back mapping the atomistic structure from the CG representation allows a multiscale approach. Although a perfect reconstruction is mathematically impossible, approximate reconstructions can be obtained (). For instance, in (), authors construct a complete back map for the Martini model (). This reconstruction is remarkably accurate for the protein backbone and quite good on the side chains. The back mapping algorithm presented here was developed for the CG model developed in. As in the Martini force field, this model represents the backbone with one bead. Nevertheless, this bead is located in the position of the C a atom instead of the center of mass of the residues backbone atoms. The side chains are modeled with one to four beads, depending on the complexity of the amino acid. The backbone reconstruction scheme presented in this work can be applied to any model that represents the backbone with a bead at the C a. Of course, side chains reconstructions strongly depend on number and positions of the beads of each CG model but the same approach can be implemented in other models (see supplementary for a Martini CG model example). We also include in our program a back mapping of a CG model for the he me group, which was obtained using a similar approach as the one used to obtain standard CG amino acids in (). In summary, this tool allows back mapping of CG structures in an accurate manner. Also, due to the simplicity of the algorithm, it can be easily expanded to other particular molecules or chemical groups, such as cofactors and ligands (e.g. the he me group).

conclusion we presented an intuitive, portable, fast, free and easy to use method to map CG structures back to all atom representation. We have tested it in several examples by changing protein structures to CG representation and back mapping them. Examples were selected in order to test the algorithm for different secondary structure elements and 3D structure complexity. Both the backbone and total reconstruction is in this example, the back mapped structure is superimposed the original accurate except, sometimes, at the more flexible parts of the structure (i.e. ends, loops and long side chains).
