Motivation: Cancer genomes are characterized by the accumulation of point mutations and structural alterations such as copy number alterations and genomic rearrangements. Among structural changes, systematic analyses of copy number alterations have provided deeper insight into the architecture of cancer genomes and had led to new potential treatment opportunities. During the course of cancer genome evolution, selection mechanisms are leading to a non-random pattern of mutational events contributing to fitness benefits of the cancer cells. We therefore developed a new method to dissect random from non-random patterns in copy number data and thereby to assess significantly enriched somatic copy number aberrations across a set of tumor specimens or cell lines. In contrast to existing approaches, the method is invariant to any strictly monotonous transformation of the input data which results to an insensitivity of differences in tumor purity, array saturation effects and copy number baseline levels. Results: We applied our approach to recently published datasets of small cell lung cancer and squamous cell lung cancer and validated its performance by comparing the results to an orthogonal approach. In addition, we found a new deletion peak containing the hla a gene in squamous cell lung cancer. Availability: The c gars program package is available for download at http://www.translational-genomics.uni-koeln.de/scientific-resources/ Documentation and examples are available together with the package. Contact

introduction recently several algorithms to identify significant copy number alterations from array based high throughput data (e.g. Affymetrix SNP arrays or array CGH) have been proposed (). All of these methods have in common that the occurrence of different levels of tumor purity and ploidy are barely taken into account. Especially in the case of patient derived tumor samples, the admixture of nonneoplastic cells is an uncontrollable experimental variable, often leading to large differences in tumor purity throughout the dataset. An additional feature of cancer genomes is that some tumors exhibit diverting levels of genome ploidy (triploid, tetraploid, etc.). Both, low tumor purity and higher genome ploidy lead to a decrease of inferred copy number amplitudes (). By using rank sums, we propose a novel copy number analysis method that automatically accounts for these different levels of purity and ploidy. We applied this approach to published datasets of small cell lung cancer (SCLC) () and squamous cell carcinoma (SQ) () and finally validated detected regions of copy number alteration by comparing the results with those derived from a g istic analysis ().
