We developed a controller that is compliant with the Chado database schema, GBrowse and genome annotation editing tools such as Artemis and Apollo. It enables the management of public and private data, monitors manual annotation (with controlled vocabularies, structural and functional annotation controls) and stores versions of annotation for all modified features. The Chado controller uses PostgreSQL and Perl. Availability: The Chado Controller package is available for download at http://www.gnpannot.org/content/chado-controller and runs on any unix like operating system, and documentation is available at

introduction with the growth of large community annotation projects due to the rapid progress of the next generation sequencing technologies, efficient and optimized genomic data management is critical. Community Annotation Systems (CASs) are suitable for curators to annotate from all over the world via the Web. Some genomic information systems () have been provided to the community but only a few of them allow manual interactive, dynamic and user friendly curation (). Generic Model Organism Database (GMOD, http://gmod.org) is a collaborative project to develop a set of interoperable open source software for visualizing, annotating and managing biological data. In this project are developed popular software such as Chado () a modular database schema that underlies many GMOD tools such as the Generic Genome Browser, GBrowse, (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  Present address: UM2, li gm CNRS, up r IGH 1142, IMGT, F-34396 Montpellier, france in conjunction with genome annotation editing tools such as Apollo () and Artemis (), these interfaces are foundations for a generic and robust CAS. However, additional components are required to consolidate these components. For instance, software to deal with confidential and unpublished data which is an important requirement for a system to be more widely adopted by biologists that prefer to deal with flat files on a local file system. Also required is a monitoring system to keep track of the annotation process and highlight annotation inconsistencies. Currently, when a modification is made, pre-existing manual annotations are overwritten and only basic data quality controls are made. To address these issues, we decided to extend the Chado schema. Our approach was driven by the GMOD philosophy and we propose a generic, modular, seamless, easy to install and highly configurable controller called the Chado Controller (CC).

DISCUSSION
