Motivation: In addition to being involved in retinal vascular growth, astrocytes play an important role in diseases and injuries, such as glaucomatous neuro-degeneration and retinal detachment. Studying astrocytes, their morphological cell characteristics and their spatial relationships to the surrounding vasculature in the retina may elucidate their role in these conditions. Results: Our results show that in normal healthy retinas, the distribution of observed astrocyte cells does not follow a uniform distribution. The cells are significantly more densely packed around the blood vessels than a uniform distribution would predict. We also show that compared with the distribution of all cells, large cells are more dense in the vicinity of veins and toward the optic nerve head whereas smaller cells are often more dense in the vicinity of arteries. We hypothesize that since vein al astrocytes are known to transport toxic metabolic waste away from neurons they may be more critical than arterial astrocytes and therefore require larger cell bodies to process waste more efficiently. Availability and implementation: A 1/8th size down-sampled version of the seven retinal image mosaics described in this article can be found on BISQUE k vile kval et al., 2010) at

introduction the large amounts of image data that can be obtained with recent advances in microscopy require mining in an objective and unbiased fashion, using automated and reproducible methods. In this way, it is possible to discover trends and hypotheses for systems that domain experts may have very little prior knowledge about. These improvements have especially had a profound impact on examination of the spatial distribution and correlation of biological entities, as the locations of large amounts of cells and other structures can be imaged in situ. Studying the spatial arrangement and relationships in full tissue samples can improve our understanding of the various development or pathological processes that underlie proper organ or organism function (). In particular, it has been found that neuronal or vascular structures are pervasive in many tissues, and oftentimes are spatially correlated with other cells (). In this study, we are particularly interested in astrocytes, one of two types of glial cells found in the nerve fiber layer (NFL) of the mammalian retina. Astrocytes can be found between vasculature and retinal neurons and although many functions of astrocytes in the retina are poorly understood, it is widely accepted that they play an essential role in the development and function of the retinal vasculature blood flow and blood retinal barrier (BRB) (). Studying astrocytes and their spatial distributions within the healthy retina may give us some insight into their function in disease cases such as glaucomatous neuro-degeneration and retinal detachment. With regard to cell characteristics, one work determines that there are two types of astrocyte cells in developing rat white matter, and that they can be differentiated by their morphology, but only analyzes a total of 1000 cells and measurements to quantify the cells are made manually (). Another, more recent work reports that astrocyte cells which lie on or near blood vessels exhibit different morphological characteristics (specifically angles and lengths of primary processes) than those which do not (). This study involves a small dataset on the order of tens of astrocyte cells, hand-picked to have distinguishable processes that can be manually counted. Our current dataset of seven full retinal mosaics, each containing 36145499 cells, provides a much richer platform for testing hypotheses such as whether there exist distinct morphological classes of astrocytes and if so, how many. Our semi automated processing pipeline attempts to minimize bias from manual measurements, while also testing the uncertainty of cell characteristic clustering results, which rely on cell segmentation. Astrocyte processes physically contact the vascular structure (), and they also play a key functional role in the development of the retinal vasculature (). An apparent spatial correlation between astrocytes and the blood vessels has been noted (), but only observational evidence of such a relationship has been provided. The vasculature is a large heterogeneous structure with specific arterial and venous delineations (;). In order to quantify spatial distributions of astrocyte cells with respect to it, we need to image the entire retina. Strong evidence of astrocyte spatial correlation with various vascular properties would lend further support to additional hypotheses of astrocyte function, such as the suspected role of astrocytes in vasodilation and constriction (). However, quantifying spatial properties of astrocytes in retinal tissue can be a challenging task. One must be careful in selecting spatial mining methods which are invariant to scale, rotation, and which use distance metrics that operate in geodesic spaces, such as along the linear network of the blood vessels. This rules out traditional spatial quantification methods such as colocation (), or nearest neighbor methods () which operate in Euclidean space. To our knowledge, there has been only one previous work focused specifically on the analysis of spatial distributions of astrocytes in the retina (). Using manually marked cell centers and automatically traced blood vessels, their study attempts to determine existence of spatial relationships between the two in both detached and healthy retinas. Astrocytes and 2 mm blood vessel segments are represented by 4D features that quantify their respective locations. Astrocytes are mapped to their nearest blood vessel segment via Euclidean projection and 2D histograms of the features are computed with respect to the width of the blood vessel segment and the geodesic vascular distance to the optic nerve head on h. The article postulates that a correlation of astrocyte cell locations with the structure of the vasculature can be determined by comparing these histograms. The study concluded that it is unlikely that the astrocytes are randomly distributed along the structure of the vasculature, regardless of the retina being normal or detached. The article also reported that arterial astrocytes are spatially distributed as random samples from the arterial structure, whereas venous astrocytes spatially deviate from the venous spatial structure. While this study presents a novel method for spatial analysis of astrocyte and blood vessel distributions, there has been much previous work in point process modeling and spatial statistics dating back to 1986 () regarding quantifying point distributions with respect to surrounding line segments or linear networks. We choose to make use of such spatial statistics tools, making our approach a more in depth and intuitive way to represent and analyze this type of data. The conclusions arrived at here offer more detail but do not contradict those of and we attribute that to the use of more principled methodology, as mentioned above, as well as a larger and more accurate dataset due to staining of astrocyte nuclei. The goal of our analysis is to determine if the spatial distribution of astrocytes in the retina correlates with the vascular network, or with morphological cell characteristics such as area and perimeter. To accomplish this, we extract astrocyte and blood vessel data for large image mosaics of the retinal NFL. We then segment the astrocytes using two different segmentation methods in order to assess the dependence of our resulting morphological characteristics on the cell segmentation step of the analysis pipeline. Following this, we perform an exploratory correlation analysis of cell characteristics to decide which to incorporate into our overall point process model and which are redundant. We also offer some possible spatial covariates for the cell distribution, whose importance will be tested on all cells and on each type of cell resulting from the study of cell characteristics. From these results we will arrive at an overall model for the density of astrocyte cells in the retina. The methodology presented here can be used for spatial studies between other vasculature structures and cells, which occur in many places in the mammalian body. Using point process models we are able to systematically quantify the spatial distribution of astrocyte cells within the mammalian retina, and provide a foundation for future research aimed at studying the spatial distribution of various biological components in large tissue images. Our contributions lie in our choice of statistical models to describe the astrocyte distributions as well as the biological conclusions derived from these models. We will show evidence that in normal healthy retinas, the distribution of observed astrocyte cells is more densely packed around the blood vessels than a uniform distribution would predict. We also show that compared with the distribution of all cells, large cells are more densely packed in the vicinity of veins and toward the on h whereas smaller cells are often more densely packed in the vicinity of arteries.

discussion in this study, we presented what we believe to be the most appropriate choice of statistical model to represent astrocyte locations and sizes in healthy mammalian retinas and most importantly, the biological conclusions derived from those models. Due to very little prior knowledge regarding these distributions, we performed an exploratory analysis which necessitates steps such as hypothesis testing and model selection. These resulting trends regarding the size of astrocytes and their spatial locations within the retina, particularly with respect to the surrounding arteries and veins are new biological discoveries that have not yet been published to our knowledge. Although some of the trends were visible from the kernel smoothing estimate of the astrocyte intensity, the full quantification of the distribution of cells and the statements regarding the statistical significance of the dependence on the proposed spatial covariates could not have been made without usage of the appropriate point process models. Our results show that in normal healthy retinas, the distribution of observed astrocyte cells is more densely packed around the blood vessels than a uniform distribution. We also show that compared with the distribution of all cells, large cells are more densely packed in the vicinity of veins and toward the on h whereas smaller cells are often more densely packed in the vicinity of arteries. The conditional density maps shown in10 and in Section 7 of Supplementary Data show that the density of large cells is clearly higher in a flower shaped region with the petals centered on the retinal veins, whereas small cells have low density in these regions. Due to this clear differentiation between arteries and veins, the results of this study could potentially aid in automated differentiation between arteries and veins in the retina, which has proven to be a difficult task (). A possible explanation for these phenomena is related to the vascular function within the retina. The retinal vasculature enters the retina through the central retinal artery via the on h and after being distributed through the retinal tissue, it leaves the tissue through the retinal vein. Astrocytes sit between vasculature and retinal neurons and although many functions of astrocytes in healthy retinas are poorly understood, it is widely accepted that they play an essential role in the development and function of the retinal vasculature, blood flow and BRB (). In fact glial cell dysfunction in retinal pathologies is associated with retinal swelling and BRB breakdown (). Astrocytes transport small molecules (glucose, glutamate, small proteins or polypeptides) from the blood stream to the neurons at the arteries and take metabolic byproducts away from the neurons back into the blood stream at the veins. We hypothesize that the latter process may be more critical, since for example it is well known that too many metabolic waste products can be toxic to neurons. We speculate that this criticality may be the reason for the astrocytes residing on the veins to be the largest, as larger cells can presumably process waste more efficiently. In this article, we have argued that the explanatory power of each covariate considered follows a common trend across all seven retinas studied, but have not yet shown the performance of the generative spatial point process model derived here on hold out retinal data. Future work will include validating the generative model that we have created on a hold out area from each retina, using the parameters generated from the rest of that retina, as well as holding out a few entire retinas and re-using parameters derived from other retinas. The latter requires normalization for the varying physical quantities between retinas such as shape, orientation, size, number of arteries, veins and overall intensity of cells. We believe that once the retinal normalization issue is resolved the resulting models will allow us to predict the locations and sizes of the cells in a new retina based on its blood vessel structure and directly compare parameters between retinas in other animals or stages of treatment, disease or detachment without needing these manual markings. This study can serve as a solid foundation for an end to end script which analyzes and simulates retinal cell distributions as well as spatial dependencies between other vasculature structures and cells, which occur many places in the body.
