Motivation: Outer membrane beta barrels o mbbs are the proteins found in the outer membrane of bacteria, mitochondria and chloro-plasts. There are thousands of beta barrels reported in genomic databases with $2–3% of the genes in gram negative bacteria encoding these proteins. These proteins have a wide variety of biological functions including active and passive transport, cell adhesion, catalysis and structural anchoring. Of the non-redundant omb b structures in the Protein Data Bank, half have been solved during the past 5 years. This influx of information provides new opportunities for understanding the chemistry of these proteins. The distribution of charges in proteins in the outer membrane has implications for how the mechanism of outer membrane protein insertion is understood. Understanding the distribution of charges might also assist in organism selection for the heterologous expression of mitochondrial o mbbs. Results: We find a strong asymmetry in the charge distribution of these proteins. For the outward facing residues of the beta barrel within regions of similar amino acid density for both membrane leaflets , the external side of the outer membrane contains almost three times the number of charged residues as the internal side of the outer membrane. Moreover, the lipid bilayer of the outer membrane is asym-metric, and the overall preference for amino acid types to be in the external leaflet of the membrane correlates roughly with the hydropho-bicity of the membrane lipids. This preference is demonstrably related to the difference in lipid composition of the external and internal leaflets of the membrane.

introduction the proteins of the outer membrane make up 23% of gram negative bacteria proteome (). These proteins are responsible for transport, cell surface enzymatic functions and structural anchoring (). Outer membrane beta barrels o mbbs of bacteria are remotely homologous to the o mbbs of mitochondria (Jimenez). The structure of outer membrane proteins are almost exclusively antiparallel beta barrels (). Outer membrane proteins are more hydrophilic than inner membrane proteins. Inner membrane proteins, which are mostly multipass transmembrane helical bundles, have lipid facing exteriors that are extremely hydrophobic and protein facing interiors that are similarly hydrophobic to the hydrophobic cores of soluble proteins (). The structures of o mbbs on the other hand, are such that they are more like inside out soluble proteins. The lipid facing exterior is highly hydrophobic, but the interior is often accessible to water and is composed of small hydrophilic residues (). The study of the lipid facing positions of o mbbs is of particular interest as it may lead to a clearer understanding of the folding mechanism of o mbbs. o mbbs have long been known to spontaneously insert into lipid vesicles (). In vivo, protein insertion can not occur without the b barrel Assembly Machinery (BAM). It has been hypothesized that o mbbs can insert by themselves in vivo but that the kinetics are too slow to allow for the insertion to occur at the speed and frequency necessary for o mbbs to promote cell viability (). Previous studies on the folding of o mbbs have used symmetric lipid vesicles or computational models that make the outer membrane a symmetric lipid bilayer. Reconstitution of mutated outer membrane phospholipase in lipid bilayer vesicles demonstrated that substitution of leucine for native residues in lipid facing positions stabilizes o mbbs and substitution of those same positions to arginine destabilizes o mbbs. The effect of these mutations on stabilization is stronger toward the center of the vesicle bilayer and is less pronounced closer to the aqueous interface (). Previous bioinformatic assessment of lipid facing omb b amino acid composition was accomplished by symmet r izing the outer membrane such that the center of the membrane was defined as z  0; 1 A  in either the internal direction or the external direction was defined as z  1. By symmet r izing the membrane, the authors could double the counts for their study and provide a statistically significant picture of the preferences of all 20 amino acids for each 1.5 A  segment of the membrane. Aliphatic amino acids were shown to prefer the interior of the membrane, polar and charged amino acids were shown to prefer the exterior of the membrane and aromatics were shown to prefer the interfacial region (). These results are similar to earlier studies of inner membrane amino acid preferences (). More recent asymmetric assessment of inner membrane alpha helical proteins () demonstrated the positive inside rule (von) in the symmetric inner membrane, as arginine and lysine have a strong propensity for localizing on the cytoplasmic facing loops of the inner membrane. This positive inside rule determines the topology of inner membrane proteins and is believed to be a result of at least three factors: the voltage across the inner membrane (), the charges in the Sec translocon () and the presence of negatively charged phospholipids (). Of these factors, the only one to be relevant to the outer membrane is that of voltage across the membrane. The outer membrane is known to have an electrical potential of similar magnitude and direction as the electrical potential across the inner membrane (). However, of the other two factors, one is not present, and one is lessened. Outer membrane proteins are inserted into the membrane using the unrelated BAM machinery rather than the Sec translocon. Moreover, although the inner membrane and the outer membrane are composed of the same phospholipids [phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), phosphatidyl glycerol (PG) and cardiolipin], there is evidence that the percentage of negatively charged phospholipids is one half to one quarter of that in the inner membrane (). The outer membrane itself is highly asymmetric with an inner leaflet of phospholipid and an outer leaflet of lipopolysaccharides (LPS) (). It has been determined that a group of proteins coordinates the maintenance of this lipid asymmetry (). Moving charges in the loops of o mbbs does not change their topology (), and previous analysis has indicated that there is a preference for positive charges on the lipid facing external region of o mbbs but no difference in the prevalence of negatively charged amino acids between the lipid facing internal and external regions of the outer membrane (). Since then, the number of non-homologous crystal structures has more than doubled (http://blanco.biomol.uci.edu/Mem brane proteins xtal html. In this work, we determine that charged and polar amino acids are disproportionately favored in the external side of the outer membrane. The localization of the charged amino acids correlates well with the structure of the lipids of the outer membrane, to the extent that differences in lipids between organisms are correlated with a difference in localizations of charges in those organisms. The description herein of o mbbs asymmetry with respect to all charged amino acids, not just positive charge, demonstrates the importance of the asymmetry of the outer membrane itself with respect to understanding the stability and insertion of o mbbs
