Motivation: A number of methods for detecting positive selection in protein coding DNA sequences are based on whether each site region has a non-synonymous to synonymous substitution rates ratio ω greater than one. However, a site region may show a relatively large number of non-synonymous mutations that conserve a particular property. Recent methods have proposed to consider as evidence for molecular adaptations how conserving, or radically different, non-synonymous mutations are with respect to some key amino acid properties. While such methods have been useful in providing a qualitative assessment of molecular adaptation, they rely on independent statistical analyses for each amino acid property and typically do not properly adjust for multiple comparisons when selection needs to be assessed at several sites. Results: We consider a Bayesian hierarchical model that allows us to jointly determine if a set of amino acid properties are being conserved or radically changed while simultaneously adjusting for multiple comparisons at the codon level. We illustrate how this model can be used to characterize molecular adaptation in two datasets: an alignment from six class I alleles of the human major histocompatibility complex and a sperm lys in alignment from 25 abalone species. We compare the results obtained with the proposed hierarchical models to those obtained with alternative methods. Our analyses indicate that a more complete quantitative and qualitative characterization of molecular adaptation is achieved by taking into account changes in amino acid properties.

introduction there are a variety of tests for detecting departures from neutrality. Such tests could be classified into two groups: those based on the distribution of allele frequencies and or segregating sites (e.g.), and those that explicitly study patterns of polymorphisms divergence in genes encoding proteins. In this second category, most methods compare non-synonymous * To whom correspondence should be addressed with synonymous substitution rates at some level. Such methods usually estimate non-synonymous to synonymous rates ratios to study intra-specific variation (e.g.), provide a formal comparison between intra and inter-specific genetic variation (e.g.) or investigate character evolution in a phylogeny by using codon based models (e.g.). In all cases, an excess of non-synonymous over synonymous mutations is considered as indicative that some form of positive selection may be taking place if a set of assumptions is met (see e.g.). Several investigators have tried to enrich the approaches listed above by considering methods that take into account changes in the physicochemical properties of the amino acids; the rationale behind this is that a replacement between two amino acids with similar physicochemical characteristics may not change the phenotype in the same way that a replacement between two amino acids that are radically different does (). While the value of comparing radical versus non radical changes as a formal test for positive selection is still under discussion (), having a flexible framework that allows us to explore changes in amino acid properties can provide useful insight in comparative studies that aim to assess the effect of positive selection (). Among the methods that take into account amino acid properties are those in that use calculations of expected random distributions of possible amino acid changes based on fixed differences between residues given a particular property. A related approach is that of, which tests significant deviations of the mean physicochemical distance from the random expectation along a lineage or across a subtree. The idea is to detect significant deviations from a process consistent with neutrality. For instance, a trend toward radical changes in a particular property is, in principle, inconsistent with neutrality. More recent methods also include those in which consider codon substitution models that incorporate changes in physicochemical properties. These methods proceed by partitioning the codons on the basis of a specific property, and then categorize substitutions as property conserving or property altering depending on whether there is a change in the partition. The methods listed above have been very useful in providing a qualitative assessment of changes in amino acid properties that may be indicative of selection acting on the divergence page 2819 28182825

discussion we present a Bayesian hierarchical regression model that allows us to detect radical amino acid changes that could facilitate the identification of adaptations by quantifying the magnitude of changes in amino acid properties. The model is flexible, with the following main features: (i) it provides global results, i.e. point estimates and associated uncertainties of the posterior probabilities of the proportions of sites that are neutral, highly conserved, Page: 2824 28182825
