Motivation: Many diseases are related by shared associated molecules and pathways, exhibiting comorbidities and common phenotypes, an indication of the continuous nature of the human pathological landscape. Although it is continuous, this landscape is always partitioned into discrete diseases when studied at the molecular level. Clinical signs are also important phenotypic descrip-tors that can reveal the molecular mechanisms that underlie pathological states, but have seldom been the subject of systemic research. Here, we quantify the modular nature of the clinical signs associated with genetic diseases in the human interactome. Results: We found that clinical signs are reflected as modules at the molecular network level, to at least to the same extent as diseases. They can thus serve as a valid complementary partition of the human pathological landscape, with implications for etiology research, diagnosis and treatment.

introduction disease associated phenotypes, also known as clinical signs, are commonly used in clinical practice to describe pathological manifestations. These signs help in the differential diagnosis and treatment of a patient, enabling identification of a particular disease. Diseases can thus be regarded as a special and important type of pathological phenotype. Most work on the molecular basis of pathologies has focused on diseases or syndromes, instead of clinical signs. This is the case, e.g. in the determination of the genetic variations associated with a given disease (). Some exceptions include the analysis of quantitative traits () (such as height, body mass index, erythrocyte count) or certain common clinical manifestations (alopecia, hearing loss, cardiac arrhythmias). Diseases are the basic pathological units in the systemic approaches to human pathologies from a network perspective (). Nevertheless, clinical signs can also be valid, useful descriptors of the human pathological landscape, currently neglected by its traditional partitioning into distinct diseases. If that is the case, partitioning the human pathological landscape into clinical signs should result in a clear link between the molecular and physiological levels. Clinical signs are thought to be reflected at the molecular network level, possibly to an even greater extent than diseases. There are numerous examples of diseases or groups of diseases with similar phenotypes caused by functionally related genes (). Previous studies observed a correlation between disease similarity as measured by common phenotypes clinical signs and their similarity due to common molecular mechanisms (such as shared genes, protein interactions, etc.) (). In a recent study provided evidence for the disease module hypothesis, demonstrating that genes associated with different diseases appear as distinct modules in the still incomplete human interactome. While most of the diseases studied appeared as separate modules, some overlap. Here, we quantify the extent to which clinical signs, not diseases, are reflected in the human interactome. Due to the lack of data on the genetic basis of most clinical signs, we built a dataset of gene clinical sign relationships through the genetic diseases they are linked to. As most genetic diseases are monogenic, it is reasonable to assume that these genes are pleiotropic and make an important contribution to the clinical sign observed. We found that clinical signs are modular. This dataset also allowed us to establish relationships between distinct clinical signs and to compare these relationships with those obtained from shared genes. We find significant overlap in neighborhoods between clinical signs and between signs and complex diseases.

discussion here we analyzed the organization of clinical signs associated with genetic diseases in the human interactome, and found that the clinical manifestations of these diseases form modules in the interactome. The size (Si) and compactness (di) of the modules differ due to the current coverage of the known interactome and to the nature of the clinical signs, but in most cases (80.53%) Si and di deviate from random expectation with the most stringent criteria. We applied the same mathematical formalism developed to estimate the modular nature of a set of complex diseases and groups of diseases (). In their study, men che et al. analyzed diseases and their relationships, and showed that diseases that overlap in the interactome have more similar clinical signs that those that do not. We found that some clinical sign modules overlap with disease modules, and that some of these overlaps are statistically significant. Our results show that not only genes associated with complex diseases are modular in the interactome, as demonstrated previously, but also genes associated with clinical signs. This offers new alternatives to the study of pathological states of common diseases and their association to genetic determinants, especially for the development of personalized medicine, as it will allow better understanding of a given disease manifestation in a given patient (with a specific set of signs and symptoms) and its relationship with the genetic variations found. As the human pathological landscape is partitioned into distinct clinical signs as well as into diseases, both can serve as targets for the study of pathological states using molecular network concepts. For diseases with no existing or immediately foreseeable treatments, one could devise ways of targeting some clinical signs by looking at their associated genes and network modules. As the human pathological landscape is a continuum, it can and should be explored beyond traditional disease definitions and classifications. In conclusion, our results show that clinical signs associated with genetic diseases appear as modules in the interactome, and some show significant overlap. As such, they can be used to identify molecular mechanisms that could explain the manifestations of more complex diseases. To quote Oti et al. '. .. we have traditionally split the human phenome into discrete entities called diseases, instead of searching for common pathogenetic mechanisms that link diseases together however there is more to the human phenome than a list of diseases'. Partitioning the human pathological landscape into other (molecularly supported) entities could help to approach diagnosis and treatment of disease states from a new perspective.
