We present ChAsE, a cross platform desktop application developed for interactive visu-alization, exploration and clustering of epi genomic data such as chips eq experiments. ChAsE is designed and developed in close collaboration with several groups of biologists and bioinformatic ians with a focus on usability and interactivity. Data can be analyzed through k means clustering, specifying presence or absence of signal in epigenetic data and performing set operations between clusters. Results can be explored in an interactive heat map and profile plot interface and exported for downstream analysis or as high quality figures suitable for publications. Availability and Implementation: Software, source code (MIT License), data and video tutorials available at

introduction epigenetics is the study of changes in the regulation of gene activity and expression that are not dependent on gene sequence. Advances in DNA sequencing technology have enabled researchers to investigate the epigenetic state of cells by profiling modifications such as histone methylation across the whole genome using techniques such as chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing chips eq. While computational methods to interpret chips eq data continue to evolve and improve, many questions can not be easily addressed in an automated fashion, and biologists need to be engaged directly in data processing and interpretation. Several techniques such as chroma sig () and chrom hmm () use probabilistic methods for the discovery of epigenetic signatures, but often require significant computational skill to use. Platforms such as cist rome () and seq monk www bioinformatics babraham ac uk projects seq monk provide a tool chain of diverse analysis methods and graphical interfaces for improved usability; however, they offer limited interactivity and visualization. Genome browsers such as the WashU epi genome Browser () are popular interactive visualization tools that plot data along a reference genome coordinate and display epi genomic marks as separate tracks vertically stacked to facilitate comparison. Local regions can be viewed one at a time but obtaining an overview of global data patterns can be challenging. More recently, epi viz () provides a scripting interface in addition to the genome browser, to allow invoking R functions and displaying the results within the tool, however, this extension remains accessible only to users with relevant technical skills. To lower this computational barrier, we had previously developed Spark () which employed an interactive V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com visualization for pattern discovery, particularly in the early data exploration phases. However, support for cluster comparison and the ability to directly query for clusters with specific data patterns remain outstanding needs. In addition we realized that most biologists prefer a standard heat map visualization for communicating and publishing results. Observing the limitations of available solutions, we designed and developed ChAsE in close collaboration with several groups of biologists and bioinformatic ians with a focus on usability and interactivity. The main features include: @BULLET exploration through multiple linked interfaces including an interactive heat map and profile plot; @BULLET automatic clustering using k means or manual clustering by sorting and selecting items in the heat map; @BULLET querying for absence or presence of signal in epi genomic marks; @BULLET comparing clusters by performing set operations; @BULLET exporting results for downstream analysis as well as producing high quality figures for publications. (examples included in the supplementary document).

application we used ChAsE to study the relationships between DNA methylation, histone modifications and several dna binding regulatory proteins in mouse embryonic stem cells me scs (data available at the tool website). After loading the data, we performed a clustering across promoter regions using chips eq data for H3K4me3 and H3K27me3, histone modifications characteristic of transcriptionally active and silent promoters, respectively. We specified these two marks for clustering by selecting the corresponding check boxes in k means pane (). The clustering results are shown in a tree in the workspace pane in a with each cluster connected to the corresponding section in the heat map in(c). The top cluster shows low H3K27me3 (blue) and moderate to high H3K4me3 yellow red indicative of 'active' promoters. In contrast, the middle cluster has moderate H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 blue yellow typical of transcriptionally poised or 'bivalent' promoters. The bottom cluster contains low levels of both modifications (blue) indicative of 'inactive' promoters. We used the contextual menu to appropriately label each of the clusters in the workspace pane. We wanted to examine the DNA methylation status of these subpopulations, as well as to study the TET family of proteins known to catalyze the oxidation of 5 methyl cytosine (5mC) to 5 hydroxyl methyl cytosine (5hmC). Consistent with recent reports (), we observed high levels of 5hmC in the presence of TET1 at bivalent promoters in the middle cluster of(c). Intriguingly, the top cluster of(c) shows high levels of TET1, but only low to moderate levels of 5mC and 5hmC consistent with the model that h3k4me3 marked promoters harbor very low levels of DNA methylation. We also investigated the enrichment of the e set histone methyltransferase at gene promoters. This protein catalyzes the methylation of H3K9 and deposition of H3K9me3 at retrotransposons and certain gene promoters (). Examining H3K9me3 and e set chips eq datasets revealed that e set bound promoters in the top and middle clusters were almost all devoid of H3K9me3. This raised the possibility that e set functions at promoters independent of its catalytic activity, perhaps to positively influence transcription. Furthermore, the presence of H3K4me3 at both the top and middle clusters may prevent the bound e set from depositing H3K9me3 at such genomic sites. Although these observations have yet to be validated by further lab experiments, this example demonstrated the effectiveness of ChAsE for deriving new hypotheses.
