Motivation: Experiments such as chip chip chips eq chip pet and da mid (the four methods referred herein as chip x are used to profile the binding of transcription factors to DNA at a genome wide scale. Such experiments provide hundreds to thousands of potential binding sites for a given transcription factor in proximity to gene coding regions. Results: In order to integrate data from such studies and utilize it for further biological discovery, we collected interactions from such experiments to construct a mammalian chip x database. The database contains 189 933 interactions, manually extracted from 87 publications, describing the binding of 92 transcription factors to 31 932 target genes. We used the database to analyze mRNA expression data where we perform gene list enrichment analysis using the chip x database as the prior biological knowledge gene list library. The system is delivered as a web based interactive application called ChIP Enrichment Analysis (ChEA). With ChEA, users can input lists of mammalian gene symbols for which the program computes over-representation of transcription factor targets from the chip x database. The ChEA database allowed us to reconstruct an initial network of transcription factors connected based on shared overlapping targets and binding site proximity. To demonstrate the utility of ChEA we present three case studies. We show how by combining the Connectivity Map (CMAP) with ChEA, we can rank pairs of compounds to be used to target specific transcription factor activity in cancer cells. Availability: The ChEA software and chip x database is freely available online at: http://amp.

introduction gene expression profiling using microarrays, or now rnase q are popular methods to measure the level of mRNA in mammalian cells at a genome wide scale. Yet, since mRNA levels only * To whom correspondence should be addressed. weakly correlate with protein level, data collected from mRNA profiling provides little clues on how cells are regulated by the activity of transcription factors, co regulator complexes and cell signaling pathways. Many methods have been applied to study transcriptional regulation both experimentally and computationally. Recently, large scale experimental methods that profile the binding of transcription factors to DNA at the genome wide level have emerged. These methods include chip chip (), chips eq (), chip pet () and da mid () (these four methods are referred to as chip x for shorthand hereinafter). Results from such experiments report the binding of specific transcription factors to DNA in proximity of target gene loci, commonly listing hundreds to thousands of potential regulatory interactions. Such interactions are often reported in Excel spreadsheets or PDF tables as Supplementary Materials to research articles, or as raw data files provided as short sequence reads in fast a format, making such data difficult for reuse. So far, information from genome wide chip x studies, as well as low throughput transcription factor dna interaction studies, is utilized to develop binding site sequence motifs. For example, JASPAR () and TRANSFAC () are two popular databases that collect information about potential binding sites into logo motifs also known as binding site matrices. These databases contain collections of transcription factors with information on regulatory motif elements. With binding site matrices, it is straight forward to map potential binding sites across an entire genome. Alternatively, conserved sequences near gene coding regions across and within species can suggest transcription factor binding sites and be used to improve predictions of functional transcription factor dna interactions using multiple alignments combined with logo motif search. The obvious emerging alternative method is to utilize chip x data for linking transcription factors to gene expression changes by computing binding site overrepresentation. By compiling chip x experiments into a gene list library database, we can rank transcription factors most likely responsible for the observed changes in gene expression based on statistical enrichment analysis. We show that this method is powerful, capable of capturing interesting underlying biology with clear signals. Such an approach likely works well because it considers the chromatin structure of a specific cellular state, in a specific experiment; and as such, it is a more direct way to infer transcription factor regulation compared to sequence based methods page 2439 24382444

discussion one of the reasons high throughput genome wide chip x studies are expected to be more useful and accurate than computational sequence based methods is because the sequence based approaches do not take into consideration the chromatin state of the cell under a specific experimental condition, cell type or organism. Hence, chip x databases and tools such as, cell types and experimental conditions, using different statistical cut-offs and experimental techniques is challenging. We chose to either use the criteria applied by the authors of each study, or apply our own standard method for finding peaks and calling target genes. Both approaches are simple and relatively unbiased. The two approaches complement each other in regards to coverage. The raw data route excludes many of the studies currently in the database since there are many chip x publications that only provide the target list without the raw data. There are also many chip x raw data files available in the public domain without a publication that contains an author extracted gene list. Regardless, we expect that the database will rapidly continue to grow. Moreover, multiple entries for the same transcription factor can increase the confidence for functional binding sites (). Our initial analysis shows that overlap among different ChIP experiments using the same factor increases functional gene predictability. For example, we examined the overlap among independent Oct4 chip x studies and compared the consensus overlapped genes with an Oct4 knock-down followed by a microarray study. Initial results demonstrate that functional genes prediction improves when multiple independent studies are combined, but this should be further investigated in future studies. Since we keep track in our database on information such as the cell type, organism, experimental method, distance to start site and peak height, we implemented filters that can be used by users to exclude the analysis from including specific organism, cell type or experimental method; as well as calibrate the gene calling threshold for peak height and distance to start site. For future studies we plan to integrate chip x data with lost of function gain of function microarray studies as well as include more histone modification chip x studies. Many of the studies that report global transcription factor binding to DNA using whole genome wide chip x experiments also often conduct global mRNA experiments after knock-down or over-expression of the transcription factors that were used in the chip x studies, as well as profiling specific histone modifications or polymerase binding using chip x technologies. By combining mRNA microarrays of rnase q together with chip x transcription factor, polymerase binding and histone modification studies, we can determine which binding sites are functional, as well as which functional sites are activation or inhibition sites. By combining expression data with chip x we should be able to obtain a signed and directed network which is desired for understanding pathways, improving enrichment analyses and performing dynamical simulations. The chip x database and ChEA web based software tool was generated utilizing code from our previous work of developing a kinase substrate database and software system for kinase enrichment analysis (KEA) (). These two software systems can potentially be combined. Since we know the group of transcription factors that regulate genes based on changes at the mRNA level under a certain experimental condition or in a specific disease based on tissue expression profiling, we can use known protein protein interactions to build a sub-network to connect these transcription factors. Then, we can link this sub-network, as input for KEA, to obtain the protein kinases and pathways that most likely regulate the transcription factor centered sub-network (). Such an approach can be used to understand cell regulation at the cell signaling network level given mRNA expression profiling data and suggest kinase inhibitors as drug targets maaya n and He, 2010).
