chem bio server is a publicly available web application for effectively mining and filtering chemical compounds used in drug discovery. It provides researchers with the ability to (i) browse and visualize compounds along with their properties, (ii) filter chemical compounds for a variety of properties such as steric clashes and toxicity, (iii) apply perfect match substructure search, (iv) cluster compounds according to their physicochemical properties providing representative compounds for each cluster, (v) build custom compound mining pipelines and (vi) quantify through property graphs the top ranking compounds in drug discovery procedures. chem bio server allows for pre-processing of compounds prior to an in silico screen, as well as for post-processing of top ranked molecules resulting from a docking exercise with the aim to increase the efficiency and the quality of compound selection that will pass to the experimental test phase.

introduction a rate limiting step in computer aided drug design (CADD) is often the need for a computational chemist expert to post process compounds that result from a virtual screening docking exercise before selecting which ones should be tested experimentally (). This post-processing step entails identifying and discarding docking poses that result in intra ligand steric clashes as well as compounds with undesirable or toxic moieties and unwanted physicochemical properties (). Cheminformatics web applications play an essential role for searching, filtering and clustering chemical compounds for drug discovery (). In recent years, several chemical compound databases have been developed, including Zinc, chem db PubChem and many others (). Nevertheless, although knowledge integration can drastically increase the power and the predictive capability of large scale computational comparisons of chemical structures, online open access web applications for compound mining are limited in number and, importantly, in pipeline integration level. Namely, in the EDinburgh University Ligand Selection System edulis s (), either similarity or pharmacophore search of compounds is performed on commercially available molecules based on a proposed ultrafast shape recognition algorithm or by calculating interatomic distances. In the SIMilar COMPound and SUBstructure matching of COMPounds web application (), chemical similarity and substructure searches are computed by means of the maximum common induced subgraph using an atom based approach and the maximum common edge subgraph or by a bond based approach. Nevertheless, in both web applications, advanced filtering criteria such as Lipinski Rule of Five () or custom made filters are not available. By using the FAF-Drugs2 web application (), users are able to process their own compound collections through simple absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and toxicity filtering rules to aid the drug discovery process. However, the user is not able to apply sub-graph search with a custom made Structure Data Format (SDF) () file. Moreover, van der Waals (vdW) energy or geometric criteria are not taken into consideration in the filtering section to discard docking poses with steric clashes. Also, no clustering technique of compounds with similar characteristics is available to any of the previously mentioned web applications. chem mine Tools () is a web service for structure visualization and comparison, similarity searching and compound clustering. However, the user can select only two compounds to compare each time, which is limiting considering the need for massive similarity searches through the compounds of a library. Thus, the process does not facilitate large scale filtering procedures. Furthermore, neither vdW energy or radii restrictions nor toxicity checking is available to the user as a filtering service. Finally, the service does not provide the user with the most representative compound for each cluster. To overcome all previously mentioned limitations, we have developed chem bio server as a free web based application aimed to assist hit selection arising from CADD. chem bio server is a web application that automates pre postprocessing tasks during virtual screening. Through a customized workflow, molecules are discarded by evaluating parameters such as vdW energy, geometry, physicochemical properties and undesired toxic moieties. The web application is implemented so that the post-processing procedure can be tailored to the specific needs of the user as every compound query is unique. It also features a clustering section with two clustering methods, the hierarchical () as well as the modern () affinity propagation (AP) clustering algorithm, grouping together * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and proposing a representative compound for each cluster (). Additionally, visualization of clusters and graphical representations of molecular properties are also available, which provide insights into the compounds' physicochemical similarity level.
