Motivation: The ch embl space graphical explorer enables the identification of compounds from the ch embl database, which exhibit a desirable poly pharmacology profile. This profile can be predefined or created iteratively, and the tool can be extended to other data

introduction there is much recent interest in designing ligands with well defined poly pharmacology arising both from the increased awareness of the multiple interactions of existing drugs, and the likely improved efficacy of treatments, which engage at several points in biological networks. (). It is straightforward to search public or proprietary data sources for compounds, which are known to hit predefined sets of targets to provide starting points for a multi target discovery project. Meanwhile, visualization approaches have been developed that analyse a biologically motivated protein network for molecules that show interactions with more than one component. (). This allows the opportunistic identification of previously unconsidered target combinations. There are several powerful network visualization and analysis tools available for this purpose, including several free open source applications [e.g. Cytoscape (. However, these tools are designed to support arbitrary network types; thus, it is not directly possible to analyse a chemo genomic network in combination with molecular structures and activity profiles. This integration of visual network exploration and activity profile lookup can be achieved by ch embl space. The user interface is designed for the visual exploration of a chemo genomic space in which the network vertices correspond to proteins that have at least one ligand in common with other targets. The user can interactively select proteins and list their ligands, subsequently designing an activity profile by adding more targets or anti targets to the selection and adjusting protein specific activity thresholds. Furthermore, the user does not have to know the profile in advance but can create it interactively, considering the matching ligands, as well as other associated proteins that might not have been clear choices initially. The molecules that meet the created activity profile are displayed within the application, and the full collection can be saved as an SD file.
