Motivation: What if you could explain complex chemistry in a simple tree and share that data online with your collaborators? Computational biology often incorporates diverse chemical data to probe a biological question, but the existing tools for chemical data are ill suited for the very large datasets inherent to bioinformatics. Furthermore, existing visualization methods often require an expert chemist to interpret the patterns. Biologists need an interactive tool for visualizing chemical information in an intuitive, accessible way that facilitates its integration into to days team based biological research. Results: chem treemap is an interactive, bioinformatics tool designed to explore chemical space and mine the relationships between chemical structure, molecular properties, and biological activity. chem treemap synergistically combines extended connectivity fingerprints and a neighbor joining algorithm to produce a hierarchical tree with branch lengths proportional to molecular similarity. Compound properties are shown by leaf color, size, and outline to yield a user defined visualization of the tree. Two representative analyses are included to demonstrate chem tree maps capabilities and utility: assessing dataset overlap and mining structure activity relationships (SAR). Availability: The examples from this paper may be accessed at http://ajing.github.io/ChemTreeMap/. Code for the server and client are available in the Supplementary Information, at the aforementioned git hub site, and on Docker Hub (https://hub.docker.com) with the name tag a jing chem treemap
introduction researchers in the field of bioinformatics are frequently tasked with exploring the relationship between chemical structures and their potential biological actions. For example, one can predict the interaction between a small molecule and a corresponding protein target, given the chemical structure (). The degree of similarity between chemical structures can also indicate a potential for drug repositioning () or off target effects (). A molecules' ability to inhibit protein protein interactions may also be predicted (). In order to discover such interactions, researchers must harness large databases, including PubChem () and ch embl (), which contain vast amounts of heterogeneous biological and chemical data. The size and complexity of these datasets necessitate automated tools to explore available chemical space in order to determine chemical relationships and predict potential interactions. Exploring chemical space frequently requires a comparison of the number of shared chemicals among multiple databases (), an understanding of the similarity within a compound series ()series, and an analysis of how compound structures give rise to a specific biological action (). Such analysis begins with the visualization of molecular datasets. There are general visualization strategies such as Venn diagrams (), networks (), heat maps (), and clusters (). However, those strategies have limited utility, depending on the biological question and how detailed the analysis must be.

conclusion chem treemap is innovative for quantifying chemical similarity in the branch lengths as done for phylogenetic trees, organizing molecules in an alternative hierarchy, and mapping multiple properties to graphical attributes. It uses robust, widely accepted methods. chem treemap is designed as a general purpose chemical visualization and data mining tool with many interactive features to ease the navigation in large datasets (dragging, zooming, searching, etc). A single click on a leaf yields detailed molecular information. Its dynamic layout allows users to modify the tree, using a click and drag feature on the nodes that can reposition branches to improve the view. chem treemap is applicable to a wide range of problems. Any data can be mapped onto the similarity tree. The approach does not make any assumptions about the relationship between activity and structure, thus enabling a data driven interpretation of biochemical information. It can also be also implemented in a client server format that allows efficient data sharing between collaborators.
