Motivation: Identification of proteins by mass spectrometry based proteomics requires automated interpretation of peptide tandem mass spectrometry spectra. The effectiveness of peptide identification can be greatly improved by filtering out extraneous noise peaks before the subsequent database searching steps. Results: Here we present a novel chemical rule based filtering algorithm , termed CRF, which makes use of the predictable patterns (rules) of collision induced peptide fragmentation. The algorithm selects peak pairs that obey the common fragmentation rules within plausible limits of mass tolerance as well as peak intensity and produces spectra that can be subsequently submitted to any search engine. CRF increases the positive predictive value and decreases the number of random matches and thus improves performance by 15–20% in terms of pep-tide annotation using search engines, such as x tandem. Importantly, the algorithm also achieves data compression rates of $75%. Availability: The MATLAB source code and a web server are available at http://hydrax.icgeb.trieste.it/CRFilter/

introduction identifying proteins from the mass spectra of their proteolytic peptides has become a standard method for analyzing complex biological samples (). In a typical experiment, mass spectra obtained via liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) are compared with theoretical spectra derived from a sequence database (In this work, we address the filtering of preprocessed spectra, which consist of a series of mono isotopic peaks that are characterized by their fragmentation mass (m/z ratio) and their intensity. The goal of filtering is to increase the quality of the data while reducing the size of the dataset under analysis. Because the analysis capacity of instruments is constantly increasing, there is a growing need for fast and efficient filtering strategies. Briefly, filtering methods fall into two large categories: spectrum filtering approaches and peak filtering approaches. Spectrum filtering approaches seek to identify low quality spectra based on their peculiar intensity or m/z distributions, and subsequently exclude these spectra from further analysis. One general strategy is to use peptide fragmentation rules to identify high quality spectra (). There are many ways to incorporate peptide fragmentation rules into spectrum annotation, and in a broad sense, all de novo algorithms and sequence tagging algorithms use fragmentation rules. Peak filtering approaches, meanwhile, seek to discard unwanted peaks from the spectra of a particular experiment. Such unwanted peaks are identified by their low intensities and or by the fact that they do not obey the fragmentation rules of a given experiment. Although technically incorrect, any peak that is deemed superfluous for a particular data processing workflow can be discarded from the spectrum as 'noise'. For instance, we can simply retain only the top 50 most intense peaks, or discard peaks with intensities 55 of the maximum intensity. A number of laboratories have reported on the use of such classical signal to noise filters that also reduce the number of peaks in a spectrum (). The advantage of noise filtering methods is that they can produce cleaner spectra. These can then be further analyzed with any search engine. However, the signal to noise filters are typically equally destructive to all low intensity peaks, regardless of whether or not they follow the expected fragmentation rules. To address this problem, we developed a set of spectral processing filters designed to reduce the number of uninformative peaks in peptide fragmentation spectra. The motivation is to use the chemical rules of gas phase peptide fragmentation () to produce filtered spectra, which can then be further analyzed by any search engine of *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com choice. Importantly, the filters presented here remove peaks that do not form by a x cz) pairs or are not separated by the mass of an amino acid. In contrast to spectrum filtering methods that use related principles for controlling spectrum quality (), our strategy only discards peaks deemed to be uninformative, rather than discarding entire spectra. This peak by peak strategy has negligible computational costs, results in data compression rates of $75% and a substantial improvement in the number of the annotated spectra at the same false discovery rate (FDR) level as compared with unfiltered data. The article is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the data and the general computational methods, Section 3 describes the results (i.e. the principle, the algorithm and the tests conducted on the method) and Section 4 contains the discussion and conclusions.

discussion we have developed a spectrum filtering method based on the gas phase chemistry of peptide fragmentation and we therefore refer to this strategy as CRF. The main goal of this filtering strategy is to enrich for peaks that most search engines recognize as coming from fragmented peptides. We have used a series of rules: one based on finding by complementary pairs, one based on finding peaks separated by the mass of an amino acid residue (amino acid neighbors) and a third one that is a combination of the first two. We found that CRF filtering improves peptide annotation by 1525%, at the same FDR level, and provides an $75% compression of the data. We have tested the CRF on data collected with maldi tof TOF, ion trap and orbit rap ion trap hybrid instruments. We have found that the CRF approach also improves the search engine performance with respect to these data. However, data compression and search engine performance gains with ion trap the numbers represent the number of the identified spectra or the number of the identified unique peptide sequences, as indicated at FDR  0.2%.
