Motivation: Chemical named entity recognition is used to automatically identify mentions to chemical compounds in text and is the basis for more elaborate information extraction. However, only a small number of applications are freely available to identify such mentions. Particularly challenging and useful is the identification of International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) chemical compounds, which due to the complex morphology of IUPAC names requires more advanced techniques than that of brand names. Results: We present chen er a tool for automated identification of systematic IUPAC chemical mentions. We evaluated different systems using an established literature corpus to show that chen er has a superior performance in identifying IUPAC names specifically, and that it makes better use of computational resources. Availability and implementation:

introduction automated NER (named entity recognition) of chemical compounds is receiving increased attention from researchers because it can facilitate the application of information extraction to the pharmaceutical treatment of diseases and to understanding how those compounds modulate gene protein activities. Chemical NER draws from the experience in performing gene and protein NER (), but differs from it in three ways. First, catalogs of names and compositions of chemical compounds have been traditionally less accessible. Fortunately, freely available chemical databases such as PubChem () or drug bank () are helping to correct this issue. This makes it possible to do NER of common drug names such as 'Aspirin' or 'Acetone' by using a dictionary based approach. Second, the complexities and the variability in the morphological structure of systematic IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry) chemical names () make it impossible to create a finite dictionary of such names. This poses the main challenge for NER of chemical names (). IUPAC names can be simple words, or contain different punctuation marks, sequences of numbers separated by commas and so forth. They can also be combined in different forms (e.g. 18bromo12butyl11chloro48 diethyl 5hydroxy15 methoxy making it impossible to enumerate them all. This means that NER of such names can not be done using a dictionary matching, requiring alternative approaches. Third, systematic nomenclatures of chemicals, like IUPAC, can be used directly to unambiguously derive their chemical structure. The number of applications that are freely available to do NER of common and systematic names of chemical compounds is still incipient, and their usability, efficiency and accuracy are far from perfect. To help alleviate these problems, in this work we present and benchmark chen er a machine learning application based on conditional random fields (CRFs) that performs NER of IUPAC chemical entities with improved performance over comparable tools. performance and selection are described in Sections 13 of the Supplementary Materials.

discussion because IUPAC names are the standard in important types of documents, such as patents, and the chemical structure is often derivable from the mention itself, it is important to have an application specifically devised for their identification. Given the potentially infinite number of IUPAC entities, it is not feasible to develop a dictionary based approach to identify them, and natural language processing methods are more suitable to identify those entities. Thus, we developed chen er an NER approach for finding IUPAC names in text, using CRFs. We demonstrate that chen er annotates IUPAC names in documents with a better f score than chem spot and OSCAR4. chen er is the only tool that is specifically developed to identify only such names, whereas chem spot and OSCAR4 do not differentiate between entity types. We also show that chen er needs less memory and CPU than the others to perform the same tasks. In addition, chen er is self contained requiring only that Java is installed to run, which makes it easier to integrate in other systems.
