The differences between observed and predicted 13 C α chemical shifts can be used as a sensitive probe with which to detect possible local flaws in protein structures. For this reason, we previously introduced che shift a Web server for protein structure validation. Now, we present CheShift-2 in which a graphical user interface is implemented to render such local flaws easily visible. A series of applications to 15 ensembles of conformations illustrate the ability of CheShift-2 to locate the main structural flaws rapidly and accurately on a per residue basis. Since accuracy plays a central role in che shift predictions, the treatment of histidine (His) is investigated here by exploring which form of His should be used in CheShift-2. Availability: CheShift-2 is free of charge for academic use and can be accessed from www che shift com
introduction chemical shifts provide important information about the conformations of proteins in solution (see, for example, Wishart, 2011, and references therein). For this reason, we developed CheShift-2, a Web server for protein structure validation based on a quantum mechanics database of 13 C  chemical shifts (). che shift was originally developed to return a list of predicted values of 13 C  chemical shifts. It was the user's responsibility to compare the predicted with the observed 13 C  chemical shifts to assess the global quality of a protein. However, it is a highly desirable goal of any accurate validation method () to identify the existence of local flaws, in addition to the global quality; see analysis of local versus global chemical shift validation of Dynein light chain 2A protein in Supplementary Material. In order to automate and facilitate the validation process on a per residue basis, we added a GUI to che shift. The GUI displays the differences between observed and predicted 13 C  chemical shifts by using a four color code mapped onto a 3D protein model. A set of 15 proteins was used to test the ability of CheShift2 to detect local flaws. This set was selected from the Protein Data Bank pdb and corresponds to obsolete and superseded NMR protein structures. Released PDB data (coordinates and experimental data) are rendered obsolete when * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors have collected new data or had re refined the structure. The obsolete entry is usually replaced by a new (superseding) entry that receives a new PDB ID.
