Promoter capture Hi-C p chic allows the genome wide interrogation of physical interactions between distal DNA regulatory elements and gene promoters in multiple tissue contexts. Visual integration of the resultant chromosome interaction maps with other sources of genomic annotations can provide insight into underlying regulatory mechanisms. We have developed Capture HiC Plotter chic p a web based tool that allows interactive exploration of p chic interaction maps and integration with both public and user defined genomic datasets. Availability and Implementation: chic p is freely accessible from www chic porg and supports most major HTML5 compliant web browsers. Full source code and installation instructions are available from http://github.com/D-I-L/django-chicp.

introduction a large majority of single nucleotide variations sn vs associated with human disease lie outside of known coding regions and are enriched in DNase I hypersensitive regions (). Promoter capture Hi-C enables the detection of physical chromatin interactions between gene promoter regions and distal DNA gene expression regulatory elements, globally and at high resolution (). By integrating with genome wide association data, it may be possible to gain further insight into the genetic mechanisms underlying a particular trait or disease (). However, owing to a dependence on restriction enzymes in the underlying method, defined interactions are based on specific restriction fragment intervals. The resultant genomic interaction maps are therefore complex, as a single promoter fragment can interact with multiple distal restriction fragments of heterogeneous size, and interactions may vary across different tissue contexts. Current genome browsers with capabilities for the visualization of these interactions, such as WashU epi genome Browser () and Ensembl (), provide a linear view which can limit a user's ability to resolve these complex interaction patterns and how they relate to other genomic features of interest. A circular representation can be helpful in this context, but existing circular viewers, such as j circo s (), circo s (), GView () and genome d3plot (), are not specifically designed and optimized to allow interactive and integrative visualization of human p chic datasets. chic p employs a hybrid approach: users see a circular overview for all interactions for a given SNV, gene or region, with the option to highlight a particular interaction of interest that results in a standard linear view. We demonstrate its functionality by integrating a recent promoter capture Hi-C dataset (with publically available g was summary statistics (http://www.immuno base org Ensembl gene annotations (
