Visualizing genomic data in chromosomal context can help detecting errors in data processing and may suggest new hypotheses to be tested. Here, we report a new tool for displaying large and diverse genomic data along chromosomes. The software is implemented in R so that visualization can be easily integrated with its numerous packages for processing genomic data. It supports simultaneous visualization of multiple tracks of data. Large genomic regions such as QTLs or synteny tracts may be shown along histograms of number of genes, genetic variants, or any other type of genomic element. Tracks can also contain values for continuous or categorical variables and the user can choose among points, connected lines, colored segments, or histo-grams for representing data. chrom plot takes data from tables in data frame in GRanges formats. The information necessary to draw chromosomes for mouse and human is included with the package. For other organisms, chrom plot can read Gap and cytoband ideo tables from the UCSC Genome Browser. We present common use cases here, and a full tutorial is included as the pack-ages vignette. Availability and Implementation: chrom plot is distributed under a GLP2 licence at http://www.bio conductor org
introduction when analyzing large amounts of genomic data, visualization in chromosomal context can reveal chromosome specific or genome wide patterns suggesting new hypotheses and their appropriate tests. In addition, it may show errors in data generation or in an analysis step. We distinguish between two types of genomic visualization: local and global. Local visualization displays data in a region within one chromosome. Global visualization displays data in whole chromosomes. Tools available for local visualization are very flexible, allowing highly customized plots with diverse data, e.g. genome graphs () and geno plot r () R packages and the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) (). Global Visualization has been incorporated in websites of cross species repositories, e.g. UCSC, Ensembl and NCBI, and in species specific websites, such as or the Chromosome Visualization Tool (() and g viewer gmod org wiki flash g viewer. Standalone tools are tasks e pecific e.g. pheno gram () represents genotype by phenotype associations. quant smooth displays discrete and continuous data in the local view, and large segments in the global view. The ideo viz r package can plot continuous values as lines or bars for binned data () but has no support for categorical data. Thus, there is a need for a generic tool for global visualization to mach flexibility of local visualizers of genomic data.
