chromo thrips is is a single catastrophic event that can lead to massive genomic rearrangements confined to one or a few chromosomes. It provides an alternative paradigm in cancer development and changes the conventional view that cancer develops in a stepwise progression. The mechanisms underlying chromo thrips is and their specific impact on tumorigenesis are still poorly understood, and further examination of a large number of identified chromo thrips is samples is needed. Unfortunately, this data are difficult to access, as they are scattered across multiple publications , come in different formats and descriptions, or are hidden in figures and supplementary materials. To improve access to this data and promote meta analysis we developed chromo thrips is db a manually curated database containing a unified description of all published chromo thrips is cases and relevant genomic aberrations. Currently, 423 chromo thrips is samples representing 107 research articles are included in our database. chromo thrips is db represents an extraordinary resource for mining the existing knowledge of chromo thrips is and will facilitate the identification of mechanisms involved in this phenomenon. Availability and implementation: chromo thrips is db is freely available at

introduction chromo thrips is is a single catastrophic event of massive chromosomal rearrangements that has been described in a wide variety of diseases, especially in cancer (). In contrast to the widely accepted model of gradual accumulation of genetic alterations during cancer development, chromo thrips is is supposed to be a newly discovered paradigm in tumorigenesis (). In brief, one or several chromosomes are shattered into many different sized fragments through a catastrophic event. Some of the fragments are then randomly stitched back together to generate a derivative chromosome, and the others are lost. This process may generate DNA amplifications, deletions and chromosomal fusion events that underpin chromosome evolution (). chromo thrips is has received a growing amount of attention in recent years since it may reveal a new way that cancer genomes can evolve. However, the mechanisms leading to this event are not yet fully characterized. A meta analysis based on a large number of chromo thrips is samples is needed to uncover more about the phenomenon, which would substantially enhance our understanding of tumor initiation and progression (). Unfortunately, due to the overall low incidence of chromo thrips is (occurs in only 23% of all cancers) (), most studies reported a relatively small number of chromo thrips is cases. Moreover, the relevant data acquisition is a cumbersome process, since they are scattered in different parts of various publications and are heterogeneous in their contents and formats. To address this problem, we created chromo thrips is db which is a manually curated database that catalogs all published chromo thrips is V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com articles and samples. In the current release, chromo thrips is db includes data and results from 107 publications covering 423 cases. DNA copy number aberrations (CNAs), structural variations (SVs) and clinical data were curated and normalized into standardized formats. To the best of the authors' knowledge, chromo thrips is db is the first database dedicated to processing and visualizing chromo thrips is data. It can facilitate future research to identify key features of this event and elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms.

conclusion chromo thrips is db is the first repository providing convenient public access to chromo thrips is data. We curated and integrated hundreds of chromo thrips is samples from the published literature into the database. We will continue to update our database every 2 months with newly published data. It represents an invaluable resource for the community and will assist in the meta analysis of chromo thrips is phenomenon.
