circle at or is a Perl application that generates circular figures of genome associated data. It leverages BioPerl to support standard annotation and sequence file formats and produces publication quality SVG output. It is designed to be both flexible and easy to use. It includes a library of circular track types and predefined configuration files for common use cases including. (i) visualizing gene annotation and DNA sequence data from a GenBank flat file, (ii) displaying patterns of gene conservation in related microbial strains, (iii) showing Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) and indels relative to a reference genome and gene set and (iv) viewing rnase q plots. Availability and implementation: circle at or is freely available under the Artistic License 2.0 from http://jonathancrabtree.github.io/ circle at or and is integrated with the c lovr cloud based sequence analysis Virtual Machine (VM), which can be downloaded from

introduction there are numerous circular genome visualization tools, with varying degrees of interactivity, usability and utility. They differ in the data types and formats they accept, the types of output they produce and the ease of customizing the mapping from input data to graphical display. Flexibility and ease of use are frequently at odds, with the most flexible tools often being the hardest to customize, particularly for non programmers. To address this issue, circle at or provides multiple configuration options, allowing each user to choose the one that best suits his her needs. Similar tools include genome plot (), a Perl/Tk application and dna plotter (), a Java application, both of which have graphical user interfaces and also support linear displays. geno map () is a Tcl/Tk microarray data viewer, and the gene wiz browser () is an interactive Java applet. Some combine analysis and visualization: BRIG () incorporates a blast based prokaryotic genome comparison algorithm, and cg view Server () is a cg view based () web service that runs on the fly BLAST comparisons. At the other extreme, some tools display only predefined datasets: The Microbial Genome Viewer () and Genome Projector () are web based tools in this category. genome diagram () supports linear and circular displays, but requires Python programming expertise. circo s () is a popular and powerful stand-alone tool but its use of complex hierarchical configuration files may put it out of reach of some users. The D3.js toolkit () has a cir cos like 'chord diagram', but does not, to our knowledge, accept standard bioinformatic file formats. circ ster (), which uses D3.js, adds circular drawing capabilities to Galaxy. circle at or follows the computer design principle of making the common case fast: if a researcher has data in a standard format and needs a routine visualization then he/she should not have to reformat the data or experiment with parameter values. Conversely, with sufficient time, it should be possible to create novel and intricately detailed figures. circle at or users who wish to accomplish the former can choose a predefined configuration file, whereas those seeking more flexibility can write their own. circle ators configuration file format supports several novel high level abstractions (e.g. loops, symbolic track references, feature based coordinate scaling) and reuses existing standards e.g. SVG, CSS (Cascading Style Sheets), where possible.
