Motivation: Increasing evidences suggest that most of the genome is transcribed into RNAs, but many of them are not translated into proteins. All those RNAs that do not become proteins are called non-coding RNAs nc rnas which out numbers protein coding genes. Interestingly, these nc rnas are shown to be more tissue specifically expressed than protein coding genes. Given that tissue specific expressions of transcripts suggest their importance in the expressed tissue, researchers are conducting biological experiments to elucidate the function of such nc rnas. Owing greatly to the advancement of next generation techniques, especially rnase q the amount of high throughput data are increasing rapidly. However, due to the complexity of the data as well as its high volume, it is not easy to re-analyze such data to extract tissue specific expressions of nc rnas from published datasets. Results: Here, we introduce a new knowledge database called cit loci which allows a user to screen for tissue specific transcripts across three organisms: human, mouse and zebrafish. cit loci is intuitive and easy to use to identify not only protein coding genes but also nc rnas from various tissues. cit loci defines homology through sequence and positional conservation to allow for the extraction of species conserved loci. cit loci can be used as a starting point for further biological experiments.

introduction a series of articles by 'Functional Annotation Of Mammalian genome (FANTOM)' projects (), 'ENCyclopedia Of DNA Elements (ENCODE)' consortium (), and others clearly indicate that a majority of genome is transcribed in the form of RNAs, yet only few percentages of them fall under the category of protein coding genes. The current estimate is that less than 3% of the mammalian genome encodes for protein coding genes (). Previously, many of the remaining RNAs were discarded as transcriptional noises and experimental errors. However, through the discovery of microRNAs (miRNAs) and other non-coding RNAs nc rnas (e.g. long non-coding RNAs ln crnas it became evident that RNAs have functions beyond templates for protein expression. The concept of nc rnas is not new, as ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and transfer RNAs (tRNAs) do not encode for proteins but are necessary for protein translation. Given such a complex reality of transcriptome s ln crnas are an immensely important topic of study for understanding biological systems. Furthermore they are of major interest in medicine with a huge range of potential applications from the detection of neurological diseases and treatments, anticancer therapies, and even cardiac regeneration (). However, compared to protein coding genes, the functions of ln crnas are poorly understood. One of the major reasons is that ln crnas exhibit low sequence conservation, making evolutionary comparison difficult. Indeed, a recent study using a computational pipeline for homology based comparison found that only 3.4% of ln crnas share sequence conservation between human and other non marsupial mammals () [compared to 85% of protein coding genes between human and mice (. Although ln crnas are poorly conserved among species, their expression patterns are distinct compared to those of protein coding genes as a majority of ln crnas (both with high and low sequence conservation) is expressed in a tissue specific manner (). Furthermore, when a set of highly conserved ln crnas was examined, their tissue expressions are conserved between species (). Since it is highly unlikely that the level of (convergent) evolution has occurred to allow for the specificity of ln crnas when comparing to their poor sequence conservation, it is possible that evolutionary pressure is effective but not on a sequence specific manner, which might suggests a sequence independent way to understand the conservation of ln crnas is necessary. Indeed, a number of methods have already been explored. One is based on the observation that the secondary structures of a number of ln crnas are conserved (). However, a large scale attempt using such methodology is still impeded by poor understanding of secondary structures of RNA in general (). Other studies have observed that promoter regions of ln crnas are relatively conserved even when compared to those of protein coding genes (). Although defining species conservation via promoters is valuable, recent evidences from chromatin conformational capture assays (e.g. 3C, 4C, Hi-C) suggest that a promoter and enhancer could be up to 120kb from the transcription start sites (TSS) of a gene to control its expression (). If this applies to the mammalian genome, it would be difficult to define which region is controlling the expression of one gene but not the other. To overcome these challenges, in this study, we introduced positional conservation based on the idea that certain regions of the genome are conserved from one species to another. This region is defined as a pair of adjacent genes, which share adjacency and homology when compared across another species. Applying this concept to three organisms (human, mouse and zebrafish), we built a knowledge database called cit loci (http://c-it-loci.uni-frankfurt.de) using published rnase q datasets from various studies covering different tissues. Using cit loci we revisited the idea of tissue specificity of protein coding genes and ln crnas. Furthermore, we examined the definition of housekeeping genes and applied its concept to screen for housekeeping ln crnas. To show the applicability of cit loci we screened for tissue specific ln crnas and confirmed their expressions in the target tissues by surveying publicly available biological experimental data.

discussion in this study, we analyzed rnase q data of various tissues from human, mouse and zebrafish. Using the latest genomic assemblies from Ensembl, we annotated each detected transcripts with detailed biotypes known to the scientific community to avoid ambiguity currently existing in the field of ln crnas (). The analyzed datasets can be explored through our cit loci knowledge database, which allows users to screen for tissue expressed enriched and specific transcripts. cit loci was built to assist researchers with a limited knowledge about analysis of rnase q data as well as bioinformatics and computational programs. An easy to use quick search function is provided at the top page of cit loci so that users can perform an in silico screening of transcripts that are expressed, enriched and or specific by comparing up to two tissues. As an output of such in silico screening, easy to view Venn diagrams are provided for conserved regions and transcripts for protein coding genes and ln crnas separately. These Venn diagrams are clickable, which jumps to the table that lists all the identified conserved regions or transcripts. From this table, users can explore the detailed information about each entry. In the detailed information page for conserved region, gene, or transcript, Ensembl ID is provided along with an official gene name and symbol, genomic position and biotype. Furthermore, link out to Ensembl database and the UCSC Genome Browser are provided. Within the same page, genome browser is implemented so that users can visually inspect the location of the identified gene and its corresponding transcripts (i.e. isoforms). In addition, a heat map is provided to examine the expression patterns of the identified gene and its isoforms. A tab is implemented to view only for those expressed tissues as well as numerical fp km values are provided in the table format. In the case of the identified gene that follows under conserved regions, a list of conserved regions and their region types are provided along with the links to the corresponding information. Since gene ontology terms are often used in the research community to categorize protein coding genes, GO terms are provided along with the link to the corresponding information page provided by AmiGO 2. There are many databases available that contain expressions of protein coding genes across various tissues, including our own 'C-It' knowledge database (). In the case of ln crnas there are three databases available that include the expressions of ln crnas across tissues; namely, l ncrna map (), ln crn at or () and non code (). l ncrna map is limited to human ln crnas and provides a link out to the UCSC Genome Browser for expression data, whereas ln crn at or and non code include more species. Of these three databases, ln crn at or includes the most amount of next generation sequencing datasets, including rnase q. Compared to these databases, our cit loci differs in the following points. First, the latest genomic assembly for human (hg38) is utilized, whereas all the other databases are based on hg19, which was released in February 2009, and numerous transcripts are not included or ambiguously annotated (Supplementary). Second, cit loci allows an in silico screening of tissue expressed enriched and specific transcripts by comparing two tissues, whose function is missing in all other databases. supplementary is provided to give an overview of tissue specific transcripts in each tissue. Such information can only be obtained through cit loci which would be valuable to conduct loss of function studies to elucidate the functions of such tissue specific transcripts, including yet function unknown ln crnas. Third, cit loci defines homologous ln crnas among three organisms, which are not so well defined in all the other databases. Of note, while our study was underway, lnc iped edia (), which is a database for human ln crnas introduced a similar method of defining homology based on genomic position. However, lnc i pedia does not provide a list of conserved mouse and zebrafish ln crnas. In our cit loci we utilized three types of conserved regions and provided all the transcripts that follow under each conserved region. Of all the databases of protein coding genes and ln crnas currently available to the research community, our cit loci is the only database that includes both protein coding genes and ln crnas as well as other types of transcripts [e.g. small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs)]. We anticipate that our cit loci serves as a start point for conducting functional studies in tissue enriched specific transcripts, including ln crnas
