We have developed CiVi, a user friendly web based tool to create custom circular maps to aid the analysis of microbial genomes and sequence elements. Sequence related data such as gene name COG class, PFAM domain, GC%, and subcellular location can be comprehensively viewed. Quantitative gene related data (e.g. expression ratios or read counts) as well as predicted sequence elements (e.g. regulatory sequences) can be uploaded and visualized. CiVi accommodates the analysis of genomic elements by allowing a visual interpretation in the context of: (i) their genome wide distribution, (ii) provided experimental data and (iii) the local orientation and location with respect to neighboring genes. CiVi thus enables both experts and non experts to conveniently integrate public genome data with the results of genome analyses in circular genome maps suitable for publication.

introduction circular genome representations provide an excellent way to comprehensively inspect genome wide data. Various tools have been developed to generate these circular visualizations including cg view (), genome vx (), gene wiz () and dna plotter (). Tools such as BRIG (), cg view Comparison Tool (), circo s () and circle at or () can also visualize genome comparisons and in some cases, visualize links between genome sequence and other types of information. The tools described above are well suited for the visualization of high throughput genomic data like sequence similarities or read counts, but have limited functionality in relation to smaller scale activities such as reconstructing transcription networks and finding gene functions associated to genetic elements. Moreover, with the exception of gene wiz (), they require laborious and sometimes complex uploads of genome and annotation data. In 2013 we published mg cv (), a linear genomic context visualization tool tailored to provide a simple and quick visual access to the publicly available genomic data from NCBI (). The tool incorporated the capabilities of the earlier MGV (), and extended the visualization with data export options to advance the gene specific analysis of microbial genomes. We now present CiVi, which has been developed using the same philosophy, to extend the circular viewing options provided by the original MGV. The extensions include the possibility to display annotation data like COG category, PFAM domain or subcellular location directly on the genome map and to reveal the position of selected annotations through a keyword search option. CiVi also enables the upload and visualization of custom data, such as the positions of genomic elements and the export of associated data. The latter include the function annotations and or sequences of neighboring genes, as well as information on the distance distribution of the elements with respect to the genes. The resulting circular maps can be edited and the pictures exported in svg-, png and pdf format. Finally, CiVi offers a completely new interface and back-end with enhanced usability, interactivity (via mouse over and speed.

conclusion civi is a versatile and easy to use web application to create custom circular genome maps. It provides a visual integration of publicly available genomic data and additional provided data, the latter including e.g. gene expression data and genomic elements. The functional analysis of latter elements is aided by the characterization of their genomic context, a feature that is unique to civi shows that the former genome contains a region that seems to have been inserted (indicated by orange box) and which is clearly associated with a deviating GC percentage (5th ring). In Bacillus species carbohydrate uptake and metabolism is governed by a phenomenon called 'carbon catabolite repression' which is mediated by CcpA. CcpA binds to a characteristic DNA operator sequence called cre, located just upstream of the regulated gene(s). Variability between the operator sequences was assumed to cause a variability in the response depending on the level of repression (). The postulated operator dependent variable response was tested experimentally and confirmed (). All of the characteristic properties of CcpA mediated regulation are apparent in an integrative visualization of the transcription factor binding site predictions (6th and 8th ring), gene expression data (7th and 9th ring) and the gene annotation (COG category 'carbohydrate transport and metabolism'; 10th ring). (B) The provided analysis of the genomic context of the predicted CcpA binding sites confirms the validity of the input motif; as it is mainly found upstream of genes and close to the translation start
