Motivation: Several algorithms exist for detecting copy number variants cn vs from human exo me sequencing read depth, but previous tools have not been well suited for large population studies on the order of tens or hundreds of thousands of exo mes. Their limitations include being difficult to integrate into automated variant calling pipelines and being ill suited for detecting common variants. To address these issues, we developed a new algorithm copy number estimation using lattice aligned Mixture Models clam ms which is highly scalable and suitable for detecting cn vs across the whole allele frequency spectrum. Results: In this note, we summarize the methods and intended use case of clam ms compare it to previous algorithms and briefly describe results of validation experiments. We evaluate the adherence of CNV calls from clam ms and four other algorithms to Mendelian inheritance patterns on a pedigree; we compare calls from clam ms and other algorithms to calls from SNP genotyping arrays for a set of 3164 samples; and we use TaqMan quantitative polymerase chain reaction to validate cn vs predicted by clam ms at 39 loci (95% of rare variants validate; across 19 common variant loci, the mean precision and recall are 99% and 94%, respectively). In the Supplementary Materials (available at the clam ms git hub repository), we present our methods and validation results in greater detail. Availability and implementation: https://github.com/rgcgithub/clamms (implemented in C).

introduction detecting copy number variants cn vs with whole exo me sequencing data is challenging because CNV breakpoints are likely to fall outside of the exo me. Almost all cnv calling algorithms for whole exo me sequencing base their calls on read depths within the CNV, which are linearly correlated to copy number state. Previously published algorithms include CoNIFER (), x hmm (), exo me depth () and CANOES (). depth of coverage is subject to both systematic biases (often related to sequence gc content and stochastic volatility (which is exacerbated by variation in input DNA quality). CNV callers must normalize coverage data to correct for systematic biases and characterize the expected coverage profile given diploid copy number, so V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.
