CLARE is a computational method designed to reveal sequence encryption of tissue specific regulatory elements. Starting with a set of regulatory elements known to be active in a particular tissue process it learns the sequence code of the input set and builds a predictive model from features specific to those elements. The resulting model can then be applied to user supplied genomic regions to identify novel candidate regulatory elements. CLAREs model also provides a detailed analysis of transcription factors that most likely bind to the elements, making it an invaluable tool for understanding mechanisms of tissue specific gene regulation. Availability: CLARE is freely accessible at http://clare.

introduction gene regulatory elements play a primary role in transcriptional regulation, a process required for the proper execution of various genetic programs. Proteins called transcription factors (TFs) recognize and bind specific regulatory elements on the DNA, leading to the activation or repression of a target gene. Identification of these regulatory elements is therefore important for understanding the regulatory mechanisms involved in the development and functioning of an organism. Experimental approaches such as chips eq or chip chip can help identify regulatory elements on a genome wide scale by profiling a TF of interest or a coactivator like p300 or CBP that colocalizes with active enhancers (). However, these methods are restricted by the number of TFs that can be profiled, the efficacy of antibodies, experimental noise, and the number of cell types that can be tested. Furthermore, these methods are usually unable to identify regulatory regions bound by an unknown TF. As a result, computational methods for identifying tf binding sites and regulatory elements are rapidly gaining ground for a review]. Few tools, however, are easily accessible online and convenient for molecular biologists who are not interested in getting through the hurdles of installing and maintaining software. Here, we present CLARE (Cracking the LAnguage of Regulatory Elements), a web interface * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First author for the method that we recently developed to predict regulatory elements active in a specific tissue or biological process (). CLARE is written in Perl and runs on a Linux platform. Our computational method has been shown to identify mammalian heart enhancers with validation rates similar to those obtained with chips eq experiments (). CLARE is freely accessible online at http://clare.dcode.org.
