Motivation: Small non-coding RNAs nc rnas play important roles in various cellular functions in all clades of life. With next generation sequencing techniques, it has become possible to study nc rnas in a high throughput manner and by using specialized algorithms ncRNA classes such as miRNAs can be detected in deep sequencing data. Typically, such methods are targeted to a certain class of ncRNA. Many methods rely on RNA secondary structure prediction, which is not always accurate and not all ncRNA classes are characterized by a common secondary structure. Unbiased classification methods for nc rnas could be important to improve accuracy and to detect new ncRNA classes in sequencing data. Results: Here, we present a scoring system called ALPS (alignment of pattern matrices score) that only uses primary information from a deep sequencing experiment, i.e. the relative positions and lengths of reads, to classify nc rnas. ALPS makes no further assumptions, e.g. about common structural properties in the ncRNA class and is nevertheless able to identify ncRNA classes with high accuracy. Since ALPS is not designed to recognize a certain class of ncRNA, it can be used to detect novel ncRNA classes, as long as these unknown nc rnas have a characteristic pattern of deep sequencing read lengths and positions. We evaluate our scoring system on publicly available deep sequencing data and show that it is able to classify known nc rnas with high sensitivity and specificity. Availability: Calculated pattern matrices of the datasets hESC and EB are available at the project web site

introduction next generation sequencing platforms such as solexa illumina ABI SOLiD or 454/Roche are extensively used to sequence small RNAs of roughly 1436 nt length at astonishing rates in various organisms (). For instance, they are used to determine expression profiles of miRNAs, 2024 nt long RNA molecules, that have emerged in recent years as important posttranscriptional regulators in all known multicellular organisms and that are known to play roles in development, tumorigenesis and viral infection (). Besides miRNAs other small noncoding RNA (ncRNA) classes such as pirn as (), snoRNAs () or scar nas () have been investigated. Only recently, 454 sequencing revealed the existence of 16 nt long RNA (therefore termed unusual small RNA or us rnas in cells infected with KSHV (). us rnas * To whom correspondence should be addressed are derived from both virus and host cell and are associated with the rna induced silencing complex (RISC). Advances in throughput, accuracy and the ability to sequence longer reads will not only lead to more and more precise detection of already known ncRNA classes, but also to the discovery of new types. It is therefore of great interest to develop methods for automatic classification of ncRNA using deep sequencing data. Most nc rnas have very specific structural properties that have been used to classify them (), e.g. tRNAs possess a cloverleaf structure, whereas miRNA precursors form stable hairpins. However, these methods rely on the prediction of RNA secondary structure and even for short molecules the current RNA secondary structure energy model is not always able to predict the native structure (). This can be due to the incompleteness of the nearest neighbor energy model or explained by the fact that the minimal free energy structure is not necessarily the native one due to unknown modifications or effects of folding kinetics (). In the case of de novo prediction of, e.g. miRNAs, the exact pre mirna sequence is not known a priori. Even if the hairpin can be predicted for the pre mirna sequence, it could be disrupted, if a few bases upstream or downstream are appended or removed from this sequence. Therefore, multiple windows around a putative miRNA are folded or a local folding tool such as rnal fold () is used. This however necessarily leads to an increased false positive rate since many genomic sequences that do not encode miRNAs can fold into stable hairpins (). Deep sequencing offers additional criteria to distinguish ncRNA classes. A typical experimental setup is to determine the content of small ncRNA in a cell under certain conditions. Therefore, only intervals on the genome are considered, where enough sequencing reads have been aligned to. The specific number of reads depends on the tradeoff between sensitivity and specificity. If the experiment aims to identify a special class of nc rnas specialized algorithms can be applied that detect specific features of that ncRNA class based on biological knowledge. For example, in miRNA biogenesis, one strand of the precursor is preferentially included into RISC (the mature miRNA) and the other is rapidly degraded (miRNA star). Considering this bias together with structural miRNA properties can dramatically increase specificity of miRNA detection, as shown before (). miRNAs recognize their targets by their seed region () and, due to their biogenesis, have specific lengths (). Both features of miRNAs should be detectable in an excess of deep sequencing reads that align to a specific genomic position and have a specific length. However, this is not always the case for miRNAs in large scale experiments (e.g.). The read start position of many miRNAs follow a narrow distribution that is often skewed toward the miRNA 3 end c a snRNA (U2). Frequencies of reads starting at position x axis and of length (y-axis) are visualized in different shades of gray. Note that both the snRNA and the tRNA could easily be mistaken for a miRNA, if only the most abundant read is considered. Graphical res presentations for all pattern matrices are available on the project web site. and read lengths are often variable (see also). Such alternative mature miRNA forms are often referred to as isom irs (). In addition to positioning and lengths of reads, distances of reads aligned in close proximity of other reads also carry information about ncRNA classes: at least for animals, the miRNA star should be detectable at a distance of roughly 40 nt to the mature miRNA (). Distance information also helps to distinguish miRNAs from degradation products of other abundant RNA species such as tRNAs or snRNAs (). And, most importantly, using this information can help to classify novel ncRNA or nc rnas that do not possess a characteristic secondary structure. In this article, we show how to exploit position and length dependent read patterns to classify nc rnas. We make no further assumptions about structural and other class specific properties and only consider primary information from the alignment of deep sequencing reads on the genome. Our method ALPS (alignment of pattern matrices score) allows to detect miRNAs and other known ncRNA classes with high accuracy and due to its unbiased nature, it also provides a straight-forward way to discover and classify novel nc rnas. Our approach is complementary to existing methods that rely on structural properties and we expect that their combination with our approach allows to increase their sensitivity and specificity.

discussion deep sequencing reads of nc rnas follow very specific patterns regarding their length and positions with respect to their genes. Classes of nc rnas are defined by their function and biogenesis and often share a common structure. Each of these can contribute to a biased distribution of reads on the ncRNA gene bullet Regulatory RNAs such as miRNAs, pirn as or siRNAs are believed to recognize their targets by a short complementary region (seed). Therefore, for a proper function, the cell has to take care that the seed of these RNA classes is not shifted and, as a consequence, a wealth of deep sequencing reads starting at specific positions should be detectable. This can be observed in the pattern matrices computed for high throughput sequencing data. The consideration of reads starting at adjacent positions allows to distinguish these ncRNA classes from degradation products of other abundant species bullet The specific pattern observed for longer nc rnas such as tRNAs (see) can possibly be explained by their degradation: cleavage by RNAses can be biased toward certain parts of the tRNA, which leads in the case of the cloverleaf structured tRNAs to a pattern of tRNA halves or quarters (). Although some of these degradation products can be mistaken for, e.g. a miRNA due to similar length, the consideration of longer intervals and the i430 page i431 i426i432
