Although a large collection of classification software packages exist in R, a new generic framework for linking custom classification functions with classification performance measures is needed. A generic classification framework has been designed and implemented as an R package in an object oriented style. Its design places emphasis on parallel processing, reproducibility and exten-sibility. Finally, a comprehensive set of performance measures are available to ease post-processing. Taken together, these important characteristics enable rapid and reproducible benchmarking of alternative classifiers. Availability and implementation: classify r is implemented in R and can be obtained from the Bioconductor project

introduction classification is an important and frequently asked question in omics work. There are a large number of R packages providing a myriad of classification algorithms and tools. However, there are presently no packages which provide a generic framework for incorporating custom classification functions and cross validation (CV) estimation of performance measures. Most CV classification errors in existing packages are provided as specific functions associated with individual classification algorithms. These functions return the classification errors in differing formats. Hence, researchers need to write wrapper functions to process the results each time they use a different function created by a different author. An effective classification package should exhibit the characteristics of fast computational time, reproducible results, flexibility to incorporate user defined classification functions and post-processing tools for performance assessment. There are some R packages which provide a subset of these desirable features. For example, SPRINT () provides a new framework for parallelizing classification algorithms in R, but requires new classification functions to be coded in C or Fortran. This is challenging for users who are only proficient in R. Many popular R packages such as e1071 () and pa mr () provide classifiers, but are not extensible. caret is a popular framework which provides parallelization and customisable classifiers, but almost no post-processing tools (). Similar packages, such as ml interfaces CMA and mcr estimate are also available from Bioconductor, but are also not comprehensive classification solutions. An extensive list of classification packages is viewable on Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) (). To address these issues, a new R package, classify r is introduced. It provides an implementation of a general framework for classification and provides simple ways to calculate multiple performance measures and explore the stability of feature selection, while being easily extensible. We will also illustrate an aspect of its flexible feature selection capability by demonstrating feature selection in both a differential expression (DE) setting, as well as differential variability (DV). The concept of DV was first introduced in Ho et al. (2008) and it selects genes with different variability between two classes of interest. This potentially selects different features to DE and offers a different perspective for identifying interesting biomarkers. The selection of DV features will be explored and classification performance examined for DV.
