Motivation: Reticulate network is a model for displaying and quantifying the effects of complex reticulate processes on the evolutionary history of species undergoing reticulate evolution. A central computational problem on reticulate networks is: given a set of phylogenetic trees (each for some region of the genomes), reconstruct the most parsimonious reticulate network (called the minimum reticulate network) that combines the topological information contained in the given trees. This problem is well known to be np hard. Thus, existing approaches for this problem either work with only two input trees or make simplifying topological assumptions. Results: We present novel results on the minimum reticulate network problem. Unlike existing approaches, we address the fully general problem: there is no restriction on the number of trees that are input, and there is no restriction on the form of the allowed reticulate network. We present lower and upper bounds on the minimum number of reticulation events in the minimum reticulate network (and infer an approximately parsimonious reticulate network). A program called PIRN implements these methods, which also outputs a graphical representation of the inferred network. Empirical results on simulated and biological data show that our methods are practical for a wide range of data. More importantly, the lower and upper bounds match for many datasets (especially when the number of trees is small or reticulation level is low), and this allows us to solve the minimum reticulate network problem exactly for these datasets.

introduction reticulate evolution, a form of evolution with hybridization and genetic exchanges between two species, are common in many organisms: bacteria, plants, fish, amphibians and many others. For better understanding of reticulate evolution, several reticulate evolutionary models have been proposed and actively studied to address various reticulate processes, such as hybrid speciation, lateral gene transfer and recombination. Since most of these models are in the forms of networks, we call them reticulate networks 1. We refer the readers to () for surveys of different reticulate network models. The key computational problem related to these models is the inference of reticulate networks. Depending on the types of biological processes involved, data for network inference may be in different forms, such as phylogenetic trees for some short genomic regions (called genes in this article) or aligned DNA sequences. In this article, we focus on inferring reticulate networks from a set of correlated phylogenetic trees. Here is the biological motivation for our problem. Suppose multiple phylogenetic trees (called gene trees in this article) are reconstructed, each from some gene for these species. Due to reticulate evolution, different genomic regions (say genes) may be inherited from different ancestral genomes and their evolutionary histories may not be the same (but are still related). Thus, these trees are correlated but not identical. No single phylogenetic tree can faithfully model the evolution of the species, and a more complex network model (i.e. reticulate network as studied in e.g.) is needed. Imagine we are given a set of 'true' gene trees and a 'true' reticulate network that models the evolutionary history of these genes. The network can be considered as a compact representation of these gene trees in the sense that one should be able to 'trace' a gene tree within the network. We say such a gene tree is displayed in the network. This motivates a natural problem, which is called 'the holy grail of reticulate evolution' in (): given a set of gene trees, reconstruct a reticulate network that displays every given gene tree. Such an inferred network reveals important correlation of evolutionary history of multiple genes. Since there exists many such networks, a common formulation is to find the one with the fewest reticulation events. Such a network is called the minimum reticulate network. The central computational problem on reticulate networks, the minimum reticulate network problem, is: given a set of gene trees, reconstruct the minimum reticulate network that displays these gene trees. This formulation may be reasonable when reticulation is believed to be rare. In general, this problem is computationally challenging: even the case with only two gene trees is known to be np complete (). There are several existing approaches for reconstructing the exact minimum reticulate networks when there are only two gene trees (). Clearly restricting to just two gene trees is a big limitation: more gene trees will be more informative to phylogenetic inference, and DNA sequences of many genes are available. Alternatively, there are also a number of approaches making simplifications to the reticulate network model, e.g. by imposing additional topological constraints on reticulate page i141 i140i148
