Popular methods for 3D protein structure similarity searching , especially those that generate high quality alignments such as Combinatorial Extension (CE) and Flexible structure Alignment by Chaining Aligned fragment pairs allowing Twists (FATCAT) are still time consuming. As a consequence, performing similarity searching against large repositories of structural data requires increased computational resources that are not always available. Cloud computing provides huge amounts of computational power that can be provi-sioned on a pay as you go basis. We have developed the cloud based system that allows scaling of the similarity searching process vertically and horizontally. cloud 4psi (Cloud for Protein Similarity) was tested in the Microsoft Azure cloud environment and provided good, almost linearly proportional acceleration when scaled out onto many computational units. Availability and implementation: cloud 4psi is available as Software as a Service for testing purposes at: http://cloud4psi.cloudapp.net/. For source code and software availability, please visit the cloud 4psi project home page at

introduction cloud computing has emerged as a result of increased requirements for the public availability of computing power and new technologies for data processing. It has become a mechanism that allows for the control of the development of hardware and software resources by introducing the idea of virtualization. In practice, cloud computing allows the public to run applications and services on a distributed network using a virtualized system and its resources, and at the same time, allows to abstract away from the implementation details of the system itself. Apart from the natural applications of cloud computing architecture in business, the concept is also becoming increasingly popular in scientific research, including life sciences, because the theoretically infinite resources of the cloud allow computationally intensive problems to be solved. cloud based solutions were proposed for various areas of bioinformatics, including automated sequence analysis (), identification of peptide sequences from spectra in mass spectrometry (), mapping next generation sequence data to the human genome and other reference genomes, for single nucleotide polymorphism discovery, genotyping and personal genomics (), 3D ligand binding site comparison and similarity searching of a structural proteome (), sequence alignment, clustering, assembly, display, editing and phylogeny (). The 3D protein structure similarity searching is a computationally complex and time consuming process that requires enhanced computational resources. This is the motivation behind efforts to develop new methods in the area and build scalable platforms, such as the presented Cloud for Protein Similarity cloud 4psi platform, that allow for the completion of the task much faster by distributing computation on many machines.
