Contact maps are a valuable visualization tool in structural biology. They are a convenient way to display proteins in two dimensions and to quickly identify structural features such as domain architecture, secondary structure and contact clusters. We developed a tool called cm view which integrates rich contact map analysis with 3D visualization using PyMol. Our tool provides functions for contact map calculation from structure, basic editing, visualization in contact map and 3D space and structural comparison with different built in alignment methods. A unique feature is the interactive refinement of structural alignments based on user selected substructures. Availability: cm view is freely available for Linux, Windows and MacOS. The software and a comprehensive manual can be downloaded from

introduction the tertiary structure of a protein is determined by non-covalent residue interactions. An all atom distance map is a lossless representation of the 3D coordinates (save chirality). Distance data can be further reduced to a binary residue contact map while still allowing complete reconstructions within 2 RMSD (). The native fold is retained in reconstructions using sparse subsets comprising as low as 10% of native contacts (). Contact maps are a convenient way to highlight structural features like domain architecture, secondary structure and contact clusters and they display unique information about the sequence separation of contacting residues which is not easily visible in 3D representations. The study of contact maps has been a valuable source of insight in experimental and computational protein structure analysis. They have for example been used to measure the dissimilarity of structures (), to analyze protein protein interaction patterns () and to study protein folding (). Here we present a tool which combines the strengths of contact map and 3D visualization for protein analysis. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.

conclusion cm view combines the strengths of rich contact map analysis with traditional 3D visualization in a single application. As a tool for contact map generation, modification and analysis it is the most feature complete application to date. Special emphasis has been put on integrating tools for the analysis of secondary structure interaction patterns and for the pairwise comparison of structural models or related proteins. In particular, structural alignments can be interactively refined based on different subsets of shared contacts. The real time link of the current position in the 2D contact map with highlighting the corresponding residue pair in the structure provides a combined 2d3d cursor. This offers a more intuitive approach to explore the relationships between contact patterns and protein structure. These unique features make cm view a valuable tool for structural analysis, protein modeling, assessment of structure predictions and education in structural biology.
