Motivation: Copy number abnormalities (CNAs) represent an important type of genetic mutation that can lead to abnormal cell growth and proliferation. New high throughput sequencing technologies promise comprehensive characterization of CNAs. In contrast to microarrays, where probe design follows a carefully developed protocol, reads represent a random sample from a library and may be prone to representation biases due to GC content and other factors. The discrimination between true and false positive CNAs becomes an important issue. Results: We present a novel approach, called cnas eg to identify CNAs from second generation sequencing data. It uses depth of coverage to estimate copy number states and flow cell to flow cell variability in cancer and normal samples to control the false positive rate. We tested the method using the COLO-829 melanoma cell line sequenced to 40-fold coverage. An extensive simulation scheme was developed to recreate different scenarios of copy number changes and depth of coverage by altering a real dataset with spiked in CNAs. Comparison to alternative approaches using both real and simulated datasets showed that cnas eg achieves superior precision and improved sensitivity estimates. Availability: The cnas eg package and test data are available at

introduction a wide spectrum of mutation mechanisms contributes to the onset and progression of cancer (). Copy number abnormalities (CNAs) represent an important type of genetic mutation that lead to abnormal cell growth and proliferation (). Amplification of many oncogenes and loss of tumour suppressor genes have been implicated in the development and progression of the cancer phenotype. Different microarray * To whom correspondence should be addressed. technologies have been successfully used to identify CNAs in cancer (). However, their resolution is limited by the number and location of probes on the array. Currently available SNP array platforms comprise 1 million probes and have a lower detection limit of 510 kb. New sequencing technologies promise comprehensive characterization of copy number profiles in cancer (). In particular, paired end read mapping (PEM) allows the detection of insertions and deletions ranging from a few base pairs (indels) to tens of mega bases. The fact that PEM allows mapping of the direction of reads makes it possible to identify copy neutral events, such as structural rearrangements. Several methods have been developed to identify indels and structural rearrangements (). In contrast, detection of CNAs from PEM data is much less explored in the literature. Although several methods, such as rd xplorer () and cnv seq (), have been developed to find copy number variation in normal individuals, they have not been tested on cancer data, so it is not clear if they can detect CNAs across the whole range of sizes and magnitudes present in cancer. Here we present a method, cnas eg developed specifically for identification of CNAs in cancer from second generation sequencing data. In contrast to microarrays, where probe design follows a carefully developed protocol, reads represent a random sampling from a library and may be prone to representation biases due to GC content and other physico-chemical characteristics. Variability could also arise from misalignment caused by mutation hotspots in a tumour. Consequently, discrimination between true and false positives becomes an important issue. A limitation of the published approaches is that (in their current versions) they do not facilitate assessment of the false positive error rate of detected CNAs in cancer genomes. We have developed a novel framework for the identification of CNA events that uses flow cell to flow cell variability to estimate the false positive rate and the depth of coverage to finalize copy number calls. In addition to dataset specific thresholding, our method has other advantages. It uses the s kellam distribution to compare read depth in tumour and control samples, which allows the use of smaller window sizes for copy number estimation and leads to greater sensitivity in pinpointing breakpoints for small CNAs. By comparing the method to alternative approaches using real and simulated datasets, we show that cnas eg achieves superior precision and improved sensitivity estimates.

discussion here we present a novel framework, cnas eg for identification of copy number aberrations in cancer from second generation sequencing data. It utilizes read depth variability between different flow cells from cancer and matched normal samples to control the false positive rate. By comparing to alternative segmentation methods, we showed that cnas eg significantly increases the precision of CNA detection at a comparable sensitivity. Although specific to Illumina reads, this general approach could readily be extended to other sequencing technologies. Here, we use flow cell to flow cell variability to disentangle genuine CNA events from noise, but in principle the cnas eg framework can be modified to allow for other sources of variation. Now that a human genome can be sequenced to high coverage on one flow cell lane to lane variability could be used instead for identifying technical variation. Another important future extension to the cnas eg framework is incorporation of explicit modelling of normal tissue admixture in cancer samples and heterogeneity of cancer cells in a tumour. Both extensions will be necessary for making accurate copy number calls and understanding tumour evolution. Compared with microarrays, second generation sequencing provides much higher resolution for detecting CNA events. in addition sequencing using paired end reads gives more information about molecular mechanisms leading to copy number changes. A number of algorithms utilize anomalous insert sizes and orientation of PEM reads to identify structural variation (SV) in normal individuals (). Detection of SV abnormalities in cancer is an important topic in its own right, as positioning of breakpoints can aid detection of fusion genes and suggest sv based mechanism of gene inactivation (). Our approach uses read depth to determine copy number changes in cancer and complements sv detecting approaches. The problem of using SV as the sole source of information in detecting CNAs is compounded by the large sizes of many CNAs compared with cn vs and also by the variety of molecular mechanisms (and hence PEM properties) that can lead to copy number changes with complex breakpoints. Consequently, the placement of breakpoints using SV data will not comprehensively segment cancer genome. However, SV information is poised to improve detection of CNA events once better understanding of mechanisms behind genomic instability in cancer becomes available. For example, knowledge of SVs can be used to build a heterogeneous HMM where the probability of transitions between states is influenced by SV locations.
