Motivation: It remains both a fundamental and practical challenge to understand and anticipate motions and conformational changes of proteins during their associations. Conventional normal mode analysis nm a based on anisotropic network model an m addresses the challenge by generating normal modes reflecting intrinsic flexibility of proteins, which follows a conformational selection model for protein protein interactions. But earlier studies have also found cases where conformational selection alone could not adequately explain conformational changes and other models have been proposed. Moreover, there is a pressing demand of constructing a much reduced but still relevant subset of protein conformational space to improve computational efficiency and accuracy in protein docking, especially for the difficult cases with significant conform-ational changes. Method and results: With both conformational selection and induced fit models considered, we extend an m to include concurrent but differentiated intra and inter-molecular interactions and develop an encounter complex based nm a cnm a framework. Theoretical analysis and empirical results over a large data set of significant conformational changes indicate that cnm a is capable of generating conformational vectors considerably better at approximating conformational changes with contributions from both intrinsic flexibility and inter-molecular interactions than conventional nm a only considering intrinsic flexibility does. The empirical results also indicate that a straightforward application of conventional nm a to an encounter complex often does not improve upon nm a for an individual protein under study and intra and inter-molecular interactions need to be differentiated properly. Moreover, in addition to induced motions of a protein under study, the induced motions of its binding partner and the coupling between the two sets of protein motions present in a near native encounter complex lead to the improved performance. A study to isolate and assess the sole contribution of intermolecular interactions toward improvements against conventional nm a further validates the additional benefit from induced fit effects. Taken together, these results provide new insights into molecular mechanisms underlying protein interactions and new tools for dimensionality reduction for flexible protein docking. Availability and implementation: Source codes are available upon request.

introduction proteins participate in many important cellular processes through interactions with proteins, nucleic acids, small molecules and so on. These interactions often occur with protein motions and unbound to bound conformational changes which might exist at different space scales but are often found to be directly relevant to protein functions (). Although it remains a fundamental challenge to fully understand and correctly anticipate these conformational changes, theoretical models describing protein protein or protein ligand interactions have been proposed beyond the traditional key and lock model where proteins are treated rigid. In particular, the theory of conformational selection treats protein

conclusion to decipher and anticipate protein conformational changes, we extended an m to include concurrent but differentiated intra and inter-molecular potentials, developed a new framework of complex based nm a cnm a to analyze protein flexibility in the environment of encounter complexes and tested two ways of extracting useful normal modes against a large scale nonredundant set of protein conformational changes. It was found important to differentiate intra and inter-molecular interactions in the model. In particular, parameters defining shorter range (D 2 ) (but preferably beyond the first layer interactions) or less strength (c 2 ) for intermolecular interactions improved the performance of approximating conformational changes. Apparently, a straightforward application of conventional b the order of slowest modes after re ranking is given on the y-axis from a far to near for each protein on the x axis with the change in ranking order shown on the z axis (negative values indicate a promotion in the order of the eigenvector after re ranking and positive ones indicate a demotion). The colors indicated the overlaps between any given mode and the corresponding actual conformational changes, warmer colors representing higher overlaps. (b) The relationship between the power of cnm a to approximate conformational changes and the quality of encounter complexes as input. Colors in each block represent the conditional probability of RMSD reduction (y-axis) given certain range of i rmsd x axis of docked encounter complexes compared with bound complexes. Calculations were performed using the sub vector approach with D 2  15 and c 2  0:25 at the first 20 modes (these parameters were not particularly optimized). sub vector approach with re ranking for proteins in geometrically fit encounter complexes average improvement against conventional nm a on (a) the whole protein and (c) the interface, and net success rates against conventional nm a on (b) the whole protein and (d) the interface i158 to liwa and y shen nm a to an encounter complex does not necessarily improve upon conventional nm a for proteins under study. Our study provides additional support to both mechanisms of conformational selection and induced fit for protein protein interactions and calls for more generalized theoretical models [candidates include population shifts (. With contributions from both intrinsic flexibility and intermolecular interactions, our new modeling and analysis framework, cnm a produced modes better at approximating significant conformational changes than conventional, intrinsic flexibility driven nm a did. Interestingly, the sub vector approach outperformed the submatrix approach thanks to the incorporation of both induced motions of the protein under study and those of its binding partner as well as the couplings between the two sets of motions. The sole contribution of intermolecular interactions toward performance improvement was further dissected and validated with a re ranking scheme applied to the sub vector approach. Our study also provides new tools for dimensionality reduction of conformational space in flexible protein docking. A successful protein docking method often involves the following critical components that affect each other: reduced and essential representation of conformational space, accurate energy function capable of discriminating native from non-native conformations and effective conformational search or sampling strategy. cnm a focuses on improving conformational representation thus is assessed in a critical way using optimal combination of its modes to isolate this component. In practice, any efficient search strategy under the guidance of a well discriminatory energy function can be applied in the reduced conformational space spanned by cnm a modes to determine weights (or coefficients) for individual modes and to improve protein docking results.
