The method for genome wide association study g was based on copy number variation (CNV) is not as well established as that for single nucleotide polymorphism snp g was. Although there are several tools for CNV association studies, most of them do not provide appropriate definitions of CNV regions cn vrs which are essential for cnv association studies. Here we present a user friendly program called cnv ruler for cnv association studies. Outputs from the 10 most common CNV defining algorithms can be directly used as input files for determining the three different definitions of cn vrs. Once cn vrs are defined, cnv ruler supports four kinds of statistical association tests and options for population stratification. cnv ruler is based on the open source programs R and Java from Sun Microsystems. Availability: cnv ruler software is available with an online manual at the website, wwwircgpcomcnvruler index html Contact: ye jun catholic ack r
introduction copy number variation (CNV) is thought to contribute to interindividual differences in phenotypes including disease susceptibility (). Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotypes are always represented as categorical values, while copy number variations cn vs are often represented as regions consisting of continuous values for consecutive probes. For this reason, the following three steps are required to perform a cnv based genome wide association study g was (i) calling cn vs (ii) merging cn vs into common CNV regions cn vrs and (iii) statistical analysis of the associations. Despite the importance and popularity of CNV phenotype association studies, there are not many algorithms that provide all three key steps mentioned above.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors * To whom correspondence should be addressed a number of tools supporting cnv disease association analysis have been developed (Supplementary). However, most of these tools do not offer methods for defining the cn vrs and require additional manual processes for converting the input CNV calls into files suitable for statistical analysis. In order to support the steps from merging cn vs into cn vrs to c nvr based association analysis in a single software program, we developed a user friendly tool for c nvg was called cnv ruler
description cnv ruler was designed to define three different types of cn vrs from the predefined cn vs and provides four statistical methods for c nvr based association studies. The overall analysis flow in cnv ruler is illustrated in. All forms of major CNV call outputs from different segmentation tools such as Genotyping Console, Genome Studio, Genomic Workbench, penn cnv and Nexus can be processed without additional conversion steps. Details are described in the user manual.

conclusion cnv ruler is a user friendly program with multiple functions that support all procedures of cnv phenotype association analysis in a single system without requiring any additional manual processes 1008
