Simulation programs based on the coalescent efficiently generate genetic data according to a given model of evolution. We present coal a an R package for calling coalescent simulators with a unified syntax. It can execute simulations with several programs, calculate additional summary statistics and combine multiple simulations to create biologically more realistic data. Availability and implementation: The package is publicly available on CRAN and on https://github. com stat gen lmu coal a under the conditions of the MIT license.

introduction coalescent simulators rapidly simulate the evolution of genetic sequences. They are routinely used in population genetics to approximate analytically intractable quantities, to verify theoretical predictions and to validate the performance of data analysis methods (). The underlying idea to trace the ancestry of the sequences backwards in time was first implemented in the program ms (). Since then the size and complexity of data sets has increased, and many extensions and modifications of the original algorithm were proposed to cope with the new challenges. For example, the program m shot () supports recombination hotspots, MaCS (), fast sim coal () and s crm () focus on the efficient simulation of long sequences, and msms () and cosi2 () account for selection. The total number of published simulators is more extensive, and created an online database to help researchers select an appropriate program. Currently, these simulators lack standardized in and output formats and usually only support the calculation of a small number of summary statistics. To calculate additional statistics, researchers usually have to convert the simulated data into different formats. This process is error prone and even small mistakes can lead to wrong conclusions or ir reproducible results. To simplify this process we present coal a an R package for calling coalescent simulators from within R. It provides a unified interface for specifying coalescent models in R (R Core), automatically selects a suitable simulator, transparently conducts the simulations, parses the results and calculates additional statistics from the output.

conclusion we have created an R package that simplifies the simulation of data according to evolutionary models. It allows researchers to conduct and process coalescent simulations in an easy, reliable and reproducible way. Different simulators can be called using a unified R syntax and a variety of summary statistics can be calculated from the results. We hope that coal a will facilitate the use of more realistic models by allowing for variable mutation and recombination rates and finite sites mutation models. Although might not always be necessary to use sophisticated simulation models, the easy availability of these features facilitates testing whether they are important for a particular application.
