Coalescent simulation has become an indispensable tool in population genetics, and many complex evolutionary scenarios have been incorporated into the basic algorithm. Despite many years of intense interest in spatial structure, however, there are no available methods to simulate the ancestry of a sample of genes that occupy a spatial continuum. This is mainly due to the severe technical problems encountered by the classical model of isolation by distance. A recently introduced model solves these technical problems and provides a solid theoretical basis for the study of populations evolving in continuous space. We present a detailed algorithm to simulate the coalescent process in this model, and provide an efficient implementation of a generalized version of this algorithm as a freely available Python module. Availability:

introduction the extinction recolonization model (or spatial fleming vi ot process) is a recently introduced model () that captures the dynamics of populations evolving in a spatial continuum (). The model solves long-standing problems (with the classical models of isolation by distance () and has the potential to explain key biological facts that can not be captured by simple diffusion (). In this model, each individual occupies a fixed location in continuous space and all movement and reproduction happen as the consequence of extinction recolonization events. Events fall randomly throughout space, independent (crucially) of the location of extant individuals. At an event, some fraction of the individuals nearby die, to be replaced by the offspring of a small number of parents chosen from the nearby population immediately before the event. Events at different scales model the effects of life history and demography. For example, the regular reproduction of individuals may be modelled by means of small and frequent events in which a few individuals in a local area die and are replaced by the progeny of nearby parents. On the other hand, broad scale mortality events can affect a substantial fraction of the population over the entire species range. see for an extensive review of the model, its applications and background.
