Motivation: To assess whether two proteins will interact under physiological conditions, information on the interaction free energy is needed. Statistical learning techniques and docking methods for predicting protein protein interactions can not quantitatively estimate binding free energies. Full atomistic molecular simulation methods do have this potential, but are completely unfeasible for large scale applications in terms of computational cost required. Here we investigate whether applying coarse grained (CG) molecular dynamics simulations is a viable alternative for complexes of known structure. Results: We calculate the free energy barrier with respect to the bound state based on molecular dynamics simulations using both a full atomistic and a CG force field for the tcrp mhc complex and the MP1–p14 scaffolding complex. We find that the free energy barriers from the CG simulations are of similar accuracy as those from the full atomistic ones, while achieving a speed up of 4500-fold. We also observe that extensive sampling is extremely important to obtain accurate free energy barriers, which is only within reach for the CG models. Finally, we show that the CG model preserves biological relevance of the interactions: (i) we observe a strong correlation between evolutionary likelihood of mutations and the impact on the free energy barrier with respect to the bound state; and (ii) we confirm the dominant role of the interface core in these interactions. Therefore, our results suggest that CG molecular simulations can realistically be used for the accurate prediction of protein protein interaction strength. Availability and implementation: The python analysis framework and data files are available for download at http://www.ibi.vu.nl/ downloads bioinformatics 2013btt675tgz
introduction protein protein interactions (PPI) are at the heart of all processes in life. To understand living systems beyond the genome, comprehensive knowledge of PPI is therefore essential. Experimental techniques (), prediction from sequence () and protein protein docking methods () all have their specific limitations. To assess the likelihood of two proteins interacting under physiological interactions, we need to know both the concentrations and the dissociation constant (or binding free energy) of the proteins involved. Although it seems that the identification of the interface region is rather successful (), major open challenges are the accurate determination of interaction strength (), the incorporation of protein flexibility () and accounting for water and small solute entropic effects (). Most importantly, ka str it is and show that there is a poor correlation between binding affinity and scores for all nine commonly used docking algorithms they tested on 81 complexes with known binding affinity. Molecular simulations using atomic pairwise interaction potentials are much more accurate for estimating interaction strength than docking scoring functions, though computationally much more expensive (). Nevertheless, an immediate bonus of molecular simulation is that it addresses all three challenges mentioned above: interaction strength, flexibility and entropic effects. For biomolecular simulation in general, the solvent (water) is the major obstacle to improve computational efficiency due to the large number of water molecules needed to solvate the protein. Many possible approaches to overcome this problem exist (for recent reviews, see). Among the fastest available are the mean field or 'implicit solvent' methods; however, one of the main drawbacks is the lack of accurate estimation of the solute entropy, especially in combination with charged solutes (). By lumping together small molecules (e.g. water molecules) or *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. molecular segments into 'meta particles', coarse grained (CG) force fields retain the explicit description of the system, including the solvent. Several CG models for water are available, each with their particular strengths and weaknesses (). Compared with atomistic force fields, CG models provide increased computational efficiency at sufficient levels of accuracy (). Therefore, for the calculation of molecular interactions, thermodynamic integration based on atomistic simulations with explicit water is both theoretically well founded and the most accurate solution available to date (). In this work, we investigate the option of addressing the high computational cost of atomistic molecular simulations by the use of a CG force field for such simulations. For this, we will use the MARTINI CG protein force field for molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (). This force field was developed for CG simulations of biological membrane protein systems and has recently been used to simulate the spontaneous association of GPCR proteins in a lipid bilayer (). The MARTINI force field does not capture structural rearrangements, such as changes in secondary structure. We will assess its applicability and accuracy for the calculation of interaction strengths for a pair of protein structures in a water environment from constraint force profiles. By applying the MARTINI CG force field, we first show that we are able to estimate the free energy barrier with respect to the bound state (G off ) with similar accuracy compared with atomistic force field calculations and in good agreement with experimental data, but at4500-fold increased computational speed. For this we selected two test cases: a tcrp mhc and an MP1p14 scaffolding complex, both of which were previously studied with atomistic models (, respectively). We then show that calculated contributions of surface residues to the interaction strength are sensitive to changes in the amino acid residues involved. Random mutations at the interface core yield major changes in calculated interaction strengths, whereas mutations at the partially solvated interface rim yield only minor changes. Random mutations at the rest of the surface on average hardly affect the interaction strength at all. Moreover, we find that the evolutionarily most likely mutations, as assessed by standard residue exchange propensities, at the interface core also have a negligible influence on the interaction strength, whereas evolutionarily unlikely mutations disrupt favourable PPI considerably. This behaviour with respect to mutations is consistent with what we would expect from a biological point of view. Finally, we discuss future implications of our finding that the major contributions to the interaction strength within our CG approach arise from the interface core.
