Coordinated Gene Activity in Pattern Sets co gaps provides an integrated package for isolating gene expression driven by a biological process, enhancing inference of biological processes from transcript omic data. co gaps improves on other enrichment measurement methods by combining a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) matrix factorization algorithm (GAPS) with a threshold independent statistic inferring activity on gene sets. The software is provided as open source C++ code built on top of JAGS software with an R interface. Availability: The R package co gaps and the C++ package gaps jags are provided open source under the GNU Lesser Public License glp l with a users manual containing installation and operating instructions. co gaps is available through Bioconductor and depends on the r jags package available through CRAN to interface co gaps with gaps jags
introduction many biological processes (BPs) and phenotypes result from coordinated activity among sets of genes, so that inference from transcriptional measurements using gene sets is more powerful for inferring BPs than inference based on isolated genes. However, gene reuse in BPs is common, so genes are typically multiply regulated. Thus, inference on sets of genes should ideally begin by identifying the portion of each gene's behavior related to its use in a BP. We have developed Coordinated Gene Activity in Pattern Sets co gaps which infers biological activity by identifying overlapping, co regulated sets of genes and applying Z-score based statistics. co gaps can presently be used to isolate transcription factor (TF) or BP activity in datasets of thousands of genes and tens to thousands of samples. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Several methods exist to infer activity of gene sets (GSs). Hypergeometric tests have been used to determine if genes in sets are differentially expressed across samples (). These statistics have been extended to rank membership (e.g.). However, these methods do not account for multiple regulation of genes. Matrix factorization techniques have been applied to infer overlapping patterns of co regulation in gene expression, including Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF;), Bayesian Decomposition (BD;) and Bayesian Factor Regression Modeling b frm. Comparison of matrix factorization techniques on Saccharomyces cerevisiae transcript omic data suggested that MCMC techniques more accurately find patterns that relate to BPs and phenotypes (), inspiring our use of the GAPS MCMC matrix factorization in co gaps. Moreover, co gaps infers activity in specific gene sets related to the inferred BPs by applying the Z-score based statistic from to patterns identified with GAPS. co gaps is based on JAGS () and includes an R interface. co gaps has been applied in the de side algorithm to identify transcriptional responses to signaling through estimation of the activity of TFs (). co gaps inferred expected decreased activity in the KIT pathway and unexpected activity in p53 and STAT3 pathways from microarrays generated from treated gastrointestinal stromal tumor cell lines and tumor sample data. We provide the data with co gaps and an rs weave document for this analysis in the Supplementary Material.
