Detection of distant homology is a widely used computational approach for studying protein evolution, structure and function. Here, we report a homology search web server based on sequence profile–profile comparison. The user may perform searches in one of several regularly updated profile databases using either a single sequence or a multiple sequence alignment as an input. The same profile databases can also be downloaded for local use. The capabilities of the server are illustrated with the identification of new members of the highly diverse pdd ex k nuclease superfamily.

introduction the concept of homology (common evolutionary origin) is at the heart of most studies dealing with protein sequence, structure and function. In the absence of protein structure, inference of homology usually has to rely exclusively on sequence data. At present, most sensitive sequence based methods use comparison of multiple sequence alignments (MSA) represented as either Hidden Markov Models () or sequence profiles (). New sequence based methods may help in revealing previously unappreciated evolutionary relationships even for proteins with known structures (). With the goal of improving distant homology detection, we have recently developed a new method (COMA; Comparison Of Multiple Alignments), based on sequence profileprofile comparison (). The new method has at least two major features distinguishing it from other profileprofile comparison methods. The first feature is position specific variable gap penalties that are more biologically relevant than the fixed ones. The second one is a global score system leading to improved estimation of statistical significance of detected similarities. The standalone software implementing the COMA method provides all the tools necessary for profile search and construction of custom profile databases, making it suitable for large scale studies. However, the use of standalone tools requires a certain level of expertise and substantial computer resources. Thus, to make this method accessible for larger biological community, we have developed a web server. The server is based on the latest version of the COMA algorithm, which is almost 2-fold faster than the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. original one without sacrifice in sensitivity. This has been achieved by the introduction of simple heuristics to filter out clearly random matches by requiring several high scoring segments on the same diagonal of the dynamic programming matrix. The server includes a number of add-ons for easier analysis and interpretation of homology search results such as merging alignments of multiple hits and structure modeling. The portability of the standalone software has also been improved by changing representation of profile databases from binary to the text format. Thus, the regularly updated server profile databases can be downloaded and used locally on different platforms. Here, we describe major features of the COMA server and provide an example of its use for uncovering distant homology.
