Motivation: Combinatorial therapies play increasingly important roles in combating complex diseases. Owing to the huge cost associated with experimental methods in identifying optimal drug combinations, computational approaches can provide a guide to limit the search space and reduce cost. However, few computational approaches have been developed for this purpose, and thus there is a great need of new algorithms for drug combination prediction. Results: Here we proposed to formulate the optimal combinatorial therapy problem into two complementary mathematical algorithms, Balanced Target Set Cover (BTSC) and Minimum off target Set Cover mots c. Given a disease gene set, BTSC seeks a balanced solution that maximizes the coverage on the disease genes and minimizes the off target hits at the same time. mots c seeks a full coverage on the disease gene set while minimizing the off target set. Through simulation, both BTSC and mots c demonstrated a much faster running time over exhaustive search with the same accuracy. When applied to real disease gene sets, our algorithms not only identified known drug combinations, but also predicted novel drug combinations that are worth further testing. In addition, we developed a web based tool to allow users to iteratively search for optimal drug combinations given a user defined gene set. Availability: Our tool is freely available for noncommercial use at http://www.drug.

introduction complex diseases, such as cancer, cardiovascular diseases and neurological disorders, usually involve multiple genes whose protein products play pivotal roles in controlling aberrant pathways and networks. In addition, disease pathways and networks are often redundant and robust to single point perturbations because most drugs are designed to selectively target specific proteins, single drug treatments usually can not break down the whole disease pathways and networks. This is why the traditional 'one disease, one gene, one drug' treatment often fails (). multi target treatments, especially drug combinations, can simultaneously target multiple components of the disease pathways and networks, thus offering hope for treating such complex diseases (). There have already been many successful combinatorial therapies to treat complex diseases. For example, highly active antiretroviral therapy is a potent combination of at least three active antiretroviral drugs targeting reverse transcriptase, protease and integrase to keep the HIV virus from replicating itself (). The combination of glyburide and metformin is used to treat type 2 diabetes in complementary ways (). Moduretic is the combination of amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide that can effectively treat patients with hypertension (HTN) (). The combination of anastrozole and fulvestrant is more effective than individual or sequential usage of both drugs for the treatment of hormone receptor positive metastatic breast cancer (). Despite the increasing successes in using drug combinations to treat complex diseases, most of them were developed based on clinical experience or test and trial strategy, which is not only time consuming but also expensive. high throughput screening methods have also been developed to identify effective pairwise drug combinations (). However, a systematic analysis of all the possible pairwise combinations is both labor intensive and cost ineffective because of the large combinatorial space needed to explore. Furthermore, most drug combinations may not significantly improve the efficacy over individual drugs. Therefore, large scale drug combination screening is highly ineffective. In addition, a systematic screening becomes unfeasible if combinations of more than two drugs are considered. The closed loop control (), stack sequential () and other search algorithms reviewed in have been developed together with biological experiments to identify the optimal drug combinations from a huge drug dose space. However, given thousands of individual drugs, careful preselection of a subset of drugs within which to search *To whom correspondence should be addressed. for optimal combinations in experimental testing is not an easy task. Several systematic computational approaches for predicting drug combinations have recently been developed and could provide a guide to limit the search space for experimental methods. For example proposed identifying the optimal drug combinations by searching for the minimal number of drugs that can target all the cancer cell lines using the highest degree first and simulated annealing algorithms. However, this heuristic search algorithm does not have optimum guarantee, and the convergence rate for large scale datasets could be slow integrated a molecular interaction network and gene expression data of individual drugs to identify subnetworks affected by individual or combinatorial drugs. The drug effect on these subnetworks is measured by taking into account both efficacy and side effect and then used to prioritize drug combinations. They successfully identified effective drug combinations used to treat type 2 diabetes, but the dependency on the availability of gene expression data treated with individual and combinatorial drugs as well as the high computational cost when handling the vast combinatorial space makes their approach unsuitable for large scale application proposed two similar computational approaches to prioritize pairwise drug combinations using feature patterns enriched in the known drug combinations and got some promising predictions. However, their approaches rely heavily on the known drug combination data that are of small size, thus biasing their predictions toward those combinations that are similar to the known ones. Therefore, the current computational approaches are limited, and there is a great need to develop new algorithms for drug combination prediction. Drug design is usually specific, but one drug may target multiple proteins due to promiscuous binding (). One protein can be targeted by multiple drugs as well. The drugs and proteins form an intricate drug target network. When used to treat diseases, a drug can affect both disease on target proteins for which it was designed and some off target proteins that are not related to the diseases. When different drugs are combined, there could be a large number of additive off targets whose effects are undesired. Thus, given a set of disease genes, the problem of finding the optimum drug combinations that maximize on target coverage and minimize off target effects is important and challenging. This is similar to the efficacy maximization and side effect minimization problem in combinatorial therapy. Also, such off target effects in drug combination have not been considered in the systematic computational studies (), with the exception of the work (). To address the on target maximization and off target minimization problem, we first formulated the optimal combinatorial therapy problem using an optimization framework and solved it using mixed integer linear programming (MILP). Then, we compared our approach with exhaustive search using simulation and demonstrated a better performance of our approach over exhaustive search. Finally, we demonstrated the good performance of our approach through searching optimal drug combinations for six disease gene sets from a drug target network. Our approach not only captured the well known drugs and drug combinations, but also suggested novel uses for some other drugs. The drug combinations discovered using our approach can target the protein products of disease genes with minimal perturbations to the other proteins and are worthy of further testing to treat such diseases. To make our approach more accessible to the general drug discovery community, we developed a web based tool to allow users to iteratively search for optimal drug combinations from a user defined gene set. The remaining part of this article is organized as follows: we first describe the optimization approach in Section 2; application of the approach on both the simulated and real data is presented in Section 3; and a brief discussion on current issues and potential future improvements is described in the concluding section of the article. we require any selected combination of drugs to cover all the on target disease genes. This can be achieved by setting to 0 and adding a constraint of full set cover. Mathematically, the restricted problem can be defined as follows problem 2. Minimum off target Set Cover mots c problem. Given a disease D  T, S and a collection of drugs M, find a subset C M that minimizes the cost d C  jS \ [Cj, where jT \ [Cj  jT \ [Mj and [C  [ C2C C.

conclusion optimal combinatorial therapy discovery is an important and challenging problem. In this article, we introduced two complementary approaches for this problem and solved them using MILP. There are many heuristic search algorithms that can provide greedy solutions for this problem. However, we are interested in finding the global optimum solution, and these heuristic search algorithms can not provide such accuracy. Therefore, we excluded this category of algorithms in solving the optimal combinatorial therapy problem and did not compare our approaches with any heuristic search algorithms. Instead, we compared our approaches with exhaustive search and demonstrated that our algorithms can obtain the same optimum solution with much faster running time. Application of our approach on real disease gene sets demonstrated its good performance in identifying known drug combinations as well as predicting novel drug combinations. In addition, our approach has the potential to unveil new functions of existing drugs for drug repositioning. We have developed an online tool for our proposed algorithms. The online tool provides many features, such as exclusion of adverse drug drug interaction, constraint on the number of drugs, iterative search, highly efficient solver and email notification. In addition, the online tool allows the user to assign the weight balance on the on target and off target sets as well as to choose how to handle drugs with opposite actions on input genes. The online tool is also flexible to include new constraints, such as the importance weight of input disease genes and the penalty weight of potential off target genes. The availability of the online tool will make our algorithm accessible not only to the computational biologists but also to the bench scientists. The mathematical analysis presented here provides a general framework for the solution of multi target therapeutic design. Although running our algorithm on arbitrarily large set of drugs is not possible due to the nature of np hard problem, most of the real applications fall into the small and mid-size categories. In practice, our algorithm and online tool demonstrate accurate and fast performance on those applications. One weakness of our approach stems from its use of incomplete drug target interaction data. However, in recent years, a significant amount of effort has been devoted to drug target annotation and prediction. With the improved size and quality of such data, we believe that our approach and web based tool will play an increasing role in drug discovery and development. In addition, personal variants in protein coding genes can be easily obtained with the advances in next generation sequencing technologies. Owing to the heterogeneity of complex diseases, even individual patients with the same disease may have a distinct set of causal genes and thus will need different treatment strategy. This problem is challenging and can not be resolved in an effective way now. However, our tool offers one way to help predict optimal drug combination for targeting individual set of disease genes, which will have a non-trivial contribution to personalized medicine.
