Motivation: The identification of cell cycle regulated genes through the cyclicity of messenger RNAs in genome wide studies is a difficult task due to the presence of internal and external noise in microarray data. Moreover, the analysis is also complicated by the loss of syn-chrony occurring in cell cycle experiments, which often results in additional background noise. Results: To overcome these problems, here we propose the LEON (LEarning and OptimizatioN) algorithm, able to characterize the cycli-city degree of a gene expression time profile using a two step cascade procedure. The first step identifies a potentially cyclic behavior by means of a Support Vector Machine trained with a reliable set of positive and negative examples. The second step selects those genes having peak timing consistency along two cell cycles by means of a non-linear optimization technique using radial basis functions. To prove the effectiveness of our combined approach, we use recently published human fibroblasts cell cycle data and, performing in vivo experiments, we demonstrate that our computational strategy is able not only to confirm well known cell cycle regulated genes, but also to predict not yet identified ones. Availability and implementation: All scripts for implementation can be obtained on request.

introduction cell cycle progression is achieved by a highly regulated temporal program of gene expression where transcription is coordinated in a series of consecutive interdependent waves. Such justin time strategy is suggested by the experimental observation that genes are expressed at peak levels at the time they are needed (). To study genes regulated in a cell cycle dependent manner, researchers have deeply used messenger RNA expression profiling microarrays of synchronously growing cells progressing through the cell cycle. Nevertheless, the genome wide identification of cycling genes is a difficult task for a number of reasons, including cell synchronization loss and intrinsic microarray noise. The most critical experimental issue is the degree of synchronization as well as its loss during a time course sampling. This is the reason why various computational methods have been proposed to correct such experimental artifact. The key problem is that the loss of synchronization results in a 'flattening' of the time profile due to the presence of cells in different stages of the cell cycle. To overcome this problem, bar have recently developed a combined experimental and computational approach to recover 'true' cell cycle expression profiles. A number of different techniques have been proposed in the literature for the identification of cycling genes in many organisms, all of them relying on a cyclicity scores based on the degree of regulation (magnitude) and or on a shape parameter (Fourier analysis). Unfortunately, there is a remarkably poor overlap between the gene sets identified as cyclic in different experiments even for the same organism (). Therefore, none of them can be considered as the 'best method' and this field is still an open area of research. Here, we provide a new tool to identify cycling transcripts by integrating different features of gene expression time profiles. In fact, the LEON (LEarning and OptimizatioN) algorithm combines, in two separate steps, information contained in the amplitude of the response (learning step) and information contained in the shape of the response by considering the consistency of peak timing between minima and maxima along two cell cycles (optimization step). In particular, this last feature is suitable to overcome the loss of synchronization problem, as peak timing of upregulation or downregulation is not significantly affected by such artifact. In other words, the shape of the expression profile of the population of cells changes as a consequence of different cell progress rate, but the up or down expression peak positions in time remain approximately the same. This property is illustrated in through the example used by where raw and deconvolved data display the same peak timing. The authors hypothesize that cell progress rates are distributed as a Gaussian with a mean of 1 (average time) and that observed expression values result from a convolution with such Gaussian kernel. Because the Gaussian kernel function is symmetric around the mean, if a certain group of cells has a cell progress rate, say 1  d, there is also a 'symmetric' group of cells having a progress rate 1  d. The total effect of these contributions leaves the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors. maxima points (and the minima points) in the same time positions. To prove the effectiveness of our approach, we used recently published human fibroblasts cell cycle data () and performed in vivo experiments to validate our computational predictions.
