Motivation: Computational prediction of signal peptides is of great importance in computational biology. In addition to the general secretory pathway (Sec), Bacteria, Archaea and chloroplasts possess another major pathway that utilizes the twin arginine translocase (Tat), which recognizes longer and less hydrophobic signal peptides carrying a distinctive pattern of two consecutive arginine s (RR) in the n region. A major functional differentiation between the Sec and Tat export pathways lies in the fact that the former translocates secreted proteins unfolded through a protein conducting channel, whereas the latter translocates completely folded proteins using an unknown mechanism. The purpose of this work is to develop a novel method for predicting and discriminating Sec from Tat signal peptides at better accuracy. Results: We report the development of a novel method, pred tat which is capable of discriminating Sec from Tat signal peptides and predicting their cleavage sites. The method is based on Hidden Markov Models and possesses a modular architecture suitable for both Sec and Tat signal peptides. On an independent test set of experimentally verified Tat signal peptides, pred tat clearly outperforms the previously proposed methods t atp and tat find whereas, when evaluated as a Sec signal peptide predictor compares favorably to top scoring predictors such as SignalP and ph obius. The method is freely available for academic users at http://www.compgen.org/tools/PRED-TAT/.

introduction in all domains of life (Bacteria, Eukarya and Archaea), the majority of secreted proteins are synthesized as precursors that carry a cleavable n terminal signal sequence. The signal peptide possesses a modular architecture with a positively charged region at the n terminus n region a hydrophobic region h region that spans the membrane and a c region of mostly small and uncharged residues ending at the characteristic cleavage site (). The signal peptide is necessary for targeting the protein to * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the membrane embedded export machinery in Bacteria (), Eukaryotes () and Archaea (). Upon translocation across the membrane, the signal peptide is cleaved from the precursor via a membrane bound signal peptidase (). In Eukaryotes, proteins targeted to the organelles of bacterial origin (mitochondria and chloroplasts) also contain cleavable n terminal targeting sequences, although they are in general different from those found in the eukaryotic or bacterial secreted proteins (). In addition to the general export pathway (Sec), Bacteria, Archaea and chloroplasts possess another major pathway that utilizes the twin arginine translocase (Tat). Tat recognizes longer and less hydrophobic signal peptides carrying a distinctive pattern of two consecutive arginine s (RR) in the n region (). A major functional differentiation between Sec and Tat export pathways lies in the fact that the former translocates secreted proteins unfolded through a protein conducting channel, whereas the latter translocates completely folded proteins using an unknown mechanism (). Interestingly, in halophilic Archaea, the components of the Tat pathway are essential for viability () and there is evidence that tat dependent translocation is widely used as part of a mechanism for adaptation to extreme saline environments (). Computational prediction of signal peptides was performed initially using weight matrices (). However, Neural Networks (NNs) () as well as Hidden Markov Models (HMMs;) introduced by the SignalP method have been proven to be the most successful methods currently available (). Recently, SignalP was retrained and, mainly due to better annotation and selection of the training set, yielded an even better accuracy (). The ph obius () and phil i us () methods followed a different approach in which a graphical model (HMM and Bayesian network, respectively) was used to predict at the same time the presence of a secretory signal peptide and transmembrane (TM) topology of a given protein minimizing thus the number of signal peptides predicted as TM segments and vice versa. Other methods such as li pop () and pred lipo () were developed during the last years for predicting lipoprotein signal peptides, which possess a distinctive cleavage site with an indispensable cysteine responsible for anchoring to the membrane (;Page: 2812 28112817) and discriminate them from secretory signal peptides. Although most of the methods mentioned so far are capable, up to a certain degree, of predicting the Tat signal peptides, only a few attempts were made toward predicting specifically this class of proteins. tat find was presented initially combining regular expression patterns and hydrophobicity analysis (), whereas few years later, t atp was presented using a combination of regular expression patterns and NNs (). t atp has been shown to be more reliable, whereas tat find is not capable of predicting the cleavage site but only recognizes the existence of the n-and h region. Another problem is that these methods are not trained to discriminate at the same time Tat from Sec signal peptides and thus, there is a need for combining these predictors with a generic signal peptide predictor such as SignalP. In this work, we present a novel method, pred tat based on HMMs, which is capable of predicting and discriminating Tat and Sec signal peptides. We show that this new method is more accurate than the previously developed methods and additionally, compares favorably to the top scoring methods for the prediction of Sec signal peptides. The prediction method is available for non-commercial users at http://www.compgen.org/tools/PRED-TAT/ and we expect it to be useful to both experimentalists and bioinformatic ians
