Motivation: Owing to its importance in both basic research (such as molecular evolution and protein attribute prediction) and practical application (such as timely modeling the 3D structures of proteins targeted for drug development), protein remote homology detection has attracted a great deal of interest. It is intriguing to note that the profile based approach is promising and holds high potential in this regard. To further improve protein remote homology detection, a key step is how to find an optimal means to extract the evolutionary information into the profiles. Results: Here, we propose a novel approach, the so called profile based protein representation, to extract the evolutionary information via the frequency profiles. The latter can be calculated from the multiple sequence alignments generated by PSI-BLAST. Three top performing sequence based kernels svm n gram svm pairwise and svm la were combined with the profile based protein representation. Various tests were conducted on a SCOP benchmark dataset that contains 54 families and 23 superfamilies. The results showed that the new approach is promising, and can obviously improve the performance of the three kernels. Furthermore, our approach can also provide useful insights for studying the features of proteins in various families. It has not escaped our notice that the current approach can be easily combined with the existing sequence based methods so as to improve their performance as well. Availability and implementation: For users convenience, the source code of generating the profile based proteins and the multiple kernel learning was also provided at

introduction by March 2013, 89 003 experimentally determined protein structures were deposited in the Protein Data Bank (). However, this number is only about one sixth of 539 616, the number of protein sequences held in the uniprotkb swissprot database (). To timely use such vast amount of structure unknown protein sequences for basic research and drug development, it is highly desired to determine their 3D structures and functions by means of homology approaches (). Unfortunately, protein remote homology detection is still a challenging problem in bioinformatics. The early methods in dealing with this problem were based on the pairwise sequence comparison approaches, such as BLAST () and smith waterman local alignment algorithm (). However, in many cases, this kind of sequence alignment method failed to detect remote homologies due to the low sequence similarities. Later methods to challenge this problem were based on the generative models to induce a probability distribution over the protein family, and then to generate the unknown proteins as new members of the family from the stochastic model. For example, the hidden Markov model (HMM) () can be trained iteratively in a semi supervised manner by using both positively labeled and unlabeled samples of a particular family to generate the positive set (). Recently, the discriminative methods, such as support vector machine (SVM) (), were used to address this problem by focusing on the differences between protein families. The key of the SVM methods is the kernel function by which to compute the inner product between two samples in the feature space. The most straightforward approach to generate the kernels was based on the features extracted from protein sequences. svm n gram (), svm pairwise () and svm la () were three of the most successful sequence based kernels. svm n gram () was based on the feature space that contains all short subsequence of length N. In svm pairwise (), a protein sequence was represented as a vector of pairwise similarities to all protein *To whom correspondence should be addressed. sequences in the training set, and then inner product between these vector space representations was taken as the kernel. svm la () measured the similarity between a pair of proteins by taking all the optimal local alignment scores with gaps between all possible subsequences into account. Besides these kernels, several other sequence based kernels were also proposed, such as Mismatch () and svm balsa (). The profile based kernels could further improve the performance by using the evolution al information extracted from the profiles. For example, top n grams () extracted the profile based patterns by considering the most frequent elements in the profiles; profile kernel () extracted the short substrings according to the profile based un gapped alignment scores; some profile based methods improved the predictive performance by developing more sensitive profiles. hh search method so ding so ding 2005) was based on a novel profile using the HMM. In COMPASS (), numerical profiles were generated to construct optimal profileprofile alignments and to estimate the statistical significance of the corresponding alignment scores. In the meantime, some other features and techniques have been applied to this field to further improve the predictive performance. For instance, the kernel combination methodology vb kc () used a single multiclass kernel machine to combine various kernels based on different feature spaces; svm physicochemical distance transformation (PDT) () combined the amino acid physicochemical properties and the profile features via PDT to incorporate the local sequence order information of the entire protein sequences. Also, based on the similarities between protein sequences and natural languages, the natural language processing techniques were applied to this field. It was shown that the performance of building block based methods could be improved by using the latent semantic analysis (LSA) (). Moreover, P ROT E m bed () detected protein remote homology by embedding protein sequences into a low dimensional semantic space. As we can see from the aforementioned introduction, most of the top performing methods were developed based on the features extracted from profiles. This is consistent with the fact that a profile is much richer than an individual sequence in encoding information. Also, biology is a natural science with historic dimension. All biological species have developed beginning from a limited number of ancestral species. It is true for protein sequence as well (). Their evolution involves changes of single residues, insertions and deletions of several residues, gene doubling and gene fusion (). With these changes accumulated for a long period, many similarities between initial and resultant amino acid sequences are gradually eliminated, but the corresponding proteins may still share many common features, such as having basically the same biological function (), folding topology, subcellular location and other attributes (). Accordingly, the key to improve the performance of these methods is to find a suitable approach to extract the evolutionary information from the profiles. In view of this, the current study was initiated in an attempt to propose a profile based protein representation by extracting the evolutionary information from the frequency profiles.

application of the proposed remote homology detection methods for studying the 3D structure of Nck5a

conclusion discriminative methods based on SVM are the most effective and accurate methods for protein remote homology detection. The performance of the svm based methods depends on the kernel function, which measures the similarity between the samples in any pair. Varieties of kernels based on sequence composition have been proposed. However, these methods often fail to accurately predict the proteins sharing low sequence similarity. Recently, methods using the evolutionary information extracted from profiles achieved great success, such as Profile (), sw pssm (), svm to png ram () and svm acc (). A key step to improve the performance of these methods is in how to find a suitable approach to incorporate the evolutionary information extracted from the profiles for prediction. In this article, we proposed a method that can convert the frequency profile into a series of profile based proteins. Three state of the art sequence based kernels, i.e. svm n gram (), svm pairwise () and svm la (), were selected for demonstration on a well known benchmark. It was shown that the methods based on the profile based proteins p1 and p2 achieved the best performance, outperforming the original three string kernels by 3.7 $ 7.5% and 9.6 $ 13.7%, respectively, according to the average ROC and ROC50 scores. These results are fully consistent with our previous findings that the top two most frequent amino acids show stronger discriminative power than the other low frequent amino acids in the frequency profiles (), further confirming that the proposed profile based protein representation is a promising approach in extracting the evolutionary information from frequency profiles for protein remote homology detection. It has not escaped our notice that the current approach can be easily combined with sequence based methods, and hence, with the development of the sequence based kernels, the currently proposed method can be further improved accordingly. It is instructive to point out that since the concept of pseudo amino acid composition, or cho us pse aac (), was introduced in 2001 (), it has been successfully used to predict various attributes of proteins (e.g.). Accordingly, the potential would be high to develop a powerful method for protein remote homology detection by combing pse aac with profile based protein representation. In the original pse aac it only uses three indices, including the hydrophobicity index, hydrophilicity index and side chain mass index. Because protein remote homology detection is a more difficult problem, proteins in the dataset only share low sequence similarity. Only these three indices would not be enough to capture the different properties of various proteins. Therefore, our further research will focus on incorporating new amino acid indices into pse aac and applying it to protein remote homology detection.
