Long non-coding RNAs ln crnas form the largest class of non protein coding genes in the human genome. While a small subset of well characterized ln crnas has demonstrated their significant role in diverse biological functions like chromatin modifications, post-transcriptional regulation, imprinting etc., the functional significance of a vast majority of them still remains an enigma. Increasing evidence of the implications of ln crnas in various diseases including cancer and major developmental processes has further enhanced the need to gain mechanistic insights into the l ncrna functions. Here, we present a comprehensive review of the various computational approaches and tools available for the identification and annotation of long non-coding RNAs. We also discuss a conceptual roadmap to systematically explore the functional properties of the ln crnas using computational approaches.

introduction noncoding RNAs have been one of the major focuses in the field of functional genomics since the last decade. Non-coding RNAs have been largely classified based on their size into small and long noncoding RNAs. The former class of nc rnas encompasses well studied candidates including tRNAs, miRNAs, pirn as and snoRNAs (). The latter class of non-coding RNAs encompasses a functionally diverse set of transcripts, which by definition are transcripts greater than 200 nucleotides in length with no potential to encode for functional proteins of more than 30 amino acids (). A large number of transcripts of this class were initially discovered through earlier studies reporting expressed sequence tags (ESTs) in Human and mouse through the h invitation () and FANTOM () consortia. This repertoire was significantly expanded in the recent years, benefitting from the availability of technologies to annotate transcriptome at single nucleotide resolutions (). There are over 23 898 transcripts from 13 870 genomic loci as reported by gen code gen code v21) for humans, which encompass classes of transcripts previously annotated as antisense transcripts, intronic transcripts, large intergenic non-coding RNAs linc rnas and processed pseudogenes (). Long non-coding RNAs are generally thought to be transcribed by RNA polymerase II, and largely observed to be 5 0 capped and 3 0 poly-adenylated, though exceptions to this general rule are not uncommon (). Recent evidence suggests that a small subclass of ln crnas could encode for small peptides and could also be processed to smaller RNAs (). The functional relevance of these observations has not been explored to great detail. The l ncrna class also includes transcripts classified by some authors as macro rnas and vl in crnas. macro rnas are long, un-spliced RNAs transcribed from RNA pol II and can readily form secondary structures. macro rnas such as air n or KCNQ1OT1 function mainly in the maintenance of imprinting in normal tissues (). vl in crnas or very long intergenic RNAs on the other hand, represent a subset of human transcriptome spanning the intergenic genomic space ranging from 50 to 700 kb in size. These transcripts have been identified in various tumors and show cell specific expression. They have also been shown to be associated with plur i potency or the extent of malignancy in some tumours (). high throughput techniques have enabled the identification of large number of circular non-coding transcripts commonly known as circ rnas. circ rnas are non-canonical alternatively spliced RNA structures in which 5 0 donor and 3 0 accept or sites are back spliced to form a circular RNA product. Recent studies have discovered large number of circ rnas majority of which have not yet been functionally characterized ().Nevertheless, one of the human circ rnas CDR1as has been shown to harbor 70 binding sites for miR-7, thus potentially acting as microRNA sponge (). Of the l ncrna repertoire known till date, only a small subset of ln crnas appear to be evolutionary conserved (). l ncrna conservation could potentially be dealt in four dimensions, viz., (i) primary sequence, (ii) secondary or tertiary structure, (iii) function and (iv) conservation in terms of their expression and regulation (). Most of the ln crnas are not conserved at the level of their primary sequence, though ln crnas could harbor small stretches of ultra conserved elements which serve as functional motifs. At the structural level, ln crnas could have conserved motifs as in the case of SRA l ncrna where they act as functional domains (). Recent analysis from our laboratory show that regions of ln crnas participating in bio-molecular interactions have a paucity of variations in potential functional domains similar to that of protein coding exons suggesting a strong selective pressure operating at these loci (). The long non-coding RNA repertoire further encompasses transcripts, which have distinct molecular functions. These functional attributes could be broadly classified as guides, decoys, signals and scaffolds (), depending upon the types of molecular interactions with other biomolecules in the cell, namely; DNA, RNA, proteins or small molecules (). These interactions have been shown to result in a wide spectrum of functional outcomes ranging from chromosomal inactivation as in the case of XIST in X chromosomal inactivation (), epigenetic modifications as in the association with Polycomb repressor proteins (), RNA interference as in antisense activity () or scaffolding of biomolecules as in the case of peri-nuclear bodies (). This diversity of functional outcomes is reflected in the myriad ways that ln crnas have been implicated in disease processes. Long noncoding RNAs are presently implicated in a number of disease processes included cancers, developmental disorders, neurological, metabolic and immunological disorders () It would be noteworthy to mention the distinct functional roles and molecular dissection of the functional interactions that have been characterized for a small subset of ln crnas. The functional roles of a vast majority of the ln crnas still remain uncharacterized and elusive. The majority of ln crnas annotated in the recent years have come out of analysis of transcriptome sequencing datasets and the information on these transcripts have been largely limited to the genomic loci and expression patterns in the various conditions studied. This gap in the understanding of the functional roles of ln crnas has largely been due to the non availability of tools to characterize specific biomolecular interactions on genome scale and of resources, which systematically catalogue these interactions. Recent insights into specific molecular interactions of ln crnas have been obtained from the integration of genome scale datasets, both from our laboratory () and from others (). Additional evidence on the potential functional attributes of ln crnas have also been obtained from methodologies, which rely on expression patterns and guilt by association methods based on correlation of expression patterns with genes or mutations linked to known phenotypes (). Computational methodologies integrating genome scale datasets, expression patterns, motifs and structure annotations provide immense opportunities towards understanding the functional role of ln crnas. In the present review, we provide an overview of the computational resources, methodologies and tools available for the identification and functional annotation of human long non-coding RNAs. We also provide a conceptual overview of computational approaches using genome scale bio-molecular interactions and expression correlation towards understanding the potential function of ln crnas. We also summarize the current status in identifying functional variations in ln crnas and discuss the major challenges and opportunities.
