Motivation: Intriguingly, sequence analysis of genomes reveals that a large number of genes are unique to each organism. The origin of these genes, termed or fans is not known. Here, we explore the origin of or fan genes by defining a simple measure called composition bias, based on the deviation of the amino acid composition of a given sequence from the average composition of all proteins of a given genome. Results: For a set of 47 prokaryotic genomes, we show that the amino acid composition bias of real proteins, random proteins (created by using the nucleotide frequencies of each genome) and proteins translated from intergenic regions are distinct. For or fans we observed a correlation between their composition bias and their relative evolutionary age. Recent or fan proteins have compositions more similar to those of random proteins, while the compositions of more ancient or fan proteins are more similar to those of the set of all proteins of the organism. This observation is consistent with an evolutionary scenario wherein or fan genes emerged and underwent a large number of random mutations and selection, eventually adapting to the composition preference of their organism over time.

introduction one of the consistent and intriguing observations that emerged from the extensive availability of whole genome sequences is the large number of genes that seem to encode unique proteins that do not exist in other organisms or exist only in very closely related organisms. This appears to be the case even when using sophisticated sequence comparison methods like psi-blast. These genes are commonly called or fan genes () and the resulting proteins are called or fan proteins. It was estimated () that 2030% of the open reading frames in a given genome are or fans. These observations were made early in the history of genome analysis, when only the first organisms had * To whom correspondence should be addressed. been sequenced. At that time, the common explanation was that these 'unique' genes were not unique at all, but that not enough organisms had been sequenced to follow the evolution of these genes. However, while the fraction of or fan genes has somewhat decreased as more genomes became available, it also became clear that the phenomenon is not a mere artifact of a small sample size; rather, even with the availability of the complete sequence of close to a thousand genomes, there remain a large number of genes whose evolutionary history is not accounted for. Several possible explanations were given over the years for this phenomenon (for a review see). One explanation is that those sequences are not real genes; rather they may represent open reading frames that are never expressed. However, several studies have shown () that these genes are expressed, and some of the resulting proteins have even been subjected to 3D structure analysis (). Another possible explanation is that these genes came from lateral gene transfer (LGT). In order for this explanation to be logically relevant, the transfer should have come from genomes whose sampling is sparse and thus can serve as a reservoir for the unique genes. Viral and phage genomes have been suggested as such a reservoir (), although other recent studies () have indicated that LGT can not be the source for most of these genes. Another possibility that has been suggested () is that or fan genes originated from ancestral genes, but because of fast evolutionary rate, these genes have mutated their sequence to such an extent that their ancestors are no longer recognizable. Yet another possibility is that some or fan genes emerged de novo from non-coding regions of each genome without being inherited in the regular evolutionary path, for example by shifting the reading frame, a phenomenon called overprinting (see e.g.) or by mutations that change non-coding regions to open reading frames (). It is well known that protein sequences have different amino acids compositions, i.e. not all of the 20 amino acids appear in proteins with the same frequency of 5%. The composition is different for different organisms () and has both evolutionary and functional origin and consequences. Furthermore, within genomes, different sequences have different compositions, and we term the deviation of each sequence from the average composition of the organism as composition bias. The composition of sequences has been used as one of the main considerations in predicting the sub-cellular localization of proteins (). Furthermore, it was observed () that

discussion the main finding of this study is the correlation between the relative age of the or fans and the degree of similarity of their composition to that of the real proteins of the organism. We found a significant correlation (correlation coefficients between 0.58 and 0.66) between the relative age of the or fans and their composition bias, as determined by various measures of the composition distance between the set of the or fan proteins and the set of real proteins. Thus, the older the or fans i.e., the more ancient the organism, the more the amino acid composition of its or fans resembles that of the rest of the proteins. Young organisms, i.e. organisms that split from their ancestor organisms more recently, tend to have or fan genes with composition that is more different from that of the rest of the proteins, and more similar to that of the random genes. We tested to see if there are other factors that correlate with the relative age of the or fan proteins and with the composition bias. As expected, we found that the fraction of or fan genes among all coding genes in each organism is correlated with the evolutionary age of the organism (correlation coefficient of 0.5). Older organisms that have, almost by definition, fewer close relatives, tend to have more or fan genes. No other factors that we tested, including the GC content of the organism, the size of the genome and the ratio of coding to intergenic regions, showed a strong correlation (0.3) with the or fan behavior. Thus, our data are consistent with a model wherein or fan genes emerged with a composition that was similar to the random composition of the genome. Then, during evolution and due to the selective pressures that shape the composition bias of each organism, the composition of or fan genes gradually converged to be more similar to the composition of the rest of the proteins of the genome. We may examine the three possible explanations for the origin of or fan genes in light of this observation. The first explanation is that or fan genes originated from bacteriophages (see a review in). We think that this is unlikely. First, note that bacterial genes that have known homologues in bacteriophage are not considered or fans by our definition. Second, for six bacteria for which sufficient bacteriophages have been sequenced, we compared the composition of the or fan genes with the composition of bacteriophage proteins and found that the composition of the or fan genes of the bacteria is not similar to the composition of the bacteriophage proteins (see Supplementary). The second possible explanation is that or fan genes emerged de novo from non-coding regions of the genome (see a review in). This is also not consistent with our observation that protein created from intergenic sequences are distinct (further to the right in) from the random proteins, while the or fan proteins fall between the random and the real proteins. If or fan proteins emerged from intergenic regions, then we would expect the or fan genes to be have more closely to intergenic non-coding regions of the genome, and not like random sequences. The third explanation is that or fan genes result from a very fast evolutionary clock rate of mutations operating on genes that are under positive selection (). This explanation is the most consistent with our observations. Random mutations are likely to create nucleotide sequences that have A/C/G/T frequencies that are similar to random sequences, thus creating novel proteins whose amino acid sequences have composition bias similar to the random proteins that we have created. Over time, the sequences underwent further mutations and selection that changed their composition and brought their composition bias to be more similar to that of the rest of the proteins.
