Motivation: Modern sequencing instruments are able to generate at least hundreds of millions short reads of genomic data. Those huge volumes of data require effective means to store them, provide quick access to any record and enable fast decompression. Results: We present a specialized compression algorithm for genomic data in fast q format which dominates its competitor, gs qz as is shown on a number of datasets from the 1000 Genomes Project (www.1000genomes.org). Availability: DSRC is freely available at http://sun.aei.polsl.pl/dsrc.

introduction one of the main tasks of bioinformatics is to collect and analyze huge genomic data. Sequencing instruments are able to generate at least hundreds of millions of short reads, accompanied with annotations, like quality scores denoting uncertainties in sequence identification processes. Read identifications and other descriptions, e.g. unique instrument names, are also kept in the same file. We propose an algorithm for effective compression of genomic reads of the described kind in the widely accepted fast q input format, and show experimental results suggesting its supremacy over existing solutions. Our scheme provides fast random access to individual records of the dataset and is capable of finding repeating sequences in reads strings. We are not aware of any direct competitors to our algorithms, except for gs qz (), presented in the experimental section. There is a number of dna compressing algorithms but they deal with genomic (and usually not annotated) sequences rather than DNA reads. The used compression techniques include detecting exact and in exact repeats (), complementary palindromes (), higher order coding, and more. Unfortunately, most of the known algorithms are computationally intensive and have been tested only on small datasets (e.g. a few MB's). A recent trend is to exploit similarities between sequences of individuals of the same species (), but this is also a problem different to the one we consider here. For a survey of compression techniques in computational biology, see (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.

conclusion we presented a specialized compressor, DSRC, for genomic sequences with quality scores, clearly superior both in compression efficiency and performance to its only known competitor for this kind of data, gs qz. Comparison with two well known general purpose compressors also puts our solution in a favorable position. A carefully designed two level structure of compressed records made it possible to extract any individual record in less than 10 ms.
