Motivation: TRAIL has been widely studied for the ability to kill cancer cells selectively, but its clinical usefulness has been hindered by the development of resistance. Multiple compounds have been identified that sensitize cancer cells to trail induced apoptosis. The drug LY303511 (LY30), combined with TRAIL, caused synergistic (greater than additive) killing of multiple cancer cell lines. We used mathematical modelling and ordinary differential equations to represent how LY30 and TRAIL individually affect HeLa cells, and to predict how the combined treatment achieves synergy. Results: model based predictions were compared with in vitro experiments. The combination treatment model was successful at mimicking the synergistic levels of cell death caused by LY30 and TRAIL combined. However, there were significant failures of the model to mimic upstream activation at early time points, particularly the slope of caspase 8 activation. This flaw in the model led us to perform additional measurements of early caspase 8 activation. Surprisingly, caspase 8 exhibited a transient decrease in activity after LY30 treatment , prior to strong activation. c flip an inhibitor of caspase 8 activation , was up-regulated briefly after 30 min of LY30 treatment, followed by a significant down-regulation over prolonged exposure. A further model suggested that ly30 induced fluctuation of c flip might result from tilting the ratio of two key species of reactive oxygen species (ROS), superoxide and hydrogen peroxide. Computational modelling extracted novel biological implications from measured dynamics, identified time intervals with unexplained effects, and clarified the non-monotonic effects of the drug LY30 on c flip during cancer cell apoptosis.

introduction combinations of drugs can have non obvious effects on a biological system, and the magnitude of their final effect can be synergistic, additive or antagonistic: meaning larger, the same as or smaller than the sum of the individual treatments (). For treating cancers, some of the current standards of care are combination therapies, but the development of synergistic combinations has been an expensive and laborious process of empirical testing (). Computational modelling of pathway dynamics has the potential to predict the effects of combination treatments, and could be useful in the design of multi-drug therapies. Single perturbations of a system (e.g. inhibiting an enzyme) are commonly studied using traditional experimental methods, but combinations of perturbations, too numerous to study experimentally, can be examined using computational tools (), based on existing models that describe the effects of single drugs. We used modelling to study the combination of TRAIL and LY303511, towards understanding their synergy and also aiding in the discovery of an unknown effect of LY303511. The polypeptide ligand TRAIL tnf related apoptosis inducing ligand, or Apo2L) induces death receptor mediated apoptosis (programmed cell death) according to a well studied pathway (). TRAIL is currently undergoing phase I/II clinical evaluation for a variety of cancers, and it holds real promise as a therapeutic strategy owing to its selective targeting of cancer cells while sparing normal tissues (). However, development of resistance is a serious obstacle to the effective clinical use of TRAIL, and combination therapies to overcome resistance to TRAIL, or to induce re sensitization to TRAIL, could be extremely important for enabling trail based therapies to succeed (). The small molecule compound LY30 (LY303511) has been shown to sensitize multiple cancer cell lines to trail induced apoptosis () and vincristine induced apoptosis (). LY30 is an inactive analogue of the phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3K) inhibitor *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. LY294002 (), and is related to the non-specific kinase inhibitor quercetin (). LY30 produces high levels of ROS (reactive oxygen species), which may be particularly harmful to cancer cells that have high metabolic rates and oxidative stress. Our recent studies found a synergistic anti-cancer effect by combining LY30 and TRAIL (). Treating cells with low doses of TRAIL plus with low doses of LY30 caused robust activation of the apoptotic pathway, while treatment with either agent alone caused minimal death. We undertook the task of modelling the effects of LY30 in the network of trail induced apoptosis, with the aim of evaluating whether the molecular effects known to be caused by LY30 were sufficient to explain the synergy of the ly30 trail combination. We were successful in using modelling to recapitulate the synergistic levels of cell death that were observed. However, the simulated activation kinetics of pro-apoptotic caspase enzymes along the pathway showed poor correlation with experimental data. In particular, there were large mismatches between simulation and experiment at early time points, particularly for upstream regions of the pathway. This suggested further experiments focusing on caspase 8 activation shortly after treatment. New data revealed an even larger and more obvious mismatch between simulation and experimental data: specifically, LY30 treatment had a brief inhibitory effect on caspase 8 30 min after treatment. Finally, we modelled two sources of ROS that might explain the effects of LY30 on caspase 8 activation, and that might be relevant for other anti-cancer drugs.
