Motivation: A critical task in high throughput sequencing is aligning millions of short reads to a reference genome. Alignment is especially complicated for RNA sequencing rnase q because of RNA splicing. A number of rnase q algorithms are available, and claim to align reads with high accuracy and efficiency while detecting splice junctions. rnase q data are discrete in nature; therefore, with reasonable gene models and comparative metrics rnase q data can be simulated to sufficient accuracy to enable meaningful benchmarking of alignment algorithms. The exercise to rigorously compare all viable published rnase q algorithms has not been performed previously. Results: We developed an rnase q simulator that models the main impediments to RNA alignment, including alternative splicing, insertions, deletions, substitutions, sequencing errors and intron signal. We used this simulator to measure the accuracy and robustness of available algorithms at the base and junction levels. Additionally, we used reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction rt pcr and Sanger sequencing to validate the ability of the algorithms to detect novel transcript features such as novel exons and alternative splicing in rnase q data from mouse retina. A pipeline based on BLAT was developed to explore the performance of established tools for this problem, and to compare it to the recently developed methods. This pipeline, the rnase q Unified Mapper (RUM), performs comparably to the best current aligners and provides an advantageous combination of accuracy, speed and usability. Availability: The RUM pipeline is distributed via the Amazon Cloud and for computing clusters using the Sun Grid Engine

introduction the ongoing high throughput sequencing (HTS) revolution in biology is placing significant demand on the informatics community. Being a sequence based technology, alignment algorithms are critical for most applications. Genome alignment algorithms such as Bowtie and BWA rely on burrows wheeler indexing for very fast genome alignment, but they have difficulties with transcriptome alignment due to splicing, RNA editing and variations from the reference such as substitutions, insertions and deletions (). Additional complications arise from poorly annotated genomes, or from samples with significant polymorphisms from the sequenced organism or from aberrant splicing found in cells with mutations in components of the spliceosome (). There are a number of programs available for rnase q alignment gives a breakdown of the alignment algorithms used in a random sample of 130 papers listed on PubMed that have rnase q in the abstract (see Supplementary Table 1 for detailed information). The most commonly cited algorithm is el and which is part of the analysis pipeline bundled by Illumina with its sequencing instruments. But to be viable for rnase q an algorithm must satisfy three basic criteria: (i) it must align single reads across splice junctions de novo; (ii) it must handle paired end reads; and (iii) it must run in a reasonable amount of time. Currently, five algorithms are available that satisfy these three criteria: top hat () g snap (), map splice (), splice map () and soap soap als (). We further desire algorithms be as robust as possible to polymorphisms and sequencing error. Based on our analyses, described below, only g snap and map splice from this list satisfy this additional criterion. Further, none of the published algorithms attempt to map against both a genome and a transcriptome and to merge the results into one alignment. As will be shown below, there is an advantage to merging genome and transcriptome alignments to achieve better disambiguation, in particular for reads that extend into introns. In order to evaluate the accuracy of the various rnase q alignment algorithms, we developed an rnase q simulator that produces paired end sequence reads with configurable rates for substitutions, indels, novel splice forms, intron signal and random error, including a decrease of the quality in the tails of the reads, as is typically observed in Illumina data. rnase q data page 2519 25182528 are discrete in nature; therefore, as long as good gene models are available, it is possible to simulate rnase q data that is sufficiently realistic to allow for meaningful benchmarking of alignment algorithms. For our purposes, we require paired end reads with polymorphisms, alternative splice forms, partial retention of introns, and which follows an error model reflective of Illumina data. We also require there be no bias toward any particular set of gene annotations. As far as we are aware, there is no published rnase q simulation software available. However, there are a few simulators available online, e.g. FLUX flux sam meth net use q use q sourceforge net sim ngs www ebiacukgoldmansrvsimngs however none of them satisfy the specific requirements for our benchmarking goals. In particular, we require strict control over the sources of polymorphisms: indels, SNPs, errors and alternate splicing. And we require detailed logging. Neither FLUX, use q nor sim ngs provide these capabilities. To meet the necessary criteria, we developed a framework called Benchmarker for Evaluating the Effectiveness of rnase q Software (BEERS) (). The BEERS simulator uses information from a filtered set of the annotated genes from 11 different annotation efforts, to generate simulated sequence read pairs with characteristics similar to those observed in Illumina sequence reads. The details are given in the Section 2 and Supplementary Material. To evaluate rnase q alignment, we developed a set of metrics to compare an inferred alignment to the true alignment of a BEERS dataset. Accuracy is evaluated on the level of the individual bases and splice junction calls. Neither metric alone indicates which method is superior and it is not clear how to define a single metric that would. For example, b fast achieves a very high base wise accuracy, because it handles polymorphisms well and therefore rarely fails to align a read. However, b fast does not make junction simulator workflow. Genes are chosen at random from a master pool, polymorphisms and novel splice forms are introduced, and then reads are generated in a six step cycle, as shown.

discussion robustness of the alignment process to novel splice forms and sequence polymorphisms is a key to wide application of rnase q. Therefore, it is important to test alignment systems with datasets that have varying degrees of such effects, and for which the truth regarding correct alignment is known. BEERS simulates rnase q data with variable levels of polymorphisms, alternative splice forms, partial retention of introns and sequence error. Of these kinds of effects, only sequence error is enabled in the Flux simulator (). The ability to simulate alternate splice forms means BEERS can also be used to benchmark the various algorithms that aim to annotate the transcriptome or to reconstruct full splice forms from rnase q data (). We used two configurations of the BEERS parameters, referred to as Test 1 and Test 2, to evaluate 14 alignment algorithms. These simulation analyses indicate that BLAT offers a powerful tool for rnase q alignment that has not been fully explored for rnase q analysis, and as such we have added necessary filters and a paired end parser to implement this approach in RUM. The analyses performed using the simulated data showed that among the appropriate rnase q alignment algorithms, RUM, g snap and map splice provide reasonably accurate and robust alignment. Although computing resources are expanding, compute time is still a relevant issue for the analysis of large rnase q datasets. This is underscored by the dramatic increase in the number of reads per lane now generated with the Illumina his eq and ABI Solid 5500 instruments. All the viable and most accurate alignment algorithms require significant computing resources. For example, none of them can handle a 100 million read dataset on one processor in reasonable time. Therefore, the number of processor hours required for each of the algorithms, as shown in, tells only part of the story. What is more important is the number of real hours required for running analyses using the desired alignment software on a reasonably sized compute cluster or multi-processor machine. map splice as yet, can not be parallelized, and therefore is the least convenient for 100 million read datasets. We use RUM on the high performance Computing Facility at the Penn Genome Frontiers Institute consisting of a 400 node cluster of 64 bit Linux machines each with 2.8 GHz quad processors and 16 GB of RAM, managed with the Sun Grid Engine. Using 50 nodes on this cluster, RUM can process clean mouse or human rnase q reads at a rate of 2 3 million read pairs per hour. The run time, however, depends on the error and polymorphism rate, with BLAT taking roughly twice as long on the second simulated data as compared with the first (and Supplementary). For small genomes such as microorganisms, run time is considerably faster. Since powerful computational resources may not be available to all investigators, we have taken advantage of the availability of cloud computing to make RUM universally available through the Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2: aws.amazon.com/ec2). More generally, RUM should run on any Unix system, and simple installation scripts will place RUM on any of the platforms mentioned above. Further, RUM is designed to work well with default settings in all situations. When applied to an rnase q dataset from mouse retina, RUM detected 47 078 novel splice junctions with a read depth of 2. To explore the reliability of detection for these novel events, we used rt pcr and Sanger sequencing to validate 75 of them with a focus on the less abundant cases in order to achieve a lower bound on the true occurrence of such novel splicing. We were able to empirically validate 81% of a subset of selected novel junctions in independent RNA samples, indicating the accurate identification of novel junctions by RUM. We believe that the true accuracy of rnase q and RUM are higher than indicated by the rt pcr and sequencing validation studies we performed due to technical reasons. For example, it is possible that some transcript variants produced by the novel junctions detected by RUM are present at too low a concentration to be detected on agarose gels following rt pcr. Further, low abundance transcripts detected by rt pcr are more difficult to isolate for sequencing. We have also found that RUM works well with rnase q data from other species, including human, zebrafish and microorganisms (data not shown). Perhaps the most important output of rnase q analyses is the identification of novel transcript variants and novel transcripts. Indeed, rnase q data are already being used to improve annotation of the human and mouse transcriptome s (). The ability to accurately detect the complete complement of transcripts expressed in a given cell or tissue type is especially important for identification of genes, which harbor mutations that cause inherited disorders, and for accurate genetic diagnostic testing of patients with these disorders. A pertinent example of this is the recent identification of a novel, retina specific isoform of the bardet biedl syndrome 8 (BBS8) gene. Mutations in BBS8 typically cause a multi-system cilia disorder characterized by cystic renal disease, polydactyly, mental retardation, retinal degeneration, Page: 2527 25182528
