Motivation: The complete sequencing of the human genome shows that only 1% of the entire genome encodes for proteins. The major part of the genome is made up of non-coding DNA, regulatory elements and junk DNA. Transcriptional regulation plays a central role in a multitude of critical cellular processes and responses, and it is a central force in the development and differentiation of multicellular organisms. Identifying regulatory elements is one of the major tasks in this challenge. To accomplish this task, we developed a solid and simple suite that allows direct access to genomic database and immediate result check. We introduce compass s (COMplex PAttern of Sequence Search Software), a simple and effective tool for motif search in entire genomes. Motifs can be partially degenerated and interrupted by spacers of variable length. Results: We demonstrate through real biological data mining the simplicity and robustness of this tool. The test was performed on two well known protein domains and a highly variable cis acting element. compass s successfully identifies both protein domains and cis acting semi conserved elements.

introduction understanding the significance of unannotated DNA sequences from genome projects is one of the major challenges, nowadays. Interpretation of the genetic code allowed to discover over 30 000 protein coding genes in the human genome (International Human). However, the major part of the genomes is not made up of genes encoding for proteins (). The genetic code can be transcribed in non-coding RNA or it can be constituted of cis acting regulatory sequences such as promoters, enhancers and other elements that affect gene expression and alternative splicing (). Moreover, most of the genomes are constituted by intergenic sequences that may have a regulatory role, but are defined as 'junk DNA' because we are unable to understand its function, yet. Nowadays, the availability of a wide range of genome sequences has greatly accelerated research to decipher the genomic regulatory code. To clarify the cryptic nature of the human genome, the ENCODE (the ENCyclopedia Of DNA Elements) research consortium has been launched. Functional elements in the human genome will be shared in a public database (). The pilot phase of the project tested and compared existing methods to analyze a small portion of the human genome sequence (1%). Now the project has been scaled to the entire human genome. In silico motif search within DNA sequences is one of the most challenging problems in molecular biology and computer science and there is a large body of work done in developing search algorithms. However, each of these approaches has its own strengths and weaknesses, while the quality of the detected motifs may vary from case to case (). In this work, we propose a simple and effective tool named compass s (COMplex Pattern of Sequence Search Software) that allows mining whole genomes for the presence of complex elements. The tool is user friendly flexible, not resource intensive and capable of browse whole genomes in minutes. compass s applies the well known wu manber multiple pattern matching algorithm to exhaustively search for motifs in the entire sequence. Input elements can be simple conserved sequences (as in BLAST engine), partially or highly degenerated sequences, or even multiple degenerated sequences, joined by poorly conserved variable length spacers. We successfully tested compass s against three experimentally validated complex patterns, providing evidences that the tool successfully identifies both protein domains as well as cis acting semi conserved elements.
