Motivation: Several new de novo assembly tools have been developed recently to assemble short sequencing reads generated by next generation sequencing platforms. However, the performance of these tools under various conditions has not been fully investigated, and sufficient information is not currently available for informed decisions to be made regarding the tool that would be most likely to produce the best performance under a specific set of conditions. Results: We studied and compared the performance of commonly used de novo assembly tools specifically designed for next generation sequencing data, including s sake v cake euler sr eden a Velvet, ABySS and soap de novo. Tools were compared using several performance criteria, including N50 length, sequence coverage and assembly accuracy. Various properties of read data, including single end paired end sequence GC content, depth of coverage and base calling error rates, were investigated for their effects on the performance of different assembly tools. We also compared the computation time and memory usage of these seven tools. Based on the results of our comparison, the relative performance of individual tools are summarized and tentative guidelines for optimal selection of different assembly tools, under different conditions, are provided.

introduction recently developed next generation sequencing platforms, such as the Roche 454 gsf lx System, Illumina Genome Analyzer and his eq 2000 system, and ABI SOLiD System, have revolutionized the field of biology and medical research (). Compared to traditional Sanger sequencing technology (), these new sequencing platforms generate data much faster and produce much higher sequencing output, while decreasing costs by more than a thousand fold sh endure * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and). The ability to rapidly generate enormous numbers of sequence reads at markedly reduced prices has greatly extended the scope of economically feasible sequencing projects. The prospect of sequencing the entire human genome for a large number of samples has become a reality. These new sequencing technologies also pose tremendous challenges to traditional de novo assembly tools designed for Sanger sequencing, as they are incapable of handling the millions to billions of short reads (35400 bp each) generated by next generation sequencing platforms (). Therefore, several novel de novo assembly tools have been developed, such as s sake (), v cake (), sharc gs (), euler sr (), eden a (), Velvet (), Celera wga assembler (), ABySS () and soap de novo (). With the recent introduction of multiple de novo assembly tools, it has become necessary to systematically analyze their relative performance under various conditions so that researchers can select a tool that would produce optimal results according to the read properties and their specific requirements recently compared the performance of several of these tools for assembling sequences of different species. Although they evaluated multiple criteria such as runtime, RAM usage, N50 and assembly accuracy, their results were based on simulation reads using only a single depth of coverage (100) and a single base call error rate (1.0%). Further investigation is necessary to determine whether, and how, these assembly tools are differentially affected by varying depths of coverage, sequencing errors, read lengths and extent of GC content of the sequence reads. Furthermore, the assembly performance of soap de novo (v1.05) has dramatically improved for long read assembly. Consequently, sufficient information is not currently available for informed decisions to be made regarding the tool that would be most likely to produce the best results, based on variations in the practical conditions identified above. Accordingly, in this study, we systematically studied and compared the performance of seven commonly used de novo assembly tools for next generation sequencing technologies, using a number of metrics including N50 length (a standard measure of assembly connectivity, to be more specifically defined later), sequence coverage, assembly accuracy, computation time and computer memory requirement and usage. To imitate different
