Motivation: Cellular information processing can be described mathematically using differential equations. Often, external stimulation of cells by compounds such as drugs or hormones leading to activation has to be considered. Mathematically, the stimulus is represented by a time dependent input function. Parameters such as rate constants of the molecular interactions are often unknown and need to be estimated from experimental data, e.g. by maximum likelihood estimation. For this purpose, the input function has to be defined for all times of the integration interval. This is usually achieved by approximating the input by interpolation or smoothing of the measured data. This procedure is suboptimal since the input uncertainties are not considered in the estimation process which often leads to over optimistic confidence intervals of the inferred parameters and the model dynamics. Results: This article presents a new approach which includes the input estimation into the estimation process of the dynamical model parameters by minimizing an objective function containing all parameters simultaneously. We applied this comprehensive approach to an illustrative model with simulated data and compared it to alternative methods. Statistical analyses revealed that our method improves the prediction of the model dynamics and the confidence intervals leading to a proper coverage of the confidence intervals of the dynamic parameters. The method was applied to the jak stat signaling pathway. Availability: MATLAB code is available on the authors website

introduction mathematical modeling of biological systems has become a widely used approach to better understand the system behavior as a whole rather than observing isolated parts (). The rapid development in quantitative molecular biology () enables to calibrate mathematical models to experimental data and therefore generating model predictions. For parametric models, such as ordinary differential equation (ODE) models, calibration can be performed e.g. by maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). Uncertainties of the measurements generated by biological variability or technical limitations have to be considered in the calibration process as they propagate to the parameter estimates. * To whom correspondence should be addressed an accurate method for calculating confidence intervals is given by the profile likelihood approach (). One unresolved issue in data based modeling is the insufficient consideration of input measurement uncertainties in the parameter estimation process. In this article, we solve this problem with a new approach. The method presented in the following includes the input estimation into the estimation process of the dynamical model parameters by minimizing an objective function containing all parameters simultaneously. An illustrative model with known parameter values and noise distributions reveals that our method is able to (i) increase the precision of the parameter estimates and (ii) correct the coverage of the likelihood based confidence intervals. Furthermore, we applied the method to a model of the jak stat signaling pathway introduced by where quantitative biological data are available, leading to different estimated dynamics of the model trajectories compared to the standard method.
