Motivation: genome scale metabolic network reconstructions have been established as a powerful tool for the prediction of cellular phenotypes and metabolic capabilities of organisms. In recent years, the number of network reconstructions has been constantly increasing , mostly because of the availability of novel semi automated procedures , which enabled the reconstruction of metabolic models based on individual genomes and their annotation. The resulting models are widely used in numerous applications. However, the accuracy and predictive power of network reconstructions are commonly limited by inherent inconsistencies and gaps. Results: Here we present a novel method to validate metabolic network reconstructions based on the concept of autocatalytic sets. Autocatalytic sets correspond to collections of metabolites that, besides enzymes and a growth medium, are required to produce all biomass components in a metabolic model. These autocatalytic sets are well conserved across all domains of life, and their identification in specific genome scale reconstructions allows us to draw conclusions about potential inconsistencies in these models. The method is capable of detecting inconsistencies, which are neglected by other gap finding methods. We tested our method on the Model SEED, which is the largest repository for automatically generated genome scale network reconstructions. In this way, we were able to identify a significant number of missing pathways in several of these reconstructions. Hence, the method we report represents a powerful tool to identify inconsistencies in large scale metabolic networks. Availability and implementation: The method is available as source code on

introduction in recent years, genome scale metabolic network reconstructions have become an important tool in systems biology (). They have the strong potential to combine distinct experimental data with biblio mic resources to generate a comprehensive knowledge base (). The resulting network reconstructions have been widely used to simulate metabolic processes or to explore the metabolic capabilities of various species (). A prominent approach applying network reconstructions is constraint based modeling, such as flux balance analysis (FBA) (). The use of metabolic models and associated methods has granted access to diverse scientific subjects, such as analysis of the bacterial metabolism (), the prediction of growth rates of Escherichia coli (), the comparison of growth rates between wild type and mutant strains of E.coli) and metabolic engineering (). Until recently, the process of network reconstruction was time consuming and necessarily required laborious curation effort (). To cope with the increasing amount of available data, automated methods became necessary to produce high throughput reconstructions as well. Several approaches are available to address this issue (). The Model SEED project successfully implemented one of these approaches and contains 4190 metabolic reconstructions, which were primarily generated in an automated way (). However, the automated process may neglect metabolic capabilities of the focal organism or include wrongly identified functionalities (). To minimize this bias, manual refinement and optimization are instrumental in the reconstruction process (), representing the most intricate elements in the workflow. To accelerate model curation, automated and semi automated methods for the detection and correction of gaps were developed and integrated in the automated reconstruction process by the Model SEED gap find and gap fill (). The most common approach used to identify gaps in network reconstructions is constraint based *To whom correspondence should be addressed.

conclusion in conclusion, as big is an efficient method for detecting inconsistencies in existing genome scale metabolic network reconstructions. The method facilitates network validation and automated gap detection in primary metabolism contributing considerably to the quality improvement of metabolic models. as big combines the conceptual approaches of autocatalytic metabolites and scope analysis, thereby allowing to test network reconstructions for their integrity. For each investigated metabolic model, a minimal seed set of metabolites, which provides access to all fundamental metabolic pathways, is computed. Putative flaws of the model can be deduced directly from identified minimal seed set. The benefit of as big was demonstrated by investigating different metabolic models. In the closely examined models, numerous kinds of errors could be identified including i) missing reactions, ii) missing pathways or iii) gaps caused by insufficient knowledge of metabolic processes. Furthermore, not only single gaps in individual models were identified, but also common flaws simultaneously present in several network reconstructions, could be detected in a large screen of 190 network reconstructions. In contrast to the commonly applied gap finding approach (i.e. deriving putative gaps from the calculated flux distributions), as big is a simple method and detects other types of inconsistencies. Hence, the application of as big contributes significantly to model refinement and validation representing a complementary approach to existing gap finding methods.
