Motivation: Calling changes in DNA, e.g. as a result of somatic events in cancer, requires analysis of multiple matched sequenced samples. Events in low mapp ability regions of the human genome are difficult to encode in variant call files and have been under-reported as a result. However, they can be described accurately through thesaurus annotation a technique that links multiple genomic loci together to explicate a single variant. Results: We here describe software and benchmarks for using thesaurus annotation to detect point changes in DNA from matched samples. In benchmarks on matched normal tumor samples we show that the technique can recover between five and ten percent more true events than conventional approaches, while strictly limiting false discovery and being fully consistent with popular variant analysis workflows. We also demonstrate the utility of the approach for analysis of de novo mutations in parents child families. Availability and implementation: Software performing thesaurus annotation is implemented in java; available in source code on git hub at genetic thesaurus (https://github.com/tkonopka/GeneticThesaurus) and as an executable on sourceforge at genetic thesaurus (https://sourceforge.net/projects/geneticthe saurus). Mutation calling is implemented in an R package available on git hub at r genetic thesaurus (https://github.com/tkonopka/RGeneticThesaurus).

introduction variants and mutations in DNA underlie several human diseases. Studies of whole exo me and whole genome datasets based on short read shotgun sequencing have already uncovered much information about the mutational landscape in disease. This is exemplified by the growth of impressive catalogues of genetic markers linked to Mendelian inherited conditions () and to cancer (). However, considerable portions of the human genome consist of non unique sequences (), which have posed challenges for bioinformatic analyses and for interpretations of findings. Thus, the mutational landscape in these regions still remains concealed. To identify non germline genetic features linked with a disease, most mutation calling workflows process several matched samples at the same time (). For example, somatic mutation callers for cancer genomics consider a tumor sample together with a normal control from the same individual. One sample (the tumor) is used to put forth a list of candidate sites that are different than in the reference genome. Information from matched control samples (normal tissue) is then used to eliminate features that also appear in cells unaffected by the disease. The control sample is thus used for personalized filtering of the candidate list. Because common features in case and control samples may arise due to the germ-line or because of sequencing artifacts, it is tempting to use models or databases of polymorphisms for this step. However, despite increasing detail in the databases and despite increasing understanding of sequencing chemistry, the personalized filtering strategy remains the most effective means to identify disease associated variants ().

conclusion in this work we extended the thesaurus variant annotation strategy () to the context of multiple matched samples. This capability makes thesaurus filtering now available for problems such as detection of somatic mutations in cancer genomes and de novo mutations in family trios. We implemented software suitable for these applications, proposed a package to handle thesaurus annotations within the R environment, and performed a number of tests on synthetic and actual data. All the tests indicated that thesaurus annotation provides a real benefit for describing changes in DNA in low mapp ability regions of the human genome. The improvements are observed relative to existing methods that report mutations at individual genomic loci through single entries in VCF files rather than clusters of loci. The contribution of this work is twofold. First, the software proposes a particular implementation of mutation calling in matched samples, i.e. an extension of existing analysis pipelines incorporating thesaurus annotation. In this direction, we showed that the software is compatible with existing workflows including different aligners and variant callers. Second, our work provides tools and data structures upon which specialized applications can draw on. The formats are intentionally generic to enable extensions and adaptations of thesaurus annotations to particular needs. In particular, selection of mutation candidates can be adjusted in many ways beyond the filters described here. A practical conclusion of the benchmarking studies is that thesaurus annotation opens the analysis window on between five and ten percent of the human genome. But the thesaurus technique also has some limitations. The implementation used in this work is not adapted to the study of indels or variants immediately near structural rearrangements. Also, because a signal from one locus is often diluted over multiple genomic sites because of alignment ambiguity, the coverage required to detect and call a variant or mutation in low mapp ability regions is higher than in high mapp ability regions. With decreasing sequencing costs and gradually increasing standards of sample coverage and read length, however, this factor should not be a serious obstacle to the study of mutations in these regions.
