Motivation: PCR, hybridization, DNA sequencing and other important methods in molecular diagnostics rely on both sequence specific and sequence group specific oligonucleotide primers and probes. Their design depends on the identification of oligonucleotide signatures in whole genome or marker gene sequences. Although genome and gene databases are generally available and regularly updated, collections of valuable signatures are rare. Even for single requests, the search for signatures becomes computationally expensive when working with large collections of target (and non-target) sequences. Moreover, with growing dataset sizes, the chance of finding exact group matching signatures decreases, necessitating the application of relaxed search methods. The resultant substantial increase in complexity is exacerbated by the dearth of algorithms able to solve these problems efficiently. Results: We have developed CaSSiS, a fast and scalable method for computing comprehensive collections of sequence and sequence group specific oligonucleotide signatures from large sets of hierarchically clustered nucleic acid sequence data. Based on the ARB Positional Tree pt server and a newly developed b grt data structure, CaSSiS not only determines sequence specific signatures and perfect group covering signatures for every node within the cluster (i.e. target groups), but also signatures with maximal group coverage (sensitivity) within a user defined range of non-target hits (specificity) for groups lacking a perfect common signature. An upper limit of tolerated mismatches within the target group, as well as the minimum number of mismatches with non-target sequences, can be predefined. Test runs with one of the largest phylogenetic gene sequence datasets available indicate good runtime and memory performance, and in silico spot tests have shown the usefulness of the resulting signature sequences as blueprints for group specific oligonucleotide probes. Availability: Software and Supplementary Material are available at

introduction oligonucleotide primers and probes are the key diagnostic agents in technologies that allow the rapid, sensitive and specific detection of nucleic acid signatures in samples. In fields such as medicine, food research and environmental microbiology, they are used to identify organisms with specific properties (). For applications such as microbial population analysis and molecular screening for microbial pathogens or indicators, there is the additional challenge of detecting and distinguishing organism groups (rather than single organisms), which can be identified in a number of ways (phylogenetically, taxonomically, etc.). Designing group specific primers and probes, however, is a significant challenge, as these primers and probes should reliably hybridize with the target sequences (i.e. have a high coverage) within the group but not interact with any non-target sequence that might be in the same sample (). In many studies, conserved housekeeping genes or gene products such as ribosomal RNA (rRNA) are targeted (). Considerable collections of probe or signature sequences for suitable target genes are rare. One exception is probe base which provides sequences and annotations of already published rrna targeted oligonucleotide probes (); however, many of these probes were designed in the past on the basis of small sequence data collections. Some of them would have to be reevaluated, optimized or even newly designed to take the relevant rRNA gene sequence data in comprehensive highly curated databases into account (). The SILVA ssu rrna reference database () contains such a curated collection of annotated nucleic acid sequence data, which is deeply hierarchically clustered by phylogenetic relationship. This work details a new computational method for the comprehensive search for sequence and group specific oligonucleotide signatures (hereafter simply referred to as signatures). Our method uses the SILVA reference database to create a signature collection that could be used to provide the sequence information of binding sites and design templates for valuable phylogenetic primers and probes. Signature collections could be published alongside the generally available and regularly updated sequence databases, and in combination, both could facilitate the design of oligonucleotide primers and probes. There are already several published approaches for searching signature or probe sequences. probes el (), oligo array (), oligo wiz
