Motivation: kinase mediated phosphorylation is the central mechanism of post-translational modification to regulate cellular responses and phenotypes. Signaling defects associated with protein phosphorylation are linked to many diseases, particularly cancer. Characterizing protein kinases and their substrates enhances our ability to understand and treat such diseases and broadens our knowledge of signaling networks in general. While most or all protein kinases have been identified in well studied eukaryotes, the sites that they phosphorylate have been only partially elucidated. Experimental methods for identifying phosphorylation sites are resource intensive, so the ability to computationally predict potential sites has considerable value. Results: Many computational techniques for phosphorylation site prediction have been proposed, most of which are available on the web. These techniques differ in several ways, including the machine learning technique used; the amount of sequence information used; whether or not structural information is used in addition to sequence information; whether predictions are made for specific kinases or for kinases in general; and sources of training and testing data. This review summarizes, categorizes and compares the available methods for phosphorylation site prediction, and provides an overview of the challenges that are faced when designing predictors and how they have been addressed. It should therefore be useful both for those wishing to choose a phosphorylation site predictor for their particular biological application, and for those attempting to improve upon established techniques in the future. Contact:

introduction phosphorylation is the most widespread post-translational modification in eukaryotes and plays a crucial role in the regulation of virtually every cellular behavior, including DNA repair (), environmental stress response (), regulation of transcription (), apoptosis (), cellular motility (), immune response (), metabolism (), and cellular differentiation (). Historically, novel phosphorylation sites have been discovered primarily through the use of low throughput biological techniques. With the advent of site directed mutagenesis, for instance, many labs started using this technique to characterize specific phosphorylation * To whom correspondence should be addressed. events (e.g.). Unfortunately, such techniques are time consuming, tedious and expensive to perform. More recently, a high throughput technique mass spectrometry has greatly accelerated the identification of novel sites. For example used mass spectrometry to map the phospho proteome of nine different mouse tissues, identifying nearly 36 000 distinct phosphorylation sites. While useful, this technique has important limitations: it can not identify the protein kinase(s) responsible for catalyzing the phosphorylation of a given site; many phosphorylation sites are modified at sub stoichiometric levels, with the unphosphorylated form sometimes preventing detection of the phosphorylated form; many interesting proteins are present at very low levels, making them difficult to detect through mass spectrometry; breaking open cells can place kinases together with substrates they would not normally encounter, potentially resulting in the detection of phosphorylation events that would not occur in vivo; technical challenges exist that sometimes make pinpointing exact phosphorylation sites difficult (); and perhaps most importantly, mass spectrometry requires very expensive instruments and specialized expertise that are not available in typical laboratories. Given the limitations associated with both low throughput and high throughput biological techniques for identifying novel phosphorylation sites, computational approaches have become increasingly popular. Such techniques require a protein sequence as input, and produce some numerical measure of the likelihood that each serine, threonine or tyrosine (S/T/Y) residue in that sequence is a phosphorylation site. For example found that the mutation R696P in the protein encoded by the i kb kap gene causes familial dysautonomia, with the hypothesized mechanism being disruption of the phosphorylation of T699a site predicted to be phosphorylated by net phos (), the first phosphorylation site prediction tool. Prediction programs are often used to narrow down the list of possible phosphorylation sites in a protein of interest, with the predictions subsequently verified using biological experiments. For instance used a combination of several predictors to identify seven putative sites phosphorylated by protein kinase C in the transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 (TRPV4) ion channel. When three of these sites were separately mutated to alanine, the resultant proteins exhibited markedly reduced activation in response to protein kinase C compared with wild type TRPV4. To the authors' knowledge, four review articles have previously been published that included significant discussion of computational phosphorylation site prediction provided a brief review of this field, along with a detailed discussion of the structural bases of protein kinase specificity. h jerri ld and reviewed both computational and biological aspects of phospho proteomics while Miller and Blom (2009) briefly summarized some of the literature on phosphorylation site prediction and provided a protocol for the use of their net phos () family of tools. Most recently reviewed phosphorylation site databases, prediction tools and miscellaneous software associated with phosphorylation sites, and also compared the performance of a subset of available predictors. Compared with the above reviews, here we concentrate more specifically on the methodologies employed by the various prediction tools, taking a comparative approach to examining the issues and challenges associated with computational phosphorylation site prediction. Section 2 of this review provides a brief overview of the available methods, while Section 3 compares and discusses the tools with respect to different aspects of their methodologies. Section 4 comments on some of the challenges that remain in the field, and Section 5 gives some concluding remarks.

conclusion there has already been a great deal of success in applying different methodologies to the problem of phosphorylation site prediction. Addressing the challenges outlined above, as well as those described by, will require much coordination and effort, but would constitute significant steps forward for the field.
