Motivation: Intrinsically disordered regions are key for the function of numerous proteins. Due to the difficulties in experimental disorder characterization, many computational predictors have been developed with various disorder flavors. Their performance is generally measured on small sets mainly from experimentally solved structures, e.g. Protein Data Bank (PDB) chains. mobi db has only recently started to collect disorder annotations from multiple experimental structures. Results: mobi db annotates disorder for UniProt sequences, allowing us to conduct the first large scale assessment of fast disorder predictors on 25 833 different sequences with X-ray crystallographic structures. In addition to a comprehensive ranking of predictors, this analysis produced the following interesting observations. (i) The predictors cluster according to their disorder definition, with a consensus giving more confidence. (ii) Previous assessments appear over reliant on data annotated at the PDB chain level and performance is lower on entire UniProt sequences. (iii) Long disordered regions are harder to predict. (iv) Depending on the structural and functional types of the proteins, differences in prediction performance of up to 10% are observed. Availability: The datasets are available from Web site at URL:

introduction the rigid structure of proteins has been considered the determinant of function for many years. Recently, an alternative view is emerging with respect to non folding regions, suggesting a reassessment of the structure to function paradigm (). Flexible segments lacking a unique native structure, known as intrinsic disordered regions (), are widespread in nature, especially in eukaryotic organisms (). These regions have been shown to play important roles in various biological processes such as cell signaling or regulation (), DNA binding and molecular recognition (). Their malleable properties allow multiple binding partners () with the flexible region often becoming folded on binding (). Despite an emerging consensus regarding their existence, there is no single definition of disorder. As a result, various flavors of disorder have been proposed (). These disorder flavors have become diverse with some based on amino acid composition (), flexibility () and functional roles coupled with conservation (). Perhaps the simplest flavor distinction is the length of a disordered region, separated into short and long. Long regions seem to be have differently () and are difficult in structural determination, causing them to be underrepresented in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (). The PDB contains structural information from X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, which can be used indirectly to study disorder. A plethora of computational predictors have also appeared, with special efforts to capture different flavors. Available methods can be broadly divided into three classes: biophysical, machine learning and consensus based. Biophysical methods () derive pseudo energy functions from residue pairings in rigid structures (i.e. non disorder to recognize sequence regions with high energy as disordered. Machine learning, especially neural networks, has been widely used to predict protein disorder (). Many are tuned for the disorder style used in the Critical Assessment of techniques for protein Structure Prediction (CASP), where the goal is to detect missing residues in the X-ray crystal (). Others attempting to move away from this disorder style measure some form of protein backbone flexibility. For example, esprit z () can predict mobile NMR regions and dis embl () loops regions with high b factor (high flexibility). The most recent disorder predictor category uses a consensus of various *To whom correspondence should be addressed.

DISCUSSION
