Motivation: DNA methylation signatures in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have been identified in fibroblast like sy novio cytes (FLS) with Illumina human methylation 450 array. Since 2% of CpG sites are covered by the Illumina 450K array and whole genome bisulfite sequencing is still too expensive for many samples, computationally predicting DNA methylation levels based on 450K data would be valuable to discover more ra related genes. Results: We developed a computational model that is trained on 14 tissues with both whole gen-ome bisulfite sequencing and 450K array data. This model integrates information derived from the similarity of local methylation pattern between tissues, the methylation information of flanking CpG sites and the methylation tendency of flanking DNA sequences. The predicted and measured methylation values were highly correlated with a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.9 in leave one tissue out cross validations. Importantly, the majority (76%) of the top 10% differentially methylated loci among the 14 tissues was correctly detected using the predicted methylation values. Applying this model to 450K data of RA, osteoarthritis and normal FLS, we successfully expanded the coverage of CpG sites 18.5-fold and accounts for about 30% of all the CpGs in the human genome. By integrative omics study, we identified genes and pathways tightly related to RA pathogenesis, among which 12 genes were supported by triple evidences, including 6 genes already known to perform specific roles in RA and 6 genes as new potential therapeutic targets. Availability and implementation: The source code,

introduction rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease marked by synovial hyperplasia and invasion into cartilage and bone (). fibroblast like sy novio cytes (FLS), which form the inner lining of the synovium, display an aggressive phenotype in RA that persists in long term culture. The mechanism that contributes to functional alterations in RA FLS is only partially understood. Recent studies have applied Illumina human methylation 450 bead chip array to reveal distinct DNA methylation patterns that distinguish RA samples from osteoarthritis (OA) and normal (NL) FLS. Integrative analysis on the differentially methylated loci (DML), the associated genes and relevant pathways has provided insightful clues for identification of therapeutic targets (). A significant limitation of the Illumina 450K array is that it only covers less than 2% of CpG loci in the entire human genome. Expanding the coverage of CpG loci in defining the DNA methylation pattern of RA is becoming an urgent need. Previously, computational methods have been developed to predict methylation values based on DNA sequences, histone modifications or integration of DNA methylation data from different techniques. Methods using only DNA sequence features can learn the methylation tendency for a CpG site based on its surrounding sequence compositions in a specific tissue (), but the trained model can not be transferred to predict methylation levels in different tissues because the input sequence features remain the same and cell type specific methylation obviously vary from one cell type to another. Histone modification features can reflect cell specificity and incorporating histone modifications allows prediction of cell specific DNA methylation patterns (). Using these models require histone modification data to be available in the cell type of interest, which is not always the case. Recently computational methods were developed to infer DNA methylation levels in the entire genome using me dip seq and mre seq data (). Since neither histone modification data nor me dip seq mre seq data are available for RA, a new computational method to expand the coverage of Illumina 450K array is no doubt valuable to further refine the DNA methylation signature of RA. In this study, we developed a prediction model integrating cell type specific 450K array data and common dna sequence features. The model was trained on 14 cell types tissues that have both 450K array and whole genome bisulfite sequencing w gbs data as local DNA methylation patterns are similar between similar tissues (), and the methylation status of a CpG in one tissue is correlated with or affected by its flanking CpG sites and sequence compositions (). The model aims to capture such local similarity of DNA methylation patterns across cell types tissues. We performed cross validations to confirm the success of this method, with an average prediction correlation coefficient around 0.9, accuracy over 0.9, and AUC close to 0.9. Particularly, 7080% of differential methylation loci were correctly retrieved using the predicted methylation levels. We previously used 450K array data to identify a characteristic DNA methylation pattern in RA FLS, which are pathogenic cells that form the lining of the joint (). These data implicated genes and pathways in the pathogenesis of RA, especially related to immunity, cell adhesion and matrix regulation. Applying this model to the original 28 FLS 450K array data, we expanded the CpG coverage to 8 555 846 sites, which is over 18fold greater than the number of CpG sites covered by 450K array. Using the predicted methylation sites, we found 3874 genes differentially methylated between RA and o anl (referred as differentially methylated genes, dmg s. Combing these dmg s genes differentially expressed between RA and o anl (DEGs), and ra associated genes from genome wide Association Study g was studies, we found 11 enriched KEGG pathways. Most of these pathways are related to immune system and expand upon with those found by 450K array data only. Twelve genes were supported by three-way evidences of DML, DMG and g was among which half are related to RA such as HLADQA1, LBH and ELMO1 ().

discussion illumina 450K bead chip array is a useful way to investigate the different DNA methylation patterns in RA and many diseases. In fact, tens of thousands of Illumina 450K array data have been generated on precious disease samples. Despite the invaluable insights generated by these 450K array data, the small coverage of the CpG sites limited the scope of the investigated DNA methylation patterns in RA and other diseases. Our computational strategy to predict DNA methylation based on 450K data alone opens a new avenue of reprocessing the existing data that were previously generated by 450K array to uncover new disease related genes before these samples are re-analyzed using w gbs. When applying to a new sample, our model only requires input of 450K array data and avoids the need of histone modification or MeDIP-seq/MRE-seq data that are not always available, which significantly expands its applicability. Illumina recently released a new Infinium methylation epic Array which is to replace the current methylation 450k array (referred to as the 850K array), which covers about 3% of CpGs of the human genome. It is straightforward to apply our expanding algorithm to significantly expand the coverage of the 850K array once enough 850K array data are available. Our method significantly expanded the coverage of CpG sites, which is 18.5 times of the CpGs covered by 450K array and accounts for about 30% of all the CpGs in the human genome. The current model is trained on 14 tissues that have both w gbs and 450K array data. The performance of the model is expected to be further improved when more tissues cells are included in training the model. Importantly, our model can successfully predict DML and its performance was confirmed by both leave one tissue out cross validations and identification of ra related genes pathways. The 12 triple evidenced genes with predicted DNA methylation data, a significant increase from 7 based on 450K array data, include 6 genes with reported functions in RA and 6 genes as potential therapeutic targets. We expect the similar applications to other diseases would greatly facilitate discovery of new drug targets and understanding of disease mechanisms.
