Motivation: piwi interacting RNAs pirn as are a class of small non-coding RNAs that are highly abundant in the germline. One important role of pirn as is to defend genome integrity by guiding PIWI proteins to silence transposable elements (TEs), which have a high potential to cause deleteri-ous effects on their host. The mechanism of pirn a mediated post-transcriptional silencing was also observed to affect mRNAs, suggesting that pirn as might play a broad role in gene expression regulation. However, there has been no systematic report with regard to how many protein coding genes might be targeted and regulated by pirn as. Results: We trained a support vector machine classifier based on a combination of mi wi clips eq derived features and position derived features to predict the potential targets of pirn as on mRNAs in the mouse. Reanalysis of a published microarray dataset suggested that the expression level of the 2587 protein coding genes predicted as pirn a targets showed significant upregulation as a whole after abolishing the slicer activity of mi wi supporting the conclusion that they are subject to pirn a mediated regulation. Availability and implementation: A web version of the method called pirn a pre as well as our results for browse is available at

introduction piwi interacting RNAs pirn as microRNAs (miRNAs) and short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are three major classes of small RNAs (). pirn as differ from miRNAs and siRNAs in several aspects: (1) pirn as show specific expression in germ cells (; (2) most pirn as have lengths in the range of 2533 nt (Sai), greater than those of miRNAs and siRNAs, which are 2023 nt in most cases, although Caenorhabditis elegans pirn as with the unusual length of 21 nt constitute an exception to the general rule (); (3) pirn as do not show any conservation in either sequence or secondary structure le except that there is a preference for a 5 0 uridine (U) residue and an adenosine as the tenth nucleotide(); (4) pirn as bind to piwi clade Argonauts, whereas miRNAs and siRNAs associate with the ago clade Argonauts (); and (5) most pirn as are derived from genomic pirn a clusters, which are discrete regions containing a large number of various types of transposable elements (TEs) (). Besides, pirn as have distinguished biogenesis mechanisms which are independent of Dicer (). The recently reported phased manner of pirn a biogenesis further supports that pirn as are more diverse than other classes of small RNAs (). The existence of pirn as represents adaptive control mechanisms that protect the genomic architecture against TEs, which constitute a large fraction of the mammalian genome and are a constant threat to the host (). PIWI proteins participate in the pirn a pathway le. The mutation of mi wi in the mouse results in male infertility and the upregulation of line 1 retrotransposon transcripts (). There have been similar observations made in flies when mutations in piwi, aub or Ago3 occurred (). The silencing machinery is similar to that of siRNAs and miRNAs (). A pirn a recognizes a transposon transcript target by complementarity, and the interacting PIWI protein then slices via its catalytic domain, cleaving the target at a position 10-nt downstream of the 5 0 end of the pirn a generating a 5 monophosphate containing fragment (). Recent studies suggest that pirn a mediated cleavage acts not only on TEs () but also on mRNAs (). In silkworm even discovered that a single pirn a is responsible for primary sex determination by mediating cleavage of the Masc mRNA, demonstrating the functional importance of pirn a mediated cleavage on mRNA. Our previous study revealed widespread mi wip irna mediated mRNA cleavage events in mouse testes and demonstrated the functional importance of the temporal cleavage of pirn a target mRNAs for sperm io genesis (). Taking advantage of published global 5 0 RACE (rapid amplification of 5 0 complementary DNA ends) tags, we previously identified 169 pirn a targeted mRNAs (). The role of pirn as in mediating mRNA cleavage is also evidenced in C. elegans () and D. melanogaster (). However, there has been no systematic assessment with respect to how many protein coding genes might be regulated by a pirn a guided cleavage mechanism. In this study, we trained a support vector machine (SVM) classifier to predict potential pirn a targets on protein coding genes. Because base pairing recognition by pirn as as well as the physical association of mi wi are both critical for pirn a guided cleavage in mouse male germ cells, the anti mi wi crosslinking immunoprecipitation coupled with deep sequencing clips eq data that we produced recently was used to obtain both pirn as and target fragments. In particular, we introduced a combination of clips eq derived features and position derived features. In contrast to the previous identification of pirn a targets from 5 0 RACE tags, which is restricted to the sequencing depth, we have undertaken a genome wide scan across all sites of mRNA transcripts and computationally identified 3781 mRNAs of 2587 protein coding genes as potential pirn a targets. This result was further validated by a microarray dataset that presented gene expression differences between catalytic mutant without mi wi slicer activity and the wild type. The dataset of pirn a targets in mRNAs is available for browsing, searching and download via http://www.regulatoryrna.org/software/piRNA/ pirn a target mrna index php
discussion using the pirn a targets that we previously identified () as positive examples of our training dataset, we made computational identification of pirn a targets genome wide de novo predictions and provided a much larger list of mRNAs that might be targeted and cleaved by pirn as. In this study, we took advantage of clips eq data, which are specific to fragments that are bound by the mi wi protein, whereas the previous study was based on 5 0 RACE sequencing data, which contains not only fragments that are produced by pirn a mediated cleavage but also other biological processes. Moreover, the previous study was restricted to the coverage of 5 0 RACE sequencing data on mRNAs, whereas the depth of the clips eq data that were used in this study makes it possible to systematic explore pirn a targets on mRNAs. In addition, the incorporation of position derived features enabled the discovery of pirn a target sites that might be missed by the absence of complementary pirn as from sequenced reads. Our method presents robustness as repeated random selection of negative examples for training the model did not resulted in much difference with regarding to the predicted list of pirn a target genes. It could also be applied to other tissue types which have both training examples and anti mi wi clips eq data. In addition to the repression of mRNAs by cleavage in this study, another repression mechanism is mediated by pirn as that induces mRNA de adenyl ation resulting in mRNA degradation. For example, pirn as target the nanos 3 0 UTR with imperfect complementarity, thus facilitating nanos mRNA de adenyl ation and normal anteroposterior embryonic patterning in Drosophila (). recently reported that more than 7000 mRNAs were associated with mi wi of which approximately 60% experienced destabilization by mi wi in the elongating spermatids of mouse. Together with mRNAs that are involved in pirn a mediated cleavage, a catalog of nearly ten thousand protein coding genes are potentially mediated by pirn as suggesting a prosperous role of pirn as in gene expression regulation. Conclusively, pirn as have mechanisms that act to repress protein coding gene expression similar to miRNAs, either causing the cleavage of the target or the degradation of the target. Both the miRNA pathway and the pirn a pathway require recognition based on base pairing and the participation of proteins from the argonaut e protein family. However, because pirn as are restricted to expression in germ cells, pirn a mediated regulation might take place primarily during spermatogenesis.

conclusion it has been well accepted for a long period of time that the emergence of pirn as plays a role in genome defense by silencing TEs; however, many recent studies have shown that pirn a guided silencing mechanisms are also involved in the regulation of non transposon transcripts. The first example of a pirn a targeting mRNA was described in the Drosophila embryo (). A similar phenomenon was also observed in C. elegans, mouse and silkworm (), suggesting that pirn as could regulate gene expression via a mechanism similar to that of miRNAs. Although there have been many published programs aimed at predicting miRNA targets as well as public databases curating experimentally verified or computational predicted targets of miRNAs, there have been no studies assessing how many protein coding genes might be regulated by pirn as. In our study, pirn a targets on mRNAs were systematically identified at the genome wide level using an SVM classifier. The classifier was trained based on the incorporation of mi wi clips eq derived features and position derived features and achieved an area of the ROC curve of 8725 at the site level and 75.55% at the gene level. Of all of the features that were used, mi wi clips eq derived features play a dominate role in the pirn a enrichment of the 5 0 end 10 nt downstream of the target site occupying the top ranked position. Of the position derived features, the genomic annotation is highly ranked, with 3 0 UTR as a preferred choice, and nucleotide usage on the first and tenth positions downstream of the target site is the next highest ranked. genome wide prediction based on the trained classifier resulted in 3781 mRNAs of 2587 protein coding genes as pirn a targets. These genes show significant upregulation as a whole after the slicer activity of mi wi was abolished, suggesting that the predicted list of pirn a targets is reliable. This work might provide valuable clues for biologists who are interested in the function of pirn as in protein coding genes. More details of the prediction results in this study and the online version of the method called pirn a pre are available at http://www.regulatoryrna.org/software/piRNA/piRNA_tar get mrna index php
