Parallel heat maps with carefully designed annotation graphics are powerful for efficient visualization of patterns and relationships among high dimensional genomic data. Here we present the complex heat map package that provides rich functionalities for customizing heat maps arranging multiple parallel heat maps and including user defined annotation graphics. We demonstrate the power of complex heat map to easily reveal patterns and correlations among multiple sources of information with four real world datasets. Availability and Implementation: The complex heat map package and documentation are freely available from the Bioconductor project

introduction heat maps are a fundamental visualization method that is broadly used to unravel patterns hidden in genomic data. They are especially popular for gene expression analysis () and methylation profiling (). With the increasing availability of genomic datasets, visualization methods that effectively show relations within multidimensional data are urgently needed. In this paper, we demonstrate how heat maps with carefully designed annotation graphics can give great enhancement for revealing underlying data structure and how utilization of parallel heat maps which focus on different sources of information gives a quick and comprehensive overview of the data. In the R programming environment, traditional tools for drawing heat maps like the basic heat map function or add-on packages such as p heat map or heat map plus only provide limited functionality to display annotation graphics and do not support plotting of multiple parallel heat maps. The complex heat map package has been designed to overcome these limitations. It provides a general solution to juxtapose different sources of information in multiple parallel heat maps. Each heat map can be enhanced by multiple annotation graphics to complete the portrayal of the dataset. Both column and row annotation graphics supported in complex heat map can either be predefined graphics, e.g. points, bar plots or boxplots or more general user defined graphics. Other features of complex heat map include: (i) flexible support for clustering. For example, rendered dendrogram s () or a user defined distance function that accepts two paired vectors are supported; (ii) separating of heat map rows into slices to support visualization of subgroups, where splitting on rows can be done either by a partitioning method, e.g. k means clustering or a data frame that contains classifications; (iii) user customization of the heat map grids for more advanced visualization of complex information, e.g. the enhanced on co print () in; (iv) interactive selection on heat maps to obtain subset of rows and columns if heat maps are drawn on an interactive device (e.g. X11) and (v) the ability to add more customized graphics after heat maps are generated. complex heat map has a modular design with a user friendly application programming interface (API). The flexibility and extensibility of the package enables fast and easy generation of novel views of multidimensional datasets and greatly facilitates discoveries from genomic and other omics data.

Application
