Motivation: Gene therapy with retroviral vectors can induce adverse effects when those vectors integrate in sensitive genomic regions. Retroviral vectors are preferred that target sensitive regions less frequently, motivating the search for localized clusters of integration sites and comparison of the clusters formed by integration of different vectors. Scan statistics allow the discovery of spatial differences in clustering and calculation of false discovery rates providing statistical methods for comparing retroviral vectors. Results: A scan statistic for comparing two vectors using multiple window widths is proposed with software to detect clustering differentials and compute false discovery rates. Application to several sets of experimentally determined HIV integration sites demonstrates the software. Simulated datasets of various sizes and signal strengths are used to determine the power to discover clusters and evaluate a convenient lower bound. This provides a toolkit for planning evaluations of new gene therapy vectors. Availability and implementation: The gene rx cluster R package containing a simple tutorial and usage hints is available from http:// www bioconductor org
introduction retroviruses such as HIV prefer to target specific regions and locations of the host genome for integration (), and these preferences differ between retroviruses (). Extensive studies have shown that the integration targeting preferences characteristic of different retroviruses are preserved in retroviral vectors, which are engineered derivatives used for gene transfer during human gene therapy. Gene therapy with retroviral vectors benefits patients but carries risks associated with integration in sensitive genomic regions (), such as the promoter of the LMO2 proto-oncogene. This motivates the development of vectors with reduced preference for sensitive genomic regions. To track such outcome in human gene therapy, the US Food and Drug Administration has advised the monitoring of integration site (IS) distribution in cells from gene corrected subjects to assess the risk of integration into sensitive regions (U.S. Food and Drug Administration, CBER, 2006). Comparing the risks of candidate gene therapy vectors depends in part on assessing their relative preferences for integration in specific genomic locations of concern. Vectors can be compared with respect to their preference for targeting known sensitive regions. However, limited understanding of the relationship between the genomic location of an integration and its risk constrains the usefulness of inspecting pre-specified regions and of supervised learning or regression methods for risk assessment, focusing interest instead on clustering detected in empirical studies. Local clusters of ISs favoring one or another vector reflect preferences for local targets. Scan statistics (generated by moving a window over a defined space and computing a summary at each position) have many applications in genomics (for an early review, see). It has been shown that combining scans using windows with a range of widths improves power over a single fixed width scan (). The false discovery rate (FDR) of such scan statistics is estimated by d FDR  1  R 1 where is the expected number of false discoveries and R is the number of discovered clumps ie. intervals formed by combining adjacent or overlapping windows with scan statistics passing a defined threshold. The estimate is unbiased when the number of false discoveries is Poisson with mean and independent of the number of true discoveries. The Poisson assumption is reasonable for clumps formed from locally dependent windows (). see and the references therein for proofs, details and further discussion. A method for discovering chromosomal intervals (or clumps) favoring one vector over another using these methods is outlined in the next section. Then it is applied to several sets of HIV ISs to illustrate how the method could be used. In the examples, we examine differential clustering in a relatively subtle setting, involving comparison of methods for recovering ISs made by infection with HIV or an hiv based vector in lymphoid cells. We then discuss the use of this method in the comparison of gene therapy vectors and some of the analytic issues that arise. In Supplementary S2 (Section 6) it is shown that the method generalizes the definition of so called common integration sites () (sets of n ISs from one vector in a defined interval) and shows how f drs can be estimated for them. *To whom correspondence should be addressed. We also present a limited comparison with a machine learning technique that recursively splits data from a chromosome to form genomic intervals ().

discussion the clumping method provides a flexible toolkit for exploring local differences in collections of retroviral ISs and for planning experiments. The comparison of the Avr with Mse recovery methods may mirror future studies of gene therapy vectors only subtle differences exist but they may have profound implications for the risk profile of a newly engineered vector. In clinical trial reporting, the CONSORT criteria () require reporting of the power of the trial for the pre-specified endpoint. This report steps in the direction of allowing a deliberative approach to study planning. Supplementary S2 (Section 5) illustrates some of the possibilities of using this toolkit for planning with an eye toward choosing sensible rules for filtering and sensible cutpoints for discovery. There are various parameters that affect the discovery of clumps and the f drs associated with them. Ideally, these would be set using prior knowledge and without dependence on statistics that correlate with the ultimate test statistic (). Optimizing the FDR reported by searching over the parameter space has the potential to introduce re substitution bias. When such optimization is desired, strategies should be implemented, such as training on one set of data and using an independent test set to validate the clumps discovered. Further work may explore how sensitive re substitution bias is to different parameters.
