Motivation: Coexpression networks are data derived representations of genes be having in a similar way across tissues and experimental conditions. They have been used for hypothesis generation and guilt by association approaches for inferring functions of previously unknown genes. So far, the main platform for expression data has been DNA microarrays; however, the recent development of rnase q allows for higher accuracy and coverage of transcript populations. It is therefore important to assess the potential for biological investigation of coexpression networks derived from this novel technique in a condition independent dataset. Results: We collected 65 publicly available Illumina rnase q high quality Arabidopsis thaliana samples and generated Pearson correlation coexpression networks. These networks were then compared with those derived from analogous microarray data. We show how variance stabilizing Transformed (VST) rnase q data samples are the most similar to microarray ones, with respect to inter sample variation, correlation coefficient distribution and network topological architecture. Microarray networks show a slightly higher score in biology derived quality assessments such as overlap with the known protein protein interaction network and edge ontological agreement. Different coexpression network central ities are investigated; in particular , we show how betweenness centrality is generally a positive marker for essential genes in a thaliana regardless of the platform originating the data. In the end, we focus on a specific gene network case, showing that although microarray data seem more suited for gene network reverse engineering, rnase q offers the great advantage of extending coexpression analyses to the entire transcriptome.

introduction the comprehensive understanding of the functional molecular mechanisms in the cell is a major challenge of modern biology (). Network representations have been successfully used to capture various cellular relationships, ranging from protein protein interactions () to gene regulations () and metabolic conversions (). In these networks, biological entities (e.g. genes, proteins and metabolites) are represented as nodes, and their interactions are represented as edges. Biological networks can be assembled either by gathering all existing experimental knowledge over relationships between these entities (), or alternatively, when this kind of data is missing, they can be reconstructed by educated inferences based on data profiles (). The latter approach, often dubbed 'biological network reverse engineering' has great cost and time advantages over, for instance, classical forward genetics approaches, as it allows to reduce the experimental investigation to a subset of candidates potentially involved in a particular biological process (). In the specific case of reverse engineered gene networks, the last decade has witnessed an avalanche in the availability of transcript expression data, provided mainly by microarray data (), which has in turn fueled the generation of 'coexpression' networks (). Coexpression networks are undirected graph representations of transcriptional co behaviour between genes within an organism. In such graphs, genes are connected by edges representing the similarity in their expression pattern across several experiments in which both genes are quantified. These similarities are usually calculated by simple methods like Pearson correlation (D') or by more sophisticated approaches such as mutual information () or linear modelling (). A significance value is usually associated to each edge to estimate the amount of coexpression between any gene pair; in the case of Pearson correlation, this value is the Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC), which ranges from 1 (perfect negative linear coexpression) to 1 (perfect positive linear coexpression), whereas 0 (no correlation) signifies the overall lack of linear relationships between the transcript quantities of the two genes (). Coexpression networks have been widely generated and exploited in studies aimed at the identification of novel gene functions via the guilt by association paradigm (), which assumes that similar expression patterns correspond to similar functions, times of activation or cellular compartments (). Noteworthy successes of this approach have been obtained, for example, in identifying novel genes involved in plant cell wall synthesis (), starch metabolism () and in the human b cell leukaemia signal transduction (). At the same time, several standalone coexpression tools have been developed (*To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com together with freely accessible online databases (). Coexpression networks have also been studied topologically, generally showing a modular structure () and a scale free distribution of their connectivity (Barabasi), meaning that most genes have a small number of co express or s while a few genes be have as coexpression 'hubs'. However, the vast majority of these studies have neglected the growing availability of rnase q datasets, which provide several potential advantages over microarrays (). First of all, rnase q does not require prior knowledge of the studied organism, extending its usage even to poorly characterized organisms (), both for 'standard' purposes (transcriptome definition and differential gene expression) and for any derived application (such as sample clustering or coexpression analysis). Furthermore, rnase q allows for the identification of all transcripts, whereas microarrays usually cover only a subset of the transcriptome. For example, in Arabidopsis thaliana, the most used microarray for quantitative transcript omics (), the Affymetrix ATH1, covers reliably and unambiguously only 21 377 genes [based on the most recent custom cdf annotation (, which is only a subset of the entire genome [27 416 genes in the TAIR10 annotation release (. Finally, rnase q has the potential to detect novel transcribed loci on annotated genomes (), splicing variants () and allele specific events (), massively increasing the investigative capability over these molecular phenomena. In the present study, we try to determine whether rnase q data can be efficiently used for coexpression analysis. To do so, we derive coexpression networks from a set of 65 high quality illumina based rnase q a thaliana experiments, and compare them with those extracted from biologically analogous and equally sized microarray data. We determine the nature of these networks, both biologically and topologically, with an overview on different network central ities and their association with gene essentiality () in Arabidopsis. Finally, we focus on two specific gene cases, showing how the increased detection range of rnase q can indeed cover missing areas of the coexpression networks.

discussion our results describe the first large scale (65 samples) attempt to use rnase q data collected from multiple tissues and experimental conditions for gene network reverse engineering. We show that coexpression networks generated from this novel technology are indeed realistic () and accurate, with accuracy increasing together with network stringency, validating the assumption that rnase q based coexpression is a better than random selector of real biological relationships (Supplementary File S6). However, our results show that microarray based coexpression networks based on simple correlation achieve a higher similarity to biological networks, and at the same time show a low overlap with rnase q based representations (). Unexpectedly, although Arabidopsis coexpression networks are generally positive predictors of protein protein interactions, the overlap is quite small and associated to weak MCCs in all cases (). All rnase q networks show a scale free topology () as previously noted on a smaller dataset (), but no rnase q dataset allowed to reach microarray like network qualities, neither as raw counts nor after two popular normalization procedures rp km and VST) (and 3 and). vst normalized data possess microarray like behaviour with regards to correlation coefficient distribution and topological network properties (size and degree distribution and E). Amongst rnase q data, VST networks also possess the highest proximity to microarray networks detected by hierarchical clustering (Supplementary File S4) and edge intersection (Supplementary File S10). rp km and raw count networks, perhaps owing to the heteroscedasticity of these types of data (), differ more markedly from microarray networks than VST networks. We also find that coexpression network betweenness centrality can be calculated from rnase q data and used as a positive marker for a thaliana essential genes (). The task of identifying essential genes has been called the 'most important task of genomics based target validation' (), as these genes are extremely important not only to understand the minimal requirements for life (), but also because they are excellent drug targets (). Another important application of coexpression analysis is in the identification of novel genes and novel gene functions. To this respect, we show how rnase q data can be complementary to microarray data in describing the functional neighbourhood of a pectin metabolism gene () or to confirm the connection with jasmonate of a poorly characterized putative transcription factor (Supplementary File S11). There are at least 6953 a thaliana genes annotated on the TAIR10 genome but not represented by any probe set on the Affymetrix ATH1 microarray platform; 3578 of these genes have no functional annotation neither experimentally inferred, nor predicted in silico ()which gives rnase q the unique possibility to functionally investigate a previously uncovered portion of the transcriptome. This potential can indeed be transposed to other organisms as well, given the fair conservation of coexpression across species, at least in the plant kingdom (). All data investigated in this article are preloaded and can be freely analysed by the CorTo coexpression tool. Despite its obvious advantages, the unexpected relative underperformance of rnase q versus microarrays in network reconstruction raises an important caveat on its direct usability for coexpression analysis, at least by the simple Pearson correlation criteria used in this work. The creation of novel approaches to properly normalize and interpret gene count correlations generated by next generation Sequencing will pose a future fundamental challenge for coexpression investigators.
