Motivation: The vertebrate retina is a complex neuronal tissue, and its development, normal functioning and response to injury and disease is subject to a variety of genetic factors. To understand better the regulatory and functional relationships between the genes expressed within the retina, we constructed an interactive gene network of the mouse retina by applying a Bayesian statistics approach to information derived from a variety of gene expression, protein protein interaction and gene ontology annotation databases. Results: The network contains 673 retina related genes. Most of them are obtained through manual literature based curation, while the others are the genes preferentially expressed in the retina. These retina related genes are linked by 3403 potential functional associations in the network. The prediction on the gene functional association using the Bayesian approach outperforms predictions using only one source of information. The network includes five major gene clusters, each enriched in different biological activities. There are several applications to this network. First, we identified ∼50 hub genes that are predicted to play particularly important roles in the function of the retina. Some of them are not yet well studied. Second, we can predict novel gene functions using guilt by association method. Third, we also predicted novel retinal disease associated genes based on the network analysis. Availability: To provide easy access to the retinal network, we constructed an interactive web tool, named more net which is

introduction in the post genome era, a major challenge is to identify the functional elements in the genomes (). Both experimental and computational approaches have been successful in identification of many functional elements (). A next step is the determination of the properties of these elements, especially for the genes that encode proteins. The properties of a gene include the biological function of its gene product, the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. biological pathways in which it acts, and any disease associations. One traditional method to predict the function of a novel protein is based on homology, as proteins with similar primary sequences or 3D structures tend to share biological function (). To understand the biological pathways in which a protein is involved or to find evidence of a disease association generally requires detailed and time consuming laboratory work. Traditional methods to study a gene's properties often focus on the protein of interest, and ignore its cellular context. An emerging technology to predict gene properties takes a different approach, one based on the analysis of gene networks (D'). Gene co-expression networks have been used to predict protein function. DNA microarray studies can generate huge amounts of gene expression data under a variety of different physiological conditions. Based on the assumption that genes with similar gene expression profiles are likely to be functionally related, researchers have been successful in applying correlation based approaches to predict gene function (). Similar concepts have also been applied to predict gene function based on protein protein interaction (PPI) networks (). A more informative gene network, and one with hopefully greater predictive power, could be constructed by integrating diverse types of biological datasets. For example, probabilistic functional networks have been developed for a number of organisms, and these studies have resulted in the identification of novel interactions (). Network analysis has also been applied to predict disease associated genes (). However, these studies often ignore the specific behavior of different cell types (or tissues) and as a result yield only a 'unified network' that is generic for all tissues. For higher eukaryotes, we believe that important aspects of gene networks are intrinsically tissue specific. In other words, a 'unified network' will likely only reflect the common, basic cellular processes shared by all types of tissues or cell types. In order to better understand the specific biological systems for higher eukaryotic cells, we need to construct tissue specific gene networks. In the analysis described here, we used mouse retina as a model system to construct a tissue specific gene network by integrating different types of available biological data supporting functional relationships of genes. In the network, genes belonging to the
