Motivation: A highly interlinked network of transcription factors (TFs) orchestrates the context dependent expression of human genes. chip chip experiments that interrogate the binding of particular TFs to genomic regions are used to reconstruct gene regulatory networks at genome scale but are plagued by high false positive rates. Meanwhile, a large body of knowledge on high quality regulatory interactions remains largely unexplored, as it is available only in natural language descriptions scattered over millions of scientific publications. Such data are hard to extract and regulatory data currently contain together only 503 regulatory relations between human TFs. Results: We developed a text mining assisted workflow to systematically extract knowledge about regulatory interactions between human TFs from the biological literature. We applied this workflow to the entire Medline, which helped us to identify more than 45 000 sentences potentially describing such relationships. We ranked these sentences by a machine learning approach. The to p2500 sentences contained 900 sentences that encompass relations already known in databases. By manually curating the remaining 1625 top ranking sentences, we obtained more than 300 validated regulatory relationships that were not present in a regulatory database before. full text curation allowed us to obtain detailed information on the strength of experimental evidences supporting a relationship. Conclusions: We were able to increase curated information about the human core transcriptional network by 60% compared with the current content of regulatory databases. We observed improved performance when using the network for disease gene prioritization compared with the state of the art. Availability and implementation: web service is freely accessible at http://fastforward.sys-bio.net/.

introduction transcription factors (TFs) influence the rates by which their target genes are transcribed by binding to regulatory dna segments like promoter or enhancer regions (). In vertebrates, the relationship between TFs and genes is complex: on one hand, regulation of a specific gene often involves a variety of TFs, acting in an independent, cooperative or competitive manner (). On the other hand, specific TFs often are involved in the co regulation of a multitude of target genes (). Furthermore, TFs often also regulate other TFs. These tft f relationships can be considered as the core of the full human gene regulatory network (GRN) that orchestrates many cellular processes by inducing or repressing genes which function is specifically required for a given environment, for a certain cell type, or at a certain point in time during development and cell differentiation. well studied parts of this GRN are involved in wound healing () or in development (), and its dys-regulation is associated with many diseases (). It also has a particularly important role in cancer (), where a highly interconnected regulatory core network mediates different aspects of the disease (). Biological research over the last decades has identified thousands of individual regulatory interactions using specific, time consuming and laborious experiments. Proving a direct regulatory relationship between a TF X and a gene Y typically comprises three individual evidences: (E1) binding of X to a genomic location related to Y, (E2) change in expression of Y upon activation of X, and (E3) abrogation of regulation of Y upon removal or alteration of the binding site. to date only some of these evidence types can be addressed in a high throughput manner. In particular, binding of TFs to genomic DNA can be assessed on a genome wide manner by chromatin immuno-precipitation (ChIP) followed by sequencing, as for example has been done on a large scale by the ENCODE project (). However, binding of TFs alone does not necessarily imply that downstream genes are regulated by the TF, and genome wide measurements tend to be rather noisy (). Consequently, classical low throughput, mechanistic studies are still considered the most reliable way of identifying regulatory interactions (), and our knowledge on the topology of the regulatory networks still remains rather sketchy (). A central problem in compiling regulatory networks from high confidence low throughput mechanistic studies is that these are scattered over the large body of scientific literature. Accessing these data in a systematic manner is difficult, as it requires finding articles discussing such relationships, correctly identifying the involved genes, and checking for each of the required evidences described earlier. There are attempts to compile knowledge about grn s in databases, including the recently established TF Encyclopedia that is a community curated repository of information about different aspects of TFs (). TRANSFAC (), tr rd () and oregan no () are more established databases specifically focusing on regulatory relationships. However, these databases do not attempt to comprehensively cover the core GRN, but rather focus on particular TFs or on specific binding sites to compile binding site motifs. Notably, these three databases (henceforth abbreviated as reg dbs together contain only 503 regulatory relationships between two human TFs for an estimated number of at least 2000 TFs in the genome (). This situation is in stark contrast to e.g. Escherichia coli, for which the regulon db () contains 369 regulatory relationships between the estimated 300 TFs in the genome (). To enlarge the body of experimentally asserted information about the human core GRN, we set out to develop, apply and evaluate a computer assisted workflow for systematically finding and extracting experimental evidence for direct regulatory relationships between human TFs from the biological literature. This workflow comprises a state of the art software to identify and normalize gene names in text; a machine learning based classifier to judge whether a sentence in which a pair of genes co occur describes a regulatory relationship between these two genes; and an extensive phase of human curation to check the truthfulness of the classifier's output on the sentence level and to provide an assessment of the strength of supporting evidences described in the containing article. We applied our workflow to all abstracts in PubMed. Altogether, we identified more than 18 million pairs of genes co occurring in the same sentence. We automatically classified each of these sentences using a classifier trained on a manually annotated gold standard corpus of sentences describing regulatory relationships and inspected in detail the to p2500 sentences mentioning a pair of human TFs. 35% of those 2500 sentences report transcriptional interactions that were already covered by reg dbs. By manual curation, we found that 660 of the remaining 1625 sentences contained interesting information about gene regulatory relations, and further 322 sentences described co-operation or competition in transcription. Domain experts then studied all 459 full text publications covering the 660 sentences to assess the trust fulness of the relationship with respect to the three lines of independent evidence mentioned earlier. This lead to the identification of 128 relationships supported by all three evidences, compared with only 35 described in the reg dbs. 310 relationships not previously covered by reg dbs were identified that are supported by at least one of the three evidences, compared with 503 described in the reg dbs. We performed an initial characterization of the expanded network and found it to be considerably larger, better connected and functionally different. It also led to improved performance when used for disease gene prioritization in four different rnase q datasets.
