Motivation: Novel approaches are needed for discovery of targeted therapies for non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that are specific to certain patients. Whole genome RNAi screening of lung cancer cell lines provides an ideal source for determining candidate drug targets. Results: Unsupervised learning algorithms uncovered patterns of differential vulnerability across lung cancer cell lines to loss of functionally related genes. Such genetic vulnerabilities represent candidate targets for therapy and are found to be involved in splicing, translation and protein folding. In particular, many NSCLC cell lines were especially sensitive to the loss of components of the LSm2-8 protein complex or the cct tric chaperonin. Different vulnerabilities were also found for different cell line subgroups. Furthermore, the predicted vulnerability of a single adenocarcinoma cell line to loss of the Wnt pathway was experimentally validated with screening of small molecule Wnt inhibitors against an extensive cell line panel. Availability and implementation: The clustering algorithm is implemented in Python and is freely available at https://bitbucket.org/youngjh/nsclc_paper. Contact:

introduction non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains a significant healthcare burden despite recent progress in drug discovery and development. Recent fda approved targeted therapies are only intended for appropriate subpopulations of patients. The drug x alkor i cri zot in ib is highly effective, but only for $4% of lung cancer patients (). Similarly, Iressa (gefitinib) and other EGFR inhibitors target mutations found only in a portion of patients while the majority have the wild type version (). Compared with cytotoxic chemotherapy, targeted therapy has the advantage of greater specificity. However, discovery and development of such agents requires the identification of drug gable targets. Inhibitors of certain characteristic mutations, such as KRAS G12C and G12D, are still under extensive development for clinical use (). The heterogeneity of NSCLC is another barrier confronting drug discovery. A number of V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

discussion collectively the protein complexes we discovered to be NSCLC genetic vulnerabilities span various cellular processes including splicing, translation and protein folding. It is natural to ask how they fit in with currently established cancer therapies and whether known drugs could be repurposed for these complexes. Clearly, they contrast with hormonal therapy or the usual mitotic targets of cytotoxic chemotherapy. It turns out that some of the strongest genetic vulnerabilities are known targets of small molecules. Arsenic trioxide (As 2 O 3 ) targets the tri ccct complex () and has been used to treat acute promyelocytic leukemia in patients who did not respond well to other types of chemotherapy (). As 2 O 3 can perhaps be repurposed for NSCLC, particularly for patients whose tumors bear similarity to the sensitive cell line subgroups identified from the 2 means clustering analysis. Several studies have evaluated the effect of As 2 O 3 in human lung primary fibroblasts and in the lung cancer cell lines A549 and H460 (). Collectively, they suggest that H460 is markedly more sensitive to As 2 O 3 than lung fibroblasts, consistent with the CCT complex vulnerability we observed. We also identified the proteasome as a candidate NSCLC drug target and recently, proteasome inhibitors have been investigated as anti-cancer agents. One such inhibitor is Velcade (bortezomib), which has been fda approved for multiple myeloma (). Bortezomib has shown to be effective in combination with other chemotherapy agents for NSCLC () and has been evaluated in clinical trials for NSCLC as well (). This also suggests that newer and more specific proteasome inhibitors, such as kypro lis car fi lzo mib could be efficacious for patients with NSCLC. In addition, translation and splicing emerged as strong genetic vulnerabilities from the 2 means analysis. Previously, translation has been proposed as a potential target in cancer (). Moreover, eIF3 is known to be overexpressed in lung cancers (), and ectopic expression of five eIF3 subunits has been shown to transform immortalized fibroblasts into malignant cells (). Notably, in our study we found that knockdown of four of those five subunits strongly sensitizes six of the 12 NSCLC cell lines in our panel, while an immortalized epithelial line is comparatively unaffected (). The splicing apparatus has been suggested as a cancer target as well (). Of the splicing associated protein complexes discovered from the 2 means analysis (), the SF3b component of U2 snRNP is known to be targeted by a number of small molecule compounds. Both the pla die noli des and me aya mycin target SF3b, and the latter has been shown to be more deleterious in human lung cancer cells than normal lung fibroblasts (). Some of the NSCLC genetic vulnerabilities that were found by our computational analysis include protein complexes that may appear to be entirely essential. It is perhaps surprising that certain cell lines are largely resistant to knockdown of many of these genes. One explanation may simply be a result of the strict thresholding of the RNAi data to produce binary readings of cell line viability, which could be affected by the 100% sensitivity of the assay. Another explanation may be provided by essential gene 'moonlighting' and 'flipping' of protein complex essentiality between distantly related species (). It was shown that certain protein complexes almost completely flip essentiality between Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe. A similar phenomenon may be occurring among our NSCLC cell line panel. Although the cell lines are not necessarily distantly related, they likely differ sufficiently due to different mutational compositions. Different yeast species flip protein complex essentiality as a result of adaptations to differing needs and environments, a phenomenon likely common to cancer cells as well. Moreover, particular NSCLC cell lines are largely resistant to loss of most, but not all, members of certain protein complexes. Those genes that are mostly essential in both sensitive and insensitive cell line subgroups could exhibit 'moonlighting' behavior by having multiple functions in both essential and nonessential processes. The NSCLC genetic vulnerabilities uncovered by the computational analysis described here extends an earlier study () in uncovering additional potential targets for therapy that were not previously reported. While our study shares the general aim of identifying genetic vulnerabilities, we exclusively focus on identification of biological systems, such as protein complexes, that certain lung cancers are especially dependent upon. Our results also present a complementary viewpoint to the Project Achilles effort in analyzing whole genome RNAi knockdown of cancer cells. One goal from Project Achilles was to discover genes that simultaneously had partial copy number loss and were essential to cancer cells (). Interestingly, the results from that analysis found single gene vulnerabilities in splicing, translation and the proteasome as well. One such vulnerability was LSM4, which is a part of the LSm2-8 complex. A key difference is that the NSCLC vulnerabilities presented here are from the viewpoint of looking not only at single genes but biological systems such as protein complexes. In contrast with previous analyses, we obtain cell line subgroups that may represent particular patient populations along with candidate targets for each of those subgroups.
