Motivation: Capabilities in the field of metabolomics have grown tremendously in recent years. Many existing resources contain the chemical properties and classifications of commonly identified metabolites. However, the annotation of small molecules (both endogenous and synthetic) to meaningful biological pathways and concepts still lags behind the analytical capabilities and the chemistry based annotations. Furthermore, no tools are available to visually explore relationships and networks among functionally related groups of metabolites (biomedical concepts). Such a tool would provide the ability to establish testable hypotheses regarding links among metabolic pathways , cellular processes, phenotypes and diseases. Results: Here we present concept metab an interactive web based tool for mapping and exploring the relationships among 16 069 biologically defined metabolite sets developed from Gene Ontology, KEGG and Medical Subject Headings, using both KEGG and PubChem compound identi-fiers, and based on statistical tests for association. We demonstrate the utility of concept metab with multiple scenarios, showing it can be used to identify known and potentially novel relationships among metabolic pathways, cellular processes, phenotypes and diseases, and provides an intuitive interface for linking compounds to their molecular functions and higher level biological effects. Availability and implementation: http://conceptmetab.

introduction in recent years, metabolomics has emerged as a new quantitative technique with the ability to characterize large numbers of small molecules in a wide variety of biological samples. Advances in liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LCMS), gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GCMS) and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), allow rapid and quantitative measurement of several hundreds of metabolites (). Untargeted LCMS based methods have potential to push the number of detected metabolites to several thousands, however securing the identities of the individual features remains challenging and time consuming (). As experimental detection methods continue to improve, metabolomics has the potential to provide increasingly informative readouts of metabolic changes in complex). In contrast to genes and proteins, metabolites have been described as providing direct signatures of biochemical activity and are therefore easier to correlate with phenotype (). Following these technological advances, a number of pathway databases and tools linking metabolites to biochemical reactions, enzymes, proteins and genes were developed (reviewed in (). Among these, there are several tools for metabolite set enrichment testing, including m sea (), metabo analyst 2.0 () and mb role (). These programs follow the paradigm of gene set enrichment tools, which test for biological functions or pathways (e.g. Gene Ontology (GO) () or KEGG Pathways () that have significant gene overlap with an experimentally derived set of genes (). Biological interpretation of metabolites has unique challenges compared to genes, including a relatively small number of measurable metabolites, low coverage of those by annotation databases, and the presence of ubiquitous metabolites (e.g. co-factors). To improve the annotation of small molecules to their biological contexts, we developed Metab2Mesh (), which contains 4 646 000 significant associations (P  0.0001) between 99 871 compounds and 20 683 biomedical terms. Metab2MeSH uses PubChem and Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) terms to identify statistically significant co occurrences of metabolites and MeSH terms in published manuscripts, thus annotating metabolites to biomedical concepts via the literature. An additional challenge to working with metabolites is the lack of convenient, standardized identifiers. While IUPAC nomenclature provides a systematic method of naming organic compounds and chemists use the CAS Registry Number, biologists prefer more familiar names that often ignore counter-ions. Consequently, biological databases often contain such names or use their own identifiers. To address these challenges, careful assembly of metabolite sets with synonyms and cross references is needed. Due to these challenges, metabolite enrichment testing has not been as widely used as for genes. Enrichment testing among predefined biologically relevant metabolite sets can help us better understand and overcome the above challenges, and improve enrichment testing with experimental data. The careful assembly, characterization and exploration of metabolite sets could facilitate the discovery of relationships among metabolic reactions, diseases and other biological phenomena in terms of the metabolites involved. Indeed, several tools for exploring similar relationships based on gene sets exist () and have been fundamental in generating novel hypotheses and identifying unexpected associations. However, no comparable tool based on small metabolites yet exists. We have developed concept metab to explore the relationships among metabolite based biomedical concepts and generate novel hypotheses. Metabolites were annotated to biomedical concepts using KEGG (), the three branches of GO and Medical Subject headings from the National Library of Medicine (MeSH) (). Statistically significant associations were identified among all pairs of metabolite sets (concepts), and maintained with additional supporting information. The concept metab website enables searching, browsing, filtering and data exporting capabilities, as well as complementary visualizations (network graphs and heat maps. We demonstrate the utility of concept metab with example workflows, and by illustrating important relationships identified with metabolites that were not identified with genes. In summary, concept metab assists in understanding links between metabolites, metabolic pathways and biological phenomena, phenotypes, environmental exposures and diseases.

discussion as the ultimate readout of metabolic state, metabolomics has the potential to transform our understanding of mechanisms underlying disease and further enhance knowledge generation through integration with other omics data. As experimental metabolomics matures and the number of measurable metabolites approaches the estimated number of endogenous metabolites, metabolomics together with transcript omics proteomics and epi genomics will provide a comprehensive understanding of a biological system as a whole. While gene based technologies, analysis methods and annotation have well established standards and an abundance of relevant bioinformatics software, the parallel requirements for high throughput metabolomics still lag far behind. As a step towards bridging this gap, we have developed a tool that annotates both endogenous and synthetic small compounds to various types of biological concepts, and that provides interactive exploration of the relationships among these concepts. With the novel mesh based annotation source, we have increased the number of annotated metabolites by $25-fold and shown that many relevant relationships not identified by genes are identified via metabolites. The ability to visualize relationships not only between pairs of metabolite sets but also the network structure among many can help bridge the gaps from molecular level to phenotype level to population level biomedical concepts. No other program allows testing for significant enrichment among predefined metabolite sets. The few programs that currently offer enrichment testing of experimental metabolite sets only annotate a small minority of compounds. The next step will be to expand upon concept metab to offer such analysis with greatly expanded annotation. In concept metab both KEGG and PubChem IDs were used to maximize annotation, giving us the benefits of both traditional annotation sources such as KEGG and GO, and our MeSH term annotations. We chose KEGG because it is well established consistent and cross referenced with PubChem. We recognize that other databases such as bio cyc (
