A recent article by Huang and He (2012) illustrates a method for applying linear programming to protein inference and compares this method to a handful of established methods for protein inference: protein prophet (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003), ms bayes (Li et al., 2008) and Fido se rang et al., 2010). Unfortunately, Huang and He (2012) gives the impression that protein probabilities computed by Fido are erratic, yielding either markedly superior performance (e.g. in the Sigma 49 dataset) or inferior performance (e.g. in the human md dataset) compared with the rest of the field; however, this erratic performance is simply the effect of not choosing the parameters by grid search as specified in se rang et al. (2010). Performing a rough grid search (2 f0:01, 0:04, 0:09, 0:16, 0:25, 0:36g, 2 f0:0, 0:01, 0:025, 0:05g and 2 f0:1, 0:3, 0:5, 0:7, 0:9g) to jointly optimize discrimination and calibration substantially improves the quality of the probabilities computed (Fig. 1) and makes Fido competitive with protein prophet. Performing the grid search takes 4.42 s on a Core i3 laptop. Not only are fi dos three parameters important for weighing many pieces of low scoring peptide evidence against fewer pieces of high scoring peptide evidence, but they also substantially determine the treatment of shared (i.e. degenerate) peptides. As a result, the optimal values for these parameters are influenced by many factors (e.g. the coverage of the experiment, the complexity of the sample and so forth), and these parameters are, understandably, dataset specific although using blind parameter estimates may give reasonable performance in some situations (particularly when the parameters come from a dataset with similar characteristics), Fido is not intended to be run without these parameters intelligently set (via the grid search noted earlier in the text or manually). To be fair, there are situations where the means to estimate free parameters (i.e. true and false positive labels) are not available , and in these cases, it is not unreasonable to try parameters estimated from another similar data set; however, even in this case, the parameters in Fido are not intended to be chosen arbitrarily without regard for their performance. If no labels are available, manual parameter choice is an option (e.g. choosing parameters that rank a known highly abundant protein over others). In the rare case when no information for validation is available, Fido, like all models with free parameters, should not be used. To better enable researchers to use Fido in the way intended and to aid in future comparisons, we have released an updated executable, which automatically performs the grid search as described in se rang et al. (2010) (without need of the previous shell script wrapper). It is available for free download from
