Motivation: The growing availability of full text scientific articles raises the important issue of how to most efficiently digest full text content. Although article titles and abstracts provide accurate and concise information on an articles contents, their brevity inevitably entails the loss of detail. full text articles provide those details, but require more time to read. The primary goal of this study is to combine the advantages of concise abstracts and detail rich full texts to ease the burden of reading. Results: We retrieved abstract related paragraphs from full text articles through shared keywords between the abstract and paragraphs from the main text. Significant paragraphs were then recommended by applying a proposed paragraph ranking approach. Finally, the user was provided with a condensed text consisting of these significant paragraphs, allowing the user to save time from perusing the whole article. We compared the performance of the proposed approach with a keyword counting approach and a pagerank like approach. Evaluation was conducted in two aspects: the importance of each retrieved paragraph and the information coverage of a set of retrieved paragraphs. In both evaluations, the proposed approach outperformed the other approaches. Contact:

introduction in recent years, the development of bioinformatics and information technology has coincided with the rapid growth of biomedical literature databases, and the rate at which more full text scientific literature becomes available on the web is accelerating. The U.S. National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI, under the U.S. National Library of Medicine) has collected more than 20 million biomedical study abstracts in its free access literature database, PubMed, which acts as a portal site for various biomedical journals and provides a literature search service for browsing and retrieving abstracts. The service helps researchers keep up-to-date on biomedical progress and discoveries, and also reduces the risk of redundant experiments. This overwhelming volume of information obviously defies manually exploration and, given time limitations, the ability of individuals and organizations to digest this flood of data is an issue of growing concern. Investigations into the automatic extraction of important information begun decades ago (). Recently, many text mining applications have been developed to raise * To whom correspondence should be addressed. efficiency and save time in literature reviews (Goetz and von der). go pubmed () categorized PubMed search results into various topics to assist users in looking for articles relevant to their specific interests; lit ln spector () enhanced search results by highlighting keywords with various colors according to predefined keyword categories. gene librarian () extracted specific information from PubMed abstracts to facilitate awareness of critical relationships between genes of interest. All of these applications use various methods to compile abstracts and present concise information. In the past, obtaining full text articles could be very inconvenient. However, these days more and more full text literature is available online via digital literature databases. PubMed Central (PMC) and PubMed (both established by the NCBI), differ mainly in that PMC is dedicated to collecting full text articles in the life science, while PubMed collects abstracts only. Both services offer free access to their collections and the PMC database currently consists of nearly 900 life science journals. Following the increased availability of free full text articles, text mining applications have allowed readers to peer into the main texts, providing full article searches which extract more complete and detailed information than would otherwise be available in the abstracts. However, directly applying tools designed for searching abstracts on a full text corpus entails unacceptably high computation and performance costs. In recent years, new research has been proposed on full text utilities. Lin (2009) compared search engine performance at various levels: abstract, whole article and sections of an article studied keyword distribution and difference cross sections investigated the performance of semi-automatic indexing on abstracts and full text articles. All of these studies make clear that the development of tools for full text use is a matter of great urgency. The advantage of applications which search full text articles is that the main text is where the details of the research are addressed. However, this data inevitably is accompanied by redundant or trivial description material. From the perspective of text miming, the variety of elements (e.g. text, equations, figures, tables, etc.) is a significant challenge for full text information extraction (), and information noise from redundant and trivial description may impair system performance. Abstracts contain much less information than the full text articles, and they are well structured and helpful for readers to quickly ascertain a paper's purpose. An abstract briefly describes the research focus, methods, findings and main conclusion in a brief text. In this study, we propose an approach to assist readers in digesting full text more effectively and efficiently. Effective and efficient reading requires a mid-sized text containing essential and detailed information. To generate this condensed text, we combine the respective advantages of an abstract and full text article using text mining and summarization techniques, and propose a ranking framework to recommend important and relevant paragraphs. These paragraphs should be related to topics mentioned in the abstract, and contain complementary and detailed information. We then collect these paragraphs into a condensed text to assist readers. In Section 2, we describe the proposed ranking framework and a metric named paragraph relevance inverse sentence relevance pris r which is used to evaluate the importance of paragraphs. Section 3 describes the materials and experimental settings used in performance evaluation. Section 4 presents the results of two perspective evaluations and conclusions are drawn in Section 5.
