Motivation: There is a growing trend for biomedical researchers to extract evidence and draw conclusions from mass spectrometry based proteomics experiments, the cornerstone of which is peptide identification. Inaccurate assignments of peptide identification confidence thus may have far reaching and adverse consequences. Although some peptide identification methods report accurate statistics, they have been limited to certain types of scoring function. The extreme value statistics based method, while more general in the scoring functions it allows, demands accurate parameter estimates and requires, at least in its original design, excessive computational resources. Improving the parameter estimate accuracy and reducing the computational cost for this method has two advantages: it provides another feasible route to accurate significance assessment, and it could provide reliable statistics for scoring functions yet to be developed. Results: We have formulated and implemented an efficient algorithm for calculating the extreme value statistics for peptide identification applicable to various scoring functions, bypassing the need for searching large random databases. Availability and Implementation: The source code, implemented in C þþ on a linux system, is available for download at ftpftpncbinlmnihgovpubqm bpqmbpmsraidraidlinux64b it
introduction assigning accurate statistical significance to identified peptides is fundamentally important because these peptides form the basis for protein identifications, whose results are often used to infer biological processes and functions. Statistical errors at the peptide identification level inevitably propagate downstream, and may have far reaching consequences, undermining the biological conclusions drawn from high level analyses. Therefore, various approaches for bounding the occurrence of false identifications have been developed. One frequently employed method is to globally control the proportion of false discoveries (PFD) () per experimental dataset. The target decoy approach () is often used to estimate the PFD, with its numerator (the number of false positives in the target database) being approximated by the number of decoy hits and with its denominator being the number of peptides identified in the target database. However, as discussed by, this estimate can be inaccurate when a global grading standard to prioritize the peptide hits across spectra and across databases is lacking. Furthermore, as emphasized by, even with a correct grading standard present and under the same PFD cut off two candidate groups from two different experiments do not have identical statistical significances. These aforementioned problems can be mitigated, however, by computing per spectrum e values p values. Given a tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectrum and a quality score cut off S c , the E-value ES c  is defined to be the expected number of random peptides with scores the same as or better than S c. (Similarly, the p value PS c  reflects the probability of finding a random peptide with quality score S ! S c .) In general, the E-value is obtained by multiplying the p value by the total number of qualified peptides, whose mass differences from the precursor ion are within the specified tolerance. There are multiple advantages to employing e values p values for controlling false positives type i error): it permits peptide protein prioritization across spectra and experiments (); it allows the statistical significances from different analyses to be combined (). Since the expected number of random matches per query can be defined without inferring experimental details, the E-value is an ideal choice for the universal grading standard for candidate peptides. This greatly assists peptide prioritization in the target decoy approach. Furthermore, when candidate peptides are ranked by their e values and a threshold E-value is chosen, one may estimate the number of false positives by multiplying the threshold E-value by the number of spectra analyzed. This estimated number of false positives divided by the total number of candidate peptides with e values smaller than the threshold E-value is the PFD estimate of S oric. Evidently, the realization of the statistical benefits described requires accurate e values p values. There exist several methods that compute e values p values using spectrum dependent information (). These methods use various parametric functions to fit the peptide score histogram per spectrum to estimate the e values p values for the peptides identified. Even though these assumed parametric functions may fit the histogram, a per spectrum goodness of fit g of is not provided. Hence, there is no guarantee that such procedures can consistently yield accurate e values p values (). Nevertheless, there exist a few published methods that do not assume any parametric form for the score distribution and are able to compute accurate spectrum specific significance consistently. One of these methods extends the central limit theorem (CLT) by analytically deriving a parametric distribution function, accounting for finite sample size and skewness, to fit the peptide score histogram per spectrum (). Another method computes e values p values by using a dynamic programming algorithm, also known as all possible peptides statistics (APPS), to generate the score histogram of all possible peptides whose masses are close enough to that of the precursor ion (). Alternatively, similar to sequence alignment statistics (), one may use the extreme value distribution (EVD) for significance assignment. indeed infer spectrum specific statistics by employing the EVD with the parameters estimated from searching multiple random databases. More information about the CLT and the EVD is provided in Section 2.1. Although all three aforementioned methods can provide accurate significance estimates (without assuming parametric fitting functions), each admits some limitations. Specifically, the clt based method is applicable only to a single choice of scoring function, the average of the sum of independent contributions; the apps based method requires each of its scoring functions be a sum of independent contributions; and the evd based method, whose parameter learning is in general challenging, can be applied only to scoring functions whose resulting score histograms fall in the domain of attraction of the EVD (). Among these three methods, however, the evd based one offers perhaps the most flexibility: permitting scoring functions other than the sum of contributions, it may enable the development of more discriminative functions that improve the sensitivity and specificity of peptide identification. To estimate the EVD parameters propose searching 100 (or 10) random protein databases and obtaining from each the best (or the best 10) score(s). Every random protein database of () is made of 10 000 random protein sequences with lengths distributed according to the mouse proteome. For each MS/MS spectrum, its corresponding set of best scores is used to find the EVD parameters maximizing the order statistics probability density function. This procedure, however, faces several challenges. First, for a given precursor ion mass, the number of scored peptides may vary among the 100 (or 10) random protein databases. Second, even within the same random database, the number of scored peptides may also vary by precursor ion masses. The set of best scoring peptides may thus be sampled from populations of varying size, affecting the accuracy of the estimated EVD parameters. Third, as the mass accuracy of the precursor ion increases, the small mass error tolerance yields few database peptides to score, decreasing the accuracy of estimated EVD parameters because the large number of scored random peptides (NSRP) needed to accurately fit the high scoring tail of the EVD () becomes unattainable. Finally, querying 100 or 10 random protein databases, as prescribed by, with a large set of MS/MS spectra can require a substantial computational cost, which may deter software developers from rigorously implementing evd based algorithms. In this manuscript, we address the algorithmic challenges faced by by completely eliminating the need for random protein databases for EVD parameter estimation. In our EVD implementation (including x corr (), hyper score (), k score () and r score ()) in raid dbs (), random peptides used to estimate EVD parameters are generated on the fly during the program execution. This allows us to fix the NSRP  100 000 regardless of the mass of the precursor ion, its mass error tolerance (d), or the size of the protein database. Under this approach, the computational cost for generating high scoring random peptides is much less than the original EVD implementation (). However, our goal is not to design a fast significance assignment method, but a flexible and robust one that can be pragmatically implemented in most tools without adding much computational cost. For the convenience of the readers, we have summarized in the acronyms used in this paper.

discussion by definition, a decoy database contains no true peptide that produces any of the observed spectra. The primary function of a decoy database is to mimic the 'real' background one encounters when searching the target database. Therefore, if the decoy database is properly constructed, the distance between score distributions, resulting respectively from searching the target and the decoy databases, should be small. However, to firmly establish that a decoy database is a good choice requires perhaps more work than the data analysis itself. Of course, this work can be waived if accurate statistics can be obtained from the target database alone. For our EVD implementation, we have tested the effectiveness of error control using both random databases (for type i and retrieval PFD curves (for type ii. We find that the reported dp vs agree closely with the observed dp vs (see, Supplementary Figs S1S3) and that the Sori c PFDs agree well with the target decoy PFDs. The former shows that our assigned statistical significance coincides with its definition, while the latter indicates that the common choice of using reverse sequences as the decoy is reasonable. In Section 2.3, the correlation between the set of maximum scores and the rank percentile (after double logarithm transformation) is introduced as the g of of the EVD models, and a cut off value of 0.92 is selected based on the work of Kinnison (1989). Evidently, raising the threshold to a higher value reduces the number of spectra for analyses, hence potentially reducing the number of peptides identified. That is, it increases the number of false negatives (leading to type ii error). On the other hand, lowering the threshold too much will include spectra for which the EVD models break down, hence potentially increasing the number of false identifications (leading to type i error). Our investigation indicates that the threshold value 0.92 seems to yield a good balance between type i and type ii errors. The search options of raid dbs allow for the inclusion of posttranslational modifications (PTMs) and or single amino acid polymorphisms (SAPs). The inclusion of ptms saps or isotopic labeling enlarge the search space, hence generally reduces sensitivity as expected (). However, the assigned statistical significances, when accurate, should naturally reflect this effect. For example, an identified database peptide with a low p value will have a worse E-value when the search space is large as compared to the case of a smaller search space.
