Motivation: Sequencing of matched tumor and normal samples is the standard study design for reliable detection of somatic alterations. However, even very low levels of cross sample contamination significantly impact calling of somatic mutations, because contaminant germline variants can be incorrectly interpreted as somatic. There are currently no sequence only based methods that reliably estimate contamination levels in tumor samples, which frequently display copy number changes. As a solution, we developed con pair a tool for detection of sample swaps and cross individual contamination in whole genome and whole exo me tumor normal sequencing experiments. Results: On a ladder of in silico contaminated samples, we demonstrated that con pair reliably measures contamination levels as low as 0.1%, even in presence of copy number changes. We also estimated contamination levels in glioblastoma WGS and WXS tumor normal datasets from TCGA and showed that they strongly correlate with tumor normal concordance, as well as with the number of germline variants called as somatic by several widely used somatic callers. Availability and Implementation: The method is available at: https://github.com/nygenome/

introduction the decreasing cost of high throughput sequencing allows analysis of larger number of samples than before, which as an unfortunate side effect increases the chances of sample mix ups and contamination. Cancer studies often jointly analyze matched tumor normal (TN) samples in order to detect somatic mutations that are present in the tumor. Even a very low level of cross individual contamination in the tumor sample may introduce many low allele frequency germline variants that will be interpreted as somatic by somatic variant calling algorithms, resulting in greatly reduced specificity (Supplementary). Detecting sample swaps and low level contamination in tumor samples are critical quality control steps that should precede every somatic analysis. However, estimating contamination in tumor samples is confounded by frequent copy number alterations that affect allelic ratio distributions. verify b amid () and ContEst () have emerged as standard methods to estimate sample contamination. verify b amid maximizes the likelihood of a contamination level in a two sample mixture model, given the alleles and base qualities, using a grid search over a range of contamination fractions and refining the result using a numerical root finding method. verify b amid provides an accurate measure for contamination in mostly diploid copy neutral samples, however it may interpret copy number driven allelic imbalance frequently seen in cancer as contamination. ContEst calculates the maximum a posteriori estimate of contamination based on the base identities and quality V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.
