Motivation: While biological systems operated from a common genome can be conserved in various ways, they can also manifest highly diverse dynamics and functions. This is because the same set of genes can interact differentially across specific molecular contexts. For example, differential gene interactions give rise to various stages of morphogenesis during cerebellar development. However, after over a decade of efforts toward reverse engineering biological networks from high throughput omic data, gene networks of most organisms remain sketchy. This hindrance has motivated us to develop comparative modeling to highlight conserved and differential gene interactions across experimental conditions, without reconstructing complete gene networks first. Results: We established a comparative dynamical system modeling cds m approach to identify conserved and differential interactions across molecular contexts. In cds m interactions are represented by ordinary differential equations and compared across conditions through statistical heterogeneity and homogeneity tests. cds m demonstrated a consistent superiority over differential correlation and reconstruct then compare in simulation studies. We exploited cds m to elucidate gene interactions important for cellular processes poorly understood during mouse cerebellar development. We generated hypotheses on 66 differential genetic interactions involved in expansion of the external granule layer. These interactions are implicated in cell cycle, differentiation, apoptosis and morphogenesis. Additional 1639 differential interactions among gene clusters were also identified when we compared gene interactions during the presence of Rhombic lip versus the presence of distinct internal granule layer. Moreover, compared with differential correlation and reconstruct then compare cds m makes fewer assumptions on data and thus is applicable to a wider range of biological assays. Availability: Source code in C++ and R is available for non-commercial organizations upon request from the corresponding author. The cerebellum gene expression dataset used in this article is available upon request from the gold o witz lab dang cmm tub cca
introduction biological systems encoded by a common genome can manifest highly diverse dynamics, because the same set of genes can interact differentially across specific molecular contexts (). Such differential gene interactions give rise to cell differentiation in development, divergent cellular types and differences between normal and pathological cells. Hence, it is of pivotal importance to compare gene interactions across biological systems so as to delineate context dependent molecular mechanisms. Automated omic technologies for gene expression, protein activity and metabolic profiling have enabled genome wide studies of molecular interaction patterns. Although numerous biological system modeling methods have been developed (), reverse engineering of biological networks is still challenging due to insufficient sampling or perturbation in practical biological experiments (). This has motivated us to compare interactions across conditions in two biological systems directly from data profiles, overriding independent network reconstruction for each system. Previous work, mostly employing reconstruct then compare or differential correlation, has met limited success in exploring differential interactions, due to restricting assumptions. reconstruct then compare methods () ignore uncertainty in the estimated model parameters and can wrongfully announce a conserved interaction as differential due to random noise. And differential correlation approaches (), also known as differential coexpression, utilize difference in correlation coefficients between a pair of variables across two conditions to detect differential interactions. Although uncertainty is accounted for, several assumptions hamper the usefulness of this strategy. The most limiting requirement is equality of data and noise variance under the two conditions (See discussion on their limitations in Supplementary Material). Such requirements are often not met in biological experiments. To overcome the limitations of differential correlation or reconstruct then compare we introduce and validate a novel statistical framework for comparing interactions in dynamical system models (DSMs). We call the framework comparative DSM cds m. We use homogeneity to refer to the similarity of page 2852 28512858.85), (4.2,8.74). A null model is first obtained: y = 4.98 (the green line). By pooling all 10 points, a homogeneity model (Hm) is obtain: y = 0.9x +2.27 (the black line). Then we obtain the heterogeneity model (Ht) which contains y = 0.61x +2.77 (the red line) and y = 3.74x 7.49 (the blue line), estimated from each group of 5 points, respectively. (b) The three models are evaluated by residual sum of squares (RSS) and model complexities via parameter dimensions (dim). (c) Finally, we compute the homogeneity and heterogeneity of the interaction between X and Y across conditions. They are related to the shaded area in the left and right panel in (a). The significant homogeneity indicates a common interaction trend; the significant heterogeneity suggests a difference between the two lines in the heterogeneity model, evidenced by a difference in slope. (d) In contrast, the difference in slope between the two models is undetectable by differential correlation, as difference between the Pearson's correlation coefficients across the two conditions is zero. an interaction across conditions (), and heterogeneity for the difference of an interaction across conditions (). Zhao and colleagues developed an expected conditional F (ECF) statistic to evaluate heterogeneity across conditions, but the asymptotic distribution of ECF is open (). We used two f statistics to evaluate heterogeneity and homogeneity of interactions as illustrated in, providing a basis to detect conserved and differential interactions in biological networks across conditions (). We demonstrated (in Supplementary Material) that our framework reduces to differential correlation if one adds four restricting assumptions: equality of sample sizes, zero data mean, equality of data variance and equality of noise variance across conditions. With a fifth assumption on equality of variance between data and noise, our framework becomes equivalent to reconstruct then compare which we will refer to as numerical comparison (). By overcoming these unpractical assumptions on experiments, the cds m framework is more general for differential interactions than other known methods. The cds m framework was evaluated by simulation studies and then applied to detect differential and conserved interactions during mouse cerebellar development. Our method outperformed numerical comparison () and differential correlation () in two simulation studies, using a cdc2-cyclin cell division cycle model with known regulation kinetics and a realistic network of unknown architecture with 1000 nodes, respectively. We then applied our method to compare gene interactions during development of the mouse cerebellum, an excellent biological model system for studying nervous system development. Although morphological events are well documented during cerebellar development (), the molecular mechanisms are nebulous and it is hypothesized that diverse gene interactions occur sequentially and in a tightly controlled manner (). Therefore, we attempted two studies using our method to identify conserved and differential interactions on genome wide microarray time course data obtained during cerebellar development. For the first study of screening genetic interactions from other organisms in bio grid (), we generated hypotheses on 58 and 52 significant genetic interactions involved in external granule layer (EGL) expansion for the DBA and BL6 mouse strains, respectively. These putative interactions are implicated in cell cycle, apoptosis and morphogenesis, and to a lesser extent differentiation. In a second study, 1639 differential interactions among gene clusters were identified when comparing cerebellar gene expression in two developmental events. Specifically, gene expression in a prenatal period in cerebellar development, characterized by the presence of the glutamatergic cell germinal zone known as the Rhombic lip, was compared with gene expression during a late embryonic to post-natal period, characterized by the presence of distinct internal granule layer (IGL). This second study also revealed novel gene interactions as new testable biological hypotheses, and we highlighted those that are involved with the WNT pathway.

discussion we have proposed and validated the cds m framework to detect conserved and differential gene interactions across molecular contexts from time course observations. Instead of focusing on the reconstruction of interactions, often limited by data insufficiency, we use cds m to compare interactions across conditions. We achieved the comparison by decomposing the total interaction strength, F t , across conditions into strengths of homogeneity F c and heterogeneity F d , and therefore established a decomposition rule. The cds m framework was validated by two simulation studies, in which it outperformed two alternative methods: numerical comparison and differential correlation. Numerical comparison ignored uncertainty and did not perform well. Differential correlation did not do well either, due to its limitations in dealing with non-linearity, combinatory effects and unequal variance of the variables and noise. The cds m overcomes these issues and can be particularly effective for comparing gene regulatory networks to detect inherent systematic changes in terms of differential interactions, beyond system state changes via differential gene expression analysis. Applying cds m to the time course microarray data for cerebellar development revealed conserved and differential interactions across various events. The gene regulatory network underlying cerebellar development is poorly understood. Our rationale is to find gene interactions that were either consistently conserved or differential in two setups through cds m on genome wide time course observations. In our first and more conservative setup, we studied how genetic interactions known in other organisms may participate in mouse cerebellar development. We found 58 and 52 significant interactions putatively involved in EGL expansion, for the DBA and BL6 mouse strains, respectively. These efforts identified promising candidates for further biological validation. For instance, E2f1, E2f2, Pax6, Pitx2 and Scx are now hypothesized to be involved in cerebellar granule cell development. In the second and more explorative setup, we detected, at the genome scale, many de novo differential interactions between the presence of Rhombic lip and presence of distinct IGL. Among these interactions, the most promising ones are those that are found to influence general developmental pathways such as the WNT pathway. An example is the novel gene interactions involved in a TF named Lef1 an essential output of the WNT pathway whose downstream gene interactions are strongly differential when comparing the two developmental events. Overall, these identified gene interactions have generated testable hypotheses that merit further biological investigation. Three conditions are important to make cds m fruitful, based on our simulation studies. First, our framework works better on a cascaded network architecture, often the case for biological systems, than on random networks. That is, an upstream differential interaction can be reliably detected, without announcing downstream interactions differential even if the expression levels of downstream genes may have changed. Second, the DSM is based on the estimation of the derivative of each variable to time, and is thus effective to deal with systems with smooth dynamics, but not discrete non-smooth observations. Third, the DSM heavily relies on the correct mathematical form for interactions, and the comparative results will be reliable only when a sufficiently good approximation of the interaction form is used in the modeling. Several future directions are possible for comparative modeling of interactions. The cds m is readily applicable to data obtained by experiments using combinatorial gene perturbation, such as data from high throughput quantitative genetic interaction assays (). Also, a wider range of mathematical forms for interactions can be included beyond our proposed models of additive non-linear terms, without changing the underlying statistical framework. This will be feasible with an increasing supercomputing power. Furthermore, prior biological knowledge obtained from alternative means can be incorporated to limit the search space for potential interactions.
