Motivation: Transcriptional regulatory network inference methods have been studied for years. Most of them rely on complex mathematical and algorithmic concepts, making them hard to adapt, re-implement or integrate with other methods. To address this problem , we introduce a novel method based on a minimal statistical model for observing transcriptional regulatory interactions in noisy expression data, which is conceptually simple, easy to implement and integrate in any statistical software environment and equally well performing as existing methods. Results: We developed a method to infer regulatory interactions based on a model where transcription factors (TFs) and their targets are both differentially expressed in a gene specific critical sample contrast, as measured by repeated two way t tests. Benchmarking on standard Escherichia coli and yeast reference datasets showed that this method performs equally well as the best existing methods. Analysis of the predicted interactions suggested that it works best to infer context specific tf target interactions which only co express locally. We confirmed this hypothesis on a dataset of 41000 normal human tissue samples, where we found that our method predicts highly tissue specific and functionally relevant interactions, whereas a global co-expression method only associates general TFs to non-specific biological processes. Availability: A software tool called twix trix is available from http:// twix trix google code com
introduction transcriptional regulatory networks, which emerge from the combinatorial regulation of the expression of all genes in an organism by a limited number of transcription factors (TFs), control the cellular response to internal and external perturbations. At present, direct experimental mapping of complete transcriptional regulatory networks remains infeasible, particularly in higher organisms, especially since the structure of these networks is itself condition dependent (). A lot of attention has therefore been devoted to computationally reconstruct transcriptional regulatory networks from compendia of genome wide gene expression measurements in diverse conditions, time points, cell types or genotypic backgrounds (). However, despite many years of research, it still remains a question which computational methods are most suited to tackle this problem. Moreover, regulatory network inference remains a task firmly in the hands of specialists, and network inference algorithms are still not routinely included in standard statistical software packages, unlike for instance differential expression testing or co-expression analysis. At least in part this is due to the fact that most network reconstruction methods depend on non-trivial mathematical concepts such as mutual information (), differential equations (), biophysical models (), Bayesian networks (), ensemble methods () or machine learning (Huynh). While these complex mathematical models are well justified in theory, current gene expression datasets have high levels of noise and are lacking in resolution, making these models prone to over-fitting. Furthermore, the resulting algorithms are difficult if not impossible to re-implement, as they often depend on poorly documented parameter choices and heuristic techniques, for instance to improve convergence rates or avoid local optima. In order to address these problems, we propose a novel method which is based on a minimal statistical model. The model assumes that TFs and their targets are both differentially expressed in a gene specific sample contrast, but it makes no assumption on any functional relationship, be it linear or non-linear, between the gene expression profiles of TFs and their targets. It should thus be ideally suited to infer regulatory interactions from noisy, low resolution gene expression maps. First, the method identifies for each gene its 'critical contrast', the separation of samples into two sets across which that gene is most significantly differentially expressed (as determined by two way t tests. Second, the method takes a list of TFs or other regulatory proteins and calculates their differential expression in the critical contrast of each possible target gene (again determined by two way t tests. The predicted network is the list of tf gene associations, ranked by these t test p values either considered as a weighted network or cut off at a desired significance threshold. *To whom correspondence should be addressed the idea to use t tests to predict regulatory interactions was first proposed by. Here, we systematically evaluate the performance of this double two way t test procedure using benchmark expression data () and networks of known transcriptional regulatory interactions () in Escherichia coli and yeast, following standard evaluation protocols established by the DREAM community (). We found that double two way t testing performs as well as the best current methods, especially in yeast. Next, we compared the top ranked predictions of each method and found that the t test procedure identifies a considerably different set of interactions than the other methods. In particular, whereas the top ranked predictions of the other methods tend to exhibit high levels of global co-expression between the TFs and their predicted targets, interactions found by the t test procedure tend to only co express locally and involve TFs that are only expressed under certain experimental conditions. We therefore hypothesized that the double two way t test method is particularly useful to predict context specific networks in multi-cellular organisms. To test this hypothesis, we applied it to a global gene expression compendium containing 41000 samples from normal human tissues (). Although due to a lack of knowledge in human, a systematic evaluation of the predicted network is impossible, manual analysis of the top ranked TFs showed that the functional enrichment of their predicted targets is indeed highly consistent with known cell type specific modes of action for these TFs.

conclusion reconstructing transcriptional regulatory networks from genome wide gene expression data remains an important bioinformatics challenge. Although diverse mathematical and computational methods have been proposed to address this problem, they have not been as successful as might originally have been expected. A possible reason is that current gene expression datasets are too noisy and lack the resolution for adequately fitting complex mathematical models. Here, we analysed a method which, rather than adding to the complexity of network inference methods, uses a minimal statistical model for associating TFs to putative target genes without assuming any linear or non-linear functional relationship between their expression profiles. The method is based on a double two way t test which assesses the differential expression of a TF in the critical sample contrast of all genes. Essentially, this results in a local co-expression measure which appears well suited to capture context specific transcriptional activity, at the expense of giving less weight to globally co-expressed tf target pairs. In bacteria, much of the cellular response to perturbations is controlled at transcriptional level only, such that many tf target pairs are co-expressed under all experimental conditions. Here, the double two way t test therefore does not improve upon existing methods. In yeast however, there is evidence of known transcriptional interactions which only co express under specific conditions. The t test procedure prioritizes such interactions and indeed performs better in yeast than E. coli, relative to the existing methods. Taking this one step further, we hypothesize that the double two way t test method for inferring regulatory interactions will be particularly useful to analyse global gene expression maps in multi-cellular organisms which combine data from hundreds of different samples. Indeed, we confirmed that our method predicts highly tissue specific and functionally relevant interactions from a dataset of 41000 normal human tissue samples, whereas global co-expression methods only associate general TFs to non-specific biological processes. In view of the time it takes to experimentally generate large expression compendia, judging a network inference method by its running time is perhaps not very relevant. Nevertheless, we note that, depending on hardware details, the t test procedure took not more than a few seconds to analyse the human dataset, while the other methods needed from a few hours up to several days. Having a fast method is clearly beneficial, e.g. to easily compare results from different normalizations of the data, or from different subsets of a large data compendium, e.g. from normal versus disease states, cell lines versus tissue samples, etc. In summary, we believe that the double two way t test method provides a useful addition to existing network inference methods, whose primary strength lies in prioritizing context specific regulatory interactions from global gene expression maps which integrate data from hundreds to thousands of samples from diverse experimental treatments, cell types, tissues, developmental stages or individuals. conf il ict of Interest: none declared.
