More and more cancer studies use next generation sequencing (NGS) data to detect various types of genomic variation. However, even when researchers have such data at hand, single nucleotide polymorphism arrays have been considered necessary to assess copy number alterations and especially loss of heterozygosity (LOH). Here, we present the tool control free c that enables automatic calculation of copy number and allelic content profiles from NGS data, and consequently predicts regions of genomic alteration such as gains, losses and LOH. Taking as input aligned reads, control free c constructs copy number and b allele frequency profiles. The profiles are then normalized, segmented and analyzed in order to assign genotype status (copy number and allelic content) to each genomic region. When a matched normal sample is provided, control free c discriminates somatic from germline events. control free c is able to analyze over diploid tumor samples and samples contaminated by normal cells. Low mapp ability regions can be excluded from the analysis using provided mapp ability tracks. Availability: C++ source code is available at: http://bioinfo.curie.fr/ projects free c
introduction cancer genomes often display copy number alterations (CNAs) and or losses of heterozygosity (LOH) (). Genetic abnormalities in specific regions may be related to the aggressiveness of a cancer and be associated with clinical outcomes (). To detect CNA and LOH regions, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays have been recently much in use (). Furthermore, next generation sequencing (NGS) has been moving to replace snp arrays in prediction of CNAs (). A recent study presented exo me cnv * To whom correspondence should be addressed. a tool to predict CNAs and LOH using exo me sequencing data (). However, detection of LOH regions and, more generally, prediction of genotype status (copy number and allelic content) of an altered region using whole genome sequencing data has remained unsolved. The main challenges to doing so are non-uniform read coverage of genomic positions [for example, due to different mapp ability and gc content (and alignment bias (reference allele coverage is usually higher than the coverage of the alternative allele). Thus, the resulting signal is noisier and more difficult to process than in the case of SNP arrays. Here, we present control free c control free Copy number and allelic content caller a tool that annotates genotypes and discovers CNAs and LOH. control free c inherits many features from free c () (assessment of copy number variation and evaluation of contamination by normal cells) as well as the general methodology of the GAP algorithm for SNP arrays (). control free c takes as an input aligned reads, then constructs and normalizes the copy number profile, constructs the b allele frequency (BAF) profile, segments both profiles, ascribes the genotype status to each segment using both copy number and allelic frequency information, then annotates genomic alterations. If a control (matched normal) sample is available, control free c discerns somatic variants from germline ones.

conclusion control free c is a tool for automatic detection of CNAs and LOH regions using NGS data. It accurately calls genotype status even when no control experiment is available and or the genome is polyploid. It corrects for gc content and mapp ability biases. In the case of tumor samples, control free c is able to evaluate the level of contamination by normal cells. The software is written in C++ and freely available.
