Since tens of millions of chemical compounds have been accumulated in public chemical databases, fast comprehensive computational methods to predict interactions between chemical compounds and proteins are needed for virtual screening of lead compounds. Previously, we proposed a novel method for predicting protein chemical interactions using two layer Support Vector Machine classifiers that require only readily available biochemical data, i.e. amino acid sequences of proteins and structure formulas of chemical compounds. In this article, the method has been implemented as the copic at web service, with an easy to use front end interface. Users can simply submit a protein chemical interaction prediction job using a pre trained classifier, or can even train their own classification model by uploading training data. copi cats fast and accurate computational prediction has enhanced lead compound discovery against a database of tens of millions of chemical compounds, implying that the search space for drug discovery is extended by 1000 times compared with currently well used high throughput screening methodologies. Availability: The copic at server is available at http://copicat.dna bio keio a cjp. All functions, including the prediction function are freely available via anonymous login without registration. Registered users, however, can use the system more intensively. Contact:

introduction due to the limitations in experimental methods for determining interactions between proteins and chemical compounds, a comprehensive computational approach is useful in the early stages of the drug discovery process. Although 3D structure based methods such as docking analysis () have been studied intensively in this field, they are still time consuming and not really feasible for genome wide application. To address the problem, we developed a comprehensively applicable statistical prediction method for interactions between any protein and chemical compound, that requires only protein prediction job: user chooses 'Prediction' from the side menu and submits the user's input data consisting of pairs of proteins and chemical compounds. The prediction result is returned as a list of protein chemical pairs with classification labels '1 (interact)' or '1 (non interact)' and their probabilities. Each protein and chemical compound is linked to a UniProt or PubChem database entry. Prediction against databases: the copic at web service performs a prediction job against a database by receiving the user's chemical compound or protein data as a query and returning the prediction results against all molecules in one of the system side databases. The following databases are available for use in the predictions: 'Ensembl' (79,063 entries), 'RefSeq' (39,107 entries), drug bank Approved Drug Targets' (456 entries), drug bank Approved Structure' (964 entries) and 'PubChem (23,130,811 entries)'. Prediction against PubChem is realized as a specialized function chemical blast. Training job: when a user uploads his own training data, an SVM trained with the user data is added to the pre-defined first layer SVMs and then the second layer SVM is re-trained using the augmented first layer outputs 1 Sample data: the default positive samples were obtained from drug bank. In addition, users can upload their own positive samples 2 first layer model addition: users can choose to add pre trained models to the first layer in three ways: (i) the user's own previously trained model. (ii) the system side specialized models: 'Nuclear Receptor', 'Ion Channel', 'GPCR', and 'Enzyme'. (iii) other user trained models via the model circulation function.
