The Illumina Infinium human methylation 450 bead chip (450k) is widely used for the evaluation of DNA methylation levels in large scale datasets, particularly in cancer. The 450k design allows copy number variant (CNV) calling using existing bioinformatics tools. However, in cancer samples, numerous large scale aberrations cause shifting in the probe intensities and thereby may result in erroneous CNV calling. Therefore, a baseline correction process is needed. We suggest the maximum peak of probe segment density to correct the shift in the intensities in cancer samples. Availability and implementation: copy number 450k cancer is implemented as an R package. The package with examples can be downloaded at http://cran.r

introduction dna methylation is the most studied epigenetic modification in cancer and many other diseases. Many technologies and platforms have been developed to facilitate DNA methylation analysis, such as bi sulphite conversion followed by analysis using DNA methylation arrays. The Illumina Infinium human methylation 450 bead chip (450k) provides detection of methylation levels of approximately 485000 CpG loci across the human genome (). The 450k platform is based on similar biochemical reaction principle and technology as the Infinium SNP arrays, making it possible to use the 450k platform to detect copy number variants cn vs as a zero cost by product of methylation studies (). Recently, bioinformatics tools were developed for copy number (CN) calling from methylation data (e.g. ChAMP (), copy number 450k and co num ee www bioconductor org. CN calling consists of the following principal steps: normalization of probe intensities, calculation of the Log R Ratios l rrs segmentation and determination of copy number status for each segment based on a chosen cut off level or a p value threshold. In each step different algorithms, methods and parameters can be applied. However, in cancer samples the large and numerous chromosomal duplications and deletions cause a shift in the l rrs away from the hypothetical baseline level (i.e. 2 n diploid level) resulting in erroneous CNV calling. The conventional normalization methods (e.g. Quantile and Functional normalization ()) as well as the median/ average sample centering can not overcome this problem. A similar centering problem was observed in copy number calling from array based Comparative Genomic Hybridization a cgh data for cancer samples. The density of the probes was suggested to help determine V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

description to resolve the cancer specific problem of erroneous CN calling in data derived from the 450k array, we provide a freely available R package denoted copy number 450k cancer that can run on all operating systems with installed R (version  3.0) and provides a novel functionality to correct the center in segmentation data obtained from CN calling tools such as copy number 450k and ChAMP.

conclusion cn calling from the 450k data is possible, but faces some difficulties in some cancer samples due to incorrect sample centering and baseline shifting. Without solving this issue the CN calling will be inaccurate. we copy number 450k cancer successfully tested the MDPE method on 450k cancer segmentation data. copy number 450k cancer package implements the MDPE method together with interactive reviewing to efficiently correct the baseline in cancer samples. The main advantages for copy number 450k cancer are: fast auto correction (few seconds per sample), high accuracy rate, in sample correction, no input parameters needed, low computer resources required and adaptable to 450k similar technologies.
