Motivation: With the accumulation of genome wide binding data for many transcription factors (TFs) in the same cell type or cellular condition , it is of great current interest to systematically infer the complex regulatory logic among multiple TFs. In particular, chips eq data have been generated for 14 core TFs critical to the maintenance and reprogramming of mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs). This provides a great opportunity to study the regulatory collaboration and interaction among these TFs and with other unknown co regulators. Results: In combination with liquid association among gene expression profiles, we develop a computational method to predict context dependent (CD) co egu lators of these core TFs in ESCs from pairwise binding datasets. That is, co occupancy between a core TF and a predicted co regulator depends on the presence or absence of binding sites of another core TF, which is regarded as a binding context. Unbiased external validation confirms that the predicted CD binding of a co regulator is reliable. Our results reveal a detailed CD co regulation network among the 14 core TFs and provide many other potential co regulators showing strong agreement with the literature.

introduction many efforts have been made recently to identify the core regulatory network in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs;). The network is anchored on three master regulators, namely, Oct4 (Pou5f1), Sox2 and Nanog. On the other hand, four transcription factors (TFs), Oct4, Sox2, c myc and Klf4, can reprogram somatic cells back to esc like cells having the characteristics of self renewal and plur i potency (). genome wide chips eq data provide the binding regions of 410 TFs that play key regulatory roles in mouse ESCs (). Computational analyses have been performed to identify the sequence motifs of these core TFs () and to detect other co regulators that may regulate genes by working with these TFs (). A common observation on these binding data is the partial and significant overlapping between the binding regions of almost any pair of the TFs, suggesting extensive co regulatory interactions among all of them. In general, one may define three sets of binding regions given two TFs, X and Y, that is, the co bound regions S XY, and the regions bound only by X or Y, denoted by S x ny and S yn x , respectively. From the perspective of TF X, the regions S XY and S x ny can be regarded as two different binding contexts, defined by whether binding is accompanied by TF Y. In our previous work (), we developed a specific motif discovery method, the contrast motif finder (CMF), which finds de novo motifs by contrasting two sets of sequences, say S XY and S X nY. Motifs found by CMF are differentially enriched between the two sequence sets. Applying CMF to contrast co bound sequences of Oct4 and Sox2 against sequences bound only by Oct4, we discovered novel context dependent (CD) motifs for Oct4, that is, the motif pattern recognized by Oct4 depends on the nearby Sox2 binding (). In this work, we generalize this idea to the prediction of CD co regulators of a TF. For a TF X with binding context defined by another TF Y, we aim at finding motifs that show differential enrichment between S XY and S x ny. These motifs may be bound by co regulators of TF X, dependent on the binding of Y. If a co regulator Z only works with X when Y is present, one may expect to find the motif of Z in S XY but not in S x ny. On the contrary, if Z collaborates with X when Y is absent, then the motif of Z will be enriched in S x ny but not in S XY. see for an illustration. The motif of such a CD co regulator can be reliably found by CMF when contrasting the two sets of sequences. On the other hand, gene expression profiles of the three TFs, X, Y and Z, may provide independent evidence for the potential CD co regulation. If Z is a co regulator of X when Y is present (or absent), one expects to observe strong positive correlation between the expression profiles of X and Z when the expression level of Y is high (or low) (). Such a three-way correlation pattern can be measured by liquid association (LA) developed by. By combining CD binding and LA among three TFs, we restrict our analysis to some specific CD co regulation patterns. We assume that binding site patterns are identical across all samples from which gene expression data are collected. Use the right panels in and b to demonstrate our model. The binding pattern that X co binds respectively, with Z and Y for different target genes is assumed to be true across all samples. Together with the three-way expression pattern among the three TFs, we are considering the following co regulatory relationship. When *To whom correspondence should be addressed. the expression of Y is low but that between X and Z is highly correlated, the co occurrence between the sites of X and Y is not functional (because of a lack of Y expression), while the co binding between X and Z regulates their target genes. When high expression of Y with low correlation between the expression of X and Z is observed, the opposite scenario is considered. This is of course a simplified model, which does not include other types of more general conditional co regulation. But for the data we analyzed in this work, a substantial fraction of TF triplets with CD binding in their chips eq data indeed show significant LA among their expression profiles. See Section 2.3 for details.

discussion we used a computational method to predict CD co regulators based on chips eq data of two TFs and gene expression data. This method can be applied to many available chips eq and gene expression data, and is able to decode complex combinatorial regulation among multiple regulators. Our application to mouse ESC data demonstrated the novel biological insights that can be generated by this method. In particular, we constructed a reliable CD co regulation network among 14 core TFs in mouse ESCs and identified a list of novel co regulators for future investigation. A few lines of future work may further widen the application of our approach. It is tempting to detect co regulators under more complex binding context, say, defined by the combinatorial binding of three or more TFs. However, an efficient way to identify a small set of most relevant binding contexts is crucial, as a naive comparison among all combinatorial binding regions will be prohibitive computationally. Therefore, a principled statistical method to detect combinatorial binding regions from chips eq data of multiple (potentially a large collection of) TFs is highly desired. Generalization of CMF to an efficient tool that finds differentially enriched motifs by comparing multiple sets of sequences is another necessary step. It is also interesting to study the relation between epigenetic factors and CD binding of TFs.
