Motivation: Comparative analyses of gene expression data from different species have become an important component of the study of molecular evolution. Thus methods are needed to estimate evolutionary distances between expression profiles, as well as a neutral reference to estimate selective pressure. Divergence between expression profiles of homologous genes is often calculated with Pearsons or Euclidean distance. Neutral divergence is usually inferred from randomized data. Despite being widely used, neither of these two steps has been well studied. Here, we analyze these methods formally and on real data, highlight their limitations and propose improvements. Results: It has been demonstrated that Pearsons distance, in contrast to Euclidean distance, leads to underestimation of the expression similarity between homologous genes with a conserved uniform pattern of expression. Here, we first extend this study to genes with conserved, but specific pattern of expression. Surprisingly, we find that both Pearsons and Euclidean distances used as a measure of expression similarity between genes depend on the expression specificity of those genes. We also show that the Euclidean distance depends strongly on data normalization. Next, we show that the randomization procedure that is widely used to estimate the rate of neutral evolution is biased when broadly expressed genes are abundant in the data. To overcome this problem, we propose a novel randomization procedure that is unbiased with respect to expression profiles present in the datasets. Applying our method to the mouse and human gene expression data suggests significant gene expression conservation between these species.

introduction changes in gene expression have been suggested to underlie many differences in gene function or in phenotype. More generally, expression is an important component of gene function, and studying the evolution of gene expression is a key step in evolutionary genomics. While there has been a great deal of research concerning the primary treatment of expression data in general (see, and for reviews), there has been little investigation into the methods used more specifically to quantify expression evolution (). This can make it difficult to critically assess contradictory results, such as the reports that broadly expressed genes are more conserved () or less conserved () than specifically expressed genes. To assess whether and how much expression has been conserved between two orthologous genes by selection, we need an expectation for expression similarity under neutral evolution. Thus, the estimation of gene expression conservation requires two components: (i) a measure of gene expression similarity; and (ii) the expected value of the divergence level under neutrality. The two most common measures of similarity between expression profiles of orthologous genes are Pearson's correlation coefficient () and Euclidean distance (). The results obtained with Pearson's and Euclidean distances have been reported to be poorly correlated (). This poses the question which of these measures provides a better description of expression similarity. It has been demonstrated that Pearson's correlation coefficient, in contrast to Euclidean distance, underestimates the expression similarity between orthologous genes with a conserved uniform pattern of expression. In consequence, use of the Euclidean distance has been encouraged (). For neutral evolution, one expects that similarity between expression profiles of orthologous genes gradually decreases with time. For species that have diverged for sufficiently long time no detectable similarity in expression is expected to remain; this has been postulated to be the case between mouse and human (100 million years;). It has been suggested that such large neutral divergence could be approximated by calculating the distance between expression profiles of randomly chosen pairs of genes from the species compared. The standard approach used to generate random pairs of genes is to permute the orthology relationship between them (). Here, we show formally and empirically that, in contrast to previous reports (), there exists a relationship between the Pearson's correlation coefficient and the Euclidean distance, which depends on the data normalization. We also extend the previous study of by considering more than just the uniform pattern of expression. We demonstrate that in fact both distance measures depend on the expression specificity of analyzed genes. Next, we discuss these observations in the context of the assessment of gene expression conservation. We show that the comparison of expression profiles for randomly permuted gene pairs is biased when broadly expressed genes are abundant in the data, a distribution characteristic of many datasets. To overcome this problem, we propose a novel procedure to generate random gene pairs. This procedure is not biased by the over or underrepresentation of any expression profile in the datasets. Finally, we use our approach to provide clear evidence for constrained evolution of gene expression between mouse and human.
