Motivation: Comparison of read depths from next generation sequencing between cancer and normal cells makes the estimation of copy number alteration (CNA) possible, even at very low coverage. However, estimating CNA from patients tumour samples poses considerable challenges due to infiltration with normal cells and aneuploid cancer genomes. Here we provide a method that corrects contamination with normal cells and adjusts for genomes of different sizes so that the actual copy number of each region can be estimated. Results: The procedure consists of several steps. First, we identify the multi-modality of the distribution of smoothed ratios. Then we use the estimates of the mean (modes) to identify underlying ploidy and the contamination level, and finally we perform the correction. The results indicate that the method works properly to estimate genomic regions with gains and losses in a range of simulated data as well as in two datasets from lung cancer patients. It also proves a powerful tool when analysing publicly available data from two cell lines (HCC1143 and COLO829). Availability: An R package, called cna norm is available at

introduction cancer cells often exhibit severe karyotypic alterations: whole chromosome gain or loss and structural rearrangements such as amplifications, deletions and translocations result in widespread aneuploidy (). The ability to detect copy number alterations (CNAs) of cancer cells is a crucial step to access the severity of chromosomal rearrangements and to find chromosomal regions where breakpoints are located. Furthermore, comparison of CNAs across tumours from different patients makes it possible to find regions commonly duplicated or lost to highlight the locations of cancer related genes. Several methodologies are available to detect CNAs. Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) (), array CGH a cgh (To whom correspondence should be addressed. 1998), single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array () and, more recently, a new generation of sequencing machines enabled massively parallel sequencing (Roche 454, Illumina ga ii his eq mi seq ABI SOLiD, Ion Torrent PGM), making it possible to sequence full genomes at affordable cost. We previously showed () how it is possible to multiplex several samples in one Illumina ga ii lane making copy number analysis by sequencing affordable and competitive with a cgh or SNP arrays. Between one and eight million aligning reads (compared to approximately half a billion reads for full coverage) are enough to provide genome wide CNA at 50 kb resolution. As we expect sequencing technologies to become more widespread, affordable and accurate, copy number analysis by low coverage sequencing will become even more convenient and informative. Furthermore, sequencing is possible even with low amounts of DNA extracted from formalin fixed paraffin embedded specimens (). Finally, one advantage of sequencing compared with array technology is that the signal scales linearly to the input DNA and does not show saturation nor background noise typical of hybridization techniques. One of the first steps to take when analysing these data is normalization. The total intensity of signal from array technology or the total number of reads from sequencing does not reflect the total DNA content of the cells of interest, but it is largely determined by various technical aspects, tuned to achieve the maximum intensity range (array technology) or highest number of reads (sequencing). The normalization is a crucial, non-trivial and often underestimated step which can have enormous repercussions on downstream analysis and conclusions. In this article, we present a computational tool, called cna norm to correct, normalize and scale the data from low coverage sequencing experiments.

discussion we have investigated a method to estimate CNA from patient tumour samples using next generation sequencing. We showed how the method performs with a range of simulated data, on low coverage data from patients' samples and on higher coverage data from cell lines. Compared with several segmentation tools available to analyse high throughput sequencing data, cna norm focuses on correcting the data for contamination, different read depth and different genomic size. We acknowledge that the problem could lead to several equally valid solutions, but provide an easy way for the user to correct the estimation from cna norm when independent clues (such as tumour content, or strong and independent evidence about ploidy of certain regions) are available. We believe that the normalization step is often underestimated or, due to its intrinsic difficulty and plurality of solution, left to a simplistic approach that assumes that the overall size of a cancer genome is comparable with that of a normal cell. With the data from the two cell lines (HCC1143 and COLO829), we have shown how information on tumour content, ploidy of some chromosomes and overall ploidy could guide the experimenter to perform a more meaningful normalization. At the same time, cna norm could provide further insight on the cancer material analysed. When no external information is available, e.g. in the case of patients tumours LS041 and LS010, cna norm performs the most conservative normalization. In this regard, if regions of homozygous deletions could be identified and confirmed, they would be a valuable guide during the normalization process. Despite being a powerful tool, cna norm is not a 'silver bullet' for CNA analysis. In particular, we would like to point out how polyclonal tumours could produce misleading results. If several tumour clones, each with its gains and loss, constitute the tumour sample, it will not be possible to detect the underlying ploidy and the mixture model approach would over fit distributions within a single ploidy range. cna norm is meant to be robust and clonal variability in a few chromosomal regions would not be problematic. However, in these cases, cna norm would tend to underestimate tumour content. This is, in our opinion, what happens with cell lines HCC1143 and COLO829. Although the cell line should be 100% tumour, cna norm estimates only 87 and 90%, respectively. We think this is due to some variability within cells. This variability can be observed, for instance, in HCC1143 where the copy number of the long arm of Chromosome 2, or Chromosome 6 are, unlike most of the rest of the genome, not close to any integer copy number. Since we are aware of possible polyclonal variability, we chose an approach and a segmentation tool, dna copy that does not force every region of the genome to fit into an integer copy number. Clues about polyclonal variation are, per se, potentially informative.

conclusion next generation sequencing data from clinical samples obtained directly from patients presents a serious challenge. Analysis of CNAs in tumour samples is not straightforward. This is because the observed raw copy number ratios do not necessarily take the expected values due to random error, different sequencing coverage and contamination with normal cells. We deal with the random error using smoothing methods. The other challenges are dealt with by acknowledging the multi-modality in the distribution of the segmented copy number ratios. This allows us to model the locations of the distribution of ratios corresponding to the different copy numbers and make the necessary correction. The simulation study shows that the method works properly to estimate genomic regions with gains and losses and that it works well in a range of real datasets from patients' samples and cell lines.
