Motivation: whole genome sequencing (WGS) allows direct interrogation of previously undetected uncommon or rare variants, which potentially contribute to the missing heritability of human disease. However, cost of sequencing large numbers of samples limits its application in case control association studies. Here, we describe theoretical and empirical design considerations for such sequencing studies, aimed at maximizing the power of detecting association under the constraint of study wide cost. Results: We consider two cost regimes. First, assuming cost is proportional to the total amount of base pairs to be sequenced across all samples, which is a practical model for whole genome sequencing, we explored the tradeoff in terms of study power between increasing the number of subjects and increasing depth coverage. We demonstrate that the optimal power of detecting association is achieved at medium depth coverage under a wide range of realistic conditions for case only sequencing designs. Second, if cost is fixed per sample, which is approximately the case in exo me sequencing, we show that in a simple case control sequencing study, the optimal design should include cases totaling 1/e of all subjects. Availability: A web tool implementing the methods is available at

introduction genome wide association studies g was have greatly improved our understanding of the genetics of human diseases (). However, for the majority of common diseases, substantial fractions of heritability remain to be explained. Rare variants, which are under the radar of g was are suggested to have significant contributions to missing heritability (). Complete ascertainment of rare variants requires genome wide resequencing, which is now feasible thanks to the development of next generation sequencing technologies (). exo me sequencing () and whole genome sequencing (WGS) () have been successfully applied to * To whom correspondence should be addressed. identify rare causal variants of Mendelian diseases. In these studies, a causal gene was implicated if it harbors rare functional mutations that are shared among cases but absent in controls or single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) databases. Extending this approach to association studies of complex diseases requires more than a handful of samples, because the causal variants of such conditions only have statistical effect (). Therefore, it is necessary to carefully consider the design of such studies under the constraint of limited resources. A critical technical attribute of WGS data is the number of times each site is observed in a sequencing read, usually termed the depth of coverage. depth of coverage is a key determinant of quality for sequencing information, and in particular, w.r.t. rare variants. Accuracy and completeness of detection and calling such variants from sequencing depend on high depth of coverage due to the randomness of read placement () and non negligible error rate (). Higher depth coverage for variant discovery and genotyping is attainable by using more sequencing resources (e.g. Illumina lanes) per sequenced sample. However, given a fixed budget, more sequencing per sample is in conflict with analyzing a large sample size, which is required for adequate statistical power of detecting associations. Here, we propose to resolve this tradeoff by finding the design that maximizes the power for detecting associations of rare variants. We define rare variants as the ones with minor allele frequency (MAF)  1% in the population, and uncommon variants as the ones with MAF between 1 and 5%. Here, we use the term rare variants to include both rare and uncommon variants.
