Next generation sequencing (NGS) techniques have been widely used to document the small ribonucleic acids (RNAs) implicated in a variety of biological, physiological and pathological processes. An integrated computational tool is needed for handling and analysing the enormous datasets from small RNA deep sequencing approach. Herein, we present a novel web server, CPSS (a computational platform for the analysis of small RNA deep sequencing data), designed to completely annotate and functionally analyse microRNAs (miRNAs) from NGS data on one platform with a single data submission. Small RNA NGS data can be submitted to this server with analysis results being returned in two parts: (i) annotation analysis, which provides the most comprehensive analysis for small RNA transcriptome, including length distribution and genome mapping of sequencing reads, small RNA quantification, prediction of novel miRNAs, identification of differentially expressed miRNAs, piwi interacting RNAs and other non-coding small RNAs between paired samples and detection of miRNA editing and modifications and (ii) functional analysis, including prediction of miRNA targeted genes by multiple tools, enrichment of gene ontology terms, signalling pathway involvement and protein protein interaction analysis for the predicted genes. CPSS, a ready to use web server that integrates most functions of currently available bioinformatics tools, provides all the information wanted by the majority of users from small RNA deep sequencing datasets. Availability: CPSS is implemented in php perl mysql r and can be freely accessed at

introduction noncoding ribonucleic acids (RNAs), which do not encode proteins, include ribosomal RNAs, transfer RNAs, microRNAs (miRNA), piwi interacting RNAs pirn as and other RNA species. These RNAs participate in a surprisingly diverse collection of regulatory events (). miRNAs have received particular attention due to their negative role in widespread regulation of mRNA metabolism through direct base pairing interactions at transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels (). To better understand the regulatory roles of miRNAs and other small RNAs in different tissues and developmental stages, the expression profiles of small RNAs need to be assessed. Recently, the emergence of the next generation sequencing (NGS) techniques has revolutionized the identification of small RNAs with particularly high levels of sensitivity and accuracy (). Several published tools detecting non-coding RNA profiles from NGS data have been developed. For example, mir express () is a stand-alone software for detecting known miRNAs and novel miRNAs. mir analyzer (), which also offers stand-alone version, is a web server tool that can detect known and novel miRNAs, identify differentially expressed miRNAs and predict miRNA targets. seq buster (), offering a web based toolkit and stand-alone version, focuses on detecting miRNA variants isoforms for known miRNAs and can also be used to identify differentially expressed miRNAs and predict miRNA targets. There are several recent comprehensive tools designed to analyse NGS data. mir tools () is a web based tool designed to explore the genome map and length distribution of short reads and to classify them into known categories, to detect differentially expressed miRNAs and to predict novel miRNAs and their secondary structures. DARIO () is a free web service for detecting and normalizing non-coding RNA expression and predicting novel non-coding RNAs. wap rna () is not used only to detect miRNA expression profile from small RNA NGS data but also to analyse mRNA NGS data (detailed overview of CPSS and other 13 bio inform tics tools are shown in Supplementary). Until now, none of the currently available tools provides functional analysis for predicted targets of miRNAs from NGS data, which could help users to find potentially candidate genes pathways for further experimental or computational studies. Thus, a comprehensive and systematic tool, integrating most features of previous tools with functional analysis for predicted targets of miRNAs from NGS data, is still needed. Herein, we present a novel and free web server, CPSS, which integrates most functions of currently available bioinformatics tools supplementary and Supplementary). By using CPSS, small RNA NGS data can be analysed systematically in one platform after a single submission of data by integration of annotation and functional analysis of novel and or differentially expressed miRNAs. CPSS generates an analysis report including i annotation analysis, which provides a comprehensive analysis for small RNA transcriptome, such as length distribution and genome mapping of sequencing reads, small RNA annotation, prediction of novel miRNAs, identification of differentially expressed miRNAs, pirn as and other non-coding small RNAs between paired samples and detection of miRNA editing and modifications and (ii) functional analysis, which provides the functional analysis of miRNAs, e.g. predicting miRNA target genes by multi-tools, enriching gene ontology (GO) terms, performing signalling pathways and analysing protein protein interaction (PPI) for the predicted genes ().
