Advances in sequencing technology have greatly reduced the costs incurred in collecting raw sequencing data. Academic laboratories and researchers therefore now have access to very large data-sets of genomic alterations but limited time and computational resources to analyse their potential biological importance. Here, we provide a web based application, cancer related Analysis of Variants Toolkit, designed with an easy to use interface to facilitate the high throughput assessment and prioritization of genes and mis-sense alterations important for cancer tumorigenesis. cancer related Analysis of Variants Toolkit provides predictive scores for germline variants , somatic mutations and relative gene importance, as well as annotations from published literature and databases. Results are emailed to users as MS Excel spreadsheets and or tab separated text files.

introduction with the advent of high throughput sequencing technology, researchers face a bottleneck in terms of the time required to analyse the potential impact on disease aetiology of the many genetic variants routinely detected. Computational algorithms can in principle help researchers to prioritize and direct future experiments by narrowing down the numerous genetic alterations identified in sequencing studies. However, in practice, it can be challenging to run these algorithms in a researcher's own laboratory, owing to the requirements of third party software and databases, and large hard disk space and RAM specifications. We have developed cancer related Analysis of VAriants Toolkit (CRAVAT), a web based application that provides a simple interface to prioritize genes and variants important for tumorigenesis, allowing users to assess millions of variants in a single upload step (). Numerous web implementations already exist for variant classifiers [reviewed in. CRAVAT handles both germline and somatic variation but is dedicated to cancer genome analysis. It accepts variant calls from sequencing studies in either genomic coordinates (hg18 or hg19) or transcript coordinates ncbi Refseq, CCDS and Ensembl (). Variants are mapped onto the best available transcript, using a greedy algorithm (see Supplementary Methods), and those variants that cause missense changes are identified. These variants can be scored in terms of their predicted impact on tumorigenesis, using the cancer specific high throughput Annotation of Somatic Mutations (CHASM) method (). They can also be scored by their predicted impact on protein function, with the Variant Effect Scoring Tool (VEST) (). Genes are ranked by their most significantly scored variant or mutation. Results are linked with published information from the 1000 Genomes Project (), the exo me Sequencing Project, Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) (), GeneCards () and PubMed, enabling users to compare predictions with known gene function, cancer associations and clinical experimental studies. CRAVAT returns results via email in Excel and or tab separated text. It can also provide a formatted submission file for mutation Position Imaging Toolbox mup it interactive n nik nafs et al., submitted for publication), allowing users to visualize variants interactively in 3D, together with position specific annotations.

discussion we provide an example to demonstrate how the CRAVAT web server can prioritize and facilitate mutation analysis. We obtained genomic coordinates of 184 824 mutations from The Cancer Genome Atlas sequencing study of 248 endometrial tumors from Firehose. We limited our submission to mutations that were called as 'missense' by Firehose, yielding 121 440 mutations. Options for 'Cancer Driver Analysis', 'CHASM', 'Uterus' tissue type and 'Include gene annotation' were selected. Results were received via email after 16 h: Excel spreadsheet with pages for 'Variant Analysis', 'Amino Acid Level Analysis' and 'Gene Level Analysis' and a separate text file to visualize amino acid substitutions in mup it. On the 'Variant Analysis' sheet, 1066 mutations, of which 800 were unique, received a CHASM false discovery rate 0.3. Many significantly scored mutations were involved in pathways previously determined to impact endometrial cancer, e.g. PI3K, Wnt signalling, MAPK signalling and p53 signalling pathways (). Several genes from these pathways (PIK3CA, PTEN, TP53, KRAS and CTNNB1) were known endometrial cancer driver genes (). In addition to identifying well known drivers, CHASM identified potential drivers not previously associated with endometrial cancer, in biologically relevant pathways: viz mt or in the PI3K pathway and GSK-3B in the Wnt signalling pathway).
