

introduction biological systems are complex systems, which are investigated separately on different levels and with different biological approaches and methods. The cycle of knowledge acquisition in biology starts usually with biological experiments to investigate interesting phenomena. The generated data is used to create a model and build hypothesis, which then can be tested by further experiments. All experiments performed in this cycle result in large datasets from different data domains, such as structural or functional image based investigations, graph based modeling approaches, numeric measurements at different time points and spatial resolution such as cell, tissue and organ level. Such data is gathered from different groups around the world in increasing quantity and quality. There is need for an integrated view on several biological data domains to analyze manifold cause and effect in the systems. All data gathered from a biological system is in context of each other and there for data integration may provide a more complete view on the system, facilitating knowledge beyond the intended results of single experiments (). It could be shown that the combination of networks and omics data is useful and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. leads to novel insight into data and biological systems (). We expand such approaches by considering spatial data, in order to be able to account for additional spatial systemic properties and often occurring data types. There have been numerous database oriented integration approaches developed (for example,), which partly provide world-wide integration of multidomain biological data, but many biological researchers are overwhelmed by the number of specialized databases, sheer data flood and un handy web interfaces. Most researchers seek for broad combination of their own data together with data from selected databases and collaborators, in the best case in one application. Consequently, there is need for an approach, which allows researchers to access and handle their data on their own computer and import data from different sources and collaborators. Complex data and several data types shall be combined and visualized in many ways, not only providing overview and insight, but also publication ready illustrations. On the one hand, there are quite a number of applications available integrating data on the database level, such as, local applications combining networks and experimental data [for a list see and 2D/3D data integration tools (). On the other hand, flexible integration of more than two different data types in one application, running locally on standard computers, is sparse. Therefore, we propose a method, which formalizes and supports the biologists workflow from the measurements to a proper visualization of the data (), together with navigation and exploration possibilities, allowing researchers to reproduce and revisit experimental results. There are two main requirements: first, it should be possible to integrate data from different experiments, realizing the multi personal multi methodological nature of biological data acquisition. Navigation, filtering and exploration possibilities will help to understand how the experiments are structured. Second, it should be possible to combine and visualize data resulting in integrated views on data from different sources and types. Visualization and data mapping approaches will help to understand what the data represent in the real system. In this article, we will focus mainly on methodological and theoretical aspects of the integration and visualization of multidomain data in an application. The structure of this article is as follows: we propose a method to integrate multimodal data at the metadata metadata graph and measurement mapping graph level and show how this allows to combine, analyze and navigate through the data by user interaction. After this, integration views to visualize combined data are explained and an application to barley data is described. finally step 1) starting with a number of measurements, which are annotated with metadata, the data get integrated into the metadata graph which allows to visualize and explore the relationship between the data on the metadata level (Step 2). Step 3: All measurements from different data domains can be combined together into 'mappings' using the mapping graph. Mappings can be visualized, allowing to create views on integrated biological data. Step 4: These integration views promote understanding of complex biological system and also serve as publication ready images. we discuss the implementation and some properties of the presented application.

discussion we presented the theoretical and methodological foundations of an application supporting the integration and visualization of biological multidomain data. Several users with biological and computer science background had time to get used to the workflow and work with a prepared project and example data. After this, personal discussions with the scientists revealed that after a short period of vocational adjustment,. the complex application workflow is logical and productive, despite the unfamiliar graph based interface, which is similar to the pool window in the Amira application (). They rated it as a good approach capable of realizing complex use cases given by biological researchers and supporting them in their daily work. At the moment, our scientific partners do not possess comprehensive datasets consisting of all the different data types from the same species. We will evaluate our integration approach when such datasets emerge in more detail. The scalability of the application is good with the currently considered datasets. Often biological experiments consists of 1001000 data records, and even tens of such experiments can be handled with standard PCs at any time. As our approach supports measurement working sets (by hiding object nodes in the metadata graph researchers are able to temporarily hide parts of the experimental data they are not interested in, while performing specific tasks. Prospective increase of data quantity can be faced with optimization of the performance and memory consumption of the underlying framework van ted improved data storage and increased screen size. Management and persistent storing of hundred of experiments is not intended by our approach, but can be realized by connecting to the DBE database () using the respective van ted Add-on. The network sizes are limited by the underlying framework and work up to 50 000 nodes. The implementation of the 3D view provides a variety of interaction and model alteration possibilities, but needs especially for high resolution volumetric data ( 50 million voxels) much memory at the moment. Improvements, such as swapping the data to the graphics card, may be included, but would end in reduced interaction possibilities [similar to].

conclusion we described a methodology and an application, which is able to bring together data from different data domains. The integration is realized by the metadata graph and the mapping graph focusing on different aspects of the data integration. Both graphs support user interaction, allowing to navigate through the data and realizing a workflow from the imported data to combined and visualized data. The application is able to bring several biological data domains together in a formalized way, guiding the user to explore, understand and visualize the data. This approach can also be useful for researchers of different fields of science, such as theoretical biology, systems biology and medicine. Further extensions are to link the application to other tools, in order to realize complex mapping functions by utilizing problem specific solutions. We will develop more mapping functions and extent the set of visualization functions, to be able to provide a broader range of biological data combinations and visualizations. This includes working with different domain scientists in order to integrate data of different sources and modalities together. By doing this the application example can be extended and the approach also validated for other species, such as human or bacterial data.
