The CRISPR/Cas9 system was recently developed as a powerful and flexible technology for targeted genome engineering, including genome editing (altering the genetic sequence) and gene regulation (without altering the genetic sequence). These applications require the design of single guide RNAs sg rnas that are efficient and specific. However, this remains challenging, as it requires the consideration of many criteria. Several sg rna design tools have been developed for gene editing, but currently there is no tool for the design of sg rnas for gene regulation. With accumulating experimental data on the use of CRISPR/Cas9 for gene editing and regulation, we implement a comprehensive computational tool based on a set of sg rna design rules summarized from these published reports. We report a genome wide sg rna design tool and provide an online web-site for predicting sg rnas that are efficient and specific. We name the tool crisp re ra for clustered regularly inter spaced short palindromic repeat mediated editing, repression, and activation (ERA). Availability and implementation: http://CRISPR-ERA

introduction the bacterial adaptive immune system, crisp r (clustered regularly inter spaced short palindromic repeats), was recently developed as a powerful and multi-purpose technology for genome engineering, including editing (modifying the genomic sequence) (), and regulation (repressing or activating expression of genes) (). The system is highly programmable, utilizing a single protein, the nuclease Cas9 for editing or the nuclease deficient dCas9 for regulation. A single guide RNA sg rna is required for precise and programmable DNA targeting (). Effective and specific genome engineering requires careful design of sg rnas which remains a major challenge. Computational tools have been used to facilitate the design of sg rnas for crisp r editing but not for other applications such as transcriptional regulation. These computational tools should enable automated sg rna design and off target site validation (). A major goal of our designer tool is to address the discrepancy for designing sg rnas that allow efficient and highly specific repression or activation of genes and for generating genome wide sg rna libraries for genetic screening in different organisms.
