Motivation: Expression databases, including the Gene Expression Omnibus and array express have experienced significant growth over the past decade and now hold hundreds of thousands of arrays from multiple species. Since most drugs are initially tested on model organisms, the ability to compare expression experiments across species may help identify pathways that are activated in a similar way in humans and other organisms. However, while several methods exist for finding co-expressed genes in the same species as a query gene, looking at co-expression of homologs or arbitrary genes in other species is challenging. Unlike sequence, which is static, expression is dynamic and changes between tissues, conditions and time. Thus, to carry out cross species analysis using these databases, we need methods that can match experiments in one species with experiments in another species. Results: To facilitate queries in large databases, we developed a new method for comparing expression experiments from different species. We define a distance metric between the ranking of orthologous genes in the two species. We show how to solve an optimization problem for learning the parameters of this function using a training dataset of known similar expression experiments pairs. The function we learn outperforms previous methods and simpler rank comparison methods that have been used in the past for single species analysis. We used our method to compare millions of array pairs from mouse and human expression experiments. The resulting matches can be used to find functionally related genes, to hypothesize about biological response mechanisms and to highlight conditions and diseases that are activating similar pathways in both species. Availability: Supporting methods, results and a Matlab implementation are available from

introduction advances in sequencing technology have led to a remarkable growth in the size of sequence databases over the past two decades. This has allowed researchers to study newly sequenced genes by utilizing knowledge about their homologs in other species (). Alignment and search methods, most notably BLAST (), have become standard tools and are extensively used by molecular biologists. cross species analysis of sequence data * To whom correspondence should be addressed is now a standard practice. However, similar usage of expression databases has not materialized. Expression databases, including Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO; www ncbi nih gov geo and array express wwweb iac uk databases microarray html hold hundreds of thousands of arrays from multiple species (). Co-expression is a powerful method for assigning new function to genes within a single species (). If we are able to identify a large set of matched expression experiments across species this method can be extended and used in a cross species analysis setting as well. Consider a human gene with unknown function that is co-expressed (across many different conditions) with a mouse gene with known function. This information can provide useful clues about the function of the human gene. This information is also useful for identifying orthologs. If a gene has multiple homologs in another species then the homolog with the highest co-expression similarity in several conditions is likely its orthologs since they are involved in the same processes in both species. While promising, querying expression datasets to identify coexpressed genes in other species is challenging. Unlike sequence, which is static, expression is dynamic and changes between tissues, conditions and time. Thus, a key challenge is to match experiments in one species with experiments in another species. Almost all studies that have analyzed expression datasets in multiple species relied on one of the two methods. They have either carried out experiments under the same condition in multiple species or have looked at coexpression within a species and tested whether these relationships are retained across species. Examples of the former set of methods include comparison of cell cycle experiments across species (), comparing response programs () and comparing tissue expression between human and mouse (). Examples of the latter strategy include the meta gene
