Motivation: off target activity commonly exists in RNA interference (RNAi) screens and often generates false positives. Existing analytic methods for addressing the off target effects are demonstrably inadequate in RNAi confirmatory screens. Results: Here, we present an analytic method assessing the collective activity of multiple short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting a gene. Using this method, we can not only reduce the impact of off target activities, but also evaluate the specific effect of an siRNA, thus providing information about potential off target effects. Using in house RNAi screens, we demonstrate that our method obtains more reasonable and sensible results than current methods such as the redundant siRNA activity (RSA) method, the RNAi gene enrichment ranking (RIGER) method, the frequency approach and the t test
introduction rnai high throughput screening (HTS) is broadly used in the identification of genes associated with specific biological phenotypes (). However, false positives generated by non-specific effects can lead to false leads and the use of resources to explore non-productive research tracks (). To reduce the impact of off target effects * To whom correspondence should be addressed ie. the rnai mediated event in which unintended mRNAs with sequence homology to the RNAi oligonucleotide are degraded) in the screening process, researchers typically examine the collective activity of multiple siRNAs (i.e. siRNA duplexes, also called siRNA singles) with different sequences against a single target gene (). The major reason for doing so is that the off target effects of these siRNAs are likely to have different directions and thus may be cancelled out in their collective activity, whereas the on target effects of these siRNAs should be in the same direction and may have substantial magnitude (at least not be cancelled out) when considered collectively. Accordingly, analytic methods try to capture the collective activity of multiple siRNAs targeting the same gene. The straightforward analytic method is the so called 'frequency approach'. Generally, a gene is selected as a hit if at least 25% of the siRNAs against the gene are selected as hits (for example, two out of seven siRNAs) (). The frequency approach has two major issues: (i) it may produce contradictory results: a gene may be selected as both upregulated and downregulated hits and (ii) it does not directly assess all the collective activity. recently proposed the RSA method in which they examine the rank distribution of all siRNAs targeting a gene and calculate the statistical significance (or p value of all siRNAs targeting a gene being unusually distributed toward the top ranking slots based on an iterative hypergeometric distribution equation. A single p value is associated with a gene so that all siRNAs for the same gene are assigned an identical p value. A feature of this approach is that a gene with multiple moderately active siRNAs is weighted more heavily than a gene with fewer active siRNAs. A potential barrier for applying this approach is that it requires two arbitrary thresholds to initially define active siRNAs and negative sirnas proposed the RIGER method that does not need such arbitrary thresholds. The RIGER method assigns an enrichment score for a given gene according to the distribution of measured values of its siRNAs within the rank list of all siRNAs using a two sample weighted 'Zc' statistic based on the likelihood ratio (). The p value corresponding to the enrichment score for each gene is calculated. In both RSA and RIGER methods, the null distribution is formed from all the siRNAs in the entire list in an experiment. However, to limit experimental cost, many genome scale RNAi screens do not use multiple siRNAs against a gene in the primary screen. In fact, most genome scale RNAi screening projects start with a primary screen where thousands of siRNA pools (three to four siRNA duplexes per well) are investigated with or without replicates. The hits from the primary screen without replicates are usually investigated in one or more confirmatory screens where each pool has replicates. The genes selected from either primary or confirmatory screens are further investigated by designing multiple siRNAs per gene in a screen. The screen in which the phenotypic effects of multiple siRNAs per targeted gene are measured separately is called a deconvolution screen. Therefore, most of the genes included in a deconvolution screen should have non-zero effects. Consequently, both RSA and RIGER methods are suitable for a primary screen where most siRNAs should have no or very small effects. They are inappropriate for a deconvolution screen where all siRNAs are pre-selected to have a large effect. We present a method using the strictly standardized mean difference ss md to directly assess collective activity of multiple siRNAs targeting a gene. ss md can also be applied to one siRNA pool or one siRNA (). To distinguish these two types of ss md we use css md to denote the ss md for collective activity of multiple siRNAs. Like RSA and RIGER, css md captures the collective activity of multiple siRNAs against a gene, thus minimizing the impact of off target effects. Unlike RSA and RIGER, the css md method does not form the null distribution from all investigated siRNAs in a screen; thus, it works effectively for both primary and confirmatory screens with multiple siRNAs against a gene. We use three in house RNAi screening projects to demonstrate the utility of the css md method compared with the RSA, RIGER, t test and frequency approach.
