Sequence comparison of genetic material between known and unknown organisms plays a crucial role in genomics, meta genomics and phylogenetic analysis. The emerging long read sequencing technologies can now produce reads of tens of kilobases in length that promise a more accurate assessment of their origin. To facilitate the classification of long and short DNA sequences , we have developed a Python package that implements a new sequence classification model that we have demonstrated to improve the classification accuracy when compared with other state of the art classification methods. For the purpose of validation, and to demonstrate its usefulness, we test the combined sequence similarity score classifier css scl using three different datasets, including a meta genomic dataset composed of short reads. Availability and implementation: Packages source code and test datasets are available under the GPLv3 license at https://github.com/oicr-ibc/cssscl.

introduction one important problem in computational molecular biology is the correct classification of unknown DNA sequences, given a database of sequences of known origin. next generation sequencing technologies have dramatically accelerated the study of microbial and viral genomes with the promise of uncovering thousands of previously unknown species. These high throughput studies have, however, produced mostly short read data (i.e. reads between 100 and 400 bp in length) that present a great challenge for phylogenetic classification (and other related meta genomic analysis () or automated genome assemblies (). Emerging long read sequencing technologies such as pac bio RS and Oxford nano pore MinION can already generate sequences over tens of kb in length that for the first time allow highly accurate automated assemblies of finished bacterial genomes (. In this article, we introduce the css scl package for taxonomic classification of DNA sequences that implements the classification model presented in our recent paper (), we describe its features and show its effectiveness at classifying sequences using three different datasets.

conclusion we propose a new Python package called css scl to facilitate the accurate taxonomic classification of long and short DNA sequences. By using three new datasets, we confirm the results of our previous findings and show that the implementation of our model presented in is correct and capable of classifying both viral and bacterial sequences with high precision and recall and within a reasonable time frame. Future work will include assessing the performance of additional similarity measures that could be added to the css scl package.
