Motivation: Cell tracking is an important method to quantitatively analyze time-lapse microscopy data. While numerous methods and tools exist for tracking cells in 2D time-lapse images, only few and very application specific tracking tools are available for 3D time-lapse images, which is of high relevance in immuno imaging in particular for studying the motility of microglia in vivo. Results: We introduce a novel algorithm for tracking cells in 3D time-lapse microscopy data, based on computing co segmentations between component trees representing individual time frames using the so called tree assignments. For the first time, our method allows to track microglia in three dimensional confocal time-lapse microscopy images. We also evaluate our method on synthetically generated data, demonstrating that our algorithm is robust even in the presence of different types of inhomogeneous background noise. Availability: Our algorithm is implemented in the ct3d package, which is available under

introduction capturing the motility of cells using time-lapse microscopy has become an important approach to understanding processes such as the cell cycle (), neuronal division and migration (), immune response () or the development of cancer (). Based on phase contrast confocal or two photon microscopy, such live cell imaging protocols are now commonly established and corresponding equipment is commonly available. This has triggered the need for computational methods to quantitatively analyze timelapse microscopy data. In this context, identifying individual cells and tracking their identities over time is one of the basic ingredients for computational analysis. Hence, cell tracking algorithms have attracted considerable attention in recent years (). Here, we introduce a novel algorithm for cell tracking that allows to track cells, in particular zebrafish microglia, in 3D two photon image sequences over time. The majority of cell tracking algorithms, as surveyed by or Miura (2005), deals with cell tracking in 2D over time. Methods range from linking cells identified in individual frames using different segmentation approaches to active contour () or level set algorithms (). The challenges imposed by the nature of the images to be analyzed lie in phenomena such as cell divisions (), cells entering or leaving the displayed area, or a large number of cells that needs to be tracked simultaneously. In addition, cell tracking is often complicated by background inhomogeneity, for instance due to uneven illumination (), and cells touching each other. While these issues have been addressed extensively for tracking cells in 2D, surprisingly few approaches have addressed cell tracking in 3D. Besides naive thresholding approaches, there are only few advanced approaches, such as the active contour based method proposed by. Recently, several authors () proposed reliable methods for tracking centrosomes in caenorhabditis e leg ans embryos. Yet, these approaches are tailored toward tracking small, bright and circular objects which e.g. resemble a Gaussian spot of a specific size. Such assumptions, however, are not satisfied by the complex and highly variable shapes of microglia under consideration here. Cell tracking is also relevant in the context of tracking cell populations in vitro, which has attracted considerable attention recently (). The lack of methods for tracking cells in 3D has been reported as a limiting factor, for instance in the context of immuno imaging (). Despite the well established protocol to capture microglia, innate immune cells in the central nervous system, in 3D using two photon microscopy following the seminal works by, motility analysis has been performed by (and limited to) manual estimations derived from 2D projections () in the numerous studies following these protocols. In fact, tracking microglia cells is complicated by several aspects. Microglia tightly contact specific brain structures in their resting state (), often making it difficult to clearly separate them from their surrounding page 565 564571
