Motivation: New high throughput sequencing technologies have promoted the production of short reads with dramatically low unit cost. The explosive growth of short read datasets poses a challenge to the mapping of short reads to reference genomes, such as the human genome, in terms of alignment quality and execution speed. Results: We present cu shaw a parallelized short read aligner based on the compute unified device architecture (CUDA) parallel programming model. We exploit cuda compatible graphics hardware as accelerators to achieve fast speed. Our algorithm uses a quality aware bounded search approach based on the Burrows– Wheeler transform (BWT) and the ferra gina manzini index to reduce the search space and achieve high alignment quality. Performance evaluation, using simulated as well as real short read datasets, reveals that our algorithm running on one or two graphics processing units achieves significant speedups in terms of execution time, while yielding comparable or even better alignment quality for paired end alignments compared with three popular bwt based aligners: Bowtie, BWA and SOAP2. cu shaw also delivers competitive performance in terms of single nucleotide polymorphism calling for an Escherichia coli test dataset. Availability:

introduction the emergence of high throughput sequencing technologies have led to an explosive growth of the size and availability of short read datasets. It is therefore important and challenging to efficiently and effectively map the sheer volume of short reads to genomes as large as the human genome for existing short read aligners. Existing aligners are mainly based on two approaches: hash tables and suffix prefix tries. The aligners based on hash tables either hash the short reads or the reference genome. By hashing short reads, aligners including r map (), MAQ () and SHRiMP () usually have a flexible memory footprint but may have the overhead introduced by scanning the whole genome when few reads are aligned. By hashing the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. reference genome, aligners such as SOAP (), PASS () and b fast () can be efficiently parallelized using multiple threads but require large amounts of memory to construct an index for the reference genome. The aligners based on suffix prefix tries essentially perform in exact matching based on exact matching. Compared with hash tables, the advantage of the use of tries is that only one search pass is needed to find the alignments to multiple identical copies of a substring in the reference genome, whereas the hash tables need to perform one search pass for each copy. The search using suffix prefix tries must rely on some algorithms and data structures, one such combination is the burrows wheeler transform (BWT) () and the ferra gina manzini (FM) index (). Several short read aligners have been developed based on the BWT and the FM index, including the popular Bowtie (), BWA () and SOAP2 (). These three aligners provide support for two types of alignments: seeded alignment, where the high quality end of a read is used as the seed and end to end alignment. Moreover, paired end mapping is usually also supported. Bowtie does not support gapped alignment, and SOAP2 and BWA support both un gapped and gapped alignments. The three aligners have been parallelized using multi-threading and are optimized for multi-core CPUs. Even though these aligners are fast, they are still time consuming for large scale re-sequencing applications. The emerging many core graphics processing units (GPUs) have evolved to be a powerful choice, in addition to multi-core CPUs and other accelerators such as cell be for the high performance computing world. Their compute power has been demonstrated to reduce the execution time in a range of demanding bioinformatics applications including sequence alignment (), motif discovery () and short read error correction (). These successes have motivated us to use GPU computing to accelerate short read alignment. As a first step implemented a short read aligner based on the hash table approach using GPUs. However, this aligner can only work for small scale microbial genomes and does not support paired end mapping. In this article, we present cu shaw a parallelized algorithm to align short reads to large genomes, such as the human genome. It uses a quality aware bounded search approach based on the BWT and the FM index and exploits compute unified device architecture cuda compatible GPUs to accelerate the alignment process. The performance of our algorithm is compared
