Database search is the most widely used approach for peptide and protein identification in mass spectrometry based prote-omics studies. Our previous study showed that sample specific protein databases derived from rnase q data can better approximate the real protein pools in the samples and thus improve protein identification. More importantly, single nucleotide variations, short insertion and deletions and novel junctions identified from rnase q data make protein database more complete and sample specific. Here, we report an R package custom pro db that enables the easy generation of cus-tomized databases from rnase q data for proteomics search. This work bridges genomics and proteomics studies and facilitates cross omics data integration. Availability and implementation: custom pro db and related documents are freely available at

introduction sequence database search is the primary method for peptide and protein identification in mass spectrometry based shotgun proteomics (). The completeness and specificity of the sequence databases directly affect the searching results. We recently showed that sample specific databases derived from rnase q data can better represent the real protein catalogs in biological samples and thus improve protein identification. In addition, sample specific databases allow the identification of variant peptides (). With the advancements of both shotgun proteomics and next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies, many researchers have started to apply both technologies to the same samples in parallel to gain a multi-dimensional understanding of cellular systems (). Even for proteomics studies without corresponding rnase q data, it is highly likely to find sequencing data (e.g. whole genome sequencing, exo me sequencing) for similar samples. Here, we report an R package, custom pro db which is dedicated to generate customized database from NGS data, with a focus on rnase q data, for proteomics search. Based on the assumption that undetected or lowly expressed transcripts are less likely to produce detectable proteins, the package allows users to filter out proteins with undetected or lowly expressed transcripts. It also allows users to incorporate single nucleotide variations, short insertion and deletions and novel junctions identified from rnase q data into the protein database illustrates the overall structure of the package. Methods and functions implemented in the custom pro db package are described in detail in a tutorial available as online Supplementary Material (Supplementary File 1). In section 2, we briefly present the main functionalities of the custom pro db package.

DESCRIPTION

application the development of the custom pro db package was mainly driven by two demands: (i) to provide a customized protein database from rnase q data for a specific sample, and (ii) to provide a consensus database from a pool of genetically similar samples. Therefore, we provide two integrated functions to help accomplish these tasks in a single step (). The value of customized databases for individual samples has already been demonstrated (). Here, we provide an example of a consensus database. A consensus database was generated based on rnase q data from 64 colon cancer samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas project (TCGA, 2012). Previously published proteomics data from three colon cancer patients () were searched against the consensus database (). By including variation and novel junction information in the consensus database, we were able to identify variant peptides and novel junction peptides from the proteomics datasets (Supplementary File 2 and 3). We did not gain significant improvements in protein identification by applying the transcript expression threshold, possibly because of the high inter patient heterogeneity. However, compared with the regular REfSeq database search, more peptide spectrum matches were identified using the consensus database. This example shows the potential of using a consensus database to capture protein features shared by a cohort of samples.

conclusion the huge amount of genomic and transcript omic data available from NGS experiments has enhanced and will continue to enhance shotgun proteomics studies. However, it is non-trivial for ordinary proteomics researchers to use such data directly. The custom pro db package fills this gap by providing an efficient tool to generate customized protein databases using expression and variation information available from NGS data.
