Motivation: Cyclodextrins (CDs) are amongst the most versatile multifunctional molecules used in molecular research and chemical applications. They are natural cyclic oligosaccharides typically employed to encapsulate hydrophobic groups in their central cavity. This allows solubilizing, protecting or reducing the toxicity of a large variety of different molecules including drugs, dyes and surfactant agents. In spite of their great potential, atomic level information of these molecules, which is key for their function, is really scarce. Computational Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations have the potential to efficiently fill this gap, providing structural dynamic information at atomic level in time scales ranging from ps to ls. Results: cyclo lib is a database with a publicly accessible web interface containing structural and dynamic analysis obtained from computational MD simulation trajectories (250 ns long) of native and modified CDs in explicit water molecules. cyclo lib currently includes 70 CDs typically employed for fundamental and industrial research. Tools for comparative analysis between different CDs, as well as to restrict the analysis to specific time segments within the trajectories are also available. cyclo lib provides atomic resolution information aimed to complement experimental results performed with the same molecules. Availability and Implementation: The database is freely available under

introduction cyclodextrins (CDs) are cyclic oligosaccharides formed by 6 (aCD), 7 (b-CD) or 8 (c-CD) glucopyranoside groups (GPUs) that play a relevant role in different fields such as pharmacy, medicine, chemistry, materials design, food or agricultural science (). By taking advantage of the different accessibility and reactivity of the primary and secondary hydroxyl groups of the native (a, b, c-)CDs, specifically designed chemical modifications allow their selective functionalization in order to affect their physicochemical and pharmaceutical properties (solubility, surface properties, complexation efficiency, control release, aggregation). New and interesting perspectives for their use have emerged in recent years by the development of novel CD derivatives (). Despite the increasing number of patents and articles based on CDs, only a tiny fraction of that literature contains atomic level structural dynamic information and even less includes results from computational simulations. The development and optimization of applications using CDs has been traditionally based on trial and error essays supported by wet lab experiments. While the pharmaceutical industry has successfully incorporated computational molecular modeling tools into the drug design process, other chemical sectors where CDs are involved (textile, food, cosmetics, cleaning, painting, agriculture, etc.) have not extensively used this type of computational tools. It is worth noting that the chemical processes involved in all these industries, including the pharmaceutical, are similar. In contrast to what is commonly assumed, it is known that CDs are not rigid (). Their flexibility is key in the way they interact to the surrounding molecules. Unlike other computational simulation methods, MD allows studying molecules in motion as well as to include the explicit interaction with the solvent and with other solutes, making the results more reliable. Here, we present a web based database with structural and dynamic analysis results obtained from computational MD simulation trajectories of native and modified CDs in explicit water molecules. Tools to easily compare the behaviour of different CDs obtained from the corresponding MD trajectories are included in cyclo lib. Due to their interesting physicochemical properties, there is a growing interest by the research community in using CDs for a number of applications based on their ability to encapsulate hydrophobic groups or to form nano aggregates (). The lack of information about these molecules at atomic scale seriously limits the capacity of researches to rationally modify their structure and also to predict their behaviour at different levels. cyclo lib provides not only the most probable structures and a detailed analysis of a large number of CDs in aqueous solution but also the parameter files required to perform more complex simulation studies including docking, aggregation or adsorption to interfaces. So, we do expect that the new insight provided by this database will significantly contribute to the ongoing efforts worldwide to design novel CD derivatives as well as to widen the range of applications based on these molecules ().
