We developed cyNeo4j, a Cytoscape App to link Cytoscape and Neo4j databases to utilize the performance and storage capacities Neo4j offers. We implemented a Neo4j network analyzer force atlas 2 layout and Cypher component to demonstrate the possibilities a distributed setup of Cytoscape and Neo4j have. Availability and implementation: The app is available from the Cytoscape App Store at http://apps. cytoscape orgappscyneo4j the Neo4j plugins at www githubcomgsummercyneo4j parent and the community and commercial editions of Neo4j can be found at http://www.neo4j.com.

introduction network biology facilitates the understanding of complex biological systems by organizing, analyzing and visualizing knowledge and experimental data in networks. Built upon the field of graph theory, network biology provides researchers decades worth of research in the form of sophisticated graph algorithms. Software applications like Cytoscape () and ge phi () are developed to provide visualization and analysis methods to data scientists, with Cytoscape being widely used in life sciences. As networks are becoming larger and more complex, the computational performance necessary to analyze them increases drastically. Moving the computation from desktop environments like Cytoscape and ge phi to powerful servers is a common method used to cope with the increasing demand for computation. We present cyNeo4j, a Cytoscape app to link Cytoscape on the desktop to a server environment using a Neo4j database. Neo4j (www.neo4j. com) is a java based database designed to store and query graphs. Neo4j falls in the category of no sql databases as it departs from the relational model used in traditional databases. Neo4j ensures transaction reliability through ACID compliance, provides a sql inspired query language called Cypher and its community edition is free to use and open source. Additionally, Neo4j servers can be extended using plugins to add more complex algorithms than the ones built in. CyNeo4j supports two such plugins which showcase the performance increase that can be achieved using a Neo4j and powerful computational backend. As of version 1.1, cyNeo4j supports a plugin that provides a set of network layout algorithms and a plugin that implements the Cytoscape network analyzer. We will briefly explain how Cytoscape users can enrich their workflows with cyNeo4j and how app and algorithm developers can benefit from it.
