Motivation: CYP2D6 is highly polymorphic gene which encodes the (CYP2D6) enzyme, involved in the metabolism of 20–25% of all clinically prescribed drugs and other xenobiotics in the human body. CYP2D6 genotyping is recommended prior to treatment decisions involving one or more of the numerous drugs sensitive to CYP2D6 allelic composition. In this context, high throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies provide a promising time efficient and cost effective alternative to currently used genotyping techniques. To achieve accurate interpretation of HTS data, however, one needs to overcome several obstacles such as high sequence similarity and genetic recombinations between CYP2D6 and evolutionarily related pseudogenes CYP2D7 and CYP2D8, high copy number variation among individuals and short read lengths generated by HTS technologies. Results: In this work, we present the first algorithm to computationally infer CYP2D6 genotype at base pair resolution from HTS data. Our algorithm is able to resolve complex genotypes, including alleles that are the products of duplication, deletion and fusion events involving CYP2D6 and its evolutionarily related cousin CYP2D7. Through extensive experiments using simulated and real datasets, we show that our algorithm accurately solves this important problem with potential clinical implications. Availability and implementation: cyp i rip i is available at http://sfu-compbio.github.io/cypiripi.

introduction response to a large number of clinically prescribed drugs varies significantly among individuals. Although some patients show a good response to a medication, the same treatment might fail in others or cause serious side effects, which can even result in the death of the patient (). In many cases, an individual's genetic make up has been recognized as one of the potential causes of treatment failures (). To avoid adverse effects, it is recommended to perform accurate genotyping prior to treatment decisions that include drugs sensitive to the allelic composition of genes involved in their metabolism (). Drug dosage and selection can then be adjusted based on the inferred genotypes. Cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) is one of the most widely studied genes for which the correlation between the allelic make up and therapy response has been established. It is currently estimated that metabolism of 2025% of clinically prescribed drugs is, at least in part, dependent on CYP2D6 genotype (). These include antidepressants, antipsychotics, anticancer drugs, opioids and many others (). CYP2D6 is highly polymorphic gene with more than 100 different allelic variants reported up to date. The information about the known alleles is publicly available at CYP2D6 allele nomenclature website (http://www.cypalleles.ki.se/cyp2d6.htm), which contains detailed information on the sequence variants characterizing each allele. The website also includes information on the impact of genotype on the activity of the encoded enzyme for more than 50 known alleles. Based on their enzyme activity, the set of known CYP2D6 alleles is divided into four categories: poor, intermediate, extensive and ultra rapid metabolizers corresponding to 'none', 'decreased', 'normal' and ultra rapid activity, respectively (

conclusion in this article, we have presented the first computational framework to exactly characterize the clinically important CYP2D6 gene and its variations by using HTS data only. Our framework, which we call cyp i rip i is able to cope with many of the issues presented by the existing (non HTS based) approaches for CYP2D6 genotyping, such as their inability to perform accurate copy number estimation, CYP2D7 variant characterization and fusion detection. In addition, cyp i rip is highly optimized running time makes it an ideal choice for clinical settings where speed is of high importance. The algorithmic basis of cyp i rip i a gene agnostic ILP, can be easily extended to other unique gene clusters with similar properties. It should be noted that there remain some challenges that we aim to investigate in follow-up work. For example, genotyping when the. cyp i rip i performance for every group available set of sequence variants can be described by more than one set of genotypes is problematic. This technology bound issue can be resolved by the use of paired end reads in some cases but may require the availability of longer reads for the resolution of other cases. In addition, exact characterization of novel genotypes within the CYP2D locus is a further goal to be investigated. As the cost of whole genome sequencing (WGS) plummets and approaches the cost of exo me sequencing, we will be able to perform detailed sequence analysis of several clinically important loci across the human genome by using standard coverage HTS data. This can reduce both the time and cost required for genomic analysis and address many of the limitations of existing non hts based techniques. As WGS makes its way into the clinic, it is providing economical and efficient means to identify many pharmaco genomic variants that can be used to provide personalized medication options. By the use of a proper computational framework such as cyp i rip i decision support systems to assist physicians for prescribing specific medications can benefit from fast and accurate genotyping based on HTS.
