Cytochrome P450 cyp s are the major enzymes involved in drug metabolism and bio activation. Inhibition models were constructed for five of the most popular enzymes from the CYP superfamily in human liver. The five enzymes chosen for this study, namely CYP1A2, CYP2D6, CYP2C19, CYP2C9 and CYP3A4, account for 90% of the xenobiotic and drug metabolism in human body. CYP enzymes can be inhibited or induced by various drugs or chemical compounds. In this work, a rule based CYP inhibition prediction online server, cyp rules was created based on predict-ive models generated by the rule based C5.0 algorithm. cyp rules can predict and provide structural rulesets for CYP inhibition for each compound uploaded to the server. Capable of fast execution performance, it can be used for virtual high throughput screening v hts of a large set of testing compounds. Availability and implementation: cyp rules is freely accessible at

introduction among CYP enzymes, CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 are responsible for 90% of drug oxidation or hydrolysis (). More than 900 drugs have been identified in causing liver injury (), making this the most common reason for a drug to be withdrawn from the market. Hepatotoxicity and drug induced liver injury account for a substantial number of compounds failure, highlighting the need for drug screening assays capable of detecting potential compound toxicity early in the drug development processes. Previous CYP prediction models or prediction servers were: either based on a small number of compounds, screened with non rule based approaches that could not suggest structural rules directly contributing to specific P450, or only gives yes no classification results (). In this study, we chose five of the most common P450 enzymes to build their corresponding inhibition prediction models with 16 000 compounds. The goals are: (i) to first build statistically high performance 2D and 3D QSAR models, utilizing rule based C5.0 algorithm () as a prediction tool to provide structural information that contribute towards P450 inhibition endpoints in a faster and more direct manner, compared with other machine learning methods, (ii) and then provide a simple, easy to use, and freely available web server for quick assessment of compound inhibitions towards the five major CYP enzymes.
