cyto modeler is an open source Java application based on the Cytoscape platform. It integrates large scale network analysis and quantitative modeling by combining omics analysis on the Cytoscape platform, access to deterministic and stochastic simulators, and static and dynamic network context visualizations of simulation results. Availability: Implemented in Java, cyto modeler runs with Cytoscape 2.6 and 2.7. Binaries, documentation and video walkthroughs are freely available at http://vrac.iastate.edu/ jl v cyto modeler
introduction large scale network analysis and quantitative modeling have emerged as key methods for interpreting biological datasets. large scale network analysis uses networks to model large scale omics data produced by high throughput screening, where nodes represent biological species and edges between nodes stand for interactions between the species. Quantitative mathematical modeling of biological systems has a much longer history than large scale network analysis. In this method, researchers build mathematical equations for biological systems and simulate, predict and test behaviors of the systems in silico. Significant progress has been made in the development of software that focuses on large scale network and quantitative modeling over the past 10 years such as Cytoscape (), a popular open source software platform for large scale network visualization and for viewing and editing data, along with a highly flexible and extensible plug-in mechanism, Systems Biology Toolbox (SBT;) and Systems Biology Workbench (SBW;) for quantitative modeling. While the number of active software tools which implement these two types of methods singly is growing fast, linkages between them are missing. Knowledge inferred from large scale network analysis can be quantitatively modeled for examining the dynamics of smaller subsystems with respect to various physiological conditions or time * To whom correspondence should be addressed. courses. cyto modeler is a software tool dedicated to bridging large scale network analysis and quantitative modeling by providing the following features: (i) access to a wide range of functionality for large scale network analysis by being a plug-in tool on Cytoscape platform, (ii) a built in compact quantitative model editor which enables model creating, importing and exporting with several formats including SBML levels 1 and 2, (iii) a model exchanger which allows users to transfer modeling information between Cytoscape and quantitative modeling tools such as the SBT on MATLAB and SBW and (iv) advanced visualization for quantitative simulation results in a network context. This functionality enables biologists to integrate large scale network analysis and quantitative modeling into an analytical workflow of systems biology.
