Cytoscape is an open source software tool for biological network visualization and analysis, which can be extended with independently developed apps. We launched the Cytoscape App Store to highlight the important features that apps add to Cytoscape, enable researchers to find and install apps they need and help developers promote their apps. Availability: The App Store is available at http://apps.

introduction cytoscape is an open source software tool for network visualization and analysis, primarily for biological data (). When users first install Cytoscape, it has a small well defined set of functionality for working with networks. In addition, Cytoscape has an open architecture so that others can extend its functionality with apps. Cytoscape apps are additional software packages independently developed, licensed and installed. The wide ranging functionality and specialization of Cytoscape principally reside in its apps. Over 150 free apps have been contributed to our Web site by developers from over a dozen countries. Originally, the Cytoscape team maintained a catalog of submitted apps (called 'plugins' at the time) that were accessible from a web page or from within Cytoscape. The catalog had several limitations. Search was limited to exact matches to app names; users could not search by app description, category or author; and apps were categorized by single terms chosen by the Cytoscape team, not app developers. Each app entry in the catalog listed all versions of an app and did not emphasize the latest version. This catalog did not make it easy for users to discover apps in which they might be interested, e.g. based on their functionality. Moreover, when users did find an interesting app through the web page catalog, they had to search for the app again in Cytoscape to install it. To help address the needs of users, we launched the Cytoscape App Store () to coincide with the release of Cytoscape 3.0, a major re architect uring of Cytoscape for improved stability, performance and versatility. The overarching goals of the Cytoscape App Store are to highlight the important features apps add to Cytoscape, to enable researchers to find apps they need and for developers to promote their apps. Here, we describe the features of the App Store for both users and app developers.

CONCLUSION
