cyto com is an interactive plugin for Cytoscape that can be used to search, explore, ana

introduction the term 'comorbidity' refers to the coexistence or presence of multiple diseases or disorders in relation to a primary disease or disorder in a patient (). A comorbidity relationship between two diseases exists whenever they appear simultaneously in a patient more than chance alone (). It represents the co occurrence of diseases or presence of different medical conditions one after another in the same patient (). Two diseases are connected if they are coexpressed in a significant number of patients in a population (). If two diseases have associated comorbidity, the occurrence of one of them in a patient may increase the likelihood of developing another disease the main challenge for research in the biomedical field is to understand the associations between human diseases. Clinical data contains many important clarifications regarding the occurrence of comorbidity in patients with two or more diseases. To measure a relationship based on disease co occurrence we need to quantify the strength of the comorbidity risk. We have adapted two comorbidity measures to quantify the strength of comorbidity associations between two diseases: (i) the Relative risk the probability that a number of patients will be diagnosed with both diseases relative to the probability that a number of patients will be similarly diagnosed according to random expectation based on disease prevalence, as the quantified measures of comorbidity tendency of two disease pairs; and (ii) correlation pearsons correlation for binary variables, to measure the robustness of the comorbidity association.

conclusion exploring the associations between diseases could greatly enhance our understanding of pathogenesis and eventually lead to better diagnosis and treatment. cyto com is an easy to use app to analyse and investigate the human DCN. This app will help users to advance their knowledge on disease mechanism and disease comorbidities in a quantitative and graphical way. We plan regular updates to the cyto com app as well as the integration of further data sources.
