With

introduction the development of the Hi-C technique by introduced revolutionary concepts to the research of genome organization. A following analysis suggested a fractal globule organization, at 1 Mb resolution, where loci interact within (intra-) and between (inter-) chromosomes (). Since then, significant efforts were made to remove bias and normalize the data (), to identify governing features, such as cc ctc factor and binding sites (), and to suggest the role of nuclear architecture in regulation () and translocation events (). Hi-C data can be considered as an end result of dissembling a puzzle or shuttering a globe into small pieces and reporting the pieces that were found together. Normalization methods attempt to remove biases and, in turn, report a corrected contact value between the different pieces. Assembling back the pieces, or genomic bins, into the underlying spatial map is an important challenge. The ability to view and compare Hi-C maps as spatial networks with respect to genomic landmarks of interest can provide important insights about the properties, dynamics and role of the nuclear organization. Through visual comparison, researchers can instantly identify what has changed and what has remained conserved between different Hi-C datasets. One may be interested in comparing the interaction map of orthologs, or view the spatial changes through a progress of a disease or through developmental stages. Comparison of cells with different functions may reveal common and cell specific spatial arrangements. Finally, comparing the same Hi-C dataset under different normalization methods, or before and after normalization has been performed, can aid in assessing differences in coverage and correction. We have developed cyto hic a plugin for the Cytoscape platform (), for generating and visually comparing spatial maps from normalized Hi-C data. cyto hic provides a user friendly interface for uploading Hi-C data and genomic landmarks and exploits the visualization power of Cytoscape to draw the corresponding spatial maps. Its implementation was designed to allow for easy identification of spatial changes and for visual integration of related properties such as methylation and gene expression. As a Cytoscape plugin, cyto hic also makes it easier to combine and convey multi omic information. To the best of our knowledge, cyto hic is the first tool developed for the task of an interactive visual comparison of Hi-C data.

conclusion cyto hic is a platform independent easy to install plugin for Cytoscape. It offers visual exploration and comparison so users can instantly and easily observe trends and changes in the spatial environment of genomic landmarks. Users may explore spatial changes from evolutionary, functional, developmental and clinical point of views. As Hi-C data take its important place in the research of nuclear architecture, visual exploration applications such as cyto hic become an important part of the required toolbox. While the spatial networks generated by cyto hic provide the user an approximation for physical proximity based on interaction frequencies, we hope to offer better methods for predicting the nuclear positions of landmarks and to fix coverage and correction errors in the future. Incorporation of such methods with a visualization tool can provide a more accurate representation of the nucleus topological map.
