cyto saddle sum provides Cytoscape users with access to the functionality of saddle sum a functional enrichment tool based on sum of weight scores. It operates by querying saddle sum locally (using the standalone version) or remotely (through an HTTP request to a web server). The functional enrichment results are shown as a term relationship network, where nodes represent terms and edges show term relationships. Furthermore, query results are written as Cytoscape attributes allowing easy saving, retrieval and integration into network based data analysis workflows. Availability: wwwncbinlmnihgovcbb research yu downloads html The source code is placed in Public Domain.

introduction cyto saddle sum is a Cytoscape () plugin to access the functionality of saddle sum an enrichment analysis tool based on sum of weights score sto j miro vic. Unlike most other enrichment tools, saddle sum does not require users to directly select significant genes or perform extensive simulations to compute statistics. Instead, it uses weights derived from measurements, such as log expression ratios, to produce a score for each database term. It then estimates, depending on the number of genes involved, the p value for that score by using the saddle point approximation () to the empirical distribution function derived from all weights. This approach was shown sto j miro vic to yield accurate p values and internally consistent retrievals. As a popular and flexible platform for visualization, integration and analysis of network data, Cytoscape allows gene expression data import and hosts numerous plugins for functional enrichment analysis. However, none of these plugins are based on the 'gene set analysis approach' that takes into account gene weights. Therefore, to fill this gap, we have developed cyto saddle sum a Cytoscape interface to saddle sum. To enable several desirable features of cyto saddle sum however, we had to significantly extend the original saddle sum code (see descriptions below). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
