Motivation: DNA methylation is an important epigenetic modification related to a variety of diseases including cancers. We focus on the methylation data from illumina s Infinium human methylation 450 bead chip. One of the key issues of methylation analysis is to detect the differential methylation sites between case and control groups. Previous approaches describe data with simple summary statistics or kernel function, and then use statistical tests to determine the difference. However, a summary statistics based approach can not capture complicated underlying structure, and a kernel function based approach lacks interpretability of results. Results: We propose a novel method D 3 M, for detection of differential distribution of methylation, based on distribution valued data. Our method can detect the differences in high order moments, such as shapes of underlying distributions in methylation profiles, based on the Wasserstein metric. We test the significance of the difference between case and control groups and provide an in-terpretable summary of the results. The simulation results show that the proposed method achieves promising accuracy and shows favorable results compared with previous methods. Glioblastoma multiforme and lower grade glioma data from The Cancer Genome Atlas show that our method supports recent biological advances and suggests new insights.

introduction dna methylation is an epigenetic chemical alternation in which a methyl group is attached to a 5 carbon of a cytosine (C) base. It is closely related to gene expression, silencing and genomic imprinting, including oncogenesis. Typically, methylation is explained as occurring in cytosine phosphate guanine (CpG) sites in mammals. The methylation of promoter regions, in particular, silences cancer suppressor genes (). We focus on the methylation data from illumina s Infinium human methylation 450 bead chip. One of the key issues for methylation analysis is to detect differentially methylated sites, i.e. a significant difference in methylation levels between the case and the control groups at a site. When comparing groups, we often summarize (or aggregate) data in summary statistics, such as mean and variance, and then investigate the difference between the groups. For example, IMA () detects the differentially methylated sites by t test Empirical Bayes (EB) method or by mann whitney wilcox (MWW) test. diff var () detects the sites by testing significant difference of variance. Other nonparametric approaches exist, such as the kolmogorov smirnov test (KS) or). In particular, since KS and MMD consider the underlying distribution structure, they are better suited for use with complicated distributions than methods based on summary statistics. These approaches are insufficient from some perspectives; underlying distributions are complicated by being skewed, heavy tailed and multimodal. In particular, since cancer cells include heterogeneities, measurements of the methylation levels potentially include complex distribution shapes. This observation indicates that we need to consider the underlying structure. The disadvantage of KS and MMD is infeasible interpretability of results because they measure the maximum and kernel distances of distributions, respectively, which are difficult to interpret corresponding to the actual difference of underlying distributions. We develop a method to detect differential methylation sites with distribution valued data (). distribution valued data are an example of symbolic data analysis (). This framework can treat complex data such as functional (), tree (), set, interval and histogram values (). The proposed method describes case and control groups using distribution values. We measure the differences between distributions using the Wasserstein metric. We detect the differential methylation sites using a statistical test of significant differences of distribution functions.

discussion here we summarize the advantages and disadvantages of D 3 M, diff var as well as MMD. These methods are designed for detecting differential methylation levels focusing on cancer heterogeneity, which is caused by epigenetic instability and diversity. Cancer heterogeneity can often be confused with outliers. For example, diff var fails to detect simulation case 6 as differential methylation, even though we set the variance, but not the mean and the shapes, to be the same for the two groups. This is because diff var deals with minority distributions as outliers and evaluates only those in the majority. In general, the significance of an outlier depends on the context of analysis (). When an outlier arises from measurement error not relevant to signals of interest, we must remove them prior to analysis. In contrast, when an outlier arises from an unusual event including new findings that we seek, we use them for further analysis. In this case, cancer heterogeneity could be regarded as an abnormal event compared with normal cases, and thus must be included in the analysis mmd was originally developed as a distribution free two sample test based on a kernel. Both the Wasserstein metric and MMD are family of integral probability metrics () designed to capture not only such basic difference as those between the means but also such higher order differences as those between the distribution shapes of the groups. From the simulation in Section 3.1, we see that MMD shows good detection performance in cases except cases 4 and 8. D 3 M shows good performance over all eight 8 cases. Specifically, D 3 M shows excellent performance in cases 7 and 8. In the study of sample size effect in Section S-2-1, using the same simulation model as in Section 3.1, the result indicates that the superiority of D 3 M to other methods are reduced compared to large sample case, although all the methods decrease in power supplementary d 3 M can be flexibly applied to differential methylation problems. Simulation results indicate that D 3 M can detect not only shape differences but also summary statistics differences as effectively as EB and diff var i.e. natural results from the decomposition (6). This suggests that if we can not obtain sufficient power using a simple summary statistics approach, we have other options to add shape information. If we would like to simultaneously check the results of variance and shape differences, we remove the mean from the data using X  EX in each group at a site before applying D 3 M. This option is provided with R package D 3 M; in the function D3M::d3m, the logical parameters of rm mean and rm var exists. If we would like to see the variance and shape differences at the same time, we just set the rm mean  T and rm var  F. The statistical test of D 3 M relies on resampling and requires computational time to calculate p values. However, we could reduce the resampling time using a semi-parametric approach (). A current limitation of D 3 M is that it deals with univariate distributions. In a case of the study of large sample sizes, we can deal with covariates, such as age and gender, but our method currently does not incorporate them into the model, and the user needs to remove the effects of covariates; for example, using residuals with regression analysis, prior to the analysis. The extension of D 3 M to multivariate distribution relies on the estimation of the Wasserstein metric between the empirical multivariate distributions. The approximation of the Wasserstein metric between the multivariate distributions has been studied recently in (), and we could derive the null distributions based on that approximation. D 3 M does not support a spatial correlation of methylation levels within the CpG island in the current form (). The spatial information will enhance the power of detection for differential methylated sites. This could be accomplished by spatially weighted average of Wasserstein distance over a fixed range of locus. These extensions of D 3 M will be covered in a future study.

conclusion in this study, we proposed a novel method, D 3 M, for detecting differential methylation sites based on distribution valued data. We showed that distribution shape includes interesting information other than that found using mean and variance based methods. A simulation study indicated that D 3 M is capable to detect various situations. In the application to the GBM and LGG dataset in the TCGA cohort, we identified 1000 sites with the smallest q values. Most of the sites detected by D 3 M show strong heterogeneity and tend to be hyper and hypo methylated in LGG and GBM, respectively, as found in previous studies. Since the GBM and LGG dataset contains a large number of significantly different sites, including 279 008, 191 050, 297 493 and 255 317 sites for EB, diff var KS, and D 3 M respectively; at the FDR 1%, it is difficult to understand the methylation levels at these sites. In the future, it would be of interest to develop a method that describes the diversity of methylation levels.
