Motivation: While phylogenetic analyses of datasets containing 1000–5000 sequences are challenging for existing methods, the estimation of substantially larger phylogenies poses a problem of much greater complexity and scale. Methods: We present d act al a method for phylogeny estimation that produces trees from unaligned sequence datasets without ever needing to estimate an alignment on the entire dataset. d act al combines iteration with a novel divide and conquer approach, so that each iteration begins with a tree produced in the prior iteration, decomposes the tax on set into overlapping subsets, estimates trees on each subset, and then combines the smaller trees into a tree on the full tax on set using a new super tree method. We prove that d act al is guaranteed to produce the true tree under certain conditions. We compare d act al to SATé and maximum likelihood trees on estimated alignments using simulated and real datasets with 1000–27 643 tax a. Results: Our studies show that on average d act al yields more accurate trees than the two phase methods we studied on very large datasets that are difficult to align, and has approximately the same accuracy on the easier datasets. The comparison to SATé shows that both have the same accuracy, but that d act al achieves this accuracy in a fraction of the time. Furthermore, d act al can analyze larger datasets than SATé, including a dataset with almost 28 000 sequences. Availability: d act al source code and results of dataset analyses are available at

introduction phylogeny estimation methods are used to estimate the true tree from sequences that have evolved down the tree. This estimation is typically performed using two phases: first, a multiple sequence alignment (MSA) is estimated, and then a statistical estimation method [such as maximum likelihood (ML)] is applied to the alignment. Such two phase approaches produce highly accurate trees when the datasets are small enough (under a few hundred sequences) and have evolved without too many insertions and deletions (called 'indels') (). Several methods for co estimation of trees and alignments based on statistical models of evolution that include indels as well as substitutions have been developed, including. Of these methods, bali phy () is the only one * To whom correspondence should be addressed. that, to our knowledge, has been able to analyze datasets with 100 sequences, but even these analyses can take a week or more. SAT is a new co estimation method, but (unlike the methods discussed earlier) estimates these alignments and trees without reference to a parametric model that includes indels as well as substitutions. Simulations show that SAT produces more accurate trees than two phase methods on large hard to align datasets (), and does so fairly quickly. Because SAT uses ra xml (), a popular ML heuristic, to produce phylogenies, it is computationally intensive for large datasets; furthermore, SAT's realignment technique can have very large memory requirements on some datasets with 25 000 sequences (). Thus, none of the current methods is able to produce highly accurate phylogenetic estimation on very large sequence datasets, when they are difficult to align. As large phylogenetic studies are increasingly common () (and more will likely arise as a result of next generation sequencing technologies), this represents a substantial limitation. An alternative approach to two phase methods are alignment free methods that estimate trees without performing any MSA at all. Although some of the promising methods have not yet been implemented (e.g.), the best of the currently available alignment free methods, while exhibiting surprising and desirable properties (such as improved accuracy in the presence of among site rate variation), do not yet produce trees of the same accuracy as two phase methods that first align and then estimate the tree (). Here, we present d act al divide and conquer Trees (ALmost) without alignments'), a method that is designed to estimate trees, but not a MSA, on large datasets. d act al combines iteration with a divide and conquer dataset decomposition approach to produce a tree without ever needing to estimate an alignment on the full dataset (). The dataset decomposition technique used in d act al is inspired by theoretical results related to super tree estimation methods and observations from extensive experience with phylogenetic analyses of large datasets; the iterative technique, however, is purely empirically motivated. Our study compares d act al to several existing methods, including several leading two phase methods and SAT, on simulated and biological datasets with 1000 to almost 28 000 sequences. We show that bullet d act al was able to analyze larger datasets than SAT can, including one dataset with 28 000 rRNA sequences, for which, SAT's re-alignment technique had excessive memory requirements.
