Anuran tissues, and especially skin, are a rich source of bioactive peptides and their precursors. We here present a manually curated database of antimicrobial and other defense peptides with a total of 2571 entries, most of them in the precursor form with demarcated signal peptide (SP), acidic pro regions and bioactive moiety s corresponding to 1923 non identical bioactive sequences. Search functions on the corresponding web server facilitate the extraction of six distinct SP classes. The more conserved of these can be used for searching cDNA and UniProtKB databases for potential bioactive peptides, for creating PROSITE search patterns, and for phylogenetic analysis. Availability: dad p is accessible at http://split4.pmfst.hr/dadp/

introduction with the growing problem of pathogens developing resistance to conventional antibiotics, there is a great interest in antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) as substitute therapeutics (). There are several existing databases on many types of AMPs: APD (), CAMP (), phy tamp (), Defensins Knowledgebase (), am sdb (), bact i base (), am per () and y a damp (). However, these databases tend to focus on the antimicrobial sequences, and the immature precursors from which the active AMPs are cleaved are not always present. dad p is a versatile database for anuran defense peptides that retains all this important information. Some anuran species contain 100 AMPs in their tissues, and especially their skin, as well as other bioactive peptides (), but many are endangered, while whole genomes have been decoded for only 2 out of almost 6000 species ().

discussion bioactive peptides from amphibian species with function, often related to host defense, are a fast growing group in the UniProtKB database and this attempt to collect and order them all can mostly serve to emphasize the incompleteness of our knowledge. For instance, out of 167 species from the dad p only 28 can be found among 2200 threatened and near threatened anuran species from the IUCN Red List. The dad p focuses on precursors and their conserved SPs and has allowed the individuation of six distinct SP classes (see Supplementary Material and Supplementary Tables S4 and S5). Consensus sequences for the different SP classes are a good foundation for searching protein or DNA databases that might carry precursors with novel AMP sequences, where a direct homology search based on the active region only is unsuccessful (). The most numerous class of SPs (present in 85% of precursors) has twin lysines at positions 5 and 6, and is denoted as class 1 in dad p. It is found in neo batra chia families Ranidae, hy lida e hyper oli ida e and Rhacophoridae. SP classes 16 are associated not only with AMPs but also with mature bioactive peptides having other functions. Precursor structure is informative about origin, function and evolution of mature peptides collected in the dad p but there are numerous peptides present only as the mature bioactive sequence, where the precursor structure is not reported. The activity data, shown as MIC and HC 50 values, are available for over 900 sequences. These should, however, be considered critically as both are quite sensitive to assay conditions, which vary from lab to lab [e.g. medium, salt concentrations and the size of initial inoculum, which should be at least 10 5 cf uml for MIC () and at most 1% erythrocytes for HC 50 determinations, limits often either not observed or not defined in published papers]. The conservation of SPs in different sub orders and families of anuran s whose relatedness follows continental tectonics and corresponding changes in biogeography, is quite impressive supplementary and the dad p web server). This is one of those rare examples when maintenance of the export SPs, which are dispensed with after secretion, is evolutionarily more conserved than the mature exported polypeptide structure. It may be beneficial for the host to have accelerated co-evolution of the mature defense peptide sequences, to keep up with the constantly shifting microbial biota, allowing to maintain the host pathogen balance (). The number of identical SPs associated with different mature peptides found in different species can be quite large (e.g. 164 identical class 1 SP sequences encompassing 36 species and associated with 141 different mature peptides). It is also possible to find identical mature peptides associated with SPs that are different in several positions. An example is the antimicrobial granulosus ind2 and palustrin-2ISa, respectively, belonging to different species amol ops granulosus from China and ran a ishikawa e from Japan). Another is the bradykinin sequence rpp gfs pfr which is associated with different SP sequences in 15 different species. These bioactive skin peptides from frogs and to ads may be effective repellents against macroscopic predators such as fish () and snakes. These two cases are possible examples of convergent evolution of the active region to provide for similar functions. The dad p can greatly facilitate using the HMMER tool () to search UniProtKB for amphibian AMPs. In this case the sequence length limitations of the tool require the combined use of the signal sequence and acidic pro piece as the query. The dad p can be regularly updated using both keywords and similarity search.
