da mid is a powerful technique for identifying regions of the genome bound by a dna binding (or dna associated protein. Currently, no method exists for automatically processing next generation sequencing da mid da mid seq data, and the use of da mid seq datasets with nor-malization based on read counts alone can lead to high background and the loss of bound signal. da mid seq thus presents novel challenges in terms of normalization and background minimization. We describe here da mid seq pipeline a software pipeline that performs automatic normaliza-tion and background reduction on multiple da mid seq fast q datasets. Availability and implementation: open source and freely available from http://owenjm.github.io/ da mid seq pipeline. The da mid seq pipeline is implemented in Perl and is compatible with any unix based operating system (e.g. Linux, Mac OSX). Contact

introduction da mid is a well established technique for discovering regions of DNA bound by or associated with proteins (van). It has been used to map the genome wide binding of transcription factors, chromatin proteins, nuclear complexes associated with DNA and RNA pol II (for e.g.). The technique can be performed in cell culture, whole organisms (van) or with cell type specificity (), and requires no fixation or antibody purification. da mid involves the fusion of a bacterial DNA adenine methylase (Dam) to any dna associated protein of interest. The bacterial Dam protein methyl ates adenine in the sequence GATC and, given that higher eukaryotes lack native adenine methylation, the dna binding footprint of the protein of interest is uniquely detectable through isolating sequences flanked by methylated GATC sites. However, a major consideration with da mid is that any Dam protein within the nucleus will non specifically methyl ate adenine s in GATC sequences at accessible regions of the genome. For this reason, da mid is always performed concurrently with a dam only control, and the final dna binding profile is typically presented as a log 2 dam fusion dam only ratio. Although the majority of published da mid experiments have used tiling microarrays for data analysis, next generation sequencing (NGS) allows greater sensitivity and higher accuracy. Although several recent studies have used NGS with da mid (), these have relied upon a comparison of peak binding intensities between read count normalized dam fusion and Dam samples. Depending on the characteristics of the dam fusion protein (see later) this approach may lead to real signal being lost, and correct normalization of the datasets is required to detect all binding by many dam fusion proteins. Here, we describe a software pipeline for the automated processing of da mid sequencing da mid seq data, including normalization and background reduction algorithms.
