Motivation: Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) is an established method for studying biological macromolecules in solution, whereby the experimental scattering patterns relate to the quaternary and tertiary structure of the macromolecule. Here we present DARA, a web server that queries over 150 000 scattering profiles pre-computed from the high resolution models of macromolecules and biological assemblies in the Protein Data Bank, to rapidly find nearest neighbours of a given experimental or theoretical SAXS pattern. Identification of the best scattering equivalents provides a straightforward and automated way of structural assessment of macromolecules based on a SAXS profile. DARA results are useful e.g. for fold recognition and finding of biologically active oligomers. Availability and implementation: http://dara.embl-hamburg.de/

introduction in a small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) experiment a homogeneous solution of proteins, nucleic acids or their complexes is illuminated by a monochromatic X-ray beam. The isotropic scattering intensity I(s) is measured as a function of momentum transfer s  4psin(h)/k, 2h being the scattering angle and k the X-ray wavelength. For monodisperse solutions, the signal after background subtraction is proportional to the scattering of a single particle averaged over all orientations. The scattering pattern contains information about the macromolecular structure at a low resolution (12 nm). Without a priori information, ab initio particle shape can be reconstructed. If an atomic model is available, its theoretical scattering can be computed and compared to the experimental data (). Comparison of the experimental scattering to a manifold of known scattering patterns is a useful alternative to shape determination. If one or several patterns agree with the experimental data the corresponding models may provide insights about the quaternary and sometimes also tertiary structure. Here, we present DARA, a web server that rapidly compares over 150 000 scattering profiles pre-computed from models in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) () with a given SAXS pattern. The current implementation of DARA represents an overhaul of the database designed for proteins over twelve years ago (). The implementation features a new search algorithm combining principal component analysis and k-d trees for almost instantaneous (within a few seconds) identification of the scattering neighbours, includes nucleic acids and complexes in the search space, and provides an enhanced presentation of the results.
