s glut a thionyl ation the reversible protein posttranslational modification (PTM) that generates a mixed disulfide bond between glutathione and cysteine residue, critically regulates protein activity, stability and redox regulation. Due to its importance in regulating oxidative nitros ative stress and balance in cellular response, a number of methods have been rapidly developed to study s glut a thionyl ation thus expanding the dataset of experimentally determined glut a thionyl ation sites. However, there is currently no database dedicated to the integration of all experimentally verified s glut a thionyl ation sites along with their characteristics or structural or functional information. Thus, the dbg sh database has been created to integrate all available data-sets and to provide the relevant structural analysis. As of January 31, 2014, dbg sh has manually collected 42200 experimentally verified s glut a thionyl ated peptides from 169 research articles using a text mining approach. To solve the problem of heterogeneity of the data collected from different sources, the sequence identity of the reported s glut a thionyl ated peptides is mapped to UniProtKB protein entries. To delineate the structural correlations and consensus motifs of these s glut a thionyl ation sites, the dbg sh database also provides structural and functional analyses, including the motifs of substrate sites, solvent accessibility, protein secondary and tertiary structures, protein domains and gene ontology. Availability and implementation: dbg sh is now freely accessible at

introductions glut a thionyl ation is a redox dependent posttranslational modification (PTM) that involves the covalent attachment of glutathione (GSH) to the thiol group of cysteine residues, and regulates based on the physiological GSH level and the gsh gssg ratio through spontaneous or enzymatic reaction (). In addition to regulating redox signaling, s glut a thionyl ation also serves to modulate cancer migration, cell death and survival, energy metabolism and glycolysis, as well as protein folding and degradation in several species, ranging from bacteria to human (). The various targets of s glut a thionyl ation also participate in pathogenesis of many diseases, such as neurodegenerative diseases, metabolic disorders and cancers (). Due to the importance of s glut a thionyl ation in clinical biological processes, numerous methods have been developed, directed toward mass spectrometry based s glut a thio nomics using various biological systems to investigate and identify s glut a thionyl ated targets and sites (). As the number of experimentally identified s glut a thionyl ated peptides grows, a structured database is desirable for the further investigation of the biological functions of s glut a thionyl ated proteins and the substrate specificities of s glut a thionyl ation sites. Although a number of databases have been developed for PTMs, such as dbp tm (), phospho site plus (), reg phos (), dbo gap () and dbs no (), limited resources have been dedicated to s glut a thionyl ated proteins and their corresponding substrate sites (). Thus, a new database dbg sh containing the experimentally verified s glut a thionyl ated peptides from research articles is proposed to facilitate the functional analysis of s glut a thionyl ated proteins and to assist with the structural investigation of substrate sites. literature (PubMed ID) reference. In addition, a small number of protein s glut a thionyl ation sites in UniProtKB are integrated into dbg sh with the corresponding literature references. As of January 31, 2014, a total of 169 s glut a thionyl ation associated articles covering 16 organisms have been retrieved from PubMed. In the dbg sh database, there are 2257 s glut a thionyl ated cysteines from 1314 s glut a thionyl ated proteins. supplementary shows the statistics for the s glut a thionyl ation data for each organism. For a given protein, the biological function can be obtained from the annotation in UniProtKB. To provide more effective information about protein functional and structural annotations relevant to s glut a thionyl ated cysteines, a variety of biological databases, such as InterPro (), Gene Ontology (GO), Protein Data Bank (PDB) () and KEGG Pathway (), are integrated. The information regarding the molecular function, cellular components and biological process for s glut a thionyl ated proteins can be accessed by a cross-linking to the corresponding entry from GO via a UniProtKB accession number. In addition, the InterPro bio mart which is a web service that provides the ability to build custom queries on the InterPro database, is used to extract the information about protein domains and functional sites for the s glut a thionyl ated proteins in dbg sh. Additionally, the molecular interaction and signaling network of s glut a thionyl ated proteins can be accessed by a cross-link that refers to the corresponding entries from KEGG pathway. To study the structural characteristics of s glut a thionyl ation sites within the protein tertiary structure, all the experimentally identified s glut a thionyl ation sites are mapped to the corresponding positions in the protein entries in PDB. The solvent accessibility and secondary structure around the substrate sites are also investigated. However, due to the limited information on protein structures in PDB, only 1% of the GSH sites have corresponding tertiary structures. With reference to a previous study investigating the structural characteristics of PTMs () in proteins without known tertiary structures, two effective tools, rvp net () and psi pred (), are used to predict the solvent accessibility and secondary structure, respectively.
