snit rosy lation (SNO), a selective and reversible protein post-translational modification that involves the covalent attachment of nitric oxide (NO) to the sulfur atom of cysteine, critically regulates protein activity, localization and stability. Due to its importance in regulating protein functions and cell signaling, a mass spectrometry based proteomics method rapidly evolved to increase the dataset of experimentally determined SNO sites. However, there is currently no database dedicated to the integration of all experimentally verified snit rosy lation sites with their structural or functional information. Thus, the dbs no database is created to integrate all available data-sets and to provide their structural analysis. Up to April 15, 2012, the dbs no has manually accumulated 43000 experimentally verified snit rosy lated peptides from 219 research articles using a text mining approach. To solve the heterogeneity among the data collected from different sources, the sequence identity of these reported snit rosy lated peptides are mapped to the UniProtKB protein entries. To delineate the structural correlation and consensus motif of these SNO sites, the dbs no database also provides structural and functional analyses, including the motifs of substrate sites, solvent accessibility , protein secondary and tertiary structures, protein domains and gene ontology. Availability: The dbs no is now freely accessible via http://dbSNO. mbc.nctu.edu.tw. The database content is regularly updated upon collecting new data obtained from continuously surveying research articles. Contacts:

introduction of the various post-translational modifications (PTMs), snit rosy lation (SNO) is reversible and involves the covalent attachment of nitric oxide (NO) to the thiol group of cysteine (residues. An increasing number of studies suggest that protein snit rosy lation plays an important role in the no related redox pathway, especially in immune, cardiovascular, neuronal and plant systems (). The various targets of snit rosy lation and differential expression of those targets modulate the activity, localization and stability of proteins () and further regulate patho-physiological events, such as neurodegenerative diseases and cancers (). Due to the importance of snit rosy lation in biological processes, numerous efforts have been directed toward mass spectrometry based s nitro syl proteomic studies using various biological systems to increase significantly the number of known snit rosy lated peptides (). Among these studies, the biotin switch method is the most commonly adapted method for the site specific identification of protein snit rosy lation (). As the number of experimentally identified snit rosy lated peptides grows, a structured database of protein snit rosy lation is desirable for the further investigation of the biological functions of snit rosy lated proteins and the substrate specificities of SNO sites. Although a number of databases have been developed for post-translational modifications, such as dbp tm (), phospho elm (), phospho site (), og lyc base (), ubi prot (), dbo gap () and pup db (), there is no database dedicated to snit rosy lated proteins and their corresponding substrate sites. Thus, a new database dbs no containing the experimentally verified snit rosy lated peptides from research articles is proposed to facilitate with the functional analysis of snit rosy lated proteins and assist with the structural investigation of snit rosy lation sites.

conclusion the dbs no database is the first public resource to allow efficient access to curated SNO sites, functional annotations, structural characteristics and substrate motifs for snit rosy lated proteins. With regard to the computational prediction of SNO sites, dbs no could provide the benchmark dataset for the development and comparison of prediction tools.
