Gene coexpression analysis was developed to explore gene interconnection at the expression level from a systems perspective, and differential coexpression analysis dce a which examines the change in gene expression correlation between two conditions, was accordingly designed as a complementary technique to traditional differential expression analysis de a. Since there is a shortage of dce a tools, we implemented in an R package dc gl five dce a methods for identification of differentially coexpressed genes and differentially coexpressed links, including three currently popular methods and two novel algorithms described in a companion paper. dc gl can serve as an easy to use tool to facilitate differential coexpression analyses. Contact: yy lisc bit org and yx lisc bit org
introduction from the perspective of systems biology, gene coexpression analysis is useful for investigating gene interconnection at the expression level. Differential coexpression analysis dce a which examines the change in expression correlation of gene pairs between two conditions, helps to explore the global transcriptional mechanisms underlying phenotypic changes. Compared with traditional differential expression analysis de a the development of dce a tools is lagged. In this work, we developed an R package, dc gl implementing three previously proposed dce a methods and two new algorithms reported in a companion paper (submitted for publication). Log Ratio of Connections (LRC) calculates the logarithm of the ratio of the connectivities of a gene between two conditions (). Average Specific Connection (ASC) counts the 'specific connections' that exist in only one coexpression network (). The weighted gene coexpression network analysis wgc na weights links with correlation coefficients and compares the sums of the correlation coefficients of a gene (). In contrast, our two methods, differential coexpression profile (DCp) and differential coexpression enrichment (DCe), are designed based on the exact coexpression changes of gene pairs, and thus can differentiate significant coexpression changes from relatively trivial ones, and identify coexpression reversal between positive and negative (submitted for publication). All the five methods are able to identify differentially coexpressed genes (DCGs) from microarray datasets, and DCe is also able to pick out differentially coexpressed gene pairs or links dc ls
