Motivation: Frameshifting (FS) indels and nonsense (NS) variants disrupt the protein coding sequence downstream of the mutation site by changing the reading frame or introducing a premature termination codon, respectively. Despite such drastic changes to the protein sequence, FS indels and NS variants have been discovered in healthy individuals. How to discriminate disease causing from neutral FS indels and NS variants is an understudied problem. Results: We have built a machine learning method called ddig in (FS) based on real human genetic variations from the Human Gene Mutation Database (inherited disease causing and the 1000 Genomes Project (GP) (putatively neutral). The method incorporates both sequence and predicted structural features and yields a robust performance by 10-fold cross validation and independent tests on both FS indels and NS variants. We showed that human derived NS variants and FS indels derived from animal orthologs can be effectively employed for independent testing of our method trained on human derived FS indels. ddig in (FS) achieves a Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) of 0.59, a sensitivity of 86%, and a specificity of 72% for FS indels. Application of ddig in (FS) to NS variants yields essentially the same performance (MCC of 0.43) as a method that was specifically trained for NS variants. ddig in (FS) was shown to make a significant improvement over existing techniques. Availability and implementation: The ddig in web server for predicting NS variants, FS indels, and non frameshifting (NFS) indels is available at http://sparks-lab.org/ddig. Contact: yao qi zhou griffith edu au
introduction a key requirement for personalized medicine is to fully annotate human genetic variations in different individuals. Some genetic variations are benign, while others are disease causing or disease associated. In addition to single nucleotide variations that change a single amino acid in a protein sequence (missense mutations), a large fraction of pathological human genetic variations are caused by nonsense (NS) mutations [comprising 11% (where a single nucleotide variation introduces a premature termination codon (PTC), and by micro insertions and micro deletions [indels, comprising 24% (] that involve the insertion or deletion of 20 nucleotides. In exonic protein coding regions, indels can be frameshifting (FS) or non frameshifting (NFS) depending upon whether or not the in del in question inserts or deletes a multiple of three nucleotides. NFS indels insert delete multiples of three nucleotides and hence do not alter the coding region, comprising three nucleotide codons, other than at the in del site. On the other hand, FS indels, having a length indivisible by three, shift the reading frame and alter the coding sequence downstream of the in del site, which depending on the location and downstream sequence context of the in del may introduce a PTC. Thus, both FS indels and NS variants alter the entire coding sequence downstream from the variation site. As a result, they are often assumed to have a significant functional impact and to be potentially disease causing. Indeed, NS variants account for $20% of all disease associated single base substitutions (). However, a considerable number of NS variants and FS indels have been identified as being benign in recent studies (). How to distinguish neutral from potentially disease causing FS indels and NS variants is therefore of both practical and fundamental interest. The functional effects of FS indels and NS variants are poorly understood although variations which introduce a PTC and activate nonsense mediated decay (NMD) are more likely to come to clinical attention (). Additionally, FS indels and NS variants may disrupt pre mrna splicing with around $31% of disease causing NS variants predicted to disrupt splicing (). It is therefore clear that the functional impact of this class of variants (FS indels and NS mutations) is not always straightforward to interpret and currently most available methods for discriminating deleterious and neutral genetic variants are devoted exclusively to missense mutations. Examples are SIFT (), poly phen () or mut pred (), for recent reviews see or. Although there are several methods for NFS indels ddig in (NFS) (), SIFT in del (), prove an (), pin por () and KD4i (, there are only three methods available for FS indels and two for NS variants. d score () ranks FS indels and NS variants based on the loss of protein information content derived from the conservation of the target protein sequence without specific training. SIFT in del () is a decision tree trained on disease causing FS indels annotated in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) () and neutral indels from pairwise alignments between human proteins and their functional orthologs in cow, dog, horse, chimpanzee, rhesus macaque and rat. SIFT in del employs four features: fraction of affected conserved DNA bases, relative in del location, fraction of affected conserved amino acids, and in del distance to the exon boundary. CADD (Combined annotation dependent Depletion) () is a general framework for predicting all possible types of genetic variations. It is based on a support vector machine (SVM) model trained with a variety of features including scores calculated with other methods such as SIFT () and poly phen (). The training neutral dataset was compiled from variants between human and inferred human chimpanzee common ancestral genomes. The training deleterious dataset was created using a genome wide simulator of de novo germline mutations. In this article, we have built the first machine learning technique for FS indels and NS variants trained entirely on actual human variants, rather than on simulated deleterious variants (CADD) or variants derived from orthologous animal proteins (SIFT in del. Moreover, we investigated the application of structural properties, which have been shown to be important for the classification of NFS indels () and missense mutations (). By utilizing disease causing variants annotated in the HGMD () and putatively neutral variants from the 1000 GP (), we found that the most discriminative feature for FS indels and NS variants was the disruption of DNA conservation, rather than the disruption of protein structure as in the case of NFS indels. The best combination of eight features identified by a feature selection algorithm was used to build the final SVM model named ddig in (FS) (Detecting disease causing Genetic variations). More importantly, the method developed here was subjected to rigorous independent testing. These tests included the use of FS indels derived from functional animal orthologs as a neutral dataset (the SIFT in del neutral dataset) and the use of NS variants for testing the method trained on FS indels. Here, we have rationalized the possible equivalence between FS indels and NS variants by their effect on the protein sequence: FS indels effectively render the protein sequence meaningless after the in del site, and probably have the same effect as truncation of the protein induced by a NS variant. ddig in (FS) achieved a Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) of 0.59 and 0.54 for the 10-fold cross validation and independent test (on non-overlapping HGMD disease causing indels and neutral indels from the SIFT in del dataset), respectively, compared with an MCC of 0.38 and 0.35 for CADD. A very different performance, MCC of 0.29 and 0.63 for the two different datasets, was observed for SIFT in del. The robust performance of ddig in (FS) was further confirmed by an independent dataset of NS variants and negative correlation with average allele frequency (AF) in the presumably healthy population from the 1000 GP.

discussion this article developed a machine learning method named ddig in (FS) that can predict disease probability for both FS indels and NS variants. For FS indels, ddig in (FS) has a consistent performance with a MCC of 0.59 in a 10-fold cross validation and 0.54 in an independent test. Its performance for NS variants matches that of ddig in (NS) directly trained for the purpose. Predicted disease probabilities for neutral variants from the 1000 GP are supported by a negative correlation with the average AFs of these variants. In developing our method, we performed feature selection and classifier obtainment using the same FS indels dataset () because it is the only human dataset available. Because this practice may result in over training several techniques were utilized to minimize such a possibility. To avoid over training in a particular group of genes, we used a sequence identity threshold (30%) to remove redundant sequences in the disease causing FS indels dataset. For the 10-fold cross validation we ensured that no two folds shared sequences with a pairwise identity 30%. A similar approach was ns variants dataset: ddig in (FS) is the independent test result, whereas ddig in (NS) is from 10-fold cross validation for clarity, we only showed the results of ddig in (FS), ddig in (NS), and CADD after neutral variants with AF 0.1% were removed. Essentially the same performance of ddig in (FS) and ddig in (NS) for NS variants demonstrates the robustness of ddig in fs used previously for methods for the prediction of damaging missense variants () or the prediction of mutation induced stability changes (Folkman et al., 2014a,b). We replicated our experiments 100 times with randomly generated folds while maintaining the ratio of the disease causing and neutral variants. This strict cross validation coupled with the sequential forward floating feature selection () led to a robust performance in two fully independent tests, which in turn confirmed that ddig in (FS) was not over trained (Tables 3 and 4). Our method differs from two other available methods, SIFT in del () and CADD (), in training. CADD was trained with disease causing variants from a genome wide simulation of de novo germline mutations and neutral variants between human and inferred human chimpanzee common ancestral genomes. SIFT in del was trained with disease causing FS indels from the HGMD and neutral variants between human and orthologous animal proteins. By contrast, both disease causing and neutral indels for training ddig in (FS) were from known human variations (HGMD and 1000 GP, respectively). Our new method also differs from previous techniques by utilizing features from predicted structural properties of proteins. Nonetheless, the three most prominent features in our method were all related to sequence conservation (). In agreement with related work [SIFT in del ()], DNA conservation was the single most important feature, while those features based on predicted structural properties of proteins were significantly less discriminative. By comparison, the most discriminative feature for NFS indels () was the disruption of structured regions predicted by protein disorder predictor SPINE-D (). This highlights the difference between local sequence disruption induced by NFS indels and the global sequence disruption induced by FS indels and NS variants. Indeed, the direct application of ddig in (FS) to a NFS indels dataset results in a significantly poorer performance [MCC of 0.42 compared with 0.68 by ddig in (NFS) (. Unlike previously developed methods, ddig in (FS) was subjected to rigorous independent testing by applying it directly to NS variants. Here, we assumed the equivalence between FS indels and NS variants because FS indels effectively render the protein sequence meaningless after the in del site, and probably have the same effect as truncation of the protein induced by a NS variant. This equivalence was supported by similar distributions of three predictive features (DNA conservation, protein conservation, and K a /K s ratio) for NS variants and FS indels (Supplementary, respectively). The equivalence is further supported by the fact that ddig in (NS), directly optimized and trained for NS variants, was only marginally better (AUC of 0.72 compared with 0.70) than the independent test performance of our 'main' method, ddig in (FS), which was designed solely using a dataset of FS indels (see Section 3.4). The performance of ddig in (FS) was lower for NS variants as compared with FS indels, but the possible difference between these two distinct types of variants is unlikely to be the main cause. We found that the neutral NS variants dataset comprised a significant proportion of extremely rare variants with AF 0.1%. By comparison, AFs for all neutral FS indels were !0.3%. When we tested ddig in (FS) only on neutral NS variants with AF ! 0.3%, the prediction performance was comparable to the performance on FS indels (AUC of 0.86 and 0.87, respectively). Thus, the main reason for a lower performance of ddig in (FS) on NS variants was the presence of false negatives in the neutral NS variants dataset. Another means of independent testing is by the use of AF, the occurrence frequency of a particular variant in a given population. AF results from multiple factors arising from the complicated interactions between human beings and their environment. Many rare alleles are both population specific and of functional significance (), whereas frequent alleles (for late onset diseases, in particular) are not necessarily benign. Thus, the fitness of the allele with respect to its associated biological function is likely an underlying trend that appears only after averaging (removing noise from other factors) (). This correlation with the average AF values but not with the individual AF values is illustrated in and Supplementary, respectively. In this work, we assumed that FS indels and NS variants identified by the 1000 GP are neutral. Although this assumption is not unreasonable, there might be false negatives disease causing variants labelled as neutral) in our datasets. Indeed, rare neutral NS variants (AF 0.1%) have led to poorer performance of CADD, ddig in (FS), and ddig in (NS) (). Interestingly, we found that ddig in (NS) trained and evaluated only on neutral variants with AF  0.1% yields an AUC of 0.76, significantly worse than 0.82 given by ddig in (NS) trained with all neutral variants. Thus, the benefit resulting from a larger number of neutral variants outweighs the potential for false negatives for some rare variants. Similar behaviour was observed for NFS indels (). Utilizing variants from the 1000 GP as our neutral dataset is further supported by the consistent performance of ddig in (FS) when these neutral variants were replaced by variants derived from animal orthologs from the SIFT in del training dataset. Moreover, the distributions of sequence conservation features for neutral FS indels from the 1000 GP are similar to those from the SIFT in del training dataset ().Detecting disease causing genetic variations
