Motivation: In silico prediction of site specific kinase substrate relationships ssk srs is crucial for deciphering phosphorylation networks by linking kino mes to phospho proteomes. However, currently available predictors for ssk srs give rise to a large number of false positive results because they use only a short sequence stretch around phospho site as determinants of kinase specificity and do not consider the biological context of kinase substrate recognition. Results: Based on the analysis of domain specific kinase substrate relationships, we have constructed a domain level phosphorylation network that implicitly incorporates various contextual factors. It reveals preferential phosphorylation of specific domains by certain kinases. These novel correlations have been implemented in phos net construct an automated program for predicting target kinases for a substrate protein. phos net construct distinguishes cognate kinase substrate pairs from a large number of non cognate combinations. Benchmarking on independent datasets using various statistical measures demonstrates the superior performance of phos net construct over ssk sr based predictors.

introduction phosphorylation of a variety of proteins by ser thr or Tyr kinases is one of the major post-translational modifications, which regulates signal transduction events in different metabolic and disease related processes within a cell. Therefore, a detailed understanding of protein phosphorylation networks is crucial for decoding the molecular basis of various cellular processes. However, an exponential increase in kino me information and identification of variety of phosphoproteins across different organisms () has made complete experimental characterization of phosphorylation networks enormously difficult. Even though several sequence as well as structure based methods () are available for prediction of site specific kinase substrate relationships ssk srs they are ideally designed for identification of phospho sites in a given substrate protein of a kinase. Hence, straightforward application of these methods to decipher phosphorylation networks by prediction of kinases that can potentially phosphorylate a given substrate protein can lead to the accumulation of false positive results. This is because every protein irrespective of whether it is actually phosphorylated is treated as a putative substrate. It is well known that approximately only one third of the entire proteome is phosphorylated (), and phosphorylation events are part of dynamic and directional protein interaction networks. The context dependent factors that are likely to govern the kinase substrate recognition process are cellular localization, co regulation of interacting pairs of proteins and also the presence of other docking interacting domains in the same polypeptide or coevolution of kinase substrate pairs as interacting domains. However, these contextual factors remain outside the purview of the sequence motif based methods for prediction of ssk srs owing to the consideration of small stretches of amino acids on substrates as determinants of kinase specificity. Therefore, recently developed approaches like network in () and i gps () have combined motif profile based predictions with information about the functional association between kinases and substrates derived from STRING () or other databases containing experimental protein protein interaction (PPI) information. These studies have demonstrated that inclusion of interaction context leads to improved prediction of ssk srs. However, direct information about functional association or pp is are only available for a limited number of kinase substrate pairs and hence it is necessary to explore alternate approaches for prediction of phosphorylation networks by inclusion of context dependent interaction probability for a kinase substrate pair. Several contextual factors are likely to better correlate with sequence signatures at the globular domain level rather than signatures in short sequence motifs. domain level sequence signatures in polypeptide chains are assigned using Pfam () or interpro type () functional domain definitions. These are derived from the HMM profiles obtained from multiple sequence alignments of related proteins. In fact, earlier studies by have demonstrated that, correlated InterPro domain level sequence signatures could be used as markers of pp is. Liu and tozer en (2010). have also attempted to predict substrates of kinases based on co occurrence of pairs of interacting domains (). Therefore, in this study, we have constructed a domain level kinase substrate network based on Pfam (Finn *To whom correspondence should be addressed) domain analysis of the experimentally identified mammalian kinase substrate pairs available in phospho site plus () and recently published activity based human phosphorylation network (). Systematic analysis of this kinase phospho domain network has revealed novel patterns of preferential phosphorylation of certain Pfam domains by specific kinases. We also demonstrate that these preferential domain specific kinase substrate relationships dsk srs can be used to distinguish cognate kinase substrate pairs from all other non cognate combinations. Extensive benchmarking on a completely independent test set indicates that by using dsk srs it is possible to predict putative target kinases that are likely to phosphorylate given substrate proteins shows various steps involved in the compilation of phosphorylation data and construction of an experimentally identified domain phosphorylation network. To have a significant number of phosphorylation events for each kinase substrate pair in the dataset, kinase substrate pairs were selected from phospho site plus (with the criterion that each of the protein kinases had at least 20 substrate proteins. This resulted in 2642 substrate proteins phosphorylated by 61 different protein kinases. The domain compositions for each of these substrate proteins and their target protein kinases were deciphered using Pfam () functional domain definitions. Phosphorylation sites on each of the 2642 substrate proteins were mapped onto the corresponding Pfam functional domains resulting in 856 unique phospho domains (Supplementary Data S1 and S2). Further details are given in Supplementary Methods. Domain phosphorylation profiles were represented by a binary matrix of dimension 61  856, where each element consisted of 1 or 0 depending on whether a selected domain is phosphorylated by a given kinase. The phosphorylation patterns of interdomain linker stretches were also represented by a similar matrix of dimensions 61  490. The distance between a pair of kinases in terms of their domain phosphorylation profiles was computed using the Jaccard coefficient between domain phosphorylation vectors followed by hierarchical clustering and the result was represented as a heat map using the p heat map module of R package www r project org
discussion in this work, we have used experimentally identified kinase substrate pairs and their Pfam domain composition to analyze dsk srs and constructed a domain based kinase substrate interaction network. Experimentally identified phospho sites on substrate proteins have been mapped onto Pfam domains or interdomain linker regions. Interestingly, degree distribution of kinases, as well as domains of this network, shows a power law type behavior, and our analysis reveals presence of a small number of highly connected hub kinases and hub domains. This suggests that only a few kinases can phosphorylate a large number of Pfam domains, while most kinases phosphorylate only a few Pfam domains and vice versa. The differential specificities of various kinases for different Pfam domains have been quantified in the form of ER of kinase domain pairs. Our analysis of dsk srs indicates that different Pfam domains are preferentially phosphorylated by a limited number of specific kinases only. Similarly, we have also computed ER values for kinase auxiliary domain pairs, which represent preference of a kinase to phosphorylate a substrate protein because of enriched occurrences of the given auxiliary domain, even if the auxiliary domain is not phosphorylated by the kinase. Short sequence motif based approaches for deciphering ssk srs have their origin in the use of peptide library data, which obviously lacks contextual information. Hence, prediction of phosphorylation networks based on ssk srs results in a large number of false positive ks rs. On the other hand, dsk srs derived in this work implicitly incorporate various context dependent features. Second, Pfam domains are essentially longer signature motifs, and thus they become more specific. This helps in eliminating false positive kinase substrate pairs that arise in ssk sr based predictions. Therefore, we have incorporated these dsk srs into a web based automated computational tool, phos net construct for genome wide identification of protein phosphorylation networks. Using these ER values, phos net construct distinguishes cognate kinase domain pairs from a large number of non cognate combinations. Benchmarking on completely independent test datasets indicates that performance of phos net construct is superior to ssk sr based predictors like GPS and net phos k. However, i gps that incorporates PPI information is the only approach that attains a comparable trade-off between sensitivity and specificity. Thus, our benchmarking results also suggest that dsk sr derived by us has implicitly incorporated context dependent information, which methods like i gps and network in incorporate by including direct pp is. Therefore, our work demonstrates that even in cases where information about PPI is not available, phos net construct can generate a potential list of cognate kinase substrate pairs by filtering out a large number of non cognate combinations and subsequently exact phospho sites can be identified using ssk sr predictors like GPS and net phos k
