Motivation: Elementary flux mode (EFM) is a fundamental concept as well as a useful tool in metabolic pathway analysis. One important role of ef ms is that every flux distribution can be decomposed into a set of ef ms and a number of methods to study flux distributions originated from it. Yet finding such decompositions requires the complete set of ef ms which is intractable in genome scale metabolic networks due to combinatorial explosion. Results: In this article, we proposed an algorithm to decompose flux distributions into ef ms in genome scale networks. It is an iterative scheme of a mixed integer linear program. Unlike previous optimization models to find pathways, any feasible solutions can become ef ms in our algorithm. This advantage enables the algorithm to approximate the EFM of largest contribution to an objective reaction in a flux distribution. Our algorithm is able to find ef ms of flux distributions with complex structures, closer to the realistic case in which a cell is subject to various constraints. A case of Escherichia coli growth in the lys ogen y broth (LB) medium containing various carbon sources was studied. Essential metabolites and their syntheses were located. Information on the contribution of each carbon source not obvious from the apparent flux distribution was also revealed. Our work further confirms the utility of finding ef ms by optimization models in genome scale metabolic networks.

introduction immediately after the success in genomics, the next step is to fill the gap between genotypes and phenotypes to have a full picture of biological systems. The genome scale metabolic network has been playing this role and has been found useful in answering biological questions (). During the past decade, various methods have been proposed to analyze metabolic networks and the constraint based modeling approach is exceptionally prominent (). One object of particular importance and increasing interest in the approach is the elementary flux mode (EFM). EFM is an important theoretical concept as well as a practical tool in metabolic pathway analysis. Theoretically, it is the minimal operational unit * To whom correspondence should be addressed. at steady state in metabolic networks satisfying the thermodynamic constraint regarding the reversibility of each reaction (). Practically, ef ms have been applied in a variety of studies: investigating network structures like network robustness (), dynamic properties of pathways (), pathway efficiency () and modularity (), exploring new pathways () and hence suggesting rational strain design (;), predicting mutants' behavior (), identifying interactions with other networks (), etc. (reviewed in). An important interpretation of ef ms is that every flux distribution can be decomposed as a positive sum of a subset of ef ms {e j } with the 'no cancelation' property that all e j have a particular component being zero wherever v has that component being zero (). That is,) for all j where Z(v) ={i|v i = 0} is the index set for the zero components of v. The 'no cancelation' property is unique compared to other generating sets of the flux space like extreme pathways (EPs) (). In many studies, flux distributions are analyzed by similar decompositions. The first attempt is the spectrum to determine the range of attainable weights for each EP (). This approach is also applicable to ef ms. Later, decomposing flux distributions with minimum sum of weights has been proposed () and applied to study yeast glycolysis (). Decompositions with respect to other objectives have also been adopted to investigate particular cases, for instances, maximum number of active ef ms (), minimum relative error (), maximum yield rate () and maximum entropy (). There are also other studies analyzing flux distributions by decompositions into ef ms (e.g.). These approaches based on decomposing flux distributions, despite the insights they have provided, have their capabilities limited because the calculation always requires the complete set of ef ms in prior given a metabolic network, whose computation is notoriously hard due to the combinatorial explosion when the network size grows. This drawback was first studied in klam t and Stelling (2002) and has been mentioned in many literatures eg page 2257 22562262

conclusion in this article, we presented an algorithm which solves mil ps iteratively to decompose a flux distribution into ef ms in genome scale metabolic networks. One advantage of the algorithm is the element arity of solutions independent of the optimality of mil ps. The objective function can then be used for other purposes and we suggested approximating the largest contributing ef ms in flux distributions. We demonstrated the ability of the algorithm to decompose flux distributions into ef ms and approximate ef ms with largest Page: 2262 22562262
