Motivation: Motif discovery is now routinely used in high throughput studies including large scale sequencing and proteomics. These datasets present new challenges. The first is speed. Many motif discovery methods do not scale well to large datasets. Another issue is identifying discriminative rather than generative motifs. Such discriminative motifs are important for identifying co-factors and for explaining changes in behavior between different conditions. Results: To address these issues we developed a method for DECOnvolved Discriminative motif discovery de cod. de cod uses a km er count table and so its running time is independent of the size of the input set. By de convolving the km ers de cod considers context information without using the sequences directly. de cod outperforms previous methods both in speed and in accuracy when using simulated and real biological benchmark data. We performed new binding experiments for p53 mutants and used de cod to identify p53 co-factors, suggesting new mechanisms for p53 activation. Availability: The source code and binaries for de cod are available at

introduction dna motif discovery has been a central problem in computational biology for almost two decades. Many methods based on word enumeration or probabilistic models including position weight matrices pwm s and Hidden Markov models (HMMs) have been developed for this task (). Word enumeration based methods are usually only able to find short motifs and tend to fail when the motif includes weak positions (). Most probabilistic methods involve iteratively scanning the input sequences to identify potential motifs and then updating the motifs to improve the likelihood of the model until convergence (). In such methods motifs are usually defined as subsequences, which are present at a much higher rate than expected when compared with a background model (D'). The use of motif discovery methods has dramatically increased over the last few years due to the rise in sequencing capacity and the advancement of other high throughput methods. These methods are routinely used to identify and predict transcription factor binding sites (), protein phosphorylation sites (), microRNAs targets () and alternative splicing locations (). However, these high throughput methods have also led to new requirements from motif search algorithms. The first is speed. Many studies now routinely search for motifs in very large sets of input sequences. For example, several chips eq experiments identify thousands of targets for specific mammalian transcription factors (). The second requirement is for identifying discriminative motifs (). Unlike traditional motif searches that are performed against a general background model, in discriminative motif search one looks for motifs that are present at a high rate in a positive set compared to a negative set. These sets can be genes that are up or downregulated at a specific time point or condition (), proteins that are initially co-localized but later diverge, genes that are bound in one condition by a TF but not in another, etc. These and other studies, including cross species analysis and methods for modeling gene regulation, require discriminative motif discovery methods that can scale to large datasets. Several discriminative motif finding methods have been developed so far. DIPS () uses a probabilistic score to quantify the difference in the number of occurrences of a PWM between two sets of sequences and uses heuristic hill climbing to search the sequences for motifs that maximizes this score. ALSE () uses a target function based on the hypergeometric distribution. This function searches for a PWM using an em like heuristic and then evaluates the likelihood that the PWM it identified represents a real motif. de me () performs a combination of global and local search to find a PWM that maximizes the conditional log likelihood of the sequence labels given the sequences and models parameters. Seeder () is a word based enumerative method. It first generates seeds by finding significantly enriched words in the positive set based on a word specific background probability distribution, and then iteratively extends these seeds to form a new PWM and updates the seeds until convergence. CMF () is also a word based method that starts by finding enriched words in the positive set based on a z-score, and then page 2362 23612367

discussion we presented de cod a novel method for discriminative motif finding in DNA sequences. de cod uses a deconvolution method which allows it to have a run time independent of the input data size while still taking into account context information.
