Motivation: The interactions between microbial colonies through chemical signaling are not well understood. A microbial colony can use different molecules to inhibit or accelerate the growth of other colonies. A better understanding of the molecules involved in these interactions could lead to advancements in health and medicine. Imaging mass spectrometry (IMS) applied to co-cultured microbial communities aims to capture the spatial characteristics of the colonies molecular fingerprints. These data are high dimensional and require computational analysis methods to interpret. Results: Here, we present a dictionary learning method that dec on volves spectra of different molecules from IMS data. We call this method MOLecular Dictionary Learning mold l. Unlike standard dictionary learning methods which assume gaussian distributed data, our method uses the Poisson distribution to capture the count nature of the mass spectrometry data. Also, our method incorporates universally applicable information on common ion types of molecules in MALDI mass spectrometry. This greatly reduces model parameterization and increases deconvolution accuracy by eliminating spurious solutions. Moreover, our method leverages the spatial nature of IMS data by assuming that nearby locations share similar abundances, thus avoiding overfitting to noise. Tests on simulated datasets show that this method has good performance in recovering molecule dictionaries. We also tested our method on real data measured on a microbial community composed of two species. We confirmed through follow-up validation experiments that our method recovered true and complete signatures of molecules. These results indicate that our method can discover molecules in IMS data reliably, and hence can help advance the study of interaction of microbial colonies.

Introduction

conclusion in this article, we present mold l a Dictionary Learning method, aimed at summarizing maldi ims data. This method dec on volves m/z signals into components that belong to different molecular species. Our method models the data as Poisson distributed, incorporates the possible ion types of MALDI mass spectrometry, leverages the spatial dependency of IMS data, and can learn the number of molecular species present in the maldi ims data automatically. We implemented this method and develop a straightforward method for choosing its hyperparameters. We tested it on three synthetic and two real experimental datasets, and showed that, compared with prior approaches, our method provides superior recovery of molecular signatures.
