Motivation: The standard genetic code translates 61 codons into 20 amino acids using fewer than 61 transfer RNAs (tRNAs). This is possible because of the tRNAs ability to wobble at the third base to decode more than one codon. Although the anticodon– codon mapping of tRNA to mRNA is a prerequisite for certain codon usage indices and can contribute to the understanding of the evolution of alternative genetic codes, it is usually not determined experimentally because such assays are prohibitively expensive and elaborate. Instead, the codon reading is approximated from theoretical inferences of nucleotide binding, the wobble rules. Unfortunately, these rules fail to capture all of the nuances of codon reading. This study addresses the codon reading properties of tRNAs and their evolutionary impact on codon usage bias. Results: Using three different computational methods, the signal of tRNA decoding in codon usage bias is identified. The predictions by the methods generally agree with each other and compare well with experimental evidence of codon reading. This analysis suggests a revised codon reading for cytosolic tRNA in the yeast genome (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) that is more accurate than the common assignment by wobble rules. The results confirm the earlier observation that the wobble rules are not sufficient for a complete description of codon reading, because they depend on genome specific factors. The computational methods presented here are applicable to any fully sequenced genome. Availability: By request from the author.

introduction the standard genetic code consists of 61 sense codons and 3 stop codons, coding for 20 amino acids and a termination signal. The molecules that convey this mapping of translation are several types of transfer RNA (tRNA). To one side of the tRNA, an amino acid is attached by a designated aminoacyl tRNA synthetase (ARS). This coupling of each amino acid by ARS to the appropriate tRNA molecule is a pivotal part for the mapping of the genetic code (). Located on the other side of the tRNA is the anticodon that binds to specific codons of the messenger RNA (mRNA) at the a site of the ribosome, ensuring that the correct amino acid is decoded. There are fewer tRNAs than codons, as non-standard base paring allows one tRNA molecule to read multiple codons, thereby reducing the number of tRNAs necessary for reading all codons. Depending on the organism, the number of different tRNA iso acceptors range from 23 (allowing for a fully degenerate binding at the third codon position) to 45 (allowing only * To whom correspondence should be addressed 45 tRNA molecules, each charged with the assigned amino acid by an ARS. The mapping of tRNA anticodon s to mRNA codons is the focus of this study degenerate binding of pyrimidines). This anticodon codon mapping of the tRNAs to the mRNA is the focus of this study (see). We first investigate the imprint of the decoding properties of tRNA in codon usage bias, then we exploit the signal to infer the codon reading in yeast. The codon usage bias is the non-random, unequal usage of synonymous codons. It is shaped by the balance of mutational bias and selection (). The mutational biases originating from DNA processes (replication and repair errors, etc.) generates a variation in the sequences. These sequence variations are under various selective pressures. A prominent such pattern of selection is the co-evolution of tRNA abundance and codon usage bias (), Many of the different patterns are induced by the physiological constraints of translational selection (). The relative strength and importance of all factors that influence the codon usage bias has not yet been resolved. Given the central role of tRNA in translation, it is not inconceivable that a signal caused by the decoding properties of tRNA is detectable by analysis of codon usage bias. The decoding properties of tRNA are governed by several factors. In essence, the ribosome constrains the first and the second position of the codon to strict cognate watson crick binding, but monitors the third position of the codon less stringently (). The third position of the codon and the first position of the anticodon are thus called the wobble position. Driven by the necessity for stable protein synthesis, the nucleotides at the wobble position of the tRNA are often chemically modified to alter the specificity of the binding (). The cell makes a comparatively large investment into genes for tRNA modifications, to maintain tRNA stability, aid recognition for the corresponding ARS and to ensure accurate codon reading (). The assignment of codon reading is important for several methods in sequence analysis. Some indices of codon usage depend on knowledge of specific anticodon codon mapping [e.g. tAI() and TPI (dos. The mapping may help to understand the evolution of the genetic code and to find potential targets for re-engineering the genetic code to incorporate non natural amino acids into proteins (). The most conclusive way of determining the binding characteristics (i.e. accuracy and efficacy) is via experiments (). Unfortunately, experimental determination of the tRNA properties is expensive and time consuming. Therefore, the ability to predict the decoding properties of tRNA is a highly desirable alternative to experimental assignment. Using knowledge of nucleotide chemistry of base pairing, Francis Crick proposed a scheme for the decoding properties of tRNA (). These are the wobble rules, which still remain a common description for the anticodon codon mapping. The original version of the wobble rules can briefly be described as: A:U, C:G, G:{C,U}, U:{A,G}, and in the case of a adenine modified to inosine: i acu. The latter being the only known modification when the wobble rules were devised. This notation is understood in the following way: the base at the first position of the anticodon is before the colon while the set of bases at the third position of the codon that can bind with the first position of the anticodon is after the colon. For example, U:{A,G} means that a uracil at the wobble position of the tRNA can bind either an adenosine or guanine. The original wobble rules are summarized in. Over time, as new tRNA modifications were discovered, several cases were found in which the original wobble rules failed to describe the true codon reading;; Yokoyama and Nishimura (1995). In response, the original wo bb rules were updated several times to accommodate the newly discovered codon readings. For example, in the restricted version of the wobble rules for eukaryote, the i a wobble is not allowed (). Observed possibilities of codon reading are summarized in. It turns out that finding simple 'rules' for codon reading is not trivial and may be impossible. To date, there is no generalization of the wobble rules, even when the base modifications are known. A particular method extending the wobble rules worth mentioning is the wobble parsimony method (). This method infers the codon reading assignment in eukaryotes from genomic data. It uses the wobble rules and adds the knowledge of the presence of tRNA iso acceptors for a given organism, information that can be extracted rather easily from the complete genome (). Wobble parsimony assumes that a codon with a cognate tRNA present, has only canonical decoding. Extended codon reading by a tRNA is assumed if a codon does not have a cognate tRNA. The rules that specify the wobble parsimony in eukaryotes are (i) codons with cognate tRNAs are assigned canonical decoding, (ii) codons without cognate tRNA are assigned following the principle of restricted wobbling (G:U, A:C) and (iii) extended pairings (A:A, U:G) are assumed for codons that remain unassigned. Wobble parsimony is only applicable for eukaryotes and not bacteria, where the tRNAs commonly recognize more codons than eukaryotes. Another sequence based approach to infer trends in codon reading of tRNA is based on the analysis of tRNA genes and trna modifying enzymes across species (). Four major decoding strategies over the three kingdoms of life have been identified by the absence presence patterns of tRNAs and genes that are involved in specific nucleotide modifications. It is assumed that the proteins for nucleotide modifications have evolved to optimize specificity and efficiency of translation. There are several exceptions for the standard modes of decoding, in particular for uracil modifications where it is difficult to distinguish the codon reading. This is a limitation of the method. For example, in a four codon box, there is no need to prevent the U*:U reading, although it is not clear if this reading is viable or not. In this study, we use a novel approach to detect the imprint of trna decoding properties in the codon usage bias and to infer the codon reading of tRNA. We propose a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) method and two auxiliary methods: regression (REG) and codon correlation (CC). The results show that the best predictions rank high in the distribution of all solutions. Also, the three methods generally agree on the prediction. The predictions of the methods outperform the wobble rules on experimentally verified codon readings.

conclusion in this study, we investigate the mapping of anticodon s to codons. We examine the weak, yet detectable, imprint in codon bias of selection from trna decoding properties. We show that we can detect a signal that coincides with known codon reading of tRNAs. For this, we are using three sequence based methods: an HMM, regression and CC. The predicted codon anticodon mappings often agree with experimental results, in particular for the HMM method, which is better than the other two methods and outperforms the method of wobble parsimony. Furthermore, all three different methods significantly agree on the predictions and the predictions generally rank high in the solution space. Associated with the methods are crucial assumptions made to aid the prediction, because the solution space is enormous. As we show, the results based on these assumptions are sufficient to make predictions that agree with experimental results. This provides a valuable basis for further studies which can improve both the model and the assumptions. We proceed to exploit the detectable patterns of tRNA decoding to predict codon reading in yeast. We use experimentally determined codon readings, sequence based predictions and manual curation. These novel assignments are more accurate than the wobble parsimony mappings that are conventionally used. We advise against solely using the wobble parsimony, because organisms tend to use a functionally redundant broad recognition of codons. Cases where the predicted anticodon codon mapping deviates from common decoding patterns are interesting targets for further experiments and theoretical investigations. With the HMM, we present a statistically sound method for identifying these targets.
