Motivation: Accurate segmentation of brain electron microscopy (EM) images is a critical step in dense circuit reconstruction. Although deep neural networks dnn s have been widely used in a number of applications in computer vision, most of these models that proved to be effective on image classification tasks can not be applied directly to EM image segmentation, due to the different objectives of these tasks. As a result, it is desirable to develop an optimized architecture that uses the full power of dnn s and tailored specifically for EM image segmentation. Results: In this work, we proposed a novel design of dnn s for this task. We trained a pixel classifier that operates on raw pixel intensities with no preprocessing to generate probability values for each pixel being a membrane or not. Although the use of neural networks in image segmentation is not completely new, we developed novel insights and model architectures that allow us to achieve superior performance on EM image segmentation tasks. Our submission based on these insights to the 2D EM Image Segmentation Challenge achieved the best performance consistently across all the three evaluation metrics. This challenge is still ongoing and the results in this paper are as of June 5, 2015. Availability and Implementation: https://github.com/ahmed-fakhry/dive

introduction anatomical connections between neurons in the brain form circuits that are responsible for the rapid information flow. Knowledge of the circuit structure is crucial for the investigation of its function. Mapping the structure and components of these circuits is one of the top priority research areas in neuroscience. It provides a foundation for understanding what the brain is made of at the cellular and structural levels, and how these properties change across the normal life span and in brain disorders. The reconstruction of such circuits at a very high resolution using electron microscopy (EM) is considered to be the gold standard for circuit mapping (Brain Research through Advancing Innovative neuro technologies BRAIN, 2014). Currently, sparse circuit reconstruction has been widely used on a small scale. Most of the studies focused on the very small caenorhabditis elegans or small parts of the nervous systems of the Drosophila. Recently, some of those efforts were extended to reconstruct the inner plexiform layer in the mouse retina (). Using EM data in large scale studies are currently a challenge, where the main bottleneck is data analysis. Better automatic image segmentation techniques would substantially amplify the impact of dense EM reconstruction. Machine learning and artificial intelligence approaches are expected to be the main driver for the desired advancements in this area. In this work, we focused on the automatic segmentation of serial section Transmitted Electron Microscopy s stem images. We provided a novel design of deep neural networks dnn s () that extends the techniques described in(2012a). We built a pixel DNN classifier that predicts the probability of every individual pixel in a given image being a membrane (border) pixel or not. Our DNN classifier accepts raw pixel intensities as input without any preprocessing and learns highly discriminative features automatically before producing final probability maps. These probability maps were fed later to another machine learning classifier based on random forests () to produce final segmentations. dnn s have been widely used in a number of applications in computer vision. It achieved the state of the art performance on tasks like large scale image and video recognition (), digit recognition () and object recognition tasks (). Recently, many attempts have been made to extend the usage of these models to the field of image segmentation, leading to improved performance (). Although some of the existing popular models have proved the ability to generalize well for different recognition tasks like the model in, most of these models that excelled on image classification and recognition tasks can not be applied directly to EM image segmentation tasks, given the difference in objectives between those tasks as well as the difference between EM and natural images (more details in Section 2.1). As a result, it is desirable to develop an optimized architecture that utilizes the full power of dnn s and tailored specifically for EM image segmentation. In this work, we developed a DNN model architecture that is highly optimized for s stem image segmentation. The key contribution is in the model itself and the novel insights about the specific kernel configuration leading to substantially improved results. We evaluated the effect of model configuration along with kernel structures and depth on the final segmentation outcome. We validated our approach by applying it to the is bi 2012 EM Segmentation Challenge () (http://brainiac2.mit.edu/ is bi challenge achieving the best performance on all evaluation metrics out of more than 40 participating groups (more groups are participating as the challenge is ongoing). Our model was one of the few that were able to beat the performance of a second human observer.

conclusion the key contributions of our work are to provide novel insights on DNN for brain EM image segmentation and to provide record breaking results. Our network is deep, wide and carefully designed to achieve the full performance power of DNN. We achieved the best results in the challenge without having to combine several models together, which makes the approach even more efficient. We believe that pre training of our model on other data sets like image net and combining the results of several models would further improve the accuracy. In addition, our model can generalize easily to different EM segmentation tasks due to the nature of dnn s which learn features from data. We are also extending this deep learning scheme on the Vaa3D () platform for other neuron images in large brain projects such as the big neuron ().We list only the to p8 groups.
