Motivation: Unsupervised cluster analysis is an invaluable tool for exploratory microarray data analysis, as it organizes the data into groups of genes or samples in which the elements share common patterns. Once the data are clustered, finding the optimal number of informative subgroups within a dataset is a problem that, while important for understanding the underlying phenotypes, is one for which there is no robust, widely accepted solution. Results: To address this problem we developed an informativeness metric based on a simple analysis of variance statistic that identifies the number of clusters which best separate phenotypic groups. The performance of the informativeness metric has been tested on both experimental and simulated datasets, and we contrast these results with those obtained using alternative methods such as the gap statistic. Availability: The method has been implemented in the Bioconductor R package attract; it is also freely available from http://compbio.dfci harvard edupubsattract101zip. Contact:

introduction clustering methods were among the first methods to be applied to DNA microarray data () and they remain one of the most commonly used techniques in the analysis of high dimensional genomic data. The assumption is that samples sharing similar patterns of expression across large numbers of genes are members of a particular molecular class or that genes grouped in clusters are co regulated across samples because they belong to a common functional group or pathway. While these assumptions have proven useful, determining where a cluster begins and ends, or equivalently, how many gene or sample clusters are present in a dataset is often arbitrary or treated as a post clustering analysis problem. In either case, the lack of a robust and reliable method can lead to potentially incorrect conclusions. Underestimating the number of clusters can artificially * To whom correspondence should be addressed. group unrelated elements while overestimating can split related groups into subgroups that confound further analysis. Here we focus on the problem of identifying informative gene expression clusters in experimental datasets resulting from comparison of multiple biological classes (such as treatment and control, or different cell types). The question we are trying to address is very specific: given a number of distinct phenotypic groups, what is the optimal cluster number (and membership) such that the clusters are maximally informative in their ability to distinguish the sample classes? Given the history of using clustering approaches in gene expression analysis and for other applications, it is surprising that this problem has not been more effectively addressed. Statistical methods that evaluate the optimal number of clusters within a dataset exist but are rarely used in a systematic manner and may reflect the fact that there are an array of experimental applications in which clustering is used as a discovery tool. model based cluster analysis methods assume that the collection of gene expression profiles can be decomposed into subgroups in which the genes display coordinated patterns of expression. model based approaches use statistical methods to search for the number of subgroups for which the consensus profiles best fit the available data (). For model based methods, metrics such as the Akaike Information Criterion () and the Bayesian Information Criterion () are both based on likelihood values and can be used to evaluate how well one model fits the data relative to another model. While these have been applied in other domains, in the analysis of microarray data, model selection can become difficult since there is often no a priori way of knowing what the structure of the underlying 'true' model might be. These approaches also may require the estimation of a large number of parameters, and in some cases, the number of samples may not be sufficient to accurately complete this task. Finally, most model based clustering algorithms assume a Gaussian distribution for variation that may not generally be appropriate for genomic profiling data. For the analysis of microarray data, a number of methods have been developed for estimating optimal cluster number based on an assessment of two properties of 'good' gene clusters: compactness and stability. A compact cluster is defined such that the intra-cluster variability is small relative to the average inter cluster variability. Metrics assessing compactness that have been applied to array data include the gap statistic (), the Silhouette width (), the Dunn index () and the

conclusion we provide an alternative way to validate the results of a cluster analysis that explicitly takes into account the experimental design which produced the dataset. This validation method is independent of the method used to generate the clusters. Given the additional insights into data structure provided by our approach, we hope that the simplicity of our method will make the integration of cluster validation approaches a more mainstream part of the cluster analysis procedure.
