Binding free energy calculations obtained through molecular dynamics simulations reflect intermolecular interaction states through a series of independent snapshots. Typically, the free energies of multiple simulated series (each with slightly different starting conditions) need to be estimated. Previous approaches carry out this task by moving averages at certain decorrelation times, assuming that the system comes from a single conformation description of binding events. Here, we discuss a more general approach that uses statistical modeling, wavelets denoising and hierarchical clustering to estimate the significance of multiple statistically distinct subpopulations, reflecting potential macro states of the system. We present the del tags eg R package that performs macro state estimation from multiple replicated series and allows molecular biologists chemists to gain physical insight into the molecular details that are not easily accessible by experimental techniques. Availability: del tags eg is a Bioconductor R package available at

introduction free energy calculations are extensively used to understand intermolecular interactions. Among the several free energy estimation methods (), the mm gbp bsa (molecular mechanics with generalized Born and surface area solvation) has gained popularity because of its fast performance and its ability to predict trends in affinities (). Traditionally in mm gbp bsa one performs molecular dynamics simulations (MDs) and selects a set of representative snapshots from a stretch of the trajectory that is deemed to be at equilibrium (or converged). The MDs are often replicated multiple times (typically from 3 to 6), each time with slightly different starting conditions. Of primary interest is the calculation of the relative free binding energy G  G complex  G receptor  G ligand , which is estimated from the replicated MDs of the complex, receptor and ligand terms. The average G across the set of selected snapshots is then reported as the net free energy, which is subject to large variation. All average based methods assume that the G series originates from a single conformation description of binding events. They are designed to minimize autocorrelation and estimate the series on appropriate (de)correlation times (otherwise the statistical error would be underestimated) via the method of statistical inefficiency or block averaging (). It has been discovered that this approach is sensitive to the drift during the course of the simulation and, especially in long simulations, gives exponentially increased correlation times (). The unappealing consequence of the monotonic relationship between the correlation and the simulation times is that longer simulations lead to less data points for reliable inference. Our new del tags eg methodology relaxes the restrictive 'single conformation' assumption and estimates multiple distinct subpopulations, reflecting potential macro states upon experimental validation, within a series and its replicates (). Rigorous statistical modeling avoids the correlation time estimation without compromising the statistical validity of the estimates.
