Motivation Can we predict protein protein interactions pp is of a novel virus with its host? Three major problems arise: the lack of known pp is for that virus to learn from, the cost of learning about its proteins and the sequence dissimilarity among viral families that makes most methods inapplic-able or inefficient. We develop de novo a sequence based negative sampling and machine learning framework that learns from pp is of different viruses to predict for a novel one, exploiting the shared host proteins. We tested de novo on pp is from different domains to assess generalization. Results: By solving the challenge of generating less noisy negative interactions, de novo achieved accuracy up to 81 and 86% when predicting pp is of viral proteins that have no and distant sequence similarity to the ones used for training, receptive ly. This result is comparable to the best achieved in single virus host and intra-species PPI prediction cases. Thus, we can now predict pp is for virtually any virus infecting human. de novo generalizes well; it achieved near optimal accuracy when tested on bacteria human interactions.

introduction predicting protein interactions of a novel virus with its host is a 3-fold data problem. First, few or no protein protein interactions pp is may be available for a novel virus to learn from, prohibiting the application of the typical single virus host PPI prediction methods. Second, learning advanced protein features (like structure) for a novel virus protein can be time consuming a challenge to obtain (), and a generalization barrier. Third, sequence dissimilarity among viral families () makes transferring knowledge from pp is of some families to another family insufficient to model its pp is. Predicting inter-species pp is (which involve proteins from two different organisms) imposes additional difficulty over intra-species PPI prediction there are four interleaving components to address for the case of predicting pp is of novel viruses with their shared host: PPI samples to learn from; features to represent the pp is in a way that allows generalization; a learning approach that deals with the difficulties imposed by this type of prediction; and the consequent problem of generating negative PPI samples to learn from. Features. Prediction methods need features extracted from PPI examples to learn. Four major feature extraction approaches are typical in pathogen host PPI prediction. Sequence homology based approaches (), structure based approaches () and domain based approaches (known interactions from one protein to another based on sequence homology, structure similarity, or sharing of interaction interfaces, respectively (). Additionally, sequence dissimilarities among viral families hamper the generalization of these knowledge based approaches to all novel viruses. The fourth category extracts features from the amino acid sequences of the protein pairs. It is successfully used on single virus host PPI prediction () and adopted in de novo learning approaches. Three major learning approaches dominate inter-species PPI prediction (): classic machine learning, where a model learns to discriminate between positive and negative pp is (); data mining approaches that model true pp is and measure a putative PPI similarity to them (); and transfer learning, where knowledge of pp is is selectively transferred from a rich domain of pp is to the target one for which prediction is needed using commonalities between the two domains (). We anticipate that data mining and transfer learning approaches are not adequate for novel virus PPI prediction, mainly because virus families carry no sequence similarities among themselves sufficient to make data mining or transfer learning from available pp is of other viruses possible. Data problem. In predicting pp is for a virus with its host, either there are a sufficient number of known pp is few, or none. In the first case, usually a model is trained on the available pp is to predict additional ones (). As most viruses do not have many known pp is these single virus host prediction approaches are not universally applicable. Recently, transfer learning is applied to learn from pp is between a pathogen and its host and make prediction for another pathogen through a transfer function that maps knowledge between the domains (). However, transfer function design can be a challenge to build between viral families where members share no sequence similarities and may require prior knowledge of the two domains. Negative sampling. A machine learning model needs to learn the difference between the positive and negative classes, yet there is no gold standard of non-interacting proteins nor is there enough information to build one (). Typically, negative examples are generated randomly, for other knowledge based methods are mostly biased (Ben). Data mining approaches bypass negative sampling by modeling true interactions. For example, conformal prediction is used in a recent study () where the conformance of a putative PPI is evaluated against the known pp is and classified as positive if its prediction confidence is above a predefined threshold solution overview. This study addresses the generalized problem of predicting pp is between a virus and its host without the need to know any of their interactions in advance. The key idea is to learn interaction features for the host proteins rather than for specific viral proteins. The model depends only on protein sequences to extract features and generate unbiased negative examples to ensure generalization. Data are partitioned in a way that simulates the situation of a new virus to reasonably evaluate the performance. We further make three hypotheses on what attributes potentially guide the learning process and use our framework to test them to link biological and computational aspects of the prediction process. We name the proposed solution de novo as an analogy to de novo protein structure prediction, for it makes prediction without prior knowledge of any interactions between the two organisms to learn from. See Supplementary Material S8 for the solution workflow. de novo demonstrates the feasibility of predicting interactions of a virus protein with human proteins by learning from the available interactions of other viruses that also infect human, even with little or no sequence similarity to the viral proteins in training. The framework achieves accuracy comparable to the best reported for intra-species PPI prediction (using sequence information) despite the challenging nature of the generalized problem. We additionally demonstrate de novo generalization to other pathogens.
