Motivation: The de novo identification of the initiation and termination zones regions that replicate earlier or later than their upstream and downstream neighbours, respectively remains a key challenge in DNA replication. Results: Building on advances in deep learning, we developed a novel hybrid architecture combining a pre trained deep neural network and a hidden Markov model dnn hmm for the de novo identification of replication domains using replication timing profiles. Our results demonstrate that dnn hmm can significantly outperform strong, discriminative ly trained Gaussian mixture model hmm g mmhmm systems and other six reported methods that can be applied to this challenge. We applied our trained dnn hmm to identify distinct replication domain types, namely the early replication domain (ERD), the down transition zone (DTZ), the late replication domain (LRD) and the up transition zone (UTZ), using newly replicated DNA sequencing repli seq data across 15 human cells. A subsequent integrative analysis revealed that these replication domains harbour unique genomic and epigenetic patterns, transcriptional activity and higher order chromosomal structure. Our findings support the replication domain model, which states (1) that e rds and l rds connected by utz s and d tzs are spatially compartmentalized structural and functional units of higher order chromosomal structure, (2) that the adjacent dtz utz pairs form chromatin loops and (3) that intra interactions within e rds and l rds tend to be short range and long range respectively. Our model reveals an important chromatin organizational principle of the human genome and represents a critical step towards understanding the mechanisms regulating replication timing. Availability and implementation: Our dnn hmm method and three additional algorithms can be freely accessed at https://github.com

introduction complete and accurate chromosomal DNA replication is crucial for proper cell division and maintenance of the genetic integrity in all organisms (). In eukaryotes, DNA replication begins and ends at multiple genomic regions, designated the replication initiation and termination zones, respectively, according to a tightly controlled spatiotemporal order (). Dysregulation of initiation or termination may delay genomic replication, resulting in various diseases () and even cancer (). The initiation and termination zones may be identified from the replication timing profiles as regions that replicate earlier or later, respectively, than their upstream and downstream neighbours (). The timing of the replication of a given DNA sequence is determined by its distance from the local active replication origin and by the timing of the firing of that origin during the S phase (). genome wide replication timing profiles have been used to identify replication origins throughout Saccharomyces cerevisiae () and in higher eukaryotes, including Drosophila (), mice () and human (). These studies revealed that the timing of DNA replication is associated with transcriptional activity, epigenetic patterns and higher order nuclear structures. However, the genomic, epigenetic and transcriptional signatures that define the early late replication domain e rds and late replication domain (LRD) in the human genome have not been fully elucidated. In particular, the strengths of the correlations between replication timing and the chromatin status within ERD and LRD across diverse human cell types remain unclear. Furthermore, the molecular mechanisms through which the chromatin patterns are established and maintained within the ERD and LRD in the human genome remain poorly understood. Resolving these questions completely depends on the precise identification of the ERD and LRD in the human genome, which remains one of the greatest challenges in bioinformatics research. To date, very few bioinformatics methods have been proposed for the de novo identification of replication domains using replication timing profiles. Recently, deep learning approaches have surpassed the state of the art performance of previous methods for many tasks (), due to their powerful capacity to automatically learn features at multiple levels of abstraction directly from data without using human crafted features or rules (). The Deep Neural Network (DNN) was developed from the Artificial Neural Network (ANN) with the advent of the deep learning algorithm (). Compared with a shallow learning model that included an ANN and Gaussian mixture model (GMM), the deep learning model, i.e. DNN, consists of multiple hidden layers showing significantly greater power to representation data than the shallow model and is widely applied in computer vision, dimensionality reduction and speech recognition. In addition, hidden Markov models (HMMs) are well known for their effectiveness in the modelling of sequential patterns of data and have been extensively applied in computational biology, specifically in biological sequence analysis, Copy Number Variation detection, motif finding, breakpoints identification and chromatin state discovery. These advances triggered our interest in developing a novel hybrid architecture between a pre trained DNN and an HMM for the de novo identification of replication domains using replication timing profiles. In this study, we present the first dnn hmm hybrid model, which combines the representational power of dnn s and the sequential modelling capacity of HMMs to successfully resolve the challenge of the de novo identification of replication domains using newly replicated DNA sequencing repli seq data. We demonstrate that DNN HMMs can significantly outperform strong discriminative ly trained g mmhmm systems and other six reported methods that can be applied to this challenge. We applied our trained dnn hmm to the identification of distinct types of replication domains, including the ERD, the down transition zone (DTZ), the LRD, and the up transition zone (UTZ), using repli seq data across 15 human cell types. A subsequent integrative analysis based on ENCODE data revealed that the replication domains of distinct types harbour unique genomic and epigenetic patterns, transcriptional activity and higher order chromosomal structure. Our findings support the replication domain model, which states that e rds and l rds connected by utz s and d tzs are spatially compartmentalized structural and functional units of higher order chromosomal structure. In our model, the adjacent dtz utz pairs form a chromatin loop, and intra interactions within e rds and l rds tend to be short and long range respectively. Our model reveals an important chromatin organizational principle of the human genome and represents a critical step towards increasing our understanding of the mechanisms regulating replication timing.

discussion in this study, we propose a pre trained dnn hmm hybrid model and present its first successful application for de novo identification of replication domains with replication timing profiles from repli seq data. Our approach has two key characteristics that distinguish it from earlier methods. First, we adopted a deeper, more expressive dnn hmm hybrid architecture and thus employed the unsupervised DBN pre training and subsequent supervised fine tuning strategy, which made the training more effective. Second, we used posterior probabilities of states as the output of DNN, which made the training more informative. Subsequent performance assessments demonstrated that our dnn hmm approach achieves substantial improvements in identification accuracy and robustness over discriminative ly trained pure g mmhmm systems, generative ly trained traditional DNN algorithms and other six reported methods. Despite these promising results, there are many aspects of using dnn hmm for practical scalability in computational biology that require further study. These aspects include investigation of the parallelization of DNN training, which may require a better theoretical understanding of deep learning, and the exploration of more optimal algorithms to training dnn hmm rather than the embedded suboptimal Viterbi algorithm. There is also a need to explore the vast improvement space in the dnn hmm hybrid model, including adopting a full sequence training of the DBN, using the mean covariance RBM, and even absorbing the insights gained from generative modelling research in both neural networks and speech and phone recognition. Recently, Brendan J. Frey and his colleagues applied a DNN to investigate the human and mouse splicing codes and demonstrated the superior advantages of this deep architecture over the previous Bayesian method for predicting the patterns of alternative splicing (). Compared with their DNN structure of a two layer neural network with only 30 hidden units, our dnn hmm hybrid architecture is much more complex and flexible. Regardless, their work and ours represent a critical process of applying deep learning in computational biology. In particular, with the exponentially rapid growth in the volume of multi omic data, such as genomics, transcript omics epi genomics proteomics and chromatin interact omics our hybrid architecture employing DNN and HMM has the potential to produce meaningful and hierarchical representations that can be efficiently used to describe complex biological phenomena. For example, dnn hmms may be useful for modelling multiple stages of a regulatory network at the sequence level and at higher levels of abstraction. In addition, dnn hmm can be applied to the identification of functional elements and regions, such as enhancers, insulators and promoters, and the identification of chromatin states. We applied our dnn hmm algorithm to de novo identification of distinct types of replication domains, including ERD, DTZ, LRD and UTZ, using repli seq data across 15 human cell types. We performed a systematic and integrative analysis of these domains using diverse ENCODE data and unravelled the replication domains of distinct types that harbour unique genomic and epigenetic patterns, transcriptional activity and higher order chromosomal structure. Our results support a unifying model in which the human genome is generally organized into large replication domains of distinct types that constitute stable regulatory units of replication timing. In our replication domain model' (), DNA replicates early within e rds that acquire permissive chromatin signatures and active regulators. Meanwhile, replication gradually moves forward into adjacent l rds that contain repressive chromatin features and repressive regulators. This gradual progression forms d tzs or utz s that connect the boundaries of e rds and l rds. d tzs were characterized by the sharp decrease increase of active repressive chromatin markers identifying replication timing domains by deep learning whereas utz s were characterized by the sharp increase decrease of active repressive chromatin markers. Our replication domain model agrees well with the previously presented fractal globule, a knot free polymer conformation (). In our model, spatially separated fractal globules are equivalent to temporally separated e rds and l rds that are connected by utz s and d tzs. The adjacent DTZ UTZ pairs separated by an ERD or LRD form a chromatin loop for each ERD and LRD through the acquisition of much stronger contacts. Most importantly, we found that in the chromatin loops formed by adjacent dtz utz pairs, l rds prefer to be more densely packed and in long range intra interactions whereas e rds tend to be more loosely packed and in short range intra interactions l rds demarcated by d tzs and utz s are spatially compartmentalized structural and functional units of higher order chromosomal structure and are dynamically associated with the nuclear lamina. In this model, the ERD is an open, loosely packed, transcriptionally active chromatin domain located far from the nuclear membrane and occupied by active epigenetic markers and active regulators, whereas the LRD is a closed, densely packed, transcriptionally inactive chromatin domain located near the nuclear membrane and occupied by repressive epigenetic markers and repressive regulators. The ERD and LRD are spatially separated by the DTZ and UTZ, which are transition zones enriched with H3k27me3 and occupied by CTCF. The adjacent DTZ UTZ pairs form chromatin loops, and intra interactions within e rds and l rds tend to be short and long range respectively
