For numerous experimental applications, PCR primers must be designed to efficiently amplify a set of homologous DNA sequences while giving rise to amplicons with maximally diverse signatures. We developed design signatures to automate the process of designing primers for high resolution melting (HRM), fragment length polymorphism (FLP) and sequencing experiments. The program also finds the best restriction enzyme to further diversify HRM or FLP signatures. This enables efficient comparison across many experimental designs in order to maximize signature diversity.

introduction primer design is a fundamental step to any application of polymerase chain reaction (PCR), including high resolution melting (HRM) analysis, fragment length polymorphism (FLP) analysis and amplicon sequencing. Although these techniques differ considerably, a common design objective is to construct primers that can efficiently amplify many different template variants while maximizing the difference between the resulting amplicon signatures melt curve, length or sequence depending on the experimental method. While many primer design tools are available (), there currently does not exist a design tool that brings together different experimental techniques sharing the objective of maximizing signature diversity. Moreover, no automatic method is available to design primers for HRM analysis. Instead, semi manual design approaches are typically used with the aid of software for melt curve prediction (). Although this approach is reasonable for discriminating single nucleotide polymorphisms, it is unlikely to yield optimal results when the goal is to differentiate more complex variants. Furthermore, when variants are impossible to distinguish with FLP or HRM, digesting amplicons with a restriction enzyme can greatly diversify their signatures (). In such cases, an automated solution is highly desirable for exploring the space of possible primer and restriction enzyme pairings. By accurately predicting results in silico, design choices can be efficiently compared to maximize resolving power and minimize costs.
