de subs is a network based systems biology R package that extracts disease perturbed sub pathways within a pathway network as recorded by rnase q experiments. It contains an extensive and customized framework with a broad range of operation modes at all stages of the sub pathway analysis, enabling so a case specific approach. The operation modes include pathway network construction and processing, sub pathway extraction, visualization and enrichment analysis with regard to various biological and pharmacological features. Its capabilities render it as a tool guide for both the modeler and experimentalist for the identification of more robust systems level drug targets and biomarkers for complex diseases. Availability and implementation: de subs is implemented as an R package following Bioconductor guidelines (permanently available in URL: http://biosignal.med.upatras.gr/wordpress/desubs).

introduction in the last years, systems level network based approaches have gained ground in the research field of systems biology (). Towards this direction the research community has been focusing on the analysis of sub pathways namely local gene sub-regions within a pathway network (). Approaches in this direction are essential for identifying more accurate system level drug targets and biomarkers for complex diseases by monitoring the local functions of networks perturbed by diseases (). Hence, several sub pathway based tools have been developed recently focusing though predominantly on differentially expressed (DE) genes (). Meanwhile, since the amount of rnase q transcriptome studies is increasing rapidly year by year, there is high demand for tailored differential expression (DE) analysis tools. Although most DE tools are crucial components in pathway analysis workflows, there is a gap in addressing this issue through an extensive and customized sub pathway based approach using DE analysis for rnase q data. Towards this orientation, we developed an R package, called de subs which extracts differentially expressed sub pathways based on rnase q expression profiles enabling so a customized analysis to the problem under investigation through numerous operation modes. de subs offers a systematic way to uncover the local perturbations within a net
