Motivation: Most complex diseases involve multiple genes and their interactions. Although genome wide association studies g was have shown some success for identifying genetic variants underlying complex diseases, most existing studies are based on limited single locus approaches, which detect single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) essentially based on their marginal associations with phenotypes. Results: In this article, we propose an ensemble approach based on boosting to study gene gene interactions. We extend the basic AdaBoost algorithm by incorporating an intuitive importance score based on Gini impurity to select candidate SNPs. Permutation tests are used to control the statistical significance. We have performed extensive simulation studies using three interaction models to evaluate the efficacy of our approach at realistic g was sizes, and have compared it with existing epistatic detection algorithms. Our results indicate that our approach is valid, efficient for g was and on disease models with epistasis has more power than existing programs.

introduction most common diseases such as neurodegenerative diseases [e.g. Alzheimer's disease (AD) and, cardiovascular diseases, various cancers, diabetes and osteoporos es are complex diseases that involve multiple genes, their interactions, environmental factors and gene by environment interactions. The complex genetic architecture of complex diseases makes the task of correlating variations in DNA sequences with phenotypic differences being one of the grand challenges in biomedical research. With recent advances in genotyping technologies for as saying single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), large scale genome wide association studies g was for complex diseases are increasingly common (e.g. Wellcome Trust Case). Most existing methods for g was are single locus based approaches, which examine one SNP at a time (). single locus based methods usually are unable to recover all involved loci, especially when individual loci have little or no marginal effects. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Detecting epistasis from g was is fundamentally difficult because of the large number of SNPs and relatively small number of samples. Existing SNP chips may contain up to one million SNPs and chips with a few millions of SNPs are on the pipeline. On the other hand, most studies only consist of less than a few thousands of samples per each disease. Computationally, researchers have to face the problem of the Curse of Dimensionality, whereas the search space of the problem grows exponentially with the number of involved SNPs. Statistically, one has to deal with the 'small n big p' problem, where the number of samples (n) is much smaller than the number of variables snps (p). In general, one can view the problem as a model selection or feature selection problem with interrelated variables. However, traditional model selection approaches, most of which have to model interactions explicitly, usually are not able to incorporate so many variables in their analyses. Feature selection reduction techniques usually are not effective in this case because of the overfitting problem as well as the problem of lack of interpretation while transforming features. Nevertheless, many approaches have been proposed over the years, though many of which are not necessarily in the context of g was see for a review). Generally speaking, existing approaches for searching gene gene or snps np interactions can be grouped into four broad categories. Methods in the first category rely on exhaustive search. Classical statistics such as the Pearson's  2 test or the logistic regression that are commonly used as single locus tests for g was can potentially be used in searching for pairwise interactions. For example have shown that explicitly modeling of interactions between loci for g was with hundreds of thousands of markers is computationally feasible. They also showed that these simple methods explicitly considering interactions can actually achieve reasonably high power with realistic sample sizes under different interaction models with some marginal effects, even after adjustments of multiple testing using the Bonferroni correction. However, directly modeling of interactions is still computationally demanding and it can hardly be extended to include more than two loci. Another popular approach based on exhaustive search called multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) (), which is based on partitioning all possible genotype combinations into meaningful subspaces, has the same problem of scalability. The second category consists of methods relying on stochastic search, with BEAM () as one representative of such algorithms. Later algorithms in this category [e.g. epi mode (largely adopted and extended BEAM. BEAM uses Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling to infer whether each locus is a disease locus, a jointly affecting disease locus, or a page i223 i222i229

discussion we presented a machine learning approach for detecting genetic interactions in large scale g was. Extensive experiments have demonstrated that it outperformed the RFs approach, a similar ensemble approach. It also outperformed several other statistical approaches in most cases, with inferior performance only when the risk allele frequency is low. In most such cases, interaction effects in our models are actually lower. We have also demonstrated that permutation based tests are generally feasible, provided efficient implementation. As expected, they are more powerful than tests with Bonferroni corrections, and should be applied routinely in g was studies for single locus tests. In our implementation of the decision tree algorithm and the SNP importance score, we used the Gini impurity score. Though it works well in general, the reduced power at low ma fs might be attributable to it. At a low MAF, the high effect entries, especially the one with all four minor alleles, are rarely present. Unlike Pearson's  2 test, which takes the summation of the deviations of observed counts and expected counts of different genotypes under the null hypothesis, the Gini impurity takes the weighted average of child nodes' impurity. This may cause some disadvantage for Gini index when allele frequencies are low because high effect nodes have smaller number of individuals. On the other hand, modifications of the importance score definition, or using different measures other than Gini impurity in building trees might improve performance. It is important to note that this difference between Gini impurity and  2 test is fundamentally a single locus effect. Therefore, modifications should not affect our approach s ability to detect epistasis, which is rooted in the whole framework. One important factor that we chose not to consider is LD. On one hand, LD is the basis for association studies. On the other hand, LD may interfere with the interaction effects because SNPs around each disease locus usually have high LD and may enhance the signal when they are considered together. We can ignore this mainly because the way how we generated the data. It is unlikely that any SNPs will be in high LD with the inserted r snps. Also, LD could be a factor in a different way, namely that the underlying r snps might not be typed, but a marker in LD could be. This basically has the effect of increasing the noise in the model and reducing the power. We will test this in our future work.
