Motivation: Recent development in chips eq technology has generated binding data for many transcription factors (TFs) in various cell types and cellular conditions. This opens great opportunities for studying combinatorial binding patterns among a set of TFs active in a particular cellular condition, which is a key component for understanding the interaction between TFs in gene regulation. Results: As a first step to the identification of combinatorial binding patterns, we develop statistical methods to detect clustering and ordering patterns among binding sites (BSs) of a pair of TFs. Testing procedures based on Ripleys k function and its generalizations are developed to identify binding patterns from large collections of BSs in chips eq data. We have applied our methods to the chips eq data of 91 pairs of TFs in mouse embryonic stem cells. Our methods have detected clustering binding patterns between most TF pairs, which is consistent with the findings in the literature, and have identified significant ordering preferences, relative to the direction of target gene transcription, among the BSs of seven TFs. More interestingly, our results demonstrate that the identified clustering and ordering binding patterns between TFs are associated with the expression of the target genes. These findings provide new insights into co regulation between TFs. Availability and implementation: See wwwstat ucla edu zhou tfk functions for source code.

introduction gene expression in high organisms is regulated by the combinatorial binding of multiple transcription factors (TFs) to the DNA sequence in upstream or other regulatory regions of the gene. A set of interactive TFs often shows complex binding patterns. Clusters of multiple TF binding sites tfbs s co-localized in a short DNA region form the so called cis regulatory modules (CRMs). More complicated patterns, such as ordering preference among binding sites (BSs) of different TFs in a regulatory region, may exist and encode hidden regulatory signals. Detecting combinatorial binding patterns and CRMs is thus an important step toward a comprehensive understanding of cis regulation consequently computational methods have been developed for this purpose based on different types of genomic data. Early methods build probabilistic models for tfbs s and their occurrences in CRMs to identify clusters of tfbs s from DNA sequence data. For a recent review of these methods, see Hardison and Taylor (2012). When the TFs involved in a particular cellular condition are known, methods have been developed to detect clusters of motif matches appearing more frequently than expected given a background model for the DNA sequence (). There are also de novo methods for the discovery of CRMs, such as;) for a few examples. Essentially, this group of methods finds clusters of tfbs s based on the enrichment of motif matches compared against a simple background model. Because motif signals are usually weak in high organisms, sophisticated binding patterns, such as the ordering and other location preferences among tfbs s can not be reliably detected from sequence data alone and thus are often not incorporated in these methods. Recently, chips eq technology has been applied to generate genome wide binding data for TFs in various cellular conditions. The accumulation of such binding data for multiple TFs in the same condition makes it possible to explore the relation among the binding of these TFs. For example, more than 10 TFs have available chips eq data in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) (). One may want to find out whether the binding of two TFs is independent of each other and, if not, identify specific binding patterns suggested by the data. Such results may indicate how two or more TFs work together to regulate the expression of target genes and help detect novel regulatory signals. However, those motif enrichment methods reviewed above are not directly applicable owing to the different data type and their simplified model assumptions. On the other hand, ad hoc methods have been used to define and detect clusters of BSs or chips eq peaks in recent studies defined multiple TF binding loci by peaks within 100 bp. Lee and Zhou (2013) identified context dependent co regulators from co bound regions constructed by chips eq peaks of two TFs with distance 550 bp determined whether binding regions have a clustering tendency based on the empirical distribution of peak topeak distances found clusters of BSs by iteratively merging peaks within 100 bp and then constructed some test using Poisson approximation identified inter-site spacing bias for some fixed range between 0 and 100 bp by a Fisher's exact test on the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. contingency table of site pair counts within or outside the range. One sees an arbitrary use of distance thresholds and simple empirical tests in finding clusters of BSs (or peaks) in existing work, without any consideration of ordering preference among tfbs s or the individual location distribution for BSs of a TF. Clearly, there is a pressing need for new statistical methods to infer combinatorial binding patterns from chips eq data. In this work, we develop statistical methods to detect clustering and ordering patterns between BSs of two TFs from their chips eq data. We assume that under the null model the locations of BSs of a TF follow an inhomogeneous Poisson point process. Test statistics for clustering and ordering binding patterns are constructed based on Ripley's k function (), a widely used method for detecting point patterns in spatial statistics, and its generalizations to pairwise TF binding data. Our approach does not rely on a pre-specified distance threshold for the detection of clusters of BSs and can automatically find the distance level at which the clustering pattern, if exists, is most significant. We make use of the large number of BSs in chips eq data and demonstrate that the null distributions of the test statistics can be accurately approximated by large sample theory. This eliminates the need for computationally intensive simulations and allows for efficient large scale analysis.
