Motivation: Detecting human proteins that are involved in virus entry and replication is facilitated by modern high throughput RNAi screening technology. However, hit lists from different laboratories have shown only little consistency. This may be caused by not only experimental discrepancies, but also not fully explored possibilities of the data analysis. We wanted to improve reliability of such screens by combining a population analysis of infected cells with an established dye intensity readout. Results: Viral infection is mainly spread by cell cell contacts and clustering of infected cells can be observed during spreading of the infection in situ and in vivo. We employed this clustering feature to define knockdowns which harm viral infection efficiency of human Hepatitis C Virus. Images of knocked down cells for 719 human kinase genes were analyzed with an established point pattern analysis method (Ripleys k function to detect knockdowns in which virally infected cells did not show any clustering and therefore were hindered to spread their infection to their neighboring cells. The results were compared with a statistical analysis using a common intensity readout of the gfp expressing viruses and a luciferase based secondary screen yielding five promising host factors which may suit as potential targets for drug therapy. Conclusion: We report of an alternative method for high throughput imaging methods to detect host factors being relevant for the infection efficiency of viruses. The method is generic and has the potential to be used for a large variety of different viruses and treatments being screened by imaging techniques. Contact

introduction despite many remarkable discoveries in virology, viruses are still a major cause of severe diseases including Dengue fever, hepatitis, immune deficiency and severe influenza. Viruses employ specific human host proteins (host factors) for each step of their 'life' cycle (). Discovering these host factors may not only unravel fundamental principals of viral modes of operation, like their replication, but also, notably, may lead to promising drug therapies * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First authors. which are not affected by the high mutational variability in viral populations. Fluorescence microscopy imaging of RNA interference (RNAi) knockdown screens has become a major method of choice to identify the function of the proteins corresponding to the silenced genes and specifically to detect potential drug targets. Typically, these screens are based on endpoint assays of transfected cells with a direct intensity readout (). More recently, large scale imaging has been used to study the transfected cells (). Image analysis software was developed to segment cells and extract cellular texture features enabling machine learning methods to identify subcellular location () and to classify the mitotic phase of imaged cells (). For HIV, three such genome wide knock-down studies have been performed (). However, there was only little overlap in the predicted host factors reducing the infection. This discrepancy might be due to differences in the experimental conditions like using different viral strains, investigating different time intervals or using different silencing sequences. In addition, it may have also resulted from incomplete data analysis. Therefore, we developed an alternative approach to detect host factors with such a screening method. Viruses can spread within the host by release of cell free virions or direct passage between infected and non-infected cells. In general, direct cell cell transfer is considerably more efficient than a cell free transfer () and is supported by filopodia l bridges (). As a consequence of such a viral cell cell spreading, clusters of infected cells may be formed. It was reported recently that spatial distribution of cells can influence the infection behavior. s nij der and co-workers observed intriguing relationships between virus species, the spatial distribution of cells and the infection rate. While the infection efficiency of a rotavirus was considerably increased in sparse populations, Dengue viruses mainly employed cells located at edges of islets, and murine hepatitis viruses were preferably found in dense cell populations (). To analyze such clustering patterns systematically, statistical methods for point pattern analysis can be employed. Ripley's k function is an established measure for defining the degree of clustering. It evaluates all interparticle distances over the studied area and compares the observed distribution with a random distribution of spots. Ripley's k function has been used in ecology, epidemiology and geography (). In cell biology, it was applied to study integrin sensing
discussion we applied an image processing analysis, a clustering analysis method and statistical analyses of intensity readouts to detect host factors involved in HCV infection. Instead of observing knockdowns of viral components, we focused on specific proteins in the host cell. Targeting host factors which are relevant to viral replication showed distinct lower clustering of the infected cells. Specifically, all three positive controls showed significantly low clustering scores. Additionally, we got hits having significantly low viral GFP intensities observed in the primary screen and hits from a secondary screen based on a luciferase read-out. Computing the intersection of hits from all three approaches yielded five genes to be considered as attractive targets against HCV infection. Besides two well known host factors being relevant for HCV replication (CD81 and PI4KA) and one host factor which has been described to phosphorylate an HCV protein, we also found two new challenging candidates (FLT-4 and SLAMF-6). FLT-4 has interesting characteristics. It was observed that it suited for a retrovirus to be genomic ally incorporated (). Even though known virulence principles of HCV and retroviruses are very different, such a mechanism may have similar advantages for replication of HCV as for the evolutionary benefits of the retrovirus. To measure clustering, we used the inhomogeneous Ripley's k function which has been used in a broad variety of scientific applications ranging from the clustering behavior of infected habitants in a country () to cell biological concerns as e.g. studying the clustering of integrins when cells sense the extra cellular matrix (). We used Ripley's k function now for observing the clustering behavior of individual infected cells in a cellular in vitro assay. With such a clustering analysis method we were able to track infection populations in a systematic way and used it to support finding crucial host factors for viral replication. Besides applying Ripley's k function to detect relevant host factors as shown in this study, it additionally may be applied to systematically investigate the infection behavior of different virus families. s nij der and co-workers observed principal differences of virus entities to populate cell samples (). Ripley's k function may be used to follow up this study by a quantitative clustering analysis supporting putting up a taxonomy for virus strains based on their population characteristics in the host. It is known e.g. that the Dengue virus infects edges of islets in cell colonies and therefore does not exhibit such a clustering tendency as HCV (). In an initial trial, we observed distinct higher clustering scores for cells infected by HCV in comparison to cells infected by the Dengue virus. Applying a clustering analysis method for estimating the virulence in cellular assays is general and can be used for other screens to observe infectious propagation in cellular populations. It may also be used for a quantitative and systematic analysis of the specific spreading and populating behavior of distinct virus families which may also have an impact on the discovery of their specific use of host factors.
