Motivation: In genome wide association studies g was up to millions of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are genotyped for thousands of individuals. However, conventional single locus based approaches are usually unable to detect gene gene interactions underlying complex diseases. Due to the huge search space for complicated high order interactions, many existing multi-locus approaches are slow and may suffer from low detection power for g was. Results: In this article, we develop a simple, fast and effective algorithm to detect genome wide multi-locus epistatic interactions based on the clustering of relatively frequent items. Extensive experiments on simulated data show that our algorithm is fast and more powerful in general than some recently proposed methods. On a real genome wide case control dataset for age related macular degeneration (AMD), the algorithm has identified genotype combinations that are significantly enriched in the cases.

introduction with recent development in high throughput single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping technologies, the number of SNPs that can be typed simultaneously on a DNA chip has grown from 10 000 in 2002 to 1 million in 2007 (). genome wide genotype data as well as phenotype information for some common diseases have been accumulated in an accelerated rate for the past 5 years (e.g.). These genome wide association studies gw ass have proven to be a powerful approach to reveal susceptibility genes for some complex diseases (). Nevertheless, the primary analysis paradigm for g was is dominated by single locus based statistical approaches (). However, epistatic interactions epist ases among multiple genes play an essential role in the pathogenesis of human complex diseases (). Many studies have also * To whom correspondence should be addressed demonstrated that epistasis contributes to diseases such as breast cancer (), diabetes, obesity () and coronary heart disease (). Single locus based approaches may not be able to detect all interacting genes, especially for those with small marginal effects. Recently, the problem of detecting genome wide epist ases has drawn much attention. Many computational algorithms have been proposed (). Existing approaches for searching gene gene or snps np interactions can be grouped into four broad categories: exhaustive search, stochastic search, data mining machine learning approaches and stepwise search. Methods based on exhaustive search enumerate all possible combinations of multiple loci and perform desired interaction tests (e.g.  2 or logistic regression) for each combination proposed a combinatorial partitioning method (CPM), which searches all possible ways of dividing m locus genotype combinations into k genotypic partitions, and selects the best one to account for quantitative traits. CPM is only computationally feasible for small datasets even for two locus interactions due to the enormous number of possible partitions. Inspired by cpm proposed a multifactor dimensionality reduction method (MDR), which partitions the multi-locus genotype space into two classes and exhaustively searches for the best classification model in predicting the disease status. It utilizes repeated cross validations and permutation tests to evaluate classification accuracy and significance, respectively. Similar to CPM, MDR can not handle large datasets, even for two locus interactions (). Though many extensions of MDR have been proposed recently, including mb mdr () and rm dr (), they are unable to tackle large g was data efficiently. In another attempt proposed a boolean operation based screening and testing (BOOST) method, which can detect two locus interactions for currently available g was data. However, because the search space grows exponentially with the number of involved genes snps methods based on exhaustive search can hardly be extended to include more than two loci. Instead of explicitly enumerating all possible combinations of m locus stochastic methods () use random sampling procedures to search the space of interactions. Among them, Bayesian epistasis association mapping (BEAM) () is one of the representatives. BEAM takes case control genotypes as its input, and iteratively uses the Markov chain Monte Carlo mcmc page 6 512

discussion by partitioning all d locus genotype combinations into two groups, MDR () significantly reduces the dimensionality of the d locus genotype combination space from 3 d to 2, which potentially improves its detection power. However, the simple partitioning method utilized by MDR may not work well in practice, especially when the case control ratios of some genotype combinations are close to the overall ratio. mb mdr () and rm dr () are two recent extensions of MDR to address this problem. The authors propose to separate all multi-locus genotype combinations into a high risk group, a low risk group and an unknown risk group. To determine which group a genotype combination belongs to, mb mdr uses the  2 test and rm dr uses Fisher's exact test. In general, mb mdr and rm dr outperform MDR, especially in the presence of low minor allele frequencies or genetic heterogeneity. However, Fisher's exact test for every genotype combination causes rm dr running even slower than MDR. Though mb mdr is faster than MDR, the repeated cross validations and permutation tests are still time consuming and prevents its usage in large scale g was studies. Furthermore, the validity of  2 test requires that all cells in the contingency table are not very small (). When the minor allele frequency is very low, there are always many empty entries in a multilocus interaction contingency table, and the  2 test based grouping of mb mdr will be inefficient. ed cf clusters the genotype combinations into three groups by assuming that the counts of multi-locus genotype combinations follow Binomial distributions. ed cfs clustering is more robust than mb mdrs grouping and much faster than rm drs grouping. In our experiments, ed cf outperforms mb mdr when f m = 0.1 for Models 1 and 3 while in the other cases, ed cf has similar performance as mb mdr. After the clustering, ed cf obtains a 32 contingency table and uses the  2 test to evaluate the significance of the interaction. By avoiding the cross validation step, ed cf is much faster than mb mdr and rm dr. Though ed cf generally outperforms other algorithms in the simulations, it has some limitations. Since ed cf separates genotype combinations into G 0 ,G 1 and G 2 based on clustering relatively frequent items, when h 2 is small, the disease related genotype combinations may be not significant enough to be relatively frequent items. In such a case, all genotype combinations may be clustered into group G 1 , and ed cf will lose some power (e.g. in Supplementary, on some two locus models with no marginal effects and low h 2 ). ed cf currently can not directly address the problem of population stratification, which, if exists, may alleviate the type I error of ed cf. One should always test for and correct stratification (if it exists) before performing association tests. Finally, like many data mining approaches, ed cf has some parameters (such as k, f s ,  s and  0 ) that need to be specified by the user. The choices of these parameters may also affect the efficiency and or power of ed cf. Although we have provided some default values in this article based on simulations, it would have been better if the parameters were chosen automatically based on input data. Parameter k is the number of interaction modules that one wishes to investigate, and f s controls the buffer size of interaction modules involving a small number of loci. Both parameters primarily depend on the available computational resources. Obviously, ed cf runs faster with a smaller f s , but with the price of possibly missing some real interactions. In our experiments, we chose  s and  0 according to simulations. These values might be too conservative for real data analysis (of the same sizes) because of correlations among SNPs and LD structures in real data. How to choose proper values for  s and  0 using real g was data could be computationally challenging. We will investigate this in our future work. In this work, we have only tested disease models with risk allele frequencies 0.1. Detecting rare SNPs in association studies is a much harder problem, which itself requires special attention and novel algorithms. Page: 12 512

conclusion in this article, we have developed a new algorithm called ed cf. Based on the clustering of relatively frequent items, ed cf groups all d locus genotype combinations into three groups and uses the  2 statistic to measure significance. To control type I error rate, we have combined Bonferroni correction and permutation tests and proposed a fast multi test correction method. By combining the advantages of the  2 test and MDR, ed cf is an effective and efficient algorithm for detecting epistatic effects for g was. Extensive experiments on simulated data illustrate that ed cf is more powerful, in general, in finding epistatic interactions than some of the recently proposed algorithms. In terms of efficiency, ed cf is comparable to BOOST in detecting two locus interaction modules and is much faster than mb mdr snp ruler and epi mode. On a real genome wide AMD dataset, several genotype combinations reported by ed cf are significantly enriched in cases, which may imply their involvement and association with AMD as interaction modules.
