Motivation: The identification of active transcriptional regulatory elements is crucial to understand regulatory networks driving cellular processes such as cell development and the onset of diseases. It has recently been shown that chromatin structure information, such as DNase I hypersensitivity (DHS) or histone modifications, significantly improves cell specific predictions of transcription factor binding sites. However, no method has so far successfully combined both DHS and histone modification data to perform active binding site prediction. Results: We propose here a method based on hidden Markov models to integrate DHS and histone modifications occupancy for the detection of open chromatin regions and active binding sites. We have created a framework that includes treatment of genomic signals, model training and genome wide application. In a comparative analysis, our method obtained a good trade-off between sensitivity versus specificity and superior area under the curve statistics than competing methods. Moreover, our technique does not require further training or sequence information to generate binding location predictions. Therefore, the method can be easily applied on new cell types and allow flexible downstream analysis such as de novo motif finding.

introduction transcriptional regulation orchestrates the proper temporal and spatial expression of genes (). The identification of transcriptional regulatory elements, such as transcription factor binding sites tfbs s is crucial to understand regulatory networks driving cellular processes such as cell development and the onset of diseases. The standard approach is the use of sequence based bioinformatics methods, which search over the genome for motif predicted binding sites mp bss representing the DNA binding sequence of a transcription factor (TF;). This binding affinity is usually represented by models such as position weight matrices pwm s. However, motifs are generally short and have low information content. Moreover, the presence of a sequence motif does not imply actual TF binding in that particular cell type. As a result, sequence based methods return myriads of putative tfbs s of which only a small fraction is functional in a particular context (). Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing chips eq allows the detection of tfbs s in vivo on a genome wide level (). However, success of chips eq assays depends on the existence of a good antibody against the TFs of interest and on the availability of large numbers of cells. These two conditions are not always met in particular for primary cells. Therefore, chips eq based studies are restricted to the analysis of a small selection of TFs and cell types () or require the effort of large consortia (ENCODE Project). Another solution is to explore the fact that an 'open' chromatin structure is crucial and a prerequisite to the cell type specific binding of a TF to DNA (). For example, regions with histone modification marks H3K4me3 and H3K4me1 highlight active promoter and enhancer elements (). More detailed studies have demonstrated that active tfbs s occur between two regions with high active histone marks peak dip peak pattern;). A classical method to detect active regulatory elements, DNase I footprinting, has also been recently combined with sequencing to indicate open chromatin regions on a genome wide scale (). dnase seq allows the identification of putative active tfbs s at base pair level resolution, i.e. 520 bp regions within two dnase seq peaks represent the so called footprints, where TFs are likely to be bound. While dnase seq returns the exact position where DNA was nicked by DNase I enzyme, chips eq returns sequences centered on the protein *To whom correspondence should be addressed  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com interacting with DNA. Therefore, dnase seq gives a more precise estimate of open chromatin than histone modification chips eq as reflected in the sharpness of the signal of dnase seq in comparison with H3K4me3 chips eq signal (see). A recent evaluation of dnase seq on 450 cell types indicated that DNase I digestion patterns describe the topology of protein DNA binding interfaces and allowed the finding of 394 novel motifs (). Several computational approaches explore open chromatin evidence from chips eq data or DNase I hypersensitivity (DHS) sites to restrict the search space of sequence based analysis (). They show a clear advantage in detecting active tfbs s as indicated by chips eq evidence, in comparison with pure sequence based methods.

discussion methods for detection of active tfbs s can be categorized in two main classes: site centric (Cuellar and Centipede) and segmentation based (Boyle, Neph and HMMs). site centric approaches require the identification of all mp bss of a given TF to classify them as active or inactive. One advantage of the latter methods is that they have an ideal spatial specificity. On the other hand, they require sequence binding affinity information (PWM) of the TFs to be known a priori. On the other hand, segmentation based approaches can be used for de novo motif detection. Previous studies have shown that footprints allowed the automatic creation of high sensitivity TF models () and the discovery of hundreds of novel motifs (). Such studies would benefit from segmentation based methods with good spatial specificity. Moreover, segmentation based methods tend to reduce computational complexity, as they decrease drastically (12%) the genomic space used for motif detection. However, it is important to mention that the interpretation of such reduced genomic space would still require knowledge of proteins' binding sequence affinity. While Centipede obtained good AUC results, the method's performance was too dependent on regularization parameters. Moreover, for large input files (TFs with a large number of PWM hits) the method required up to 6 day score of computing and 65 GB of memory on a single TF and cellular condition. The most computational expensive segmentation method, dh hmm requires 9 day score for predicting footprints and active binding sites over all 500 TFs from JASPAR in one cell type. Another important aspect is the proposed combined use of DHS and histone modifications shapes around the tfbs s. Cuellar method is based on obtaining read counts around the tfbs s. Clearly, such method can not take the local shape profiles into account. For example, it can not distinguish the DHS peaks with the footprint signals and would detect any TFBS inside a region with high DHS levels as the regions indicated in. Our experimental results confirm the poor specificity of the method. While Centipede used the local profiles of the DHS signal, it used simple read count statistics for the histone modification signals. Therefore, it is unable to detect the valley shapes indicated in. Not surprisingly, no improvements were possible with the use of histone modifications using Centipede, as indicated in Pique. The dh hmm model could show improved results by using the local profiles of DHS and histone modification signals. Moreover, dh hmm footprints cover a higher percentage of DHS regions than other segmentation based methods. Recent studies have also indicated that the histone modification profiles centered on DHS sites can be clustered and these clusters can also have asymmetric shapes, where there is lower evidence of histone marks downstream or upstream of the DHS. We have also tested variants of the dh hmm to capture such asymmetric signals, but no significant improvement was obtained. As show in Supplementary, the slope signals have high values changes even on low histone modification values and are responsible for the correct characterization of such asymmetric peaks. Lastly, the HMMs displayed robustness in the training evaluation on distinct cell types. This indicates that no further training of the HMMs and time intensive manual annotation of genomic regions are required. This is achieved by addressing both within and between data set variability with our normalization pipeline.
