Motivation: Identifying the set of genes differentially expressed along time is an important task in two sample time course experiments. Furthermore, estimating at which time periods the differential expression is present can provide additional insight into temporal gene functions. The current differential detection methods are designed to detect difference along observation time intervals or on single measurement points, warranting dense measurements along time to characterize the full temporal differential expression patterns. Results: We propose a novel Bayesian likelihood ratio test to estimate the differential expression time periods. Applying the ratio test to systems of genes provides the temporal response timings and durations of gene expression to a biological condition. We introduce a novel non-stationary Gaussian process as the underlying expression model, with major improvements on model fitness on perturbation and stress experiments. The method is robust to uneven or sparse measurements along time. We assess the performance of the method on realistically simulated dataset and compare against state of the art methods. We additionally apply the method to the analysis of primary human endothelial cells under an ionizing radiation stress to study the transcriptional perturbations over 283 measured genes in an attempt to better understand the role of endothelium in both normal and cancer tissues during radiotherapy. As a result, using the cascade of differential expression periods, domain literature and gene enrichment analysis, we gain insights into the dynamic response of endothelial cells to irradiation. Availability and implementation: R package n sgp is available at www ibis cfr en logiciels a rob as Contact

introduction with the advent of high throughput measurement technologies, large scale systems biology experiments are now routinely performed. The first step towards understanding the system level responses is determining the genes that are differentially expressed across samples obtained from two () or multiple biological conditions (), which is usually performed over static microarray measurements. However, time series measurements of the transcript omic state of the cells are necessary to reveal additional information of the inherently dynamic regulation and function of the cells. Several differential expression methods have been designed for time series data, with majority of them testing whether the two sample time series are differential throughout the whole time course (). In this article, we focus on the currently overlooked task of determining when genes are differentially expressed from time series experiments under two sample setting (e.g. control and case). Both Bayesian and frequentist statistical tests have been proposed for time series data (). In the Bayesian approach, a Bayes factor between a null hypothesis assuming no differential expression and a differential hypothesis is often approximated by computing the likelihood ratios of the observed data against the competing hypotheses (). In the differential hypothesis, separate time series models are learned for both biological conditions, while in the null hypothesis a single model explains both samples. A difference is declared if the two time series can be explained more confidently using separate differential models compared to a single null model. These approaches have been applied to testing whole time series to determine if a gene is differentially expressed or not introduced the first test for estimating differential expression separately for individual observation times to produce time intervals of differential expression. A time period between two neighboring and differential measured time points is assumed to be differential as well. This allows characterizing the starting and ending times of the differential expression, providing for a temporal characterisation of the underlying biological processes. The time periods are restricted to start and end at an observed time point. However, in the case of sparse or uneven observation times, it is highly desirable to be able to estimate differential expression accurately between measured time points producing a continuous estimate of the differential expression time periods. In this article, we extend the approach of by introducing a method for unconstrained detection of differentially expressed time periods, which need not to contain measured time points. We propose two likelihood ratio tests that measure the expected data likelihood instead of the observed data likelihood. These can be evaluated naturally over probabilistic underlying expression models. We consider the Gaussian process regression (GPR) models, which have been commonly applied to model time course gene expression (), and are an apt model for likelihood ratio estimation (). GPR models are a flexible class of non-parametric Bayesian models, which quantify the uncertainty of the underlying process estimates using Gaussian distributions (). GPR models of temporal gene expression have been extended with outlier detection (), hierarchical replicate models and clustering (), bootstrapping () and with ordinary differential equation (ODE) model integrations (A  ij and L hd esm ki, 2009;). GPR models naturally support replicate measurements (), missing values and sparse observation times. An important particularity of many gene expression measurements is that they are generally obtained from a perturbation of the basal system under study. As other non-parametric models, GPRs based on time invariant parameters are not appropriate to model kinetics in response to a perturbation. To improve the accuracy of the modeling, we consider non-stationary Gaussian processes (), that is, GPR models that do not assume time invariance. Hence, ideal to perturbation experiments, they can model the early and late perturbation responses by varying the model smoothness. We introduce a non-stationary Gaussian kernel, where the kernel variance is restricted to a logarithmic function of time, which is directly learned from the data. We consider a human endothelial cell irradiation response experiment to elucidate gene expression inhibitions and activations in the irradiated cells. Irradiation is an important class of stress to endothelial cells for both normal tissues and tumors during radiotherapy. Perturbation of the endothelial system by ionizing radiation, which remains mostly unknown, has important consequences on the radiosensitivity of both normal and cancer tissues. It is, therefore, of major importance to better understanding the biological consequences of exposure to ionizing radiation, and particularly to decipher the network perturbations that lead to a pathological phenotype of the cells. We assess the method against a realistic al simulated gene expression time series and apply the novel ratios to the analysis of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) under a realistic radiotherapy dose fraction (2 Gy) against a control cell population. As a direct result of the method over this large scale gene system, an insightful cascade of differential expression time periods of the observed genes emerges. Below, we present a non-stationary Gaussian process model in Section 2, and introduce a non-stationary Gaussian kernel and two novel likelihood ratios in its subsections. In Section 3, we evaluate the method against a simulated dataset and apply it to study the large scale dynamic genetic response to irradiation. We conclude in section 4.
