Motivation: A major challenge in genomics is the accurate annotation of component genes. Enzymes are typically predicted using homology based search methods, where the membership of a protein to an enzyme family is based on single sequence comparisons. As such, these methods are often error prone and lack useful measures of reliability for the prediction. Results: Here, we present DETECT, a probabilistic method for enzyme prediction that accounts for the sequence diversity across enzyme families. By comparing the global alignment scores of an unknown protein to those of all known enzymes, an integrated likelihood score can be readily calculated, ranking the reaction classes relevant for that protein. Comparisons to BLAST reveal significant improvements in enzyme annotation accuracy. Applied to Plasmodium falciparum, we identify potential annotation errors and predict novel enzymes of therapeutic interest. Availability: A standalone application is available from the website: http://www.compsysbio.org/projects/DETECT/ Contact:

introduction comprising the entire network of chemical reactions carried out by a living cell, metabolism represents sets of enzymes and pathways that drive the synthesis and degradation of the essential molecules of life. The reconstruction of these networks through genome analyses are beginning to reveal a considerable diversity in metabolic complements, reflecting fundamental biological and ecological adaptations (). As such, there is increasing interest in the accurate reconstruction of metabolic networks for purposes of metabolic engineering and drug discovery (). Prior to the advent of genomic sequencing, metabolic network construction involved painstaking studies focused on individual enzymes derived from an organism of interest. As a result, only a small number of reconstructions were possible (), * To whom correspondence should be addressed. but are very well developed and serve as models for the reconstruction process in other organisms (). The challenge is now to apply this knowledge to help annotate the increasing numbers of genomes that are currently being sequenced. The process has been aided by the development of the Enzyme Commission (EC) hierarchy in which sequences are mapped to distinct enzymatic functions. Due to the large number of genes encoded by a genome, the annotation process is reliant on the use of automated methods based on sequence similarity or profile discovery. Commonly used tools such as BLAST () are useful when looking for homologues based on overall sequence similarity, while more sensitive profile based methods [e.g. PFAM (), PROSITE (focus on the conservation of domains, sequence patterns and even single residues (). Although widely applied in databases such as KEGG () and bio cyc (), sequence based methods suffer from limitations when dealing with enzymatic proteins. In particular, homology transfer methods typically ignore the range of sequence variation characterizing individual enzyme classes; while certain enzymes are relatively easy to classify based on sequence conservation, there are numerous examples of enzymes that share high sequence similarity and catalyze different reactions (). Furthermore, the use of only a single protein match to assign function (usually the highest scoring homolog) greatly impacts the reliability of the assignment. In the absence of some measure of reliability, genes may be indiscriminately annotated with incorrect EC numbers that can lead to non biologically relevant interpretations (). Consequently, there is a need to associate enzyme annotations with an appropriate confidence score, which is lacking even in recently developed functional classification tools (). In an attempt to circumvent these issues, enzyme databases such as KEGG and bio cyc devote considerable effort to manual curation to improve on the quality of annotations. However, critical comparisons of these databases reveal numerous discrepancies, highlighting the importance of developing consistent methods and standards for assigning reliable gene annotations (). Here, we describe a new probabilistic method for enzyme prediction based on both global and local sequence alignment, which we term Density Estimation Tool for Enzyme ClassificaTion (DETECT). DETECT uses a Bayesian framework that integrates information from density estimation profiles generated for each EC number. Instead of relying on similarity to a single sequence page 1691 16901698
