Motivation: To define V3 genetic elements and structural features underlying different HIV-1 co-receptor usage in vivo. Results: By probabilistically modeling mutations in the viruses isolated from HIV-1 B subtype patients, we present a unique statistical procedure that would first identify V3 determinants associated with the usage of different co receptors cooperatively or independently, and then delineate the complicated interactions among mutations functioning cooperatively. We built a model based on dual usage of CXCR4 and CCR5 co receptors. The molecular basis of our statistical predictions is further confirmed by phenotypic and molecular model-ing analyses. Our results provide new insights on molecular basis of different HIV-1 co-receptor usage. This is critical to optimize the use of genotypic tropism testing in clinical practice and to obtain molecular implication for design of vaccine and new entry inhibitors
introduction hiv is the etiological agent of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, affecting $40 million people worldwide (World Health Organization, http://www.who.int/hiv/en/). HIV is an enveloped virus with a single stranded RNA genome that mainly infects CD4 lymphocytes and macrophages. HIV entry is a complex and intricate process that facilitates the delivery of HIV-1 genome into the host cell. The only viral surface protein, envelope (Env), is composed of a trimer of gp120 and gp41 heterodimers. To enter the target cell, HIV requires a coordinated interaction of the envelope glycoprotein gp120 with the CD4 receptor and with one of the chemokine receptors, mainly CC chemokine receptor type 5 (CCR5) or C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4). HIV-1 strains can be phenotypically classified according to virus ability to use the CCR5 and or CXCR4 co-receptor. Thus, pure R5-tropic and pure X4-tropic virus can use only the CCR5 and CXCR4 co receptors to enter the target cell, respectively (), whereas dual tropic virus can use both co receptors. HIV-1 co-receptor usage is so far of central pathological importance. It has been shown that R5-tropic viruses are generally responsible for the establishment of the initial infection and predominate in the majority of newly hiv1 infected patients, whereas the use of the CXCR4 co-receptor is generally observed in more advanced stages of disease, and it has been associated with a more rapid CD4 decline and progression to AIDS (). The determination of HIV-1 co-receptor usage is also critical, as the CCR5 co-receptor has recently become the target of a new class of anti-HIV-1 drugs that specifically inhibit the entry of CCR5-tropic HIV-1 strains into the target cells by allosteric inhibition of the CCR5 co-receptor (). mar avi roc is the first approved CCR5 antagonist that entered clinical practice in 2007. Its administration is so far recommended only in patients with pure R5-tropic viruses. Among the different domains of HIV-1 gp120, the V3 loop is so far the focus of intense research efforts because it is the primary determinant for HIV-1 co-receptor usage (). Nevertheless, a comprehensive map of V3 genetic markers and structural features underlying, individually or in network, the pure or dual usage of CCR5 and CXCR4 co-receptor is still missing. In particular, limited information is available regarding V3 genetic determinants underlying dual tropism. This is critical, as different studies have shown that high proportion of patients harbor dual mixed tropic viruses, with prevalence ranging 1215% in drug nave nave and 2050% in treatment experienced patients (). In this light, using unique computational methods along with structural analysis and docking simulations, this study is aimed at defining the V3 genetic determinants and the structural features underlying the ability of HIV-1 to use the CCR5 and CXCR4 co receptors. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.

discussion in this article, we described a systematic approach for a better definition of V3 genetic determinants underlying different co-receptor usage in vivo. This approach enabled us to capture sophisticate associations of V3 genetic determinants among the usage of co receptors CCR5 and CXCR4 and even dual usage of them. This information is critical to optimize the use of genotypic tropism testing in clinical practice and to obtain molecular implication for design of vaccine and new entry inhibitors. In particular, the current algorithms for tropism prediction classify the virus with respect to its co-receptor usage genetic using statistical learning methods based on specific V3 sequence feature and, in particular, on amino acid substitutions observed at specific V3 positions. The genetic determinants identified and characterized in this study can be used to improve predictive performances of such algorithms. We proposed an advanced model to detect mutation associated with different co-receptor usage and to infer detailed interaction structures among these mutations. We focused on three cases: viruses using CCR5 co-receptor, CXCR4 co-receptor only or dual of CCR5/CXCR4 co-receptor. A bpdu cm seeking 10 possible partitions was applied to define V3 genetic determinants either independently or interactively associated with the usage of those three cases. Efforts were also being taken to infer dependency structure among cooperative associations through RMS procedure. Positions 12, 28, 32 and 34 were further partitioned into two interaction subgroups 12 and 28 and 32 and 34. The molecular basis underlying the mechanisms of action of such determinants has been further unraveled by docking analysis and free energy calculations. Specifically, our thermodynamic results confirmed the observation that mutations at positions 11, 12, 25, 28, 32 and 34 were found almost exclusively in cxcr4 using or dual tropic viruses (Supplementary). In particular, G28E, I12M and I12T substitutions were found to be associated with remarkably favorable CXCR4 affinity profiles. Such a finding could be related to a strong electrostatic contribution of R9 for the co-receptor recognition in presence of the negatively charged glutamate that acts as a bridge between R9 and CXCR4 n terminus (Supplementary). By contrast, in the I12M and I12T best poses, this weight decreased, as the co-receptor was able to establish one HB with C173 and good contacts with A394 (Supplementary). Another interesting result was obtained in CXCR4 gp120 recognition in presence of the S11R substitution, associated with a favorable thermodynamic profile of the co-receptor. Specifically, in the best optimized configuration, we observed a strong electrostatic repulsion between the positively charged R11 and R9. Such a finding was related to a shift of the arginine at position 9 and its consequent involvement in an HB with a glutamic residue of the CXCR4 n terminus interaction not found in the WT sequence. Moreover in the WT gp120-CD4-CCR5 complex, serine at position 11 was involved in 3 HB with threonine at position 23; interestingly, in the WT gp120-CD4-CXCR4 optimized configuration, in addition to these hydrogen bonds, S11 established other 2 HB with N13. Consequently, we noticed a remarkable shift of the terminal part of V3 loop in gp120-CD4-CXCR4 complex, with a conformational fold responsible for a RMSD (Root Mean Square deviation), calculated on V3 residues 11-23 with respect to gp120-CD4-CCR5 complex, equal to 8.91 A  (). Interestingly, position 34 was found to be related to the best CXCR4 affinity profile, in particular when mutation H34Y/N was associated with substitutions at position 32. Analyzing the component interaction data, such a finding could be justified by the strong contribution of C173 and S177 residues in CXCR4 recognition. In particular, the co presence of mutations H34N  Q32K, associated with CXCR4 usage, was involved in the most significant affinity improvement because of the co-receptor ability in establishing two HB with C173. Moreover, the comparison of such a mutated complex with respect to the WT revealed some interesting structural insights. In fact, in the WT best pose CXCR4 was found able to establish two HB and several VdW interactions with Q32, whereas hyst i dine at position 34 resulted implicated in an intramolecular HB with N36. This contacts network could probably explain the conformational change observed in presence of the double mutation H34N  Q32K. In particular in this case, no intramolecular interaction was noticed, and CXCR4 was found to get closer to the gp120 C2 conserved domain, not involved in the co-receptor recognition of the WT complex (Supplementary). A previous study highlighted the presence of genetic determinants in C2 domain critical for co-receptor usage (even independently from the use of CD4) (). Here, we provide structural basis explaining the involvement of C2 domain in mechanisms underlying the usage of CXCR4 co-receptor. Some interesting structural details were also revealed in presence of Q32K/R and H34Y mutations, with a particular remark when they were associated. Specifically, in Q32K and H34Y mutated complexes, CCR5 n terminus was able to establish an HB with C173 and K175, respectively, by means of its tyrosine terminal residue. These interactions were probably responsible for the co-receptor shift from the gp120 V3 loop, with the. Superimposition of gp120CD4CCR5 complex (cyan) with respect to gp120CD4CXCR4 complex (light magenta) in WT sequence. The glycoprotein is shown as ribbon, whereas the gp120 residues involved in HBs, indicated as black dashed lines, are represented as cyan and light magenta carbon sticks, respectively. The RMSd value is reported and expressed in Angstrom consequent loss of crucial contacts with E25 and R31 and a final unfavorable thermodynamic profile if compared with the WT sequence. Interestingly, the co presence of Q32K and H34Y substitutions, associated with an increased ccr5 binding affinity with respect to the WT and to the single mutations, was related to a significant co-receptor conformational change because of a better accommodation of the sulfo tyrosine at position 14, able to establish an additional HB with R3. Conversely, when the glutamine at position 32 was replaced by an arginine, we observed a remarkable conformational change of the CCR5 sulfo tyrosine at position 10. In particular, with respect to the WT complex, where huang s geometries were well reproduced, Tys10 dihedral angle resulted completely inverted with respect to the WT, causing the lack of crucial HB with R31 (Supplementary). Moreover, CCR5 n terminus terminal tyrosine was able to establish an additional HB with K175, with the co-receptor shift from the gp120 V3 loop and a final destabilizing effect in the glycoprotein recognition step. In CXCR4 gp120 mutated complexes, we observed that the increased co-receptor affinity versus gp120 could be attributed to a conformational rearrangement of the sulfo tyrosines. In particular, in presence of the single mutations Q32K and Q32R, Tys21 resulted closer to V3 loop, with remarkable co-receptor stabilization because of its additional HB with S177. Interestingly, the presence of H34Y mutation, single or associated with the substitutions at position 32, caused a further conformational accommodation of CXCR4 n terminus with a shift of Tys7, which was well stabilized by several HB with N5, N6, N7 and T8 residues. Such an additional conformational change allowed us to assume that the remarkably increased CXCR4 affinity mainly depends on the mutation at position 34, rather than at position 32. In conclusion, new genetic determinants of tropism within the V3 domain have been detected and confirmed by phenotypic and molecular modeling analysis. Additionally, our gb pm analysis led us to recognize the most relevant structural features of gp120 V3 loop associated with both co receptors and the most pivotal protein protein occurring interactions into all the analyzed complexes independently from their chemical nature. These observations could clear the way for the application of a virtual screening method able to identify novel scaffolds as potential entry inhibitors and for the development of new pharmaco pho ric models helpful in the drug discovery, vaccine design and clinical disease management ().
