Motivation: genome wide association studies gw ass aim to identify genetic susceptibility to complex diseases by as saying and analyzing hundreds of thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Although traditional single locus statistical tests have identified many genetic determinants of susceptibility, those findings can not completely explain genetic contributions to complex diseases. Marchini and coauthors demonstrated the importance of testing two locus associations allowing for interactions through a wide range of simulation studies. However, such a test is computationally demanding as we need to test hundreds of billions of SNP pairs in g was. Here, we provide a method to address this computational burden for dichotomous phenotypes. Results: We have applied our method on nine datasets from g was including the aged related macular degeneration (AMD) dataset, the Parkinsons disease dataset and seven datasets from the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium wtc cc. Our method has discovered many associations that were not identified before. The running time for the AMD dataset, the Parkinsons disease dataset and each of seven wtc cc datasets are 2.5, 82 and 90 h on a standard 3.0 GHz desktop with 4 G memory running Windows XP system. Our experiment results demonstrate that our method is feasible for the full scale analyses of both single and two locus associations allowing for interactions in g was
introduction in genetics, it has been well established that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are associated with a variety of diseases. In the emerging genome wide association studies g was the goal is to identify genetic susceptibility through as saying and analyzing SNPs at the genome wide scale. While the analysis of susceptibility of individual SNPs has been standardized and led to in the two locus association study. Class I: SNPs with a significant main effect and a significant interaction with a second SNP. Class II: SNPs with a significant main effect but without a significant interaction with any other SNP. Class III: SNPs without a significant main effect but with a significant interaction with some other SNP. Class IV: SNPs with neither a significant main effect nor a significant interaction with any other SNP. Class V: a subclass of Class IV, in which pairs of SNPs display significant associations via the combination of their main effects and their interaction effects. Please note that the first SNP and the second SNP in the definitions need not be in the same class. many interesting findings, these findings can not completely explain the genetic causes of complex diseases. Consequently, identifying two locus association patterns of complex diseases has attracted more attentions (). In general, SNP association patterns in the two locus association study can be partitioned into four classes based on the different combinations of main effects and interaction effects, as illustrated in. Current works focus on finding SNPs in Classes I, II and III. As a result, many genetic determinants of susceptibility have been mapped. Two recent reviews () presented the detailed analyses on many popular methods, including traditional single locus based statistical tests () and multi-locus analysis methods, such as the ones implemented in PLINK (), multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) (), Tuning relief f (), Random Jungle () and BEAM ().
