Motivation: Studying the interplay between gene expression and metabolite levels can yield important information on the physiology of stress responses and adaptation strategies. Performing transcript omics and metabolomics in parallel during time series experiments represents a systematic way to gain such information. Several combined profiling datasets have been added to the public domain and they form a valuable resource for hypothesis generating studies. Unfortunately, detecting co responses between transcript levels and metabolite abundances is non-trivial: they can not be assumed to overlap directly with underlying biochemical pathways and they may be subject to time delays and obscured by considerable noise. Results: Our aim was to predict pathway co memberships between metabolites and genes based on their co responses to applied stress. We found that in the presence of strong noise and time shifted responses, a hidden Markov model based similarity outperforms the simpler Pearson correlation but performs comparably or worse in their absence. Therefore, we propose a supervised method that applies pathway information to summarize similarity statistics to a consensus statistic that is more informative than any of the single measures. Using four combined profiling datasets, we show that co membership between metabolites and genes can be predicted for numerous KEGG pathways; this opens opportunities for the detection of transcriptionally regulated pathways and novel metabolically related genes. Availability: A command line software tool is available at

introduction changes in metabolite abundances are the first molecular events that follow shifts in an organism's environment. As the steady state of metabolism is broken, gene expression changes to reestablish homeostatic control and to adapt the system to the altered living conditions. This interlocking regulation between gene expression and metabolite levels manifests in intricate patterns of co responses where metabolite and transcript levels alternately vary consistently with the behavior of both regulators and targets (). Therefore, the elucidation of metabolite and transcript co responses can yield important clues to the consequences of * To whom correspondence should be addressed. altered environmental conditions on the biochemical level as well as to the organism's coping strategies. From the perspective of biotechnology, knowing which genes affect metabolite levels is crucial for metabolic engineering since metabolism can not whereas gene expression can, be altered directly. Consequently, many studies using metabolomics and transcript omics in parallel have been performed to monitor development (e.g.) and stress responses (e.g.) in time series experiments. The datasets from this type of experiments are now a valuable resource with the potential to fill similar needs as the widely applied gene coexpression databases (e.g.) for hypothesis generating research (). transcript transcript (TT) correlations that derive from genes coding for enzymes that catalyze nearby reactions are stronger than correlations that derive from genes that catalyze metabolically distant reactions (). When the system is not at steady state, abundances of neighboring metabolites also tend to be correlated; this observation was used to approximate the glycolysis pathway from metabolite abundance measurements (). The inverse relationship between metabolite metabolite (MM) correlations versus pathway distance was recently shown to manifest also on the omics level during heat and cold stress responses in Escherichia coli (). Although interpreting MM correlations is far from straightforward (), metabolite transcript (MT) correlations are arguably even more multifaceted. First, since enzymes influence the reaction speed, metabolically driven correlations are more intuitive between transcripts and metabolite fluxes than for the more easily measured abundances. Second, correlations are not expected for metabolites that are rapidly consumed by subsequent reactions. Third, other modes such as post-translational modification appear to be more common for regulating enzyme activity than transcription (). However, there are many other reasons for correlations between metabolites and transcripts that do not derive from the underlying biochemical pathway. In a 2006 review, lad urner described several mechanisms in which metabolites can tune gene expression; they include ribo switches direct interactions with transcription factors, regulation of cofactors, chromatin remodeling, chromatin modification and hormone signaling. In plants, the last is arguably the best known since hormones play central roles in nearly all stress responses and developmental programs. With these considerations in mind, it becomes clear that MT correlations may take many forms exhibiting various degrees of noise, time lags and conditionality on the studied response see for examples). Therefore, to detect such co responses using page i358 i357i365in the glucosinolate (Gls) synthesis pathway during sulfur deficiency. (a) ATST5a catalyzes a late step in the synthesis of indolyl methyl gls and its transcript is positively correlated with the reaction product. (b) CYP7F1 and MAM3 catalyzes aliphatic Gls synthesis from methionine that appear anti correlated with isoleucine, also a precursor for aliphatic Gls via a pathway that shares enzymes with the methionine  aliphatic Gls pathway. (c) SUR1 catalyzes a later step in aliphatic Gls synthesis and appear correlated with methylthio butyl Gls at a positive time lag. combined profiling data, methods that can handle these issues and deliver interpretable results are needed.

discussion we presented an approach for detecting co responses between metabolites and transcripts using combined profiling time series data. In previous studies, the direct or lagged Pearson correlation was used for identifying such patterns but as demonstrated by our simulations, this approach does not work well for short time series with strong noise and time lagged responses (). Our hmm based similarity measure performed well also in this most degenerate scenario but, as expected, not better than the Pearson correlation in the more favorable scenarios. In general, both MM and TT correlations are expected to decrease with increasing distance in the underlying metabolic pathways. By looking at differences in the correlations between cognate and non cognate transcript and metabolite pairs, we could reproduce earlier findings (with the CO 2 dataset for TT and MM correlations, and for MM correlations with the sulfur datasets (). However, different from, we could not see a dependency between metabolic distance and MT correlations for any of the studied datasets regardless of the used measure. Circumstances such as differences in experiment designs and analytical platforms may be causative of this discrepancy. Possibly, since a thaliana is a much more complex organism than yeast, it could also show less obvious dependency on the pathways that have been deciphered primarily in single cell organisms. Nonetheless, with the inevitably high number of false positives among pairwise correlations, we contend that co responses on the level of whole pathways are both more likely to be detectable and easier to interpret. In actual stress response data, we saw similar tendencies as in our simulation; Pearson was better at detecting direct, clear responses () and HMM was better at more complex patterns (d). In combined profiling data, we both expected and saw many types of co responses between metabolites and transcripts. However, the nature of these responses lagged or direct, noisy or clear is not enough for judging their relevance because they have many possible origins (): each with its own expected pattern. Therefore, we propose to combine different types of measures and then to summarize them by looking at a set of true associations as guiding examples. This approach worked well; the combined hmm pearson methods were best for predicting pathway co memberships between the metabolites and transcripts on all four datasets (). The richness of the interplay between metabolism and gene expression requires attentiveness when interpreting observed patterns. While direct co regulation is conceptually possible, pleiotropic and indirect causes are presumably more likely. However, observed co responses may still be informative for understanding the perception of stress and the events that follow on a molecular level. We presented three examples of this i In plant stress responses, photosynthesis is strongly downregulated to avoid the production of detrimental reactive oxygen species () while metabolism undergoes large scale changes. With decreasing energy production, the at pad p ratio drops and free phosphate levels increase. These are the same patterns we observe under cold stress and sulfur deficiency (). However, under conditions of elevated CO 2 , which may initially be beneficial to the plant (), the photosynthesis rate increases and consequently, phosphate levels start to decrease (). This pattern was also detected with our approach although it is overloaded by circadian rhythmic expression (). (ii) OAS is a key metabolite in sulfur assimilation and also a member of the cytokinin z eat in synthesis pathway (). Cytokinins themselves are well known repressors of sulfur uptake (). The observation of a strong increase in ATCKX5 expression before the increase in the oas levels may therefore be a manifestation of upregulated sulfur transport and of changes that follow sulfur assimilation. The co responses in the glucosinolate synthesis pathway discussed by were also clearly detected in both root and shoot datasets (Supplementary Figs. S6 and S7; pathway 00966). (iii) During elevated CO 2 conditions, as the expression of photosynthesis genes increases, carbon assimilation also changes. As it is a central metabolism pathway, metabolites involved in starch and sucrose synthesis show complex behavior but our method still highlighted co responses between them and related transcripts. Interestingly, both the Pearson correlation and HMM3 consensus statistics were informative here but completely orthogonal (). Furthermore, the op lsda model prioritizes different metabolites, highlighting that different types of co response patterns are present and that Pearson and HMM complement each other predicted MT associations by combining several stress response datasets using a Bayesian approach. As that methodology was based on the use of Pearson correlations and does not handle time lags, it would profit from the incorporation of the co response statistics proposed here. The presented photosynthesis example indicates that combining datasets may be useful also in our case. However, this appeared to be more of an exception than a rule since the significant pathways overall differed strongly between different datasets (Supplementary Figs. S4S7). Furthermore, as a difficulty in combining datasets from completely different experiments, there typically is a very small overlap of the detected metabolites. For example, only seven metabolites were measured in all the datasets we studied. Moreover, combining data will only capture MT co responses in pathways affected in the majority of the studied stress conditions. This may worsen predictions for stress specific metabolite transcript associations. Extrapolation of the predictions with additional sources of biological data, as shown with at pin indicates the power of the methodology for finding de novo associations. One interesting future aspect is the inclusion of further interaction data for validation purposes and integrative analysis. Moreover, we are currently developing a web tool over an expanded collection of datasets that includes genome wide predictions of MT associations.
