Motivation: The reliable detection of genomic variation in resequencing data is still a major challenge, especially for variants larger than a few base pairs. Sequencing reads crossing boundaries of structural variation carry the potential for their identification, but are difficult to map. Results: Here we present a method for split read mapping, where prefix and suffix match of a read may be interrupted by a longer gap in the read to reference alignment. We use this method to accurately detect medium sized insertions and long deletions with precise breakpoints in genomic resequencing data. Compared with alternative split mapping methods, sp lazers significantly improves sensitivity for detecting large in del events, especially in variant rich regions. Our method is robust in the presence of sequencing errors as well as alignment errors due to genomic mutations divergence and can be used on reads of variable lengths. Our analysis shows that sp lazers is a versatile tool applicable to unanchored or single end as well as anchored paired end reads. In addition, application of sp lazers to targeted resequencing data led to the interesting discovery of a complete, possibly functional gene retro copy variant. Availability: sp lazers is available from http://www.seqan.de/ projects/ sp lazers
introduction next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have had huge impact on the study of molecular biology (): ultra high throughput NGS technologies provide excellent means for analyzing RNA content of a cell (), resequencing whole genomes () and detecting, for example, disease causing variants () or investigating the epigenetic state of a cell (). There is a long list of biological applications and, accordingly, a high demand for specialized * To whom correspondence should be addressed. bioinformatics tools for the analyses. Due to the tremendous data yield, this constitutes a great challenge to computational biology. One of the most fundamental tasks is read mapping, i.e. determining the origin of the sequenced reads in a reference genome. All further analysis is based on the mapped reads, e.g. genomic variants are identified or transcript expression is quantified. Reads containing more than a few variant base pairs with respect to a reference will be hard to map, and sequencing errors further complicate this task. While a large part of human genomic variation is due to single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), recent years have shown that insertion deletion in del variants dramatically contribute to genomic diversity (). Furthermore, they have been linked to many diseases (), and especially large indels have been shown to have strong structural and functional impact (). The first high throughput method for genome wide detection of large deletions and duplications was array comparative genomic hybridization a cgh where sample and reference DNA are competitively hybridized on a probe array (). Given steadily decreasing costs, sequencing approaches are likely to gradually replace a cgh methods, since they carry the potential to provide base pair resolution and identify novel insertions while generating less measurement noise. sequencing based in del detection methods are based on different strategies often utilizing paired end or mate pair sequencing data. One conclusion from the 1000 Genomes Project so far is, that a comprehensive in del detection method needs to make use of different detection strategies as no strategy alone is sufficient (). We will briefly introduce the different strategies and point to their strengths and weaknesses. Most prominently, strategies based on paired end or mate pair data make use of the approximate distance and relative orientation of read pairs. Shifts in the mapped distance or changes in relative orientation indicate in del events or also more complex structural variation. Examples for popular methods that address in del detection based on abnormal insert sizes are p emer (), break dancer (), mod il () and sv detect (). A drawback of these read pair methods is that they require tight insert size distributions for accurate discovery of small to medium sized indels and for confident localization of breakpoints (). so called anchored split read mapping addresses this shortcoming by

discussion the availability of various kinds of sequencing data, i.e. derived from different sequencing technologies and protocols, has fueled the development of various computational tools for in del identification [for reviews, see. Often the overlap of predicted indels between different computational methods is low (), indicating that none of the methods is fully comprehensive and a satisfactory solution is yet to be found. Therefore, a comprehensive method is likely to use an integrative approach, combining the strengths of different methods. The split read mapping approach has its strength in the potential to exactly predict in del size and location. Early next generation technologies yielded very short read lengths (36 bp) where only anchored split mapping was feasible, with the mapping search space greatly reduced by a confidently mapped paired end (). However, advances in sequencing technology have led to single end reads long enough to reliably predict long deletions and also medium sized insertions without anchoring. sp lazers supports both anchored paired end split mapping as well as unanchored single end split mapping, which is a unique feature among split read mapping tools. By adding unmapped paired end reads and treating them as single end data, a significant increase in sensitivity could be demonstrated. In our comparisons with pin del (), which to our knowledge is the most widely used paired end split read in del detection method, and with state of the art single end split read aligners, sp lazers showed highest PPV and highest sensitivity, especially in variant rich regions. This strength may prove especially Page: 626 619627
