Motivation: time resolved hydrogen exchange (HX) followed by mass spectrometry (MS) is a key technology for studying protein structure, dynamics and interactions. HX experiments deliver a time dependent distribution of deuter ation levels of peptide sequences of the protein of interest. The robust and complete estimation of this distribution for as many peptide fragments as possible is instrumental to understanding dynamic protein level HX behavior. Currently, this data interpretation step still is a bottleneck in the overall hx ms workflow. Results: We propose hex icon a novel algorithmic workflow for automatic deuter ation distribution estimation at increased sequence coverage. Based on an L 1 regularized feature extraction routine, hex icon extracts the full deuter ation distribution, which allows insight into possible bimodal exchange behavior of proteins, rather than just an average deuter ation for each time point. Further, it is capable of addressing ill posed estimation problems, yielding sparse and physically reasonable results. hex icon makes use of existing peptide sequence information, which is augmented by an inferred list of peptide candidates derived from a known protein sequence. In conjunction with a supervised classification procedure that balances sensitivity and specificity, hex icon can deliver results with increased sequence coverage. Availability: The entire hex icon workflow has been implemented in C++ and includes a graphical user interface. It is available at

introduction the determination of protein structure and dynamics is a key issue for the understanding of living systems ().s: the isotope envelope shifts to higher m/z values because of deuterium incorporation. The deuter ation content is encoded in a complex mixture of isotope distributions. Due to the noise and overlapping isotope clusters, the separation of individual peptides is non-trivial. The abundance of the spectrum is labeled as y by combining the information of the protein dynamics and other classical functional data, a more complete understanding of protein function can be obtained. In many cases, protein dynamics are directly related to specific protein functions such as conformational changes during enzyme activation and protein movements during binding (). Hydrogen exchange (HX) followed by mass spectrometry (MS) hx ms has become a standard approach for interpreting HX experiments: the location and rate of deuter ation are indicative of solvent accessibility and in particular hydrogen bonding and hence of conformation and dynamics (). They can be estimated by tracking the mass shift of peptide fragments in mass spectra over samples with different incubation times () (). In comparison to nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, MS requires lower protein concentrations and amounts, provides higher measurement speed and better scalability in terms of protein size, and detects coexisting conformations (). Whereas manifold improvements in experimental methodology and instrumentation have been implemented for hx ms experiments page 1536 15351541

discussion as shown in Section 3.1, to avoid overfitting Chik's approach requires padding optimization by user input or pre-processing. The reason is that the least squares regression attempts to use each predictor without any restriction, and thus over fits the data and causes several spurious basis functions to be selected, as shown in marked by ''). The proposed approach benefits from the sparsity of the l1 regularization and discards those spurious deuter ation levels automatically, and thus requires no additional processing such as thresholding or any further user interaction. This overfitting problem becomes worse when overlapping patterns occur. As shown in, Chik's approach (with padding optimization) gives a reasonable distribution for a aere rele but yields an unrealistic estimate for IAKKKRWNSIEER, i.e. the large gaps between neighboring deuter ation levels. hex icon on the other hand, keeps the intrinsic smoothness and sparsity of the deuter ation levels. Although the estimate for the low intensity IAKKKRWNSIEER is subject to low SNR, it is still represented by a compact deuter ation distribution at the most relevant positions and appears to be physically reasonable. While maximum entropy deconvolution based methods () might theoretically be appealing, they are not applicable to the problem since they require a pre-defined noise level (), which is usually not available to the users and may vary among different m/z regions or experiments. Further, these approaches are prone to overfitting and are computationally expensive (). The improved sequence coverage provided by hex icon is particularly helpful to gain a more complete and detailed understanding of a dataset. Due to under segmentation of crowded regions in the LC/MS data, hex icon did not recover all manually selected peptide sequences from the ht pg dataset, but it still managed to yield a higher sequence coverage because other peptide sequences were selected to compensate for the missing ones. Further, as shown in, hex icon finds more than twice the number of peptide sequences selected by human experts, which allows exchange behavior prediction in finer regions. For instance, the estimation of exchange rate at positions 279284 can be inferred from both hlqrvghfdpvtrspltqeqlipn l (position 259284) and HLQRVGHFDPVTRSPLTQE (position 259278). Since we only considered those hex icon results with the highest quality score for the computation of the sequence coverage, this number can be regarded as a conservative estimate. Additional lower quality results provided by hex icon can guide users towards further targeted experiments. For instance, ambiguous results, when multiple peptide sequences could be assigned to the same spectrum, might motivate additional MS/MS run on specific peptide sequences of interest, and thereby allow further improvement on the sequence coverage.
