Motivation: high throughput reverse phase protein array rpp a technology allows for the parallel measurement of protein expression levels in approximately 1000 samples. However, the many steps required in the complex protocol (sample lysate preparation, slide printing, hybridization, washing and amplified detection) may create substantial variability in data quality. We are not aware of any other quality control algorithm that is tuned to the special characteristics of rpp as. Results: We have developed a novel classifier for quality control of rpp a experiments using a generalized linear model and logistic function. The outcome of the classifier, ranging from 0 to 1, is defined as the probability that a slide is of good quality. After training, we tested the classifier using two independent validation datasets. We conclude that the classifier can distinguish rpp a slides of good quality from those of poor quality sufficiently well such that normalization schemes, protein expression patterns and advanced biological analyses will not be drastically impacted by erroneous measurements or systematic variations. Availability and implementation: The classifier, implemented in the  super curve  R package, can be freely downloaded at http://bioinformatics.mdanderson.org/main/OOMPA:Overview or http://r-forge.r-project.org/projects/supercurve/. The data used to develop and validate the classifier are available at http://bioinformatics.mdanderson.org/MOAR.

introduction the majority of known biological effector molecules, diagnostic markers and pharmaceutical targets are proteins (). Historically, investigations have focused on single proteins. The ability to profile the expression of multiple proteins has added a major new dimension of information on biological and clinical processes. A technology that accomplishes that is reverse phase protein array rpp a. rpp a offers a powerful tool for defining more than 100 protein expression profiles for over a 1000 samples simultaneously in an experiment. Typically, an rpp a experiment is performed by extracting protein lysates from biological samples, making a series of dilutions of the lysates, printing the lysates onto nitrocellulose coated glass slides, hybridizing the samples with primary and enzyme tagged secondary antibodies, then adding a substrate of the enzyme to generate a colorimetric signal. The signal intensities, which reflect the abundance of the corresponding proteins in the hybridized samples, are then detected and quantified by any number of approaches, such as those used by the software micro vi gene vi genetech Inc., http://www.vigenetech.com/Micro vi gene htm. This software computes the mean net and mean total values of the signals. To ensure data validity, a positive control derived from the same lysate extract of the mixed cell lines is repeatedly spotted on each slide. Each sample and positive control on an rpp a slide usually has five dilution steps (undiluted, 2, 4, 8 and 16). A typical rpp a slide contains 48 sub grids and each subgrid has the dilution series of 22 samples and 2 positive controls. Therefore, an rpp a slide contains up to 5760 spots, which can accommodate up to 1152 samples and controls (). A large amount of data can be obtained from a single experiment. Thus, an experiment requires extensive data handling, including quality control (QC). rpp a technology has been used in a variety of studies, such as those involving cellular signaling pathway activation (), discovery of biomarkers of treatment response and survival (), disease classification for diagnostic and prognostic purposes (), and identification of new drug targets (). Most studies that have used rpp a have concentrated on biological analyses; however, to our knowledge, no study has been published that explores QC for rpp a slides. It is common for an rpp a experiment to result in some slides of poor quality due to experimental variation that arises even under optimal conditions. To avoid poor rpp a images and subsequent spurious data which may have adverse impact on normalization, lead to wrong conclusions, take extra time to process and require extra space to store it is crucial to exclude slides with poor quality in the early stages of data processing. Current QC strategies are based on a visual examination of slide images or correlation coefficient analysis on a limited number of replicates if there are replicates on a slide. However, when analysing a large number of slides, visual examination is labor intensive and time consuming. Moreover, the QC criteria for visual examination may vary from examiner to examiner, which may lead to inconsistent or inaccurate results. The alternative, correlation coefficient analysis, indicates a predictive relationship between two variables, but not reproducibility or reliability. In general, the development of a QC model consists of defining descriptive categories, selecting features and constructing the model. The descriptive categories are quality criteria, with predictors being used to measure the criteria. In this study, each qualitative category corresponds to the nature of an rpp a slide. In practice, biologists are interested in excluding unreliable slides from further analysis by dividing the slides into two categories: one category that consists of slides that are excluded from further analysis (referred to as slides of poor quality hereafter) and a second category that consists of slides that are used in the actual data analysis (referred to as slides of good and fair quality hereafter). The classification problem arises when the categories established for the slides vary from biologist to biologist. To tackle that problem, we define the quality of an rpp a slide using an exhaustive set of quantitative predictors in a generalized linear model (GLM;) and a logistic function by which an outcome of a GLM calculation is transformed to the probability that the slide is of good quality. We demonstrate here the quantitative features, model training and model validation of our rpp a QC model background intensity and uneven patches: An ideal rpp a image is one in which sample spots are visualized without background or with an evenly distributed light background. An uneven, dark background makes it hard to detect and quantify the true spot intensity. Background patches with various levels of darkness may cause a biased estimation of the true spot intensity. The sources of the background signal can be background staining from the nitrocellulose coating of the glass slide and contamination from the hybridization and washing procedures. Varia tion in the positive controls: The intensities of positive control spots are expected to be equal because they are technical replicates. A visualized intensity variation among the positive control spots indicates uneven hybridization, an uneven background or ir reproducible technical replicates. We used Cohen's kappa test () to evaluate the agreement in the slide quality categorization from the different experts for each dataset. The experts significantly agreed on their visual categorizations, with an average p value of 4.22E07 for Cohen's kappa (P values ranged from 2.20E16 to 2.86E06). To finalize the categorization of the slides, we assigned a score to each category (3 was good, 2 was fair and 1 was poor), averaged the scores from the different experts for each slide, and used 1.5 and 2.5 as cutoffs. A slide with an average score smaller than or equal to 1.5 was classified as a poor slide; a slide with an average score between 1.5 and 2.5 was a fair slide and a slide with an average score larger than or equal to 2.5 was a good slide. As a result, the training set had 50 good, 64 fair and 24 poor slides. One of the validation sets (n  117) had 57 good, 40 fair and 20 poor slides. The other validation set (n  174) contained 29 good, 75 fair and 70 poor slides (Supplementary). The process that the experts used to set up the criteria and perform the quality evaluation was completed prior to and independent from model development.

discussion in this study, we developed a classifier for assessing the quality of rpp a slides by using a GLM and logistic function. The GLM is a flexible generalization of ordinary least square regression, and the logistic function computes probability, which allows for the prediction of a discrete outcome when a cut off is chosen. The GLM is more robust than the linear regression model because it allows the magnitude of the variance of each measurement to correlate with its predictive value. The classifier calculates the probability that a slide is of good quality. To ensure that the classifier operates with a high level of accuracy, we first fitted a GLM to all features that were potentially useful in predicting the response variable. We then tested the fit of the model after each coefficient was removed from the model during a stepwise regression process. The stepwise regression ensures that a model still adequately fits the data after variables are eliminated from the model in the iterative process. The features left in the model after AIC stepwise selection were the slopes and coefficients of variation of the positive control intensities, and the DRs and an index of the percentage of good spots for the sample intensities. The utility of a predictive model depends on its external validity, that is, its ability to maintain accuracy when applied to data from settings that are different than those on which the model was developed. The application of our classifier to two independent datasets that were also evaluated by expert visual examination resulted in discrepancies between the model prediction and the visual evaluation. A re-evaluation of the involved slides by the examiners increased the predictive accuracy of the classifier. The rpp a Core Facility at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center has hybridized more than 18 000 rpp a slides each year. Because the classifier was developed and implemented in the super curve R package (http://bioinformatics.mdanderson.org/OOMPA/) in 2011, it has automated the rpp a production line, saved a tremendous amount of time for the rpp a experts who previously provided visual examinations of slide quality and provided high quality data without bias to world-wide customers. These high quality rpp a data have been applied to characterize and provide outcome predictions for studies of human colon and rectal cancer (Cancer Genome Atlas Network, 2012a), breast cancer (Cancer Genome Atlas Network, 2012b), ovarian cancer (), endometrial cancer (Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, 2013) and pan cancers (). All of the rpp a slides fabricated by the rpp a Core Facility are designed with samples that have five dilution steps. In order to maximize predictability, the classifier was developed based on predictive features obtained from the individual dilution steps. Therefore, the limitation of the classifier is that it is specific to the slide design. The current version of the classifier can predict the quality of an rpp a slide only if it has five dilution steps. However, the approaches used to define the classifier could be readily applied to alternative slide designs.
