Motivation: Data independent acquisition mass spectrometry has emerged as a reproducible and sensitive alternative in quantitative proteomics, where parsing the highly complex tandem mass spectra requires dedicated algorithms. Recently, targeted data extraction was proposed as a novel analysis strategy for this type of data, but it is important to further develop these concepts to provide quality controlled , interference adjusted and sensitive peptide quantification. Results: We here present the algorithm DIANA and the classifier py prophet which are based on new probabilistic sub scores to classify the chromatographic peaks in targeted data independent acquisition data analysis. The algorithm is capable of providing accurate quantitative values and increased recall at a controlled false discovery rate, in a complex gold standard dataset. Importantly, we further demonstrate increased confidence gained by the use of two complementary data independent acquisition targeted analysis algorithms, as well as increased numbers of quantified peptide precursors in complex biological samples. Availability and implementation: DIANA is implemented in scala and python and available as open source (Apache 2.0 license) or pre-compiled binaries from http://quantitativeproteomics.org/diana. py prophet can be installed from PyPi (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/ py prophet
introduction accurate and precise quantification of proteins is a critical component of life science and systems biology applications. The prevailing method for quantification of complete proteomes was until recently data dependent acquisition (DDA), also referred to as shotgun mass spectrometry (MS). Shotgun MS can provide extensive maps of the measurable and expressed proteomes of a large numbers of organisms, tissues, organs and organelles. However, 550% of identified peptides are typically shared between two replicate shotgun MS injections (), requiring multiple injections of the same sample to reproducibly measure peptides in all samples (). The limited analytical reproducibility observed in shotgun MS has fuelled the development of targeted MS strategies such as selected reaction monitoring (SRM), to increase reproducibility and specificity compared with shotgun MS (). To perform targeted MS strategies requires a priori determined information on how to target a given peptide sequence. Such information typically consists of the peptide sequence, the preferred charge state, the empirical or predicted high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) elution time, as well as the relative intensities and masses of the n most prominent fragments. The construction of these MS assays requires a substantial effort, which has resulted in the assembly of public repositories of peptides and MS assays, to simplify further studies (). Although the targeted MS strategies such as SRM provides reproducible and accurate protein quantification, the throughput is normally limited to up to a few hundred peptides per injection (), limiting the technique for whole proteome studies. data independent acquisition MS diam s was originally used to improve peptide identification rates (), but lately workflows using diam s combined with targeted data extraction have been described in attempts to combine the reproducibility of SRM with the throughput of shotgun MS (). Data acquisition in diam s relies on deterministic splitting of the survey scan peptide ion mass range into one or more subsets, followed by co fragmentation of all precursor masses in one entire subset, while leaving the de-convolution of the peptide ions in these complex MS 2 spectra to the post acquisition analysis. The acquisition method yields complete MS 2 retention time maps, compared with the discontinuous maps of shotgun MS, and can be seen as a complete digitization of the sample as seen by the mass spectrometer. Targeted extraction diam s has the sensitivity, precision, reproducibility and dynamic range to allow deep large scale measurement of the proteomes of biological systems (*To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com 2013). However, the strategy s data analysis needs further improvement, and currently only a few tools exist that are capable of large scale robust targeted extraction diam s analysis (). The poor availability of data analysis tools limits robustness, as users are blindly exposed to any potential error in the particular algorithm used, and lowers sensitivity, as parts of the proteome might be unreachable due to the potential preferences of a given algorithm. For example, the combination of multiple algorithms in shotgun MS has been shown to increase the amount of peptide spectrum matches with up to 50% compared with a single algorithm (). We have previously described algorithms for detection of the correct signals in SRM chromatograms based on fragmentation patterns (), and we hypothesized that these concepts can further improve the targeted data analysis in DIA data, and also provide complementarity towards existing tools. Here, we investigate this by combining the diam s targeted analysis strategy with our previous efforts in SRM data analysis, and present a new algorithm and software for automated analysis of diam s data. The algorithm, called DIANA, introduces a new function for computing chromatographic peak sub scores based on expected ratios between fragments, as well as a new interference corrected measure of quantity. These factors, together with the new semi supervised classification tool py prophet increase the amounts of peptide quantifications and enable more accurate quantifications in complex samples. Finally, we also demonstrate that DIANA is complementary to the previously published open swath software (R  ost et al., 2014), and that the combination of results from the two engines can further improve on the confidence in and number of peptide quantifications.

discussion the presented work demonstrates three advancements in targeted extraction diam s analysis. First, the invention of a probabilistic score for fragmentation patterns is shown to give high analytical power in the complex bacterial and yeast backgrounds, which should be considered the minimal expected sample complexity for in vivo or cell line studies. Second, the adopted interference corrected measure of quantity from our previous SRM work is shown to provide increased accuracy in quantification in the noisy diam s data. Third, we demonstrate the advance of combining two analysis tools for diam s data processing. The combined output from DIANA and open swath generated both an increased number of identifications and considerably increased confidence in the peptides identified by both engines. The DIANA algorithm is very reliant on the peptide fragmentation pattern, both for scoring and interference correction. This is both a strength and a weakness. The advanced probabilistic score is very powerful as the probabilities are individually calculated based on the noise in each specific ratio channel, and this allowed us to rely completely on extracted chromatograms for the analysis. On the other hand, the algorithm depends on conserved fragmentation, and changes in instrument collision energy tuning or mass dependent ion transmission could hinder detection of true peptides. Nevertheless, we have demonstrated powerful classification (AUC50.92) and accurate quantification (95% of peptides have r 2 40.96) of the new scoring software DIANA and classifier py prophet in a gold standard dataset. Further,. diam s analysis of four Streptococcus pyogenes lysates grown with 0% or 10% plasma supplement. Combined analysis using open swath and DIANA confirms close to 30000 peptide ion quantifications, but each engine also quantifies over 8000 peptides exclusively. Less than 1000 peptide ions have conflicting quantifications from the two algorithms even if performance is largely similar, DIANA is shown to improve performance in samples from bacterial whole cell lysates with sufficient amounts of true positives, compared with open swath. The structure of DIANA and open swath are conceptually similar. The observed differences in performance between the engines can likely be explained by the detailed differences such as the different sub scores or the exact chromatogram extraction or peak detection. We believe that further improvement of DIANA could be achieved by including something similar to open swaths intensity and signal to noise sub scores as well as a preliminary score to initiate the semi supervised learning better. The lack of such sub scores could well explain DIANA's lower sensitivity in samples with very few true positives. In the performed gold standard and streptococcal lysate analysis, we demonstrate the usefulness of utilizing multiple analysis tools, to increase the confidence and amounts of detected peptides. Increasing peptide identification rates and confidence using a combination of search engines is an attractive option, as it only requires computer hardware investments that are minor compared with instrument investment and maintenance costs. Being standard procedure in shotgun MS data analysis, we believe this study to validate the approach also in diam s. Although shotgun MS data analysis is a mature field with tens of different tools available, research on the analysis of targeted analysis DIA data has only begun. It can be anticipated that several powerful concepts for DIA analysis remain to be discovered. We believe DIANA demonstrates some such new analysis concepts, and their successful application to the complex task of detecting and quantifying peptide ions.
