We present a tool, di calib d for detecting identity by descent (IBD) tracts between pairs of genomic sequences. Our method builds on a recent demographic inference method based on the coalescent with recombination, and is able to incorporate demographic information as a prior. Simulation study shows that di calib d has significantly higher recall and precision than that of existing single nucleotide polymorphism based IBD detection methods, while retaining reasonable accuracy for IBD tracts as small as 0.1 cM. Availability: http://sourceforge.net/projects/

introduction the notion of identity by descent (IBD) between distantly related individuals is playing an increasing role in a variety of genetic analyses, including association mapping (), inferring past demographic history () and detecting signals of natural selection (). Currently there exist several useful methods for detecting IBD tracts. These methods are based on characterizing similar haplotypes [e.g. GERMLINE (or considering patterns of linkage disequilibrium [e.g. fast ibd Refined IBD and ibd seq (, b)], but they do not explicitly model genealogical relationships between genomic sequences. Here, we present a new IBD detection tool, di calib d which is based on a well used genealogical process in population genetics, namely, the coalescent with recombination. Another feature that distinguishes our method is that we can incorporate demographic information as a prior. There seems to be no universally accepted definition of IBD. The definition we adopt is the same as that in and Ralph and Coop (2013). Specifically, an IBD tract is defined as a maximally contiguous genomic region that is wholly descended from a common ancestor without any recombination occurring within the region. In contrast to other methods, we allow IBD tracts to contain point mutations, which are likely to occur in humans due to comparable mutation and recombination rates. di calib d is able to detect IBD tracts with high accuracy in unrelated individuals, between whom the vast majority of shared tracts are 51 cM. single nucleotide polymorphism snp based methods are successful in detecting tracts 42 cM, but have low power for shorter tracts, whereas sequence based meth dods such as di calib d and ibd seq maintain reasonable accuracy for tracts as small as 0.1 cM.
