Motivation: Identification of differential expressed genes has led to countless new discoveries. However, differentially expressed genes are only a proxy for finding dysregulated pathways. The problem is to identify how the network of regulatory and physical interactions re wires in different conditions or in disease. Results: We developed a procedure named DINA (DIfferential Network Analysis), which is able to identify set of genes, whose co regulation is condition specific starting from a collection of condition specific gene expression profiles. DINA is also able to predict which transcription factors (TFs) may be responsible for the pathway condition specific co regulation. We derived 30 tissue specific gene networks in human and identified several metabolic pathways as the most differentially regulated across the tissues. We correctly identified TFs such as Nuclear Receptors as their main regulators and demonstrated that a gene with unknown function (YEATS2) acts as a negative regulator of hepatocyte metabolism. Finally, we showed that DINA can be used to make hypotheses on dysregulated pathways during disease progression. By analyzing gene expression profiles across primary and transformed hepatocytes, DINA identified hepato carcinoma specific metabolic and transcriptional pathway dysregulation. Availability: We implemented an on-line web tool http://dina.tigem.it enabling the user to apply DINA to identify tissue specific pathways or gene signatures.

introduction gene Expression Profiles g eps measured in different conditions and cell types via microarrays or, more recently, next generation sequencing, have been extensively used in computational systems biology to reverse engineer gene regulatory networks (). The main use of reverse engineering has been the identification of unknown regulatory or functional interactions among genes, microRNAs and proteins from large datasets (). state of the art reverse engineering methods model gene networks as static processes, i.e. regulatory interactions among genes in the network (such as direct physical interactions or indirect functional interactions) do not change across different conditions or tissue types. However, different cell types, or the same cell type but in different conditions, may carry out different functions, and it is expected that their regulatory networks reflect these differences. Several methods have been proposed to identify active subnetworks across different conditions from changes in gene expression. One of the first attempts is a general method to search for 'active sub-networks' connecting genes with unexpectedly high levels of Differential Expression (). This method requires in input a single network, and it identifies a set of genes (i.e. subnetwork) whose expression changes across two conditions. However, changes in expression may be mild or absent, even when the subnetwork is active. Hence, looking only at the differential expression levels of genes could be not sufficient. Therefore, more recent approaches attempted to identify Differential co regulation (DC) of genes in the subnetwork (). By differentially co regulated (DC) genes, we mean set of genes, which are co regulated only in a specific condition but not in others (). The main differences among all of these approaches are in how the genes to be tested are selected, how co regulation is measured (i.e. Pearson Correlation Coefficient or Mutual Information) and how DC across the conditions is quantified. Some of the most advanced methods go beyond pair-wise co regulation and aim at automatically identifying de novo subnetwork(s) containing genes whose co regulation changes the most across two or more conditions (). This is achieved by advanced optimization techniques such as genetic algorithms, which, however, are computationally intensive (), as they require checking all of the possible subnetworks to identify the ones that are most dysregulated. Hence, these methods are limited in the number of different conditions that can be compared (), and they may require fine tuning of the algorithm parameters (). *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
