Motivation: Chromatin regulators (CR) and transcription factors (TF) are important transacting factors regulating transcription process, and many efforts have been devoted to understand their underlying mechanisms in gene regulation. However, the influences of CR and TF regulation effects on nucleosomes during transcription are still minimally understood, and it remains to be determined the extent to which CR and TF regulatory effect shape the organization of nucleosomes in the genome. In this article we attempted to address this problem and examine the patterns of CR and TF regulation effects from the nucleosome perspective. Results: Our results show that the CR and TF regulatory effects exhibit different paradigms of transcriptional control in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We grouped yeast genes into two categories, cr sensitive genes and tf sensitive genes, based on how their expression profiles change upon deletion of CRs or TFs. We found that genes in these two groups have very different patterns of nucleosome organization. The promoters of cr sensitive genes tend to have higher nucleosome occupancy, whereas the promoters of tf sensitive genes are depleted of nucleosomes. Furthermore, the nucleosome profiles of cr sensitive genes tend to show more dynamic characteristics than tf sensitive genes. These results reveal that the nucleosome organizations of yeast genes have a strong impact on their mode of regulation, and there are differential regulation effects on nucleosomes between CRs and TFs.

introduction transcriptional regulation in eukaryotic cells is a very important and complicated process. In the model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae, this process involves a precise orchestration of complex molecular events, and is mediated by a series of regulators to create transcription factories, such as transcription factors (TFs), chromatin regulators (CRs) and the general transcription machinery with * To whom correspondence should be addressed related regulators (such as RNA polymerase molecules) (). Many studies have attempted to investigate the mechanisms of TFs and CRs and how they work together to regulate the gene transcription process (; Kim and O'). In yeast, the activation of TFs is usually affected by environmental stimuli through signaling pathways, which further determines the level of mRNA abundance (). One common strategy is to use regulatory feedback loops, in which the TFs are embedded in the feedback loops and tune gene expression with the corresponding needs (). CRs and TFs are often coupled together and jointly regulate the transcriptional state of specific genes (). Some of the CRs can utilize the energy of ATP hydrolysis to affect the interaction of histone and DNA as a result of nucleosome delocalization, such as histone sliding, eviction or replacement (). This in turn affects the accessibility of TFs to their binding targets, leading to transcriptional activation or repression. Gene transcription in the cell need to be tightly regulated, not only to optimize the expression level at different physiological conditions, but also to provide the cells the capacity to quickly adjust genes' expression level in response to external signals and perturbations. It has been recognized that, in addition to regulation by TFs, CRs also play important roles in regulating gene expression. The arrangements of nucleosomes along the DNA sequences are pivotal mechanism influencing gene regulation (). A number of recent genome wide in vivo and in vitro experiments have revealed some general principles that govern nucleosome organization (). Although it was considered that DNA sequence itself largely determines the mode of binding by nucleosomes, this concept is still under debate (). For example, it has been reported that the nucleosome positioning can be the consequence of the regulatory activities of trans-acting factors (). Among these trans-acting factors, TFs can compete with nucleosomes for accessing to the DNA sequences (), and CRs can help to conduct chromatin assembly and organization, leading to nucleosome arrays of uniform spacing (such as is wi family) ([13:22 16122010 page 148 147152). For example, Whitehouse and showed that ATPase Isw2 acts to position nucleosomes over less favorable sequence elements at the POT1 promoter. About 35% of Isw2 regulated genes (400 genes) were subject to detectable chromatin remodeling compared with wild type cells, and the transcription of these genes can be initiated after Isw2 is deleted (). In this study, we analyzed the different effects of CR and TF regulations on nucleosomes, e.g. nucleosome positioning, packing, dynamics and histone activities. We also described how nucleosomal effects can have an impact on gene expression. Our results indicated that TFs and CRs might have distinct strategies on the gene regulation by influencing nucleosome organization at the promoter region.
