Experimentally found gene expression profiles are used to solve different problems in pharmaceutical studies, such as drug repositioning, resistance, toxicity and drug drug interactions. A special web service, dig epp red for prediction of drug induced changes of gene expression profiles based on structural formulae of chemicals has been developed. structure activity relationships for prediction of drug induced gene expression profiles were determined by Prediction of Activity Spectra for Substances (PASS) software. Comparative Toxicogenomics Database with data on the known drug induced gene expression profiles of chemicals was used to create mrna and protein based training sets. An average prediction accuracy for the training sets (ROC AUC) calculated by leave one out cross validation on the basis of mRNA data (1385 compounds, 952 genes, 500 up and 475 down regulations and protein data (1451 compounds, 139 genes, 93 up and 55 down regulations exceeded 0.85. Availability: Freely available on the web at

introduction drug induced gene expression profile dig ep is an important determinant of the drug effect on a cell. Recent rapid advances in DNA microarray technology allow one to use in practice the dig eps (). Lamb introduced Connectivity Map (CMap) as a phenotype based drug discovery approach based on comparison of disease gene signature and drug induced changes in gene expression profiles (). Since then, more than 50 studies using CMap approach for drug repositioning, lead discovery, mechanism of action elucidation and so forth were published (). It was shown that CMap approach can be used to reveal side effects of drugs (), estimation of drug resistance () and analysis of the drug synergistic effects (). CMap approach is applicable only for several thousand drugs having experimentally determined dig eps but can not be used for other drugs or new drug candidates. To overcome this limitation, we decided to create a web service to predict dig eps for new drug like compounds on the basis of the existing data on dig eps. There are several freely available databases on experimental dig eps including NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (), Connectivity Map Database () and Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD) (). structure activity relationships are traditionally used to decrease the number of experiments in the process of drug development. The gene expression changes can be considered as a particular type of the biological activity of a drug. Therefore, Prediction of Activity Spectra for Substances (PASS) approach can be applied for prediction of dig eps. To the best of our knowledge, the developed web service is the first tool that allows the prediction of drug induced changes in gene expression profiles based on the structural formulae of chemical compounds. drug like organic compounds based on their structural formula (). PASS is based on the use of Bayesian approach and Multilevel Neighborhoods of Atom descriptors for representation of a molecule structure (). It was earlier shown that the Bayesian approach used in PASS, being selected by comparison of many mathematical algorithms for analysis of structure activity relationships, overtakes them by accuracy of prediction () and robustness (). A freely available web service for prediction of the biological activity spectra for drug like molecules on the basis of PASS technology (http://www.way2drug.com/PASSonline) was developed earlier (). PASS prediction results are represented by the list of activities with probabilities ''to be active'' Pa and ''to be inactive'' Pi. The list is arranged in a descending order of PaPi; thus, the more probable changes of gene expression are at the top of the list. The list can be shortened at any desirable cut off value, but Pa40.5 is used by default. In this case, both the chance to confirm the predicted dig eps by the experiment and the number of false positive predictions are reasonable. The detailed description of PASS approach is represented in the Supplementary Material.
