Motivation: Cancer progression and development are initiated by aberrations in various molecular networks through coordinated changes across multiple genes and pathways. It is important to understand how these networks change under different stress conditions and or patient specific groups to infer differential patterns of activation and inhibition. Existing methods are limited to correlation networks that are independently estimated from separate group specific data and without due consideration of relationships that are conserved across multiple groups. Method: We propose a pathway based differential network analysis in genomics (DINGO) model for estimating group specific networks and making inference on the differential networks. DINGO jointly estimates the group specific conditional dependencies by decomposing them into global and group specific components. The delineation of these components allows for a more refined picture of the major driver and passenger events in the elucidation of cancer progression and development. Results: Simulation studies demonstrate that DINGO provides more accurate group specific conditional dependencies than achieved by using separate estimation approaches. We apply DINGO to key signaling pathways in glioblastoma to build differential networks for long term survivors and short term survivors in The Cancer Genome Atlas. The hub genes found by mRNA expression, DNA copy number, methylation and microRNA expression reveal several important roles in glio-blastoma progression.

introduction complex biological processes, such as the development and progression of cancer, often involve the interaction of genomic and epigenetic factors with environmental factors (). Research has shown that genes can promote or inhibit tumor development within coordinating modules such as functional or cell signaling pathways (). These genes and their corresponding pathways form networks that regulate various cellular functions. Thus, the construction and exploration of the topology of such networks and their constituents is of great interest for developing and understanding the biological mechanisms behind disease development and progression. It is well established that sub-networks within functional regulatory networks of genes and their products undergo changes in response to different conditions, such as cellular DNA damage or environmental stress. (). Analytic approaches for evaluating the regulation of such networks have sought to determine how specific genes and pathways operate in the promotion or inhibition of human disease (). For example, a hub gene within a regulatory network is a gene that acts to influence the activity of a large number of genes or transcription factors (). Thus, it is of interest to analyze the activity or expression of a hub gene during different stages of disease. While differential gene expression analysis evaluates the changes in the expression of the hub gene under different conditions or states, the incorporation of a network structure extends the differential gene expression analysis to differential network analysis (), which is one of the primary aims of this article displays an example of the differential network analysis of data from two groups (e.g. of patients) that represent two different disease states. Each letter (vertex) represents a gene or any of its products (e.g. expression, methylation, copy number or transcription factor), and each line (edge) represents the co-expression in the network. In the group specific networks (left panels), the edge colors and widths represent the signs and strengths of co-expression quantities. A differential network between group 1 and group 2 (right panel) is constructed by edge-wise subtraction of the co-expression quantities in the group specific networks. In the differential network, the edge colors represent the signs of the differences and the edge widths are proportional to the strengths of the differences. This approach to network analysis allows us to discover some less obvious network relations that are not identified in the group specific networks. At the same time, it will allow us to discard the relations that do not differentiate one disease state of interest from another (e.g. group 1 from group 2 in) (). Most of the methods for differential network analysis rely on different correlation based metrics to measure the strength of association between pairs of vertices in a network. Broadly, there are three main approaches for comparing group specific networks in differential network analysis. The first approach obtains sparse group specific networks and compares the network topologies, such as degrees of vertices or modular ities between groups (). The second approach handles weighted group specific networks and uses some functions of the edge specific weight differences as the edge weights to construct differential networks (). Instead of relying on edge-wise co-expression differences, the last approach focuses more on finding gene sets and identifying which correlation patterns differ between groups. This approach formulates summary measures that represent co expressions within a set of genes and compares the quantities between groups (). Although the above approaches have been useful in addressing important biological questions, the existing methods for analyzing differential networks are limited to correlation networks (i.e. two genes at a time). Also, the group specific correlations are estimated separately using observations within each group. In this article, we obtain more refined, undirected relations than those based on correlation networks by estimating conditional dependencies between two genes after removing the effects of all other genes. This results in the construction of an undirected graph of conditional dependencies that is sparser than a correlation network (). More importantly, the separate estimations are performed without due consideration of the global relationships that are preserved for all groups, i.e. are invariant to group specifications. For example, in our motivating example, we consider gene regulatory networks constructed using different modalities of genomic data (mRNA expression, DNA copy number, methylation status and microRNA expression). We are interested in determining how the network connectivity changes for patients with glioblastoma who experience different survival times, long term and short term survival times. Our hypothesis is that some conditional dependencies are shared across the groups and can be thought of as 'passenger' events and other conditional dependencies are unique to the groups and thus can be 'driver' events that change with cancer progression. The delineation of these components allows for a more refined picture of the major events (driver and or passenger) in the elucidation of cancer progression and development. To this end, we propose a differential network analysis in genomics (DINGO) framework, wherein we decompose the conditional dependencies among the genes variables into a global component and a 'local' group specific component and jointly estimate the group specific conditional dependencies after adjusting for the global conditional dependencies. With the DINGO model, the dimension of the parameters is greatly reduced compared with that in separate estimations. In addition, we provide techniques for conducting rigorous statistical inference on the differential networks based on bootstrap procedures for assessing the differences in the group specific conditional dependencies. This article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the DINGO model and the estimation approach for calculating the group specific networks and bootstrap thresholding to determine the significant differential edges. In Section 3, we apply our method to data obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) glioblastoma study. We estimate differential networks for genes in glioblastoma cell signaling pathways, comparing data from long term survivors lts s and short term survivors (STSs) using data from multiple platforms. In Section 4, we evaluate the DINGO method and compare it with other estimation approaches via simulations under different settings. We provide a summary and discussion in Section 5. In the Supplementary Materials, we present the technical details, additional results from the application of DINGO to TCGA glioblastoma data and additional simulation results.

discussion we propose a joint modeling approach, DINGO, for estimating differential networks in various genomic data in the presence of group information. DINGO estimates separate conditional dependencies for each group and allows for global dependencies; thus, it borrows strength more efficiently between groups. We applied our DINGO method to TCGA glioblastoma data from four platforms, mRNA expression, DNA copy number, methylation and microRNA expression and we found hub genes based on the differential networks, many of which were in the regulatory network related to the c myc gene that contributes to the regulation of GBM proliferation and shorter survival times in GBM patients. While pathways used in our analysis (Section 3) have been implicated in GBM in prior studies, the exact nature of the pathway components has not been studied with respect to differential patterns of activation inactivation related to the patient prognostic groups. Our re-analysis focuses on the exact pathway breakages using data from multiple platforms, which sheds a completely different light on the various biological processes involved in GBM progression. The established pathways include up to 600 genes (Supplementary). For 50 and 600 genes, Steps 1 and 2 of DINGO take around 20 s and 57 min, respectively, which makes it feasible to conduct pathway based differential network analysis. A more detailed discussion of the computation time is provided in Supplementary Section S7. Although our DINGO method was applied to a two group setting, the model can be generalized to incorporate multiple categories (such as multiple stages of disease and multiple subtypes) as well as continuous covariates (such as age and time). For three groups with an intercept term, we can apply x  1; 1; 1 T ; x  1; 1; 0 T and x  1; 0; 1 T for group 1, group 2 and group 3, respectively, in the Equation (1). We can also add age as a continuous covariate by defining the covariate vectors x  1; 1; age i  T for i in lts s and x  1; 1; age i  T for i in STSs. This would require additional generalizations of our estimation and computational algorithms; tasks that we leave for future consideration.
