Motivation: Generating accurate transcription factor (TF) binding site motifs from data generated using the next generation sequencing, especially chips eq is challenging. The challenge arises because a typical experiment reports a large number of sequences bound by a TF, and the length of each sequence is relatively long. Most traditional motif finders are slow in handling such enormous amount of data. To overcome this limitation, tools have been developed that compromise accuracy with speed by using heuristic discrete search strategies or limited optimization of identified seed motifs. However, such strategies may not fully use the information in input sequences to generate motifs. Such motifs often form good seeds and can be further improved with appropriate scoring functions and rapid optimization. Results: We report a tool named discriminative motif optimizer di mo. di mo takes a seed motif along with a positive and a negative database and improves the motif based on a discriminative strategy. We use area under receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) as a measure of discriminating power of motifs and a strategy based on perceptron training that maximizes AUC rapidly in a discriminative manner. Using di mo on a large test set of 87 TFs from human, dros-ophila and yeast, we show that it is possible to significantly improve motifs identified by nine motif finders. The motifs are generated/ optimized using training sets and evaluated on test sets. The AUC is improved for almost 90% of the TFs on test sets and the magnitude of increase is up to 39%. Availability and implementation: di mo is available at http://stormo.

introduction transcription factors (TFs) can modulate gene expression patterns and hence are key components of cellular regulatory networks. TFs bind to DNA in a sequence specific manner. The relative preference of TFs to various nucleotide sequences is conveniently expressed in the form of position weight or frequency matrices (PWM or PFM, respectively), often referred as TF binding site motifs. A typical experiment to determine TF specificity, especially using next generation sequencing, generates information about binding sites at a relatively low resolution. The binding site is identified within a region of the genome that is significantly larger than TF binding site. Identified peaks can be as long as few hundreds to thousands of base pairs, and the total number of peaks can also be in a similar range. Most traditional motif finders are slow to identify motifs from such an enormous amount of unaligned sequences. As an attempt to overcome this problem, a few hundreds of top scored peaks are used for identifying TF binding site motifs leaving a large number of sequences unused to generate accurate motifs. Alternatively, in recent years motif finders have been developed that can handle relatively large amount of sequences and identify motifs faster with the use of some approximations. For example, a recently developed method, Discriminative Regular Expression Motif Elicitation dre me rapidly identifies multiple short eukaryotic motifs for a large number of sequences. To achieve higher speed, it searches for motifs over degenerate sequence (IUPAC) space and estimates Fisher's p value rather than rescanning input sequences (). Another method, Discriminative Motif Enumerator (DME) is fast in identifying motifs by use of precomputed matrices. However, the number of precomputed matrices increases significantly and speed decreases for identification of motifs at fine resolutions (). mds can uses few sequences from large input set to identify motifs and calculates significance on a number of sequences that are larger than those used for finding motifs (). Automated Motif Discovery (AMD) uses multistep processing and filtering to identify significant core motifs in IUPAC space. The core motifs are then extended and refined based on selected sites with one mutation from core motifs (). DECOnvolved Discriminative motif discovery de cod uses a heuristic hill climbing approach to identify enriched motifs from a limited set of km ers (specified by motif cardinality) (). All these methods can identify significant seeds motifs from a large database leaving room for further optimization. Like a few other methods (;), Contrast Motif Finder (CMF) uses two step strategies: seed identification and iterative optimization. Both steps use Z-score to identify significant motifs (). Discriminative PWM Search (DIPS), one of the earliest discriminative motif finder, uses an iterative optimization process to find a set of sites that maximizes discrimination score (). xx motif is a recently developed method that uses three step procedures seed finding, merging and refinement to find motifs enriched in positive sequences (). Both seed searching and refinement are performed based on enrichment p value. Peak motifs of regulatory sequence analysis tool rs at are fast and capable of handling several thousands of sequences. It also generates user friendly and rich output (). It rapidly searches overrepresented hexa hep tamer followed by merging significant patterns. DIPS, CMF and xx motif compared with DME and mds can are slower for an input of several hundred sequences. *To whom correspondence should be addressed however they can handle small number of sequences efficiently and produce motif models. Such motifs can again be used as seeds and further re optimized on a larger set of sequences. In addition to these, several other methods are developed using discriminative principle based on different scoring functions and search procedures (da) and vary on a scale of computational efficiency. In this article, we present a discriminative motif optimizer, di mo that takes seed motifs described earlier in the text and upgrades them with a systematic, rapid and local search. di mo can be used for the same number of sequences that is used for identifying motifs or on larger databases. di mo uses intuitive AUC under ROC curve as a measure of discrimination by a motif and improves it using a strategy based on the logic of perceptron learning. With the use of di mo statistically significant improvements in a ucs were achieved on a large test set of 87 TFs motifs. The motifs generated using multiple software, on sequences from chips eq and chip chip experiments on human K562 cell lines, drosophila and yeast, were improved. In addition, applicability of di mo in generating more complete motifs by optimizing width of motifs is also suggested. In addition to this, di mo is fast and converges in median of nine epochs when seed motifs were optimized with same motif lengths.
