Motivation: The goal of large scale metabolite profiling is to compare the relative concentrations of as many metabolites extracted from biological samples as possible. This is typically accomplished by measuring the abundances of thousands of ions with high resolution and high mass accuracy mass spectrometers. Although the data from these instruments provide a comprehensive fingerprint of each sample, identifying the structures of the thousands of detected ions is still challenging and time intensive. An alternative, less comprehensive approach is to use triple quadrupole (QqQ) mass spec-trometry to analyze predetermined sets of metabolites (typically fewer than several hundred). This is done using authentic standards to develop QqQ experiments that specifically detect only the targeted metabolites, with the advantage that the need for ion identification after profiling is eliminated. Results: Here, we propose a framework to extend the application of QqQ mass spectrometers to large scale metabolite profiling. We aim to provide a foundation for designing QqQ multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) experiments for each of the 82 696 metabolites in the met lin metabolite database. First, we identify common fragmentation products from the experimental fragmentation data in met lin. Then, we model the likelihoods of each precursor structure in met lin producing each common fragmentation product. With these likelihood estimates, we select ensembles of common fragmentation products that minimize our uncertainty about metabolite identities. We demonstrate encouraging performance and, based on our results, we suggest how our method can be integrated with future work to develop large scale MRM experiments. Availability and implementation: Our predictions, Supplementary results, and the code for estimating likelihoods and selecting ensembles of fragmentation reactions are made available on the lab website at http://pattilab.wustl.edu/FragPred.

introduction large scale metabolite profiling aims to compare the relative concentrations of as many metabolites as possible between two or more groups of biological samples (). This is generally done using high resolution high mass accuracy quadrupole time of flight qt of or orbit rap mass spectrometers to measure abundances of thousands of ions. The rate limiting step when using these instruments is establishing metabolite identifications. Obtaining fragmentation data are often necessary for metabolite identification, but there are challenges with both acquiring a breadth of high quality fragmentation data on targeted precursor ions, and with identifying structures given the resulting fragmentation data. As such, very few of the thousands of ions detected in large scale metabolite profiling experiments are structurally identified. Several frameworks exist for using fragmentation data collected with qt of or orbit rap instruments to structurally identify detected ions. The most robust approach is to match the fragmentation spectrum of a research sample to the fragmentation spectrum of an authentic standard. This can be done in cases where an experimental spectrum matches a reference spectrum in a database (), or when the correct reference spectrum can be generated in the lab. When there is no matching reference spectrum, computational methods can be applied to prioritize the structures most likely to have generated the experimental fragmentation spectrum. These methods fall into two categories: those that first precompute a spectrum for every structure in a database and then match the experimental spectrum against the in silico generated spectra (), and those that predict the structural features that likely generated the observed spectrum, and then prioritize putatively matched database structures on the basis of structural similarity (). An alternate, widely used approach for metabolite profiling relies on triple quadrupole (QqQ) mass spectrometers. Metabolite profiling with QqQ mass spectrometers is accomplished by performing targeted analysis on a relatively small number of compounds. This can be employed in a discovery context to assay whether the concentration of a targeted list of metabolites changes between biological samples. Although qqq based metabolite profiling provides information about only a limited number of compounds, a major advantage of this approach is that metabolite identifications can be made efficiently once QqQ methods are established. To design a QqQ method, researchers generally purchase commercial standards and use them to identify precursor to product ion transitions that can be readily measured by using the QqQ in either multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) () or fragmentation product scanning () mode. The objective is to identify combinations of precursor fragment pairs that are specific to the metabolite being profiled, although the specificity is often not assessed explicitly. To date, qqq based methods have not been applied to profile more than several hundred metabolites. Here, we explore the possibility of extending the use of qqq based experiments to analyze the portion of the thousands of detected ions that match a precursor mass in the met lin metabolite database. First, we identify common fragmentation products from the experimental data in met lin. Then, we model the likelihoods of each precursor structure in met lin producing each common fragmentation product. With these likelihood estimates, we select ensembles of common fragmentation products that minimize our uncertainty about metabolite identities. On the basis of these results, we suggest how our method can be integrated with future work to develop large scale MRM experiments ().
