Motivation: The discovery of novel gene fusions can lead to a better comprehension of cancer progression and development. The emergence of deep sequencing of tran crip to me known as rnase q has opened many opportunities for the identification of this class of gen-omic alterations, leading to the discovery of novel chimeric transcripts in melanomas, breast cancers and lymphomas. Nowadays, few computational approaches have been developed for the detection of chi-meric transcripts. Although all of these computational methods show good sensitivity, much work remains to reduce the huge number of false positive calls that arises from this analysis. Results: We proposed a novel computational framework, named chimEric tranScript detection algorithm eric script for the identification of gene fusion products in paired end rnase q data. Our simulation study on synthetic data demonstrates that eric script enables to achieve higher sensitivity and specificity than existing methods with noticeably lower running times. We also applied our method to publicly available rnase q tumour datasets, and we showed its capability in rediscovering known gene fusions. Availability: The eric script package is freely available under GPL v3 license at http://ericscript.sourceforge.net.

introduction the identification of genomic rearrangements in cancer research plays a main role to investigate causes and development of the disease. Gene fusions are common alterations in which two genes are fused, leading to the production of a chimeric transcript that may have a new or altered activity. Gene fusions are well known mechanisms for oncogene activation in leukaemias, lymphomas and sarcomas (), but recent studies found novel chimeric transcripts also in common epithelial cancers, such as prostate cancers () and non small cell lung cancer (). The past few years have seen the emergence of several high throughput sequencing platforms that enable to sequence hundreds of millions of short sequences (reads) simultaneously and have routinely being applied to genome, epi genome and transcriptome studies. The sequencing of tran crip to me (), known as rnase q has been widely used for the study of abundance estimation (), RNA editing (), identification of novel transcripts () and splicing variants detection ().proposed a new methodology to comprehensively catalogue functional gene fusions in cancer by using paired end (PE) transcriptome sequencing data. The basic idea behind their approach was the identification of paired reads mapping against different genes (discordant alignments). Following this original approach, several studies for the detection of gene fusions have been carried out found no nets gene fusions in human prostate cancer identified 11 novel melanoma gene fusions produced by underlying genomic rearrangements and 12 novel read through transcripts detected 24 novel and 3 previously known fusion genes in breast cancer cells and found highly expressed gene fusion involving the major histocompatibility complex class II transactivator CIITA in KM-H2 cells. At present, several computational approaches have been developed for the detection of chimeric transcripts in rnase q data. fusion seq () identifies gene fusions by means of a two step analysis, identification of potential fusions based on PE mapping and the application of a sophisticated filtration cascade to filter out analysis artifacts. DeFuse () is a software package that uses clusters of discordant paired end alignments to perform a split read alignment analysis for finding fusion boundaries. chimeras can () is a tool that implements the original computational methodology followed by. fusion map is able to search for gene fusion products in both single end and paired end sequencing by using 'seed reads' (). top hat fusion implements several changes to the top hat aligner, all designed to enable the discovery of fusion transcripts (). short fuse () detects chimeric transcripts rnase q data by using both *To whom correspondence should be addressed. unique and ambiguously mapping read pairs. Although all of these computational methods show good sensitivity in discovering chimeric transcript events, much work remains to reduce the huge number of false positive results that arises from this kind of analysis. Here, we present a novel computational method, named eric script (chimERIC tranSCRIPT detection algorithm), for the detection of chimeric transcripts in PE rnase q data. The novelty of our approach consists in an efficient recalibration process of the exon junction reference that enables to increase sensitivity and specificity and to reduce running times. Moreover, we introduce a set of scores that enable to distinguish with high precision between true chimeric transcripts and false positive events and reduce the large amount of calls generated from data analyses. To evaluate the performance of eric script we generated synthetic datasets of different read length simulating different levels of coverage, and we compared it with other four state of the art algorithms. The synthetic datasets were also used to train an adaptive boosting (AdaBoost) classifier to rank analysis results. We implemented the procedure that we used to simulate gene fusions in the eric script package. Our simulation study demonstrates that eric script enables to achieve higher sensitivity and specificity than existing methods with noticeably lower running times. We also applied our method to publicly available PE rnase q tumour dataset, and we showed its capability in rediscovering known gene fusions.
