Motivation: Discovering useful associations between biomedical concepts has been one of the main goals in biomedical text mining and understanding their biomedical contexts is crucial in the discovery process. Hence, we need a text mining system that helps users explore various types of (possibly hidden) associations in an easy and comprehensible manner. Results: This article describes fact a a real time text mining system for finding and visualizing indirect associations between biomedical concepts from MEDLINE abstracts. The system can be used as a text search engine like PubMed with additional features to help users discover and visualize indirect associations between important biomedical concepts such as genes, diseases and chemical compounds. fact a inherits all functionality from its predecessor, fact a and extends it by incorporating three new features: (i) detecting biomolecular events in text using a machine learning model, (ii) discovering hidden associations using co occurrence statistics between concepts, and (iii) visualizing associations to improve the interpretability of the output. To the best of our knowledge, fact a is the first real time web application that offers the functionality of finding concepts involving biomolecular events and visualizing indirect associations of concepts with both their categories and importance. Availability: fact a is available as a web application at http://refine1-nactem.mc.man.ac.uk/facta/, and its visualizer is available at http://refine1-nactem.mc.man.ac.uk/facta-visualizer/.

introduction text search engines such as PubMed are crucial in everyday research activities in biomedical sciences as a significant fraction of biomedical knowledge is still accessible only in textual form. We have previously developed fact a a text mining system designed to help researchers find direct associations between biomedical concepts in an interactive fashion (). It is capable of producing ranked lists of important biomedical concepts, e.g. genes, diseases and chemical compounds, which are considered relevant to the query according to their co occurrence statistics. The system has also been used as a search engine () to link biomolecular pathways to textual evidence. * To whom correspondence should be addressed this article describes three new classes of functionality that are introduced to extend and improve fact a. The first extension is the use of biomolecular events as semantic metadata used for search. Semantic metadata derived from text to index digital documents for retrieval purposes have been used in systems like SUISEKI (), iHOP (), chili bot (), go web (), h analyzer (), Semantic MEDLINE (), MEDIE (), ebi med () and klei o (). Automatic extraction of events has a broad range of applications in biology (), ranging from support for the creation and annotation of pathways () to automatic population or enrichment of databases. This novel event extension allows users to specify a concept which involves a biomolecular event. The second extension is to help users discover indirectly associated concepts. Discovering hidden, previously unknown and potentially useful associations between biomedical concepts such as diseases and chemical compounds from the literature is a longstanding goal in biomedical text mining (). The pioneering work of hypothesized the role of fish oil in clinical treatment of Raynaud's disease, combining different pieces of information from the literature, and the hypothesis was later confirmed with experimental evidence. Among various approaches to the automatic generation of such hypotheses (), we adopt a simple approach using two step associations. More specifically, we attempt to discover indirect associations by combining two known associations which are obtained from direct co occurrence statistics. In this work, we give a probabilistic interpretation to the strengths of the discovered indirect associations, which allows the system to rank them in the order of their expected amount of information. The third extension is visualization. The output format of fact a was a tabular format the associated concepts found by the system are categorized, ranked and presented in multiple columns. Although the tabular format may be useful enough in most cases, visualizing the output can help the user grasp the results more intuitively. The visualization component we have introduced in fact a uses a technique called tree mapping (), which enables the user to easily understand the relative importance of many different concepts. This article is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our machine learning approach to detecting biomolecular events in text. Section 3 presents our algorithm for discovering indirect page i112 i111i119

conclusion we have presented three extensions which have recently been introduced in fact a a text search engine for MEDLINE. First, we have proposed a joint learning approach to detecting biomolecular events described in text. The performance of detecting trigger words has been significantly improved by performing the task jointly with protein name recognition. Second, we have presented a method for detecting indirect associations. The associations are ranked by the level of novelty and reliability, which are estimated by combining the strengths of multiple known associations that are directly observable from co occurrence statistics in the literature. Third, we have implemented a novel visualization component which provides an intuitive overview of the discovered concepts and their associations. Each concept is represented with a coloured rectangle; the colour shows the category and the area indicates the importance. Each association is displayed with a link whose width indicates the importance. The three classes of functionality described in this article are implemented in fact a. The system accepts concept identifiers, arbitrary keywords and their boolean combinations as a query and immediately produces a ranked list (or its visualization) of concepts that are indirectly associated with the query. fact a is implemented in C++ and currently running on a single Linux server with 32 GB of memory. The service is available at http://refine1-nactem.mc.man.ac.uk/facta/, and the visualization i117 system is available at http://refine1-nactem.mc.man.ac.uk/factavisualizer/.
