Motivation: Identifying the cellular wiring that connects genomic perturbations to transcriptional changes in cancer is essential to gain a mechanistic understanding of disease initiation, progression and ultimately to predict drug response. We have developed a method called Tied Diffusion Through Interacting Events tie die that uses a network diffusion approach to connect genomic perturbations to gene expression changes characteristic of cancer subtypes. The method computes a subnetwork of protein protein interactions, predicted transcription factor to target connections and curated interactions from literature that connects genomic and transcript omic perturbations. Results: Application of tie die to The Cancer Genome Atlas and a breast cancer cell line dataset identified key signaling pathways, with examples impinging on MYC activity. Interlinking genes are predicted to correspond to essential components of cancer signaling and may provide a mechanistic explanation of tumor character and suggest subtype specific drug targets.

introduction to optimize cancer treatment, whole genome sequencing and expression data for an individual patient must be synthesized into a coherent explanation of disease causing changes. Gene networks encapsulate our understanding of how genes and their products interact in the cell to mutually influence activity through protein protein protein dna and coupled metabolic reactions. However, different tumors usually harbor unique combinations of mutations, or other genomic or epi genomic changes. A key question is how best to infer the structures of gene networks important for normal and diseased phenotypes using high throughput data and a priori biological knowledge. Viewing cancer from a gene network perspective is expected to enhance our understanding of disease initiation, progression and therapy. Given genes with functions disrupted in a particular type of cancer, newly implicated genes can be identified by searching for those with known regulatory connections to the input set. However, this task is complicated by the presence of many mutations whose functional significance in cancer is unclear, leading to many false positive discoveries. For example, using data on copy number alterations, gene mutations and methylation status, it may be difficult to distinguish the genomic changes that exert a physiologically meaningful influence on tumor biology from numerous passenger events that result from loss of genome integrity. One can identify subnetworks that interconnect mutated genes, enriching the set of events for those proteins participating in common pathways. The assumption underlying this approach is that such mutations are more likely to be functionally relevant. Approaches such as MEMo () and d end rix () have been applied successfully in this manner. Several subnetwork enrichment methods have been developed to identify regions of a network that contain an unexpectedly high number of relevant genes (see Supplementary Methods for an overview). Importantly, most methods suffer from the influence of curation bias in the network. The 'hub' genes that have many connections simply because of being studied to a greater extent in the literature are selected at high frequency even given random input genes. One promising class of approaches that helps mitigate this problem is the class based on heat diffusion, such as the hot net algorithm (). Intuitively, a diffusion strategy makes the a priori relevance of a hub comparable with a sparsely connected gene because hubs might receive more total heat than a non hub but the hub can also lose the same proportion out of its many connections. The Tied Diffusion of Interacting Events tie die method described here extends on the heat diffusion strategies by leveraging different types of genomic inputs to find relevant genes on a background network with high specificity, in an attempt to reduce the false positive rate of previous approaches shows a simple schematic of tie die applied to two distinct sets *To whom correspondence should be addressed. of genes: a source set (e.g. mutated genes) and a target set [e.g. transcription factors (. Using two diffusion processes, the method discovers newly implicated genes as linking nodes residing on paths connecting sources to targets where the diffusion processes overlap. A logically consistent solution can then be extracted from the resulting network of sources, targets and linkers (Supplementary). We demonstrate that using two diffusion processes improves our ability to recover pathway models. The overlay of genomic perturbations in a single tumor sample with tie die solutions reveals patient specific networks that may provide insights into therapy.

discussion we describe a new tied diffusion method, tie die that is able to integrate transcriptional and genomic perturbation data with biological pathway models yielding subnetworks that connect the two distinct data sources. We demonstrate the ability of tie die to generate better precision than single source diffusion methods in recovering both genes and paths across a wide range of recall, with both a simulated toy example and patient data. Current limitations of the method are described in the Supplementary Methods section. Because many TFs are not conventionally regarded as being drug gable approaches such as tie die that pinpoint influences upstream of these factors but still in neighborhoods proximal to key driving mutations may provide key starting points for identifying new drug targets. A unique set of genes may be essential for a specific tumor to thrive in its transformed environment the so called synthetic lethal partners to those genes mutated in the tumor. Essential genes would be less likely to appear among a list of 'cancer drivers' based on frequently mutated genes because negative selection would eliminate alterations to essential genes. Thus, methods like tie die can aid in finding these important genes to potentially inhibit their activity, which can be tested with specific inhibitors. In support of these observations, we found that the tie die solutions enrich for genes that are more sensitive to small interfering RNA targeting in cell lines (Supplementary Results; Supplementary). Thus, tie die might be used to provide a scaffold for simulation of the effects of gene knockouts or drug treatments, potentially improving both computational costs and pathway specificity, when compared with a simulation performed on the entire starting network. The method can be used to characterize individual tumor samples, which may display unique changes in pathway logic that do not conform to the canonical clinical subtypes. In such cases, tumor heterogeneity and tumor evolution may produce a mixture of subtypes. The challenge is to identify which pathways are significantly impacted in complex primary tumors and metastases, and how we can leverage such information to specifically target therapy for a particular patient. Using data from the TCGA breast cancer cohort, we identified a core signaling pathway that recapitulates several known aspects of the biology distinguishing the major basal and luminal A subtypes that was highly concordant with models derived from breast cancer cell lines. In addition, the non-overlapping regions of these pathways lie in areas where we expect to find differences such as tumor metabolism. One exciting possibility would be to compare a patient specific network with a previously recorded set of networks derived from a bank of stable cell lines grown under different conditions. Exploring therapeutic options for that patient would then involve searching the library of cell lines and growth conditions for those that maximally match the patient's network. tie die holds promise for uncovering pathways relating genomic perturbations to downstream transcriptional changes. Higher precision over single diffusion was obtained both in simulations and in human tumor sample datasets where a large set of genes involved in oncogenesis are known. Even though we chose breast cancer as a test case, the approach can be applied to a wide variety of datasets for both basic molecular biology applications and human disease applications outside of cancer. Funding: NIH LINCS Consortium grant http://www.lincsproject.org/) to P.K.S.; National Cancer Institute TCGA grant to J.M.S. and D.H.; National Science Foundation CAREER award to J.M.S. Conflict of Interest: none declared.. Luminal A sample TCGA-BH-A0BR specific network reveals basal like molecular behavior. The network connects genomic perturbations in the sample, red or blue rings around nodes, to transcriptional changes in the same sample, inner node coloring. Red and blue colors indicate higher and lower cohort mutation rates in luminal A samples as compared with basal, outer ring; overall cohort differential expression of luminal A compared with basal samples, second ring; individual sample expression, inner circle. Transcriptional interactions, solid lines; posttranscriptional interactions, dashed. Activating interactions, arrow at the target node; inactivating, flat bars
