Motivation: Electronic medical records, nowadays routinely collected in many developed countries , open a new avenue for medical knowledge acquisition. In this article, this vast amount of information is used to develop a novel model for hospital admission type prediction. Results: I introduce a novel model for hospital admission type prediction based on the representation of a patients medical history in the form of a binary history vector. This representation is motivated using empirical evidence from previous work and validated using a large data corpus of medical records from a local hospital. The proposed model allows exploration, visualization and patient specific prognosis making in an intuitive and readily understood manner. Its power is demonstrated using a large, real world data corpus collected by a local hospital on which it is shown to outperform previous state of the art in the literature, achieving over 82% accuracy in the prediction of the first future diagnosis. The model was vastly superior for long term prognosis as well, outper-forming previous work in 82% of the cases, while producing comparable performance in the remaining 18% of the cases. Availability and implementation: Full Matlab source code is freely available for download at: http:// ognjenarandjelovict15org data d pro gzip
introduction public healthcare is an issue of major global significance and concern. On the one end of the spectrum, the developing world is still plagued by 'diseases of poverty' which are nearly non-existent in the most technologically developed countries; on the other end, the health risk profile of industrially leading nations has dramatically changed in recent history with an increased skew toward so called 'diseases of affluence'. Healthcare management poses challenges both in the sphere of policy making and scientific research. Considering the complexity of problems at hand, it is unsurprising that there is an ever increasing effort invested in a diverse range of promising avenues. Yet, the available resources are inherently limited. To ensure their best usage, it is crucial both to develop an understanding of the related epidemiology, as well as to be able to communicate this knowledge effectively to those who can benefit from it: governments, the medical research community, healthcare practitioners and patients (). The associations between diseases and a wide variety of risk factors are underlain by a complex web of interactions. This is particularly the case for the modern diseases of the developed world. The key premise of this work is that to facilitate the understanding of this complexity and the discovery of meaningful patterns within it, it is crucial to make use of the vast amounts of data routinely collected by healthcare services in industrially and technologically developed countries. Herein, the specific aim is to develop a framework which allows a health practitioner (e.g. a doctor or a clinician) to understand the available patient information in an intuitive yet powerful fashion. Such a framework would, on the one end of the utility spectrum, facilitate a deepening of disease understanding and, on the other, provide the practitioner with a tool which can be used to incentivize the patient at risk to make the required lifestyle changes.
