Motivation: The computational evaluation of candidate genes for hereditary disorders is a non-trivial task. Several excellent methods for disease gene prediction have been developed in the past 2 decades, exploiting widely differing data sources to infer disease relevant functional relationships between candidate genes and disorders. We have shown recently that spatially mapped, i.e. 3D, gene expression data from the mouse brain can be successfully used to prioritize candidate genes for human Mendelian disorders of the central nervous system. Results: We improved our previous work 2-fold: (i) we demonstrate that condition independent transcription factor binding affinities of the candidate genes promoters are relevant for disease gene prediction and can be integrated with our previous approach to significantly enhance its predictive power; and (ii) we define a novel similarity measure termed Relative Intensity overlap for both 3D gene expression patterns and binding affinity profiles that better exploits their disease relevant information content. Finally, we present novel disease gene predictions for eight loci associated with different syndromes of unknown molecular basis that are characterized by mental retardation. Contact: rpi rod kfz de or

introduction although experimental methodologies for the identification of disease causing mutations have significantly improved in particular by the recently introduced next generation sequencing techniques computational approaches to an in silico evaluation of candidate genes remain an important aid for the identification of genes involved in human hereditary disorders (). A large variety of computational methods have been developed for this purpose, exploiting various data sources ranging from MEDLINE abstracts, functional gene annotation, protein protein interactions and high throughput gene expression data to intrinsic gene or protein properties (such as coding sequence length, number of introns, conservation and so forth). For more information on available disease gene prediction tools and methods, we refer to some recent reviews (). To a large extent, cellular homeostasis depends on coordinated gene expression, both in space and time. Gene expression determines where and when the molecular function of a gene product is exerted. For this reason, gene expression patterns have been successfully exploited by several computational disease gene prediction methods (). In our previous work (), we have shown that the high resolution 3D gene expression patterns provided by the Allen Institute's Mouse Brain Atlas (MBA) () can be used to successfully prioritize not only candidate genes for mouse phenotypes but also for human Mendelian disorders of the central nervous system (CNS). Briefly, we prioritized the candidate genes from a mapped 'orphan' locus of a disease phenotype with unknown molecular basis by comparing their 3D gene expression patterns to those of a set of 'reference genes', known to be involved in similar disease phenotypes. The condition and sample dependency of gene expression profiles constitutes a desired feature for the prediction of functional relationships between genes. A complementary view, and hence additional clues to gene functions, may instead be provided by condition independent regulatory information, obtained from promoter analysis (). Classically, position frequency matrices pf ms or their associated position weight matrices pwm s that describe transcription factor (TF) binding sites are used to scan promoters for short, often degenerate, regulatory elements. In many cases, genome wide PWM scans require stringent criteria to limit the false discovery rate and to yield an acceptable specificity. This can lead to reduced sensitivity and likely misses low affinity binding sites (, which have been shown to be abundant and functional in vivo (). An alternative approach builds on the notion of an overall likelihood that a promoter is bound by a given TF, without requiring the identification of one or more well defined regulatory elements (), thus better reflecting the thermodynamic nature of TF binding (). For this purpose, a total binding affinity (TBA) for the TF's PFM can be calculated over the entire promoter, taking into account the collective contribution of (potential) high and low affinity binding sites, without strictly drawing a line between binding and non-binding sites. In a recent study, we showed TBA to be predictive of tf binding events, as revealed by chip chip and chips eq experiments (). Here, we introduce the notion of TF binding co affinity of a pair of genes that we compute from the genes' TBA profiles composed of their binding affinities for a core set of TFs. We show that these co affinities can decipher the disease relevance of candidate genes for human hereditary disorders and further improve the predictive power by developing a new similarity measure termed Relative Intensity Overlap (RIO). We combine this approach with the prioritization based on spatially mapped, i.e. 3D, gene expression, applying it to several disorders of unknown molecular basis characterized by mental retardation (MR).

discussion regulatory information from PWM scans has previously been used as an additional information source in a number of candidate gene prioritization methods (). However, because of the stringent criteria that are often necessary to decide whether a specific DNA segment is a binding site, leading to reduced sensitivity and a likely disregard of possibly functional low affinity binding sites (), it is unlikely that information from PWM scans alone would be suitable for disease gene discovery. Likewise, the benefit of more comprehensive TBA profiles is not immediately clear and has previously not been explored on a large scale. Although gene function can often be inferred from primary coding sequences, deciphering functional properties exclusively from non-coding sequences is much more difficult carroll mutations in coding exons only the transcription factor ETV5, but no abnormalities were found (). Interestingly, we found ETV5 as the second best candidate. However, although it is in principle possible that mutations affecting its regulatory regions may be responsible for the phenotype, this seems unlikely on the basis of the available functional information. Indeed, ETV5 loss of function has been shown to affect the maintenance of spermatogonia l stem cells () and kidney development (), whereas ETV5 overexpression has been linked to ovarian cancer (). The only top 10 candidate that has been linked to an mr related disorder is MCCC1, mutations of which are known to be responsible for 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase 1 deficiency (), which is characterized by multiple clinical features, one of which can be MR (). Alopecia, however, is generally not a feature of the disease, although a possible association has been reported in a single case (). However, as a particular strength of the predictive method that we present here is an extrapolation of functional relationships from reference genes to candidate genes that relying on gene expression and sequence information alone do not require any known functional annotation, less obvious candidates could nonetheless be associated with the disorder. The first candidate, CLCN2, encodes a voltage gated chloride channel, previously implicated in idiopathic generalized epilepsies (). DCUN1D1, ranking third, is another interesting candidate because a polymorphism has been identified as a risk factor in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (). Also DVL3, ranking forth, is of particular interest because the protein it encodes interacts with Shank, which is involved in several neuronal disorders including MR ().Best candidates for orphan loci from OMIM associated with autosomal and x linked MR phenotypes. Gene map loci are as reported by OMIM, but whenever possible more accurate chromosomal locations were taken (Supplementary Information and Supplementary). The number of evaluated candidate genes is reported along with the 10 best ranking candidate genes. For larger loci with 4100 candidates), the top 20 candidates are listed. Known or potential MR genes are highlighted in bold. For associated disorders and references, see Supplementary Information (Supplementary). For complete prioritized candidate lists, see Supplementary Information (Supplementary Tables S6S13). a genes known to be involved in other neurological disorders. b genes known to be involved in mr related syndromes. c genes potentially involved in other neurological disorders.
