Motivation: Genotype imputation methods are used to enhance the resolution of genome wide association studies, and thus increase the detection rate for genetic signals. Although most studies report all univariate summary statistics, many of them limit the access to subject level genotypes. Because such an access is required by all genotype imputation methods, it is helpful to develop methods that impute summary statistics without going through the interim step of imputing genotypes. Even when subject level genotypes are available, due to the substantial computational cost of the typical genotype imputation, there is a need for faster imputation methods. Results: Direct Imputation of summary STatistics (DIST) imputes the summary statistics of untyped variants without first imputing their subject level genotypes. This is achieved by (i) using the conditional expectation formula for multivariate normal variates and (ii) using the correlation structure from a relevant reference population. When compared with genotype imputation methods, DIST (i) requires only a fraction of their computational resources, (ii) has comparable imputation accuracy for independent subjects and (iii) is readily applicable to the imputation of association statistics coming from large pedigree data. Thus, the proposed application is useful for a fast imputation of summary results for (i) studies of unrelated subjects, which (a) do not provide subject level genotypes or (b) have a large size and (ii) family association studies. Availability and implementation: Pre-compiled executables built under commonly used operating systems are publicly available at

introduction genome wide association studies gw ass have been successful in detecting associations between genetic variants and complex diseases (). However, gw ass genotype only a fraction of the tens of millions of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) found in the human genome. To increase resolution, and thus the detection rate for genetic signals, researchers proposed imputing genotypes at numerous untyped (unmeasured) SNPs (). Most commonly used genotype imputation tools, e.g. IMPUTE2 (), MACH (), bimba m () and BEAGLE (), are based on Hidden Markov Models (HMMs). Although these methods are accurate, due to their need for haplo typic phasing of all subjects in the study, they are extremely burdensome computationally. Their computational burden would become even more extreme with the ever increasing size of studies and reference panels. Other genotype imputation methods [PLINK (), sn pm stat (), un phased () and TUNA ()] are based on multinomial models (MMs) of haplotype frequencies instead of HMM. These methods are simpler and faster, but their imputation accuracy is generally lower than the accuracy of hmm based methods (). Recently, researchers proposed a new mm based imputation method, called BLIMP, which imputes genotypes allele frequencies for unmeasured SNPs by using the conditional expectation formula for multivariate normal variates (). Regardless of their model usage, all these imputation tools require a two stage procedure that (i) imputes subject level genotypes at the unmeasured SNPs on the basis of genotypes at measured SNPs and a relevant reference population [e.g. 1000 Genomes (1KG) (and (ii) tests for association between imputed genotypes and phenotype of interest. However, this procedure requires access to subject level genotypes, which are often unavailable. To directly impute summary statistics while (i) substantially reducing the computational burden and (ii) retaining imputation accuracy, we propose Direct Imputation of summary STatistics (DIST). DIST avoids the imputation of subject level genotypes by directly applying, to unmeasured SNP statistics, the classical conditional expectation formula for multivariate normal variates.
