Motivation: Identification of every single genome present in a microbial sample is an important and challenging task with crucial applications. It is challenging because there are typically millions of cells in a microbial sample, the vast majority of which elude cultivation. The most accurate method to date is exhaustive single cell sequencing using multiple displacement amplification, which is simply intractable for a large number of cells. However, there is hope for breaking this barrier, as the number of different cell types with distinct genome sequences is usually much smaller than the number of cells. Results: Here, we present a novel divide and conquer method to sequence and de novo assemble all distinct genomes present in a microbial sample with a sequencing cost and computational complexity proportional to the number of genome types, rather than the number of cells. The method is implemented in a tool called squee z ambler. We evaluated squee z ambler on simulated data. The proposed divide and conquer method successfully reduces the cost of sequencing in comparison with the nave nave exhaustive approach. Availability: squee z ambler and datasets are available at

introduction critical applications, including the Human microbio me Project (), bio threat detection and combating antibiotic resistant pathogens, necessitate identification of all distinct genome sequences in a bacterial sample. When prior knowledge is available about which organisms may be present in the sample, flow cytometry and 16S rRNA gene sequencing may be used. However, meta genomics is usually used for analyzing the genomics of relatively abundant microbes when no prior knowledge is given. meta genomics consists the study of the variation of species in a complex microbial sample. Because the vast majority of environmental bacteria elude cultivation, meta genomics investigates microbial communities by sequencing sampled genome fragments without the need for culturing. Such a heterogeneous pool of sequencing reads can also be assembled to yield a superposition of highly abundant genomes in the sample (). There are two problems with meta genomics (i) the resulting assembly contains multiple genomes superimposed, and (ii) only highly abundant genomes survive the sampling process. Advances in DNA amplification technology have enabled whole genome sequencing directly from individual cells without requiring growth in culture. single cell sequencing methods have enabled investigation of novel uncultured microbes (). These culture independent single cell studies are a powerful alternative to meta genomics studies. Genomic sequencing from single bacterial genomes was first demonstrated with cells isolated by flow cytometry (), using multiple displacement amplification (MDA) (). MDA is now the preferred method for whole genome amplification from single cells (). The first attempt to assemble a complete bacterial genome from one cell () further explored the challenges of assembly from amplified DNA, including amplification bias and chimeric DNA rearrangements. Amplification bias results in orders of magnitude difference in coverage () and absence of coverage in some regions. Chimera formation occurs during the DNA branching process by which the 29 DNA polymerase generates DNA amplification in MDA (). Subsequent studies continued to improve single cell assemblies (). A nearly full potential of single cell genome assembly has recently been realized by the work of followed by those of. Owing to recent progress in single cell DNA amplification techniques and de novo assembly algorithms, the genomes of all bacterial species in a sample can be captured one cell at a time. However, there are often millions of cells per sample, in which case the nave nave deep sequencing of every cell becomes prohibitively costly. Moreover, it is expected that deep sequencing of every cell is often not necessary, as the majority of biologically important samples are sparse in the sense that many cells are biological replicates. Compressed c and s and) and distilled (adaptive sampling and refinement) sensing methods () have been proposed in the past decade to exploit sparsity for reducing the cost of sensing and reconstructing signals in various spaces, ranging from Banach spaces to Boolean algebras (). Inspired by those advances, we give an *To whom correspondence should be addressed. algorithm in this article that exploits sample sparsity to reduce the cost of sequencing without compromising the accuracy of identification of all distinct genomes, even the ones that are minimally represented in the sample.

conclusion we presented an adaptive divide and conquer algorithm for distilled sequencing and de novo assembly of distinct genomes in a bacterial community, e.g. human gut microbio me. Samples derived from such communities are often sparse in the sense that the number of distinct genomes is much less than the number of cells. Our algorithm exploits sparsity to decrease the amount of sequencing and the number of multiplexing barcodes needed for single cell sequencing and de novo assembly. We implemented our algorithm in a tool which we call squee z ambler and performed simulation experiments to demonstrate its power. Our results show that (i) the number of required barcodes with our divide and conquer algorithm is less than that required by the nave nave approach, and that (ii) the amount of sequencing needed remains the same or decreases. Owing to the computational intensity of the problem, only small examples with low sparsity were studied in this work. real world samples are much sparser ($1000 species in $10 14 cells) than the examples here ($5 species in $100 cells). Also, the parameters used to run our tool were chosen conservatively and without optimization. Therefore, we expect the improvement of our algorithm to be higher than what we reported in this article in real world situations. squee z ambler 1.0 identifies all distinct genomes in the sample, which are candidates for different strains species. Those cells that are identified as having distinct genomes need to be subsequently deeply sequenced and assembled to obtain a more detailed assembly. Funding: NIH RO1 DK089167, STTR R42GM087013 and NSF DBI-0965741 (to S.D.). Conflict of Interest: none declared.
