Motivation: diy abc is a software package for a comprehensive analysis of population history using approximate Bayesian computation on DNA polymorphism data. Version 2.0 implements a number of new features and analytical methods. It allows (i) the analysis of single nucleotide polymorphism data at large number of loci, apart from micro-satellite and DNA sequence data, (ii) efficient Bayesian model choice using linear discriminant analysis on summary statistics and (iii) the serial launching of multiple post-processing analyses. diy abc v2.0 also includes a user friendly graphical interface with various new options. It can be run on three operating systems: GNU/Linux, Microsoft Windows and Apple Os X. Availability: Freely available with a detailed notice document and example projects to academic users at

introduction one prospect of current biology is that molecular data will help us to reveal the complex demographic processes that have acted on natural populations. The extensive availability of various molecular markers and increased computer power has promoted the development of inferential methods. Among these novel methods, approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) method () is increasingly used to make inferences from large datasets for complex models in various research fields, including population and evolutionary biology. General statistical features, practical aspects and applications of ABC in evolutionary biology have been reviewed in three recent papers (). Briefly, ABC constitutes a recent approach to carrying out model based inference in a Bayesian setting in which model likelihoods are difficult to calculate (due to the complexity of the models considered) and must be estimated by massive simulations. In ABC, the posterior probabilities of different models and or the posterior distributions of the demographic parameters under a given model are determined by measuring the similarity between the observed dataset (i.e. the target) and a large number of simulated datasets; all raw datasets (i.e. multilocus genotypes or individual sequences) are summarized by statistics, such as mean number of alleles or F st. Several ABC programs have been proposed to provide solutions to non specialist biologists (; see also Supplementary Appendix S1).) developed the (coalescent based) software diy abc in which a user friendly interface helps non expert users to perform historical inferences using ABC. diy abc allows considering complex population histories including any combination of population divergence events, admixture events and changes in past population size (with population samples potentially collected at different times). diy abc can be used to compare competing evolutionary scenarios and quantify their relative support and estimate parameters for one or more scenarios. Eventually, it provides a way to evaluate the amount of confidence that can be put into the various estimations and to achieve model checking computation. In this article, we present diy abc v2.0, a completely rewritten version of the software diy abc (). Version 2.0 implements a number of new features and analytical methods allowing extensive analyses of large molecular datasets, including single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data.
