Motivation: Local motifs are patterns of DNA or protein sequences that occur within a sequence interval relative to a biologically defined anchor or landmark. Current protein motif discovery methods do not adequately consider such constraints to identify biologically significant motifs that are only weakly over-represented but spatially confined. Using negatives, i.e. sequences known to not contain a local motif, can further increase the specificity of their discovery. Results: This article introduces the method d local motif that makes use of positional information and negative data for local motif discovery in protein sequences. d local motif combines three scoring functions, measuring degrees of motif over-representation, entropy and spatial confinement, specifically designed to discriminative ly exploit the availability of negative data. The method is shown to outperform current methods that use only a subset of these motif characteristics. We apply the method to several biological datasets. The analysis of peroxisomal targeting signals uncovers several novel motifs that occur immediately upstream of the dominant peroxisomal targeting signal 1 signal. The analysis of proline tyrosine nuclear local-ization signals uncovers multiple novel motifs that overlap with C2H2 zinc finger domains. We also evaluate the method on classical nuclear localization signals and endoplasmic reticulum retention signals and find that d local motif successfully recovers biologically relevant sequence properties.

introduction local motifs are patterns in DNA or protein sequences that occur in a short sequence interval relative to a sequence anchor or landmark. For example, the peroxisomal targeting signal 1 (PTS1; defined by the consensus k rh occurs at the c terminus of many proteins that localize to the peroxisome. However, up to 12 residues found upstream of PTS1 are important for localization, but as of yet, no motif is known (). Another example is the proline tyrosine nuclear localization signal py nls that is recognized by a specific nuclear import factor Kap2 (). The py nls contains a highly conserved PY at the c terminus of the motif, but residues upstream of this motif are required for the interaction with Kap2. Additionally, proteins are retained in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) owing to the presence of the motif del local to the c terminus (Elrod). We aim to discover multiple local motifs that co occur with these anchors. Existing motif discovery methods typically aim to discover over-represented motifs in DNA and protein sequences (), but do not usually account for positional information and negative data. The few methods that do use sequence distance or position as a feature operate on DNA sequences () and are thus unsuitable for proteins. Discriminative motif finding methods distinguish functional motifs from randomly occurring sequence patterns by using functionally unrelated 'negative' sequences in which sought motifs are absent (or present owing to chance alone) (). To our knowledge, none of the available protein motif discovery methods make use of both types of information. Several local motif discovery methods are designed for inferring motifs that define gene regulatory networks (). recently developed local motif for discovering nucleotide motifs that occur in a short sequence interval relative to transcription start sites. They introduced a novel scoring function to determine the spatial confinement of a DNA motif. Using human promoter data, the authors demonstrated that their method outperformed several other tools such as Amadeus (), Trawler (), Weeder () and MEME () on discovering transcription factor binding motifs in ChIP data. The 'spatial confinement score' () does not adequately deal with sparse data. With few samples, the spatial confinement score is high at singular counts. To make matters worse, at low numbers of samples under observation, the method * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author(s) 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com for determining statistical significance is inaccurate (). local motif is therefore incapable of distinguishing between real and spurious, low count motifs. In this article, we develop a new method inspired by local motif () that works for the 20 symbol amino acid alphabet enabling protein motif discovery. It uses negative data enabling discriminative motif discovery, and statistically identifies local motifs at realistically low counts. Our new method d local motif discovers motifs in a set of protein sequences that are aligned relative to a defined landmark. We use three scoring functions, namely motif spatial confinement (MSC), motif over-representation (MOR) and motif relative entropy (MRE). To deal with spurious matches, we use pseudo counts for probabilities in the scoring functions. (Maximum a posteriori estimates tend to reasonable values when there is little data.) The scoring functions collectively establish whether a motif is enriched in a constrained sequence interval in the positive dataset relative to the negative dataset. To uncover only significant, spatially confined motifs, p values are determined by a (corrected) binomial test of motif location within matched sequences. We believe that d local motif is the only tool for discovering local motifs in protein sequences. We expect that several methods, including Trawler and Amadeus, could be reworked to operate on proteins, but the efficiency and accuracy are yet unknown. We use synthetic datasets to characterize the accuracy of our method and to compare it with alternative methods. The results indicate that d local motif has superior accuracy on protein sequences largely because of its ability to use positional information and negative data. In addition, d local motif finds the most favourable position of each discovery. We apply our method to several biological datasets and uncover novel motifs that co occur with a variety of protein localization signals.

conclusion in this article, we address the motif discovery problem when motifs are only weakly enriched overall, but biological expertise suggests that they are confined to an approximate, but defined position. For example, structural constraints of protein conformation make fragments distant in sequence come together in space. d local motif discovers such 'local motifs' in a set of protein sequences that are aligned to a predefined anchor, and their appearance is linked to their position within the alignment. Unlike similar current methods, d local motif is specifically designed for proteins, and to solve problems where negative data are available. To evaluate the performance of the proposed method, we investigated a series of protein translocation problems where targeting signals are assisted by additional, often spatially related, but otherwise more subtle properties. To enable d local motif to adequately deal with sparse data, we re-designed the scoring functions of Narang et al. by introducing pseudo counts. We formulated three discriminative scoring features, MSC, MOR and MRE. These features establish whether a motif is positioned in a sequence interval in positive data and is generally absent in negative data. The new formulation gives a quantitative evaluation of a motif's relevance, considering its over-representation, relative entropy and spatial confinement. Importantly, our search strategy removed all motifs with non-significant spatial confinement p values determined using a robust binomial test of motif location. Although d local motif has many parameters that can be tuned, we have shown that default parameters settings are effective for discovering biologically significant motifs. To examine the performance of d local motif we planted random negative and decoy motifs in artificial datasets. The results underscored that d local motif is able to accurately discover the location of a planted motif's occurrence, independently of sequence length. The results also demonstrated that d local motif will outperform standard motif discovery algorithms, here represented by MEME (), de me () and nested mica () when motifs are spatially confined. It is important to note, however, that standard motif discovery algorithms are not expected to discover local motifs any better than non-local motifs, and their performance thus degrades with the increase in sequence length. On biological data with limited over-representation of motifs, d local motif discovered multiple local motifs. We present seven novel PTS1 local motifs, some of which appear to be species distinct. d local motif discovered three entirely novel py nls local motifs that overlap with C2H2 Zf domains, associated with nuclear trafficking. We believe these motifs may further our understanding of py nls mediated translocation. d local motif successfully recovered ER retention motifs and the bipartite NLS, despite the absence of negative data. Specifically in ER retention data, we found a motif consisting of acidic residues that occurs immediately upstream the classical ER retention signal. Literature indicates that the same motif may contribute to the efficiency of ER retention. With many motif discovery tools unable to deal with large motifs with variable linker regions, d local motif offers a compromise by detecting multiple smaller but spatially interlinked motifs. Conflict of Interest: none declared.
