d me as is the first user friendly tool dedicated to analyze the distribution of DNA methylation patterns for the quantification of epigenetic heterogeneity. It supports the analysis of both locus specific and genome wide bisulfite sequencing data. d me as progressively scans the mapping results of bisulfite sequencing reads to extract DNA methylation patterns for contiguous CpG dinucleotides. It determines the DNA methylation level and calculates methylation entropy for genomic segments to enable the quantitative assessment of DNA methylation variations observed in cell populations.

introduction dna methylation is a crucial epigenetic modification involved in many biological processes, from normal cellular differentiation to disease genesis and progression. Traditionally, DNA methylation analysis is limited to the determination and comparison of DNA methylation levels. A number of computational tools including bis ma q dmr BiQ Analyzer HT and cpg mps have been developed to analyze DNA methylation data derived from illumina bead chip or bisulfite sequence reads (). Recently, great interest has been aroused in decoding DNA methylation patterning to understand the generation of cell diversity. In addition to tracing the cell lineage (), DNA methylation patterns can be used as a measure of the epigenetic heterogeneity in cell populations (). In particular, with the emergence of next generation sequencing techniques, rapidly accumulating deep bisulfite sequencing data allow the securitization of DNA methylation patterns on genome wide scale. However, existing DNA methylation analysis tools mainly focus on the bisulfite sequencing data mapping and the comparison at DNA methylation level. No software has been developed to assess DNA methylation variations embedded in bisulfite sequencing data. Here, we present d me as a C# implementation of the algorithm for DNA methylation entropy calculation () as an interactive tool to evaluate the variation in DNA methylation patterns.

conclusion we have successfully developed d me as the first software to enable the analysis of DNA methylation pattern and the quantification of epigenetic heterogeneity. For bisulfite sequencing data, locus specific or genome wide d me as can automatically identify and determine the methylation levels and entropies for all possible 4-CpG segments. The visualization of DNA methylation pattern of each segment is implemented and the descriptive statistical summary on segments, including the distributions of methylation level and entropy, are provided. In addition, Pearson correlation was adopted to measure the correlation of the methylation levels and entropies across samples. We anticipate it will assist researchers to explore DNA methylation data in a new dimension. Funding: This work was supported by grants from the Natural Science Foundation of China. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. Conflict of Interest: none declared.
