Motivation: An important question that has emerged from the recent success of genome wide association studies g was is how to detect genetic signals beyond single markers genes in order to explore their combined effects on mediating complex diseases and traits. Integrative testing of g was association data with that from prior knowledge databases and proteome studies has recently gained attention. These methodologies may hold promise for comprehensively examining the interactions between genes underlying the pathogenesis of complex diseases. Methods: Here, we present a dense module searching (DMS) method to identify candidate subnetworks or genes for complex diseases by integrating the association signal from g was datasets into the human protein protein interaction (PPI) network. The DMS method extensively searches for subnetworks enriched with low p value genes in g was datasets. Compared with pathway based approaches, this method introduces flexibility in defining a gene set and can effectively utilize local PPI information. Results: We implemented the DMS method in an R package, which can also evaluate and graphically represent the results. We demonstrated DMS in two g was datasets for complex diseases, i.e. breast cancer and pancreatic cancer. For each disease, the DMS method successfully identified a set of significant modules and candidate genes, including some well studied genes not detected in the single marker analysis of GWA studies. Functional enrichment analysis and comparison with previously published methods showed that the genes we identified by DMS have higher association signal. Availability: dmg was package and documents are available at

introduction genome wide association studies g was have revealed hundreds of common variants conferring susceptibility to common diseases. According to the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) Catalog of Published genome wide Association Studies (), there have been 2898 SNPs reported in 596 publications (as of July 1, 2010, http://www.genome.gov/gwastudies/). Although the discovered single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) greatly expanded our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms of common diseases, only limited heritability has been explained, and it still remains unclear how these markers genes interact and confer a predisposition to disease. Depending on the underlying genetic structure of diseases, it is possible that many markers genes having low or moderate risk in and of themselves, interact to confer a significant combined effect. So far, g was data analysis has largely focused on single marker discovery. However, at the stringent genome wide significance level of P  5  10 8 , many markers that are truly but weakly associated with disease often fail to be detected. Novel statistical or computational methods to detect the combined effect of a set of genes may provide useful alternative approaches in g was. Recently, integrative analysis of g was data with other high throughput datasets has been shown to be effective in the examination of multiple variants' combined effect. One example is the application of gene set based methods to systematically examine gene sets, typically in the form of biological pathways or functional groups, using g was datasets. Representative examples include gene set enrichment analysis g sea adapted from the original microarray expression data analysis (), the SNP ratio test (O') and the hypergeometric test. These methods search for significantly enriched gene sets collected from predefined canonical pathways or functional annotations such as Gene Ontology (GO) terms. However, by sorting genes into classical pathways or functional categories, the results of these methods might be over limited to a priori knowledge (e.g. predefined gene sets) and, thus, make it difficult to identify a meaningful combination of genes (). Realizing this problem suggested that investigators group genes by cellular functions instead of classical pathways, assuming that genetic variation might converge on components acting across pathways. However, this strategy requires strong disease specific background knowledge, and still uses predefined gene sets. Another limitation is the incomplete annotation of pathways or GO annotations in the current knowledgebase. The protein protein interaction (PPI) network based approach may largely overcome these limitations because it allows flexibility in setting the components of a gene set. This approach has recently page 96 95102
