There have been numerous applications developed for decoding and visualization of ab1 DNA sequencing files for Windows and MAC platforms, yet none exists for the increasingly popular smartphone operating systems. The ability to decode sequen-cing files can not easily be carried out using browser accessed Web tools. To overcome this hurdle, we have developed a new native app called dna app that can decode and display ab1 sequencing file on Android and iOS. In addition to in built analysis tools such as reverse complementation, protein translation and searching for specific sequences, we have incorporated convenient functions that would facilitate the harnessing of online Web tools for a full range of analysis. Given the high usage of android ios tablets and smartphones, such bioinformatics apps would raise productivity and facilitate the high demand for analyzing sequencing data in biomedical research.

introduction restriction sites and tags; see for the Android graphical user interface (GUI) of. To aid users in further analysis, dna app is capable of generating all six possible translations of a DNA sequence to proteins. The copy and search functions are applicable for protein sequences. Should the user require storing the sequence data as a human readable text based document, the dna app allows the export of fast a format files. Because the analyzed sequence would be too long to fit within the device screen in a single line, we incorporated the use of fast and end scrolling icons for different speed scrolling. For longer reads, the app also adapts by auto rotation to landscape orientation. In the development of dna app the biggest challenge was the decoding of the sequencing ab1 file. Using the ab if (Applied bio system Inc. Format), the elements of data stored in the ab1 file include the trace data of the four signal channels corresponding to DNA bases adenine (A), guanine (G), thymine (T) and cytosine (C); the array of peak locations; the DNA sequence inferred by the base caller of the sequencing system; and the quality score array. dna app acquires each data item by looking up the desired entry in the file directory, figures out the starting offset, data size of each data element and number of elements the data item has and finally performs the reading. Chromatograms are shown by plotting the arrays of trace data of the four channels A, G, T and C using spline interpolation (). To generate the reverse complement chromatogram, inference was done by: trace b i  =trace b L  i  1   , in which b=fA; G; T; Cg, where b is the complement base of b, L is the sequence length, 0 i L-1. This feature assesses the confidence of reverse complement bases. For the segment searching feature, we used the knuth morris pratt algorithm () dna app is created for on the go visualization and quick analysis of ab1 files on mobile computing platforms. It has been built to facilitate integration with online Web tools (accessible through mobile browsers) for in depth analysis if needed. Examples of such analyses that can be performed are available in the app download pages and user guide. The Android version of the application is available in Google Play Store for Android version 4.4.2 onward and is compatible with both smart phones and tablet PCs at configurations as low as 1Ghz CPU and 512MB RAM. The iOS version is available in App Store for iOS 7 and above.
