Motivation: Genome studies have become cheaper and easier than ever before, due to the decreased costs of high throughput sequencing and the free availability of analysis software. However, the quality of genome or transcriptome assemblies can vary a lot. Therefore, quality assessment of assemblies and annotations are crucial aspects of genome analysis pipelines. Results: We developed DOGMA, a program for fast and easy quality assessment of transcriptome and proteome data based on conserved protein domains. DOGMA measures the completeness of a given transcriptome or proteome and provides information about domain content for further analysis. DOGMA provides a very fast way to do quality assessment within seconds. Availability and Implementation: DOGMA is implemented in Python and published under GNU GPL v.3 license. The source code is available on https://ebbgit.uni-muenster.de/domainWorld/ DOGMA/. Contacts:

introduction genomics and transcript omics have become key technologies in all branches of life sciences over the last years and the huge amount of resulting data calls for proper computational analysis methods. Though many improvements were made in automatized sequence assembly and genome annotation, both processes remain an extremely challenging task, and there are enormous differences in the quality of the resulting data (). These differences result mainly from problems that can occur during the various steps of an assembly and annotation pipeline. Reads can be of low quality, they may not be precisely mapped and or many small scaffolds might exist, making subsequent steps in the pipeline, such as gene annotation, more complicated. Even with high quality assemblies, gene annotation is a complex process and also with transcriptome data as supporting information, gene models can be wrong, incomplete or missing altogether from the annotation (). Therefore, quality assessment of the results is important and, accordingly, several methods to determine quality of reads, assemblies, transcriptome and proteome data have been developed. Read quality can be assessed using per base error rates or km er distributions (). For resulting genome or transcriptome assemblies, programs like ce gma () or BUSCO () have been developed. Both ce gma and BUSCO use a similar approach: a predefined set of genes, that are conserved over a specific clade, is compared to genes annotated in the genome or transcriptome to be analyzed. The measured gene completeness, the percentage of core genes found in the sample, is assumed to be representative for the whole gene set of the genome and is therefore used as a quality indicator. The ce gma scores of Ensembl genomes (), for example, are in the range of 46.77% vic ugn a paco s to 97.58% (Saccharomyces cerevisiae). The core set of ce gma is based on 'euKaryotic clusters of Orthologous Groups' k ogs resulting in a set of Core Eukaryotic Genes ce gs (). bus cos core gene set is based on orthologous genes from ortho db (). ce gma and BUSCO can be used for genome quality assessment, while for transcriptome s and proteomes only BUSCO can be used. The protein quality index (PQI) provides a list of quality scores for publicly available proteomes (). The quality score consists of different components, such as sequence length, domain content, percentage of undefined amino acids and others. Protein domains are independently evolving structural and functional building blocks of proteins (), known to be well conserved across tax a (). Usually, domains are represented as Hidden Markov Models (HMMs). As HMMs are more sensitive than other sequence search methods, protein domains can be identified in very diverged sequences with HMMs (). Because of the better detection of protein domains, they are a good candidate for quality assessment. Protein domains can occur together in the same protein and form in combination a domain arrangement, specified by their order in the amino acid sequence (). The domain content is considered in two different measures of the PQI. The first one is that the sample proteome is searched for SUPERFAMILY () domain arrangements that occur in the ce gs of ce gma. The second measure is a simple comparison of the number of different domains that occur in the sample proteome compared to the number of domains in the same clade. However, no program is provided and new proteomes can only be evaluated by sending a request to the providers of the PQI. The domain content is incorporated in the program introduced here as well. Domain arrangements have been successfully used in different contexts such as homology search () or orthology construction (). The advent of analyses using protein domains and their arrangements to study functional roles and evolutionary relationships of proteins and complete families demonstrates the utility of information about absence or presence of specific protein domains and their arrangements (e.g.). In this work we introduce DOGMA domain based General Measure for transcriptome and proteome quality Assessment), a program that facilitates the quick assessment of transcriptome and proteome quality. DOGMA scores a sample transcriptome or proteome regarding its completeness of conserved protein domains provided as percentage of a defined core set. Combined with a tool for fast domain annotation up roc (), DOGMA is able to rapidly perform quality assessments and provide information about missing domains and domain arrangements.

conclusion the results presented here show that DOGMA achieves similar completeness scores as existing programs, but is able to run much faster when it is used in combination with a fast domain annotation tool such as up roc. Furthermore, the use of protein domains represents a less biased approach because HMMs are more sensitive. Therefore, HMMs are still able to detect domains even if the primary sequence has gained a lot of mutations. When running DOGMA with up roc the order of domains can not be taken into account (opposing to using pfam scan for the annotation). However, the completeness scores produced with both methods do not differ much and, due to the huge running time advantage and the possibility to apply up roc directly to transcriptome s the usage of up roc is generally recommended. Another advantage compared to other quality assessment methods is that DOGMA offers straightforward additional information about missing protein domains in the dataset that could be used for functional analyses. In conclusion, DOGMA combined with pfam scan annotations should be preferred for functional analyses, because of the additional information about the order of domains in domain arrangements. up roc is recommended for quality assessments due to the extreme running time advantage at nearly the same quality. Finally, the results presented above show that the choice of an appropriate core set is important for the analysis. Both DOGMA and BUSCO provide different core sets. However, with the exception of an eukaryotic core set, the core sets are based on different clades. The test on the eukaryotic core set shows that the score is robust to slight changes in the core set as well as changes in the cd a size. Note that the tools compared here can not compete in every type of analysis, because they are partly designed for different tasks. DOGMA does not allow to analyze whole genomes like ce gma and BUSCO. On the other hand ce gma can not be used to analyze transcriptome or proteome assemblies which is possible with DOGMA or BUSCO. We did not compare our program to the PQI because a stand alone program is not available. However, we believe that our approach has several advantages over the domain metrics that are part of PQI. Presumably a simple comparison of the number of domains is not useful because domain types, selected arrangements for specific clades, and variation in frequency for particular domains are important. Since the comparison of domain arrangements for the PQI is based on ce gs it is limited to eukaryotes and thus to a relatively low number of domains. Moreover, there is no option to choose a more specific core set for the PQI and therefore differences regarding the domain content that might be of interest are lost. To conclude, DOGMA introduces a new efficient quality assessment, which is based on conserved protein domains and domain arrangements, that is qualitatively comparable to other methods, while DOGMA outperforms other programs on a great scale if combined with a fast annotation tool.
