Motivation: Many drug discovery projects fail because the underlying target is finally found to be un drug gable. Progress in structure elucidation of proteins now opens up a route to automatic structure based target assessment. dog site scorer is a newly developed automatic tool combining pocket prediction, characterization and drug g ability estimation and is now available through a web server. Availability: The dog site scorer web server is freely available for academic use at http://

introduction rating the attractiveness of a drug target is one of the major challenges in the early stages of drug discovery. Besides attr activity assessment based on medical rationale and commercial viability, the properties of the target and its ability to be modulated by small drug like compounds (further referred to as drug g ability have to be analyzed. Due to the large amount of available crystal structures, the automatic collection of target information gains importance. In a first step, binding pockets have to be detected on the protein surface. Some methods fulfilling this task are available through web services, e.g. q sitefinder cast p SCREEN, pocket depth meta pocket and f pocket (servers are referenced in). The next step on the path toward target classification or drug g ability prediction is the annotation and comparison of target specific pocket properties. Some servers exist that allow besides binding site prediction for their analysis and functional classification, e.g. find site (), split pocket (), f pop (), prob is () and site comp (). Many of these approaches search for structural similarities, which can help to predict side effects of known drugs or to identify the role of yet uncharacterized proteins. Although methods for fully automatic structure based drug g ability predictions such as SiteMap (), f pocket () and d lid () exist, none of these methods is available online for predictions on new targets. f pocket allocates a web service where drug g ability scores and information can be requested () but only for precalculated data points.

conclusion dog site scorer web server provides an easy to use interface to predict pockets and sub pockets of a protein structure of interest. Furthermore, key properties characterizing the pocket and drug g ability estimations are supplied.
