Motivation: Semantic role labeling (SRL) is a natural language processing (NLP) task that extracts a shallow meaning representation from free text sentences. Several efforts to create SRL systems for the biomedical domain have been made during the last few years. However, state of the art SRL relies on manually annotated training instances, which are rare and expensive to prepare. In this article, we address SRL for the biomedical domain as a domain adaptation problem to leverage existing SRL resources from the newswire domain. Results: We evaluate the performance of three recently proposed domain adaptation algorithms for SRL. Our results show that by using domain adaptation, the cost of developing an SRL system for the biomedical domain can be reduced significantly. Using domain adaptation, our system can achieve 97% of the performance with as little as 60 annotated target domain abstracts. Availability: Our bio kit system that performs SRL in the biomedical domain as described in this article is implemented in Python and C and operates under the Linux operating system. bio kit can be downloaded at http://nlp.comp.nus.edu.sg/software. The domain adaptation software is available for download at

introduction advances in biology and life sciences have led to an exponential growth in the amount of biomedical literature. Thus, automatic information retrieval (IR) and information extraction (IE) methods become more and more important to help researchers to keep track of the latest developments in their field. Current IR is still mostly limited to keyword search and unable to infer the relationship between two entities in a text. A system that is able to understand how words in a sentence are related could greatly increase the quality of IE and would allow IR to handle more complex user queries. Semantic role labeling (SRL) is a shallow semantic processing task that has become increasingly popular in the natural language processing (NLP) community over the last few years. The task is to * To whom correspondence should be addressed. identify all parts of a sentence that represent arguments for a given predicate and subsequently label each argument with a semantic role. Roughly speaking, SRL can be thought of as the task of finding the words that answer simple questions of the form Who did what to whom when and where? The input to the SRL system is a single sentence and a predicate in that sentence. The output is the same sentence, but with labeled semantic roles. Consider the following example: Input: Transcription factor GATA-3In this example, the semantic role Arg0 is the cause of stimulate and the semantic role Arg1 is the thing stimulated (see Section 2 for a detailed description of semantic roles). This information is most valuable for IE () and other tasks such as question answering and summarization. Traditionally, most work in SRL has focused on documents from the newswire domain. While SRL works well on test sentences from the same domain, the models show a sharp performance drop when they are tested on a different domain (). Although there have been a number of efforts to apply SRL to the biomedical domain in recent years, the development of state of the art SRL systems for the biomedical domain is hampered by the lack of large biomedical corpora that are labeled with semantic roles. The creation of such corpora is time consuming and expensive. In this article, we address SRL on biomedical text as a domain adaptation problem. The goal is to adapt an SRL system for the newswire domain (where a large annotated corpus is available) to the biomedical domain (where only a small amount of annotated text is available). This way, we can leverage existing corpora from the newswire domain and significantly reduce the cost of developing an SRL system for the biomedical domain. The main contributions of this article are: @BULLET it is the first work that performs a comparative evaluation of the performance of three recently proposed domain adaptation algorithms on the task of SRL for biomedical text; @BULLET it is the first work that investigates the extent of manual annotation needed to port an SRL system trained on newswire text to biomedical text, by explicitly determining the to our knowledge, this is the first detailed study of domain adaptation for SRL in biomedical text, and our work demonstrates that domain adaptation can greatly reduce the cost of developing biomedical SRL systems.

conclusion in this article, we study the effect of domain adaptation for SRL in the biomedical domain. We evaluate three different domain adaptation algorithms on the bio prop corpus using a competitive,
