Motivation: The development of molecular markers is one of the most important challenges in phylo-genetic and genome wide population genetics studies, especially in studies with non model organisms. Highly promising approach for obtaining suitable markers are the utilization of genomic partitioning strategies for the simultaneous discovery and genotyping of a large number of markers. Unfortunately, not all markers obtained from these approaches provide enough information for solving multiple evolutionary questions at a reasonable taxonomic resolution. Results: We have developed DOMINO, a bioinformatics tool for informative marker development from both NGS data and pre-computed sequence alignments. The application implements popular NGS tools with new utilities in a highly versatile pipeline specifically designed to discover or select personal-ized markers at different levels of taxonomic resolution. These markers can be directly used to study the tax a surveyed for their design, utilized for further downstream PCR amplification in a broader set taxonomic scope, or exploited as suitable templates to bait design for target DNA enrichment techniques. We conducted an exhaustive evaluation of the performance of DOMINO via computer simulations and illustrate its utility to find informative markers in an empirical dataset.

introduction it is well known that phylogenetic inferences based on a single or very few genetic markers can lead to systematic errors and reach invalid conclusions (). Next generation sequencing (NGS) has become a feasible and cost effective way of obtaining large amounts of genetic markers suitable for addressing ecological and evolutionary questions. Among current methodologies, the hybrid enrichment and the reduction representation sequencing methods (for a review see) are particularly promising approaches for studies in non model organisms. Markers developed with these methodologies, however, may not be informative enough to resolve multiple evolutionary questions across a reasonable taxonomic range; indeed, some markers may be inefficient for a particular study in a specific taxonomic group, or can be useful only for limited phylogenetic ranges. These problems make often necessary to accomplish various cost intensive enrichment or reduction representation experiments to further obtain makers suitable to be applicable across a wide range of species. Recently, some optimizing approaches have been developed to try to overcome this limited marker informativeness. For instance, the marker miner 1.0 pipeline (), outputs different types of multiple sequence alignments (MSA) files, some of them including reference coding sequences containing introns, which facilitates the downstream evaluation of the phylogenetic utility of each marker or the prediction of intron exon boundaries and intron sizes, very useful for primer or probe of development. Nevertheless, the pipeline does not perform these assessments by itself and the application is specifically devised to work only with transcriptome assemblies and with a set of plant reference genomes. Indeed, the possibility of selecting particular markers with a specific number of samples has been recently implemented in the rad seq data processing pipeline rad is (). However, this application does not include other key options and parameter combinations, such as the selection of a specific nucleotide variation range across a set of pre-defined tax a options that can be very useful for a plethora of studies. bait fisher () also implements a novel approach to optimize the design of target enrichment baits to be applicable across a wide range of tax a. This software includes an algorithm to infer target DNA enrichment baits from multiple tax a by exploiting user provided nucleotide sequence information of target loci in a representative set of species and can handle both genomic and cDNA data. Nevertheless, this software works on the basis of MSA of already known target loci that directly serves as templates for bait design (i.e., it can not be used with raw NGS data or for de novo marker discovery here we present DOMINO (Development Of Molecular markers In non model Organisms) a new bioinformatics tool that facilitates the development of highly informative markers from different data sources, including raw NGS reads and pre-computed MSA in various formats (such as those from RAD data). DOMINO efficiently process NGS data or pre-computed MSA and identifies (i.e., de novo discovery) or selects the sequence regions or alignments that meet user defined criteria. Customizable features include the length of variable and conserved regions (when requested), the minimum levels (or a preferred range) of nucleotide variation, how to manage polymorphic variants, or which tax a (or what fraction of them) should be covered by the marker. All these criteria can be easily defined in a user friendly GUI (Graphical User Interface) or under a command line version that implements some extended options and that it is particularly useful for working with large NGS data sets in high performance computers (Supplementary; see also the DOMINO documentation). The regions identified or selected in DOMINO can be i) directly used as markers with a particular depth of taxonomic resolution, ii) utilized for their downstream PCR amplification in a broader taxonomic scope or iii) used as suitable templates to optimized bait design for target DNA enrichment techniques.
