Assessing and improving the safety of chemicals and the efficacy of drugs depends on an understanding of the biodistribution, clearance and biological effects of the chemical(s) of interest. A promising methodology for the prediction of these phenomena is physiologically based pharmacokinetic pharmacodynamic modeling, which centers on the prediction of chemical absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion (pharmacokinetics) and the biological effects (pharmacodynamics) of the chemical on the organism. Strengths of this methodology include modeling across multiple scales of biological organization and facilitate the extrapolation of results across routes of exposure, dosing levels and species. It is also useful as the foundation for tools to (i) predict biomarker levels (concentrations of chemical species found in the body that indicate exposure to a foreign chemical), given a chemical dose or exposure; (ii) reconstruct a dose, given the levels of relevant biomarkers; and (iii) estimate population variability. Despite the importance and promise of physiologically based phar-macokinetic pharmacodynamics based approaches to forward and reverse dosimetry, there is currently a lack of user friendly freely available implementations that are accessible and useful to a broad range of users. doses im was developed to begin to fill this gap.

introduction the rational design of drugs and drug dosing regimens, and the risk and safety assessment for environmental toxicants, depend on an understanding of the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics pk pd of the chemicals of interest. A methodology that is increasingly used for pk pd analyses is physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling (). PBPK models integrate information across multiple time and spatial scales through the specification of biological, biochemical and physiological information at the tissue, organism and population levels. These models can then be used to predict the absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion and potential biological effects of chemicals to the exposed individual.
