We report our new draw sneak peek software for dna seq analysis. DNA resequencing analysis workflow (DRAW) automates the workflow of processing raw sequence reads including quality control, read alignment and variant calling on high performance computing facilities such as Amazon elastic compute cloud. sneak peek provides an effective interface for reviewing dozens of quality metrics reported by DRAW, so users can assess the quality of data and diagnose problems in their sequencing procedures. Both

introduction next generation sequencing (NGS) has redefined what big data means in biomedical research. Advances in quality and capacity have led to a declining cost of implementation, allowing NGS to be used in a wide range of experiments at a variety of scales; from a few samples in small laboratories to thousands of samples from multi institute collaborations. Processing terabytes of data requires a certain level of information technology and bioinformatics expertise, which can be daunting to small laboratories with limited resources. The programs we developed will enable these groups to process dna seq data and identify single nucleotide variants and small insertions and deletions (indels). Our software suite consists of DNA resequencing analysis workflow (DRAW) and sneak peek two independent interoperable components (). DRAW automates the entire workflow of whole genome whole exo me dna seq data processing from mapping sequence reads to calling variants. sneak peek is a quality metrics management system for reviewing the sequencing quality of multiple samples across different flow cells. It displays dozens of quality metrics per sample collected throughout DRAW on a dynamic web interface and is a useful diagnostic tool for trouble-shooting unsatisfactory sequencing results. We used draw sneak peek to process whole genome sequencing, whole exo me sequencing (WES) and targeted sequencing experiments on traditional high performance computing clusters as well as on Amazon elastic compute cloud (EC2). DRAW was used to analyze part of the WES data for a multi institutional autism study () and more than 500 exo mes genomes for human and Caenorhabditis elegans in our laboratories. supported by the third party programs, jobs will be distributed in parallel computing environment to expedite the process. A complete run of DRAW produces analysis ready read alignment BAM files, annotated variant call Variant Call Format files and a flat file of 36 quality metrics ready for sneak peek (Section 3). Should errors occur, the completed steps can be skipped during the re execution. This modularity reduces potential waste of time and cost on unnecessary repeated jobs.
