Motivation: The rapidly increasing set of sequenced genomes highlights the importance of identifying the synteny blocks in multiple and or highly duplicated genomes. Most synteny block reconstruction algorithms use genes shared over all genomes to construct the synteny blocks for multiple genomes. However, the number of genes shared among all genomes quickly decreases with the increase in the number of genomes. Results: We propose the Duplications and Rearrangements In Multiple Mammals d rimm synteny algorithm to address this bottleneck and apply it to analyzing genomic architectures of yeast, plant and mammalian genomes. We further combine synteny block generation with rearrangement analysis to reconstruct the ancestral pre duplicated yeast genome. Contact:

introduction the evidence in favor of the whole genome duplication wg d in Saccharomyces cerevisiae was discovered by Wolfe and Shields (1997) but was heavily contested (e.g. see used pre duplicated genomes of Kluyveromyces walt ii and Ashbya gossypii to settle this controversy (see, for a recent study contesting the wg d in yeast). Starting from Wolfe and Shields (1997) and all wg d studies essentially amounted to constructing synteny blocks of certain type [e.g. sister blocks in seo ig he and Wolfe, 1999 or doubly conserved synteny (DCS) blocks in and demonstrating that these blocks cover a large portion of the genome. Remarkably, there is still no general purpose tool that would automate such analysis and reduce various wg d studies to simply computing a duplic a tivity coverage' of the genome. For example, software from is not applicable to finding the synteny blocks from seo ig he and Wolfe (1999) and vice versa. Indeed, most wg d studies () developed new software for wg d analysis instead of using some previously developed tools! * To whom correspondence should be addressed we argue that the lack of tools for automated wg d analysis is the result of the lack of tools for synteny block identification in highly duplicated genomes. Many genomes have undergone extensive duplications followed by gene losses and rearrangements, making decoding of genomic architecture (synteny block reconstruction) in such genomes difficult. For example, duplications account for 70% of the Arabidopsis thaliana genome () making synteny block reconstruction in this and other plant genomes challenging shows a highly duplicated 'genome' G along with its decomposition into overlapping (left) and non-overlapping (right) synteny blocks. The nonoverlapping decompositions are more desirable since they are required for the follow-up rearrangement and duplication studies (e.g. the existing genome rearrangement algorithms are unable to analyze overlapping decompositions). However, constructing nonoverlapping decompositions is more difficult than constructing overlapping decompositions. While it may appear that one can simply sub partition the overlapping blocks into the non-overlapping ones explained that this partitioning does not work for complex genomes proposed the first algorithm for synteny block generation, which was aimed at comparative mapping data and did not take into account micro rearrangements. The first algorithms for synteny block reconstruction in sequenced genomes grimm synteny () and chains and nets (were developed in 2003 when thousands of micro rearrangements in mammalian genomes were discovered. These and many other synteny block generation algorithms () proved to be adequate for small sets of genomes but did not address issues that stem from extensive duplications and deletions. Most previous efforts to generate synteny blocks for highly duplicated genomes () generated overlapping rather than non-overlapping blocks. In contrast, some recently developed tools [e.g. en redo tool () used in Ensembl (] aim to generate non-overlapping synteny blocks. The non-overlapping representation has advantages over the traditional pairwise (and overlapping) representation of duplications. Indeed, the pairwise representation (that dominated previous studies of human segmental duplications) left the question of finding ancestral dupl icons in the human genome unanswered (), while the non-overlapping representation constructed in a human chimpanzee macaque rat mouse opossum cow synteny block (in Human chromosome 1) contains 29 genes with only 2 of them shared between all 7 species. While 17 of these 29 genes appear to be present only in a single genome (like gene 27 in macaque), most of these 17 genes have orthologs in other species (these orthologs are not shown since they are located within other synteny blocks in other species). resolved it. Also, an overlapping representation can be easily obtained from a non-overlapping representation but not vice versa shows an human chimpanzee macaque rat mouse opossum cow synteny block and illustrates the challenge of constructing synteny blocks in multiple genomes. As the number of analyzed genomes increases, the number of shared genes may substantially decrease. While this block contains 29 genes, only 2 of them are shared between all 7 species. The existing synteny block generation algorithms (such as grimm synteny are likely to miss such a block with only two shared genes or discard it as statistically insignificant noticed that the problem of constructing non-overlapping synteny blocks is similar to the difficult problem of de novo repeat classification ().introduced the a bruijn graph approach to repeat classification, representing all repeats as a mosaic of nonoverlapping sub repeats. Later, the a bruijn graphs were found to be useful in diverse applications such as multiple alignment (), de novo protein sequencing (), analysis of segmental duplications () and next generation DNA sequencing (). While diverse applications of a bruijn graphs use the same algorithmic idea, each application has unique features that need to be addressed for a new research domain. The original a bruijn graph approach () involves some heuristics that may or may not work for a particular application. For example, the bulge removal heuristic was originally designed for fragment assembly of Sanger reads but turned out to work well in various tools for next generation DNA sequencing (), mass spectrometry () and synteny block reconstruction (). Another important heuristic that is application specific is the threading procedure from that reconstructs how the genome traverses the transformed a bruijn graph. While threading was never problematic in sequencing applications came to the conclusion that it is a major bottleneck in synteny block reconstruction and wrote: 'Optimizing the a bruijn graph approach for synteny block generation represents the next challenge in analyzing the genomic architectures.' Our article addresses this problem by devising the first a bruijn graph approach that does not require a threading step and substitutes it with an alternative genome modification step implemented in the Duplications and Rearrangements In Multiple Mammals d rimm synteny software ( http://bix.ucsd.edu/projects/drimm/). We illustrate applications of d rimm synteny to analyzing yeast, plant and mammalian genomes and further combine it with rearrangement analysis to reconstruct the ancestral pre duplicated yeast genome (see section 5 of the Supplementary Material).

discussion the rapidly increasing set of sequenced genomes highlights the importance of identifying the synteny blocks in multiple and or highly duplicated genomes. As the number of analyzed genomes increases, the number of shared genes may decrease substantially. The synteny block generation algorithms based on pairwise comparisons are often limited, since in some cases, the synteny blocks can only be reconstructed by multi-way comparison. We proposed the d rimm synteny algorithm for identifying the nonoverlapping synteny blocks and bypassed the difficult threading problem [a bottleneck in] by developing a new a bruijn graph approach for solving the smp analyzing en red os results. We also thank Max aleksey ev Rustem Aydagulov and Vladimir do bryn in for their helpful comments. We are grateful to Max aleksey ev Kevin Byrne, Tao Jiang and Qian Peng for help with generating gene orders of yeast, plant and mammalian genomes.
