Motivation: drop seq has recently emerged as a powerful technology to analyze gene expression from thousands of individual cells simultaneously. Currently, drop seq technology requires refinement and quality control (QC) steps are critical for such data analysis. There is a strong need for a convenient and comprehensive approach to obtain dedicated QC and to determine the relationships between cells for ultra high dimensional datasets. Results: We developed dr seq a QC and analysis pipeline for drop seq data. By applying this pipeline , dr seq provides four groups of QC measurements for given drop seq data, including reads level, bulk cell level, individual cell level and cell clustering level QC. We assessed dr seq on simulated and published drop seq data. Both assessments exhibit reliable results. Overall, dr seq is a comprehensive QC and analysis pipeline designed for drop seq data that is easily extended to other droplet based data types.

introduction in recent years, the advances of rnase q technology have allowed single cell rnase q scrn a seq to emerge as a powerful and popular technique to study the cell to cell expression variability of thousands genes (). However, the time and cost constraints of preparing libraries from many individual cells have prevented scrn a seq for more broad applications. Recently, drop seq and in drop two new, easy, fast and low cost technologies to quickly profile thousands of individual cells for rnase q have been developed (). As both technologies are based on the combination of droplet based micro fluid and individual cell barcode approaches, and their data structures are largely similar, we termed both technologies as drop seq in this study. drop seq only requires 12 h to prepare 10 000 single cell libraries for sequencing (). The breakthrough of this technology provides many applications, such as the deconstruction of a cell population, the detection of rare cell types and the inference of interactions between genes. However, drop seq technology still suffers from some restrictions. Currently, the mRNA capture rate, conversion efficiency and sequencing depth are not sufficient to cover thousands of genes from a large fraction of cells, leading to increased levels of noise, which can influence the interpretation of drop seq data. Therefore, quality control (QC) should be the first step in the analysis pipeline to assure the data quality and to provide a solid basis for subsequent analysis. Although there are already some QC algorithms for bulk rnase q () and scrn a seq () data, a QC pipeline specifically for drop seq data is still necessary given the low capture efficiency, high dimensionality and sequenced cell number. Here, we present dr seq an integrated drop seq QC and analysis pipeline. dr seq can systematically evaluate drop seq data quality together with the visualization of unsupervised cell clustering.

conclusion in summary, dr seq is specifically designed for QC and analysis of drop seq data. It takes standard format input files via simple commands, reports informative QC measurements from four levels, and provides detailed analysis results. It also displays tolerance of low sequencing depth and small cell number in certain cell types. Besides, dr seq has the potential to be easily extended to other droplet based data types, such as drop chip dr seq
