Recently, several high profile studies collected cell viability data from panels of cancer cell lines treated with many drugs applied at different concentrations. Such drug sensitivity data for cancer cell lines provide suggestive treatments for different types and subtypes of cancer. Visualization of these datasets can reveal patterns that may not be obvious by examining the data without such efforts. Here we introduce drug cell line Browser (DCB), an online interactive HTML5 data visualization tool for interacting with three of the recently published datasets of cancer cell lines drug viability studies. DCB uses clustering and canvas visualization of the drugs and the cell lines, as well as a bar graph that summarizes drug effectiveness for the tissue of origin or the cancer subtypes for single or multiple drugs. DCB can help in understanding drug response patterns and prioritizing drug/ cancer cell line interactions by tissue of origin or cancer subtype. Availability and implementation: DCB is an open source web based tool that is freely available at:

introduction patient derived cancer cell lines have long been used as experimental models for tumor biology in cancer research. These cell lines preserve the genomic, transcript omic and proteomic features of tumor cells and emulate tumor cells' response to stimuli. A drug that substantially inhibits the growth of a cancer cell line would potentially suppress the progression of its tumor of origin. Cell viability assays measure the number of live cells in response to treatment by drugs applied in different concentrations. This type of assay is used to test the efficacy of a drug for inhibiting the growth or killing cancer cell lines. A cancer cell line is considered sensitive to a drug if it has low viability when the drug is applied at low concentration. Screening many cancer cell lines with many drugs applied in many concentrations can be used to match tumors with the most likely effective drugs. These drugs could potentially be used to eventually treat individual patients (). Aberrant tumor growth through rapid cell proliferation could be attributed to malfunction of many pathways (). The regulatory networks that regulate cell proliferation and tumor growth in cancer are wired differently from cell line to cell line, and such intricacies imply that different drugs, targeting different pathways, would have different effects on different cell lines. Yet, until recently, efforts to screen drugs against cell lines in high throughput were impeded by the amount of cell viability assays that could be performed in a reasonable time. In recent years, however, the technology for high throughput cell viability assays has been developed, and several datasets consisting of tens of thousands cell viability experiments have been published (). These datasets include cell viability assays of dozens of drugs applied to hundreds of cell lines. Analysis and visualization of such data can potentially uncover informative patterns that would have direct therapeutic potential. Here, we present drug cell line Browser (DCB), a HTML5 web based application that uses canvas clustering () to visualize three recent cell viability assay datasets: from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia cc le project (), from the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity (GDS) in cancer project () and from an anticancer compound study for breast cancer ().
