Motivation: In silico prediction of drug target interactions from heterogeneous biological data is critical in the search for drugs and therapeutic targets for known diseases such as cancers. There is therefore a strong incentive to develop new methods capable of detecting these potential drug target interactions efficiently. Results: In this article, we investigate the relationship between the chemical space, the pharmacological space and the topology of drug target interaction networks, and show that drug target interactions are more correlated with pharmacological effect similarity than with chemical structure similarity. We then develop a new method to predict unknown drug target interactions from chemical, genomic and pharmacological data on a large scale. The proposed method consists of two steps: (i) prediction of pharmacological effects from chemical structures of given compounds and (ii) inference of unknown drug target interactions based on the pharmacological effect similarity in the framework of supervised bipartite graph inference. The originality of the proposed method lies in the prediction of potential pharmacological similarity for any drug candidate compounds and in the integration of chemical, genomic and pharmacological data in a unified framework. In the results, we make predictions for four classes of important drug target interactions involving enzymes, ion channels, GPCRs and nuclear receptors. Our comprehensively predicted drug target interaction networks enable us to suggest many potential drug target interactions and to increase research productivity toward genomic drug discovery. Supplementary information: Datasets and all prediction results are available at

introduction the identification of drug target interactions (interactions between drugs and target proteins) is a key area in genomic drug discovery. Interactions with ligands can modulate the function of many classes of pharmaceutically useful protein targets including enzymes, ion channels, G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) and nuclear receptors. Owing to the completion of the human genome sequencing and the development of various biotechnologies, we are beginning to analyze the 'genomic space' populated by these protein classes. At the same time, the high throughput screening (HTS) of large scale chemical libraries is enabling us to explore the entire * To whom correspondence should be addressed. 'chemical space' of possible compounds. However, our knowledge about the relationship between the chemical space and the genomic space is very limited. In recent years, the importance of chemical genomics is growing fast to relate the chemical space with the genomic space (). The genome wide detection of compound protein interactions is a key issue in chemical genomics research, which can lead to identification of new drug leads and therapeutic targets for known diseases such as cancers. Although various biological assays are becoming available, experimental determination of compound protein interactions remains challenging and very expensive even nowadays. There is therefore a strong incentive to develop new in silico methods capable of detecting these potential compound protein interactions efficiently. Traditional computational approaches are categorized into ligand based approach and docking approach. ligand based approach like QSAR (Quantitative Structure Activity Relationship) compares a candidate ligand with the known ligands of a target protein to predict its binding using machine learning methods (). However, the performance of the ligand based approach is poor when the number of known ligands for a target protein of interest decreases. The docking is a powerful approach, but the docking can not be applied to proteins whose 3D structures are unknown (). This limitation is serious for membrane proteins. For example, there are only two GPCRs with 3D structure information as of writing. Therefore it is difficult to use the docking on a genome wide scale. Recently, a variety of statistical methods have been developed to predict compound protein interactions on a genome wide scale, following the spirit of chemical genomics. The underlying idea is that similar ligands are likely to interact with similar proteins, and the prediction is performed based on compound chemical structures, protein sequences and the currently known compound protein interactions. A straightforward statistical approach is to use binary classification methods where they take compound protein pairs as an input for machine learning classifiers such as neural network and support vector machine (SVM) (;). The other statistical approach is the distance learning in the framework of supervised bipartite graph inference (). Another promising approach is to use pharmacological information. The use of side effect similarity has been recently proposed, which is based on the assumption that drugs with page i247 i246i254
