Motivation: Detecting drug drug interaction (DDI) has become a vital part of public health safety. Therefore, using text mining techniques to extract dd is from biomedical literature has received great attentions. However, this research is still at an early stage and its performance has much room to improve. Results: In this article, we present a syntax convolutional neural network s cnn based DDI extraction method. In this method, a novel word embedding, syntax word embedding, is proposed to employ the syntactic information of a sentence. Then the position and part of speech features are introduced to extend the embedding of each word. Later, auto encoder is introduced to encode the traditional bag of words feature (sparse 0–1 vector) as the dense real value vector. Finally, a combination of embedding based convolutional features and traditional features are fed to the soft max classifier to extract dd is from biomedical literature. Experimental results on the ddi extraction 2013 corpus show that s cnn obtains a better performance (an f score of 0.686) than other state of the art methods. Availability and Implementation: The source code is available for academic use at http://202.118. 75.18:8080/DDI/SCNN-DDI.zip.

introduction adverse drug reactions (ADRs) lead to 300 000 deaths per year in the USA and Europe (). drug drug interaction (DDI), which is broadly described as a change in the effect of one drug by the presence of another drug (), is an important subset of ADRs. Landau reported that about 2.2 million people in USA, aged 5785, faced potentially dangerous drug combinations (). As a result, detecting dd is has become a vital part of public health safety. With rich dd is knowledge, the patients can be prevented from taking two or more drugs simultaneously which will cause harmful interactions. Currently, some drug related databases, like drug bank () and stockley s Drug Interactions (), have been created to help detect dd is. However, since the volume of biomedical literature is growing rapidly, a large number of valuable dd is remain hidden in the unstructured biomedical texts. Thus, the automatic extraction of dd is information from biomedical literature has become an important research area. In recent years, ddi extraction 2011 () and 2013 challenges () have been held successfully. ddi extraction 2011 only focuses on the identification of all possible dd is while the 2013 challenge requires, in addition to DDI detection, the classification of each DDI, i.e. the dd is need to be classified into four predefined DDI types: ADVICE, EFFECT, INT and MECHANISM (). ADVICE is assigned when a recommendation or advice regarding concomitant use of two drugs involved is described; EFFECT is assigned when the effect of the DDI is described; INT is assigned when a DDI appears in the text without any additional information provided; MECHANISM is assigned when a DDI is described by its pharmacokinetic mechanism. Existing DDI extraction methods can be roughly divided into two categories: the one stage and two stage methods. The one stage method accomplishes DDI detection and classification simultaneously by training a multiclass SVM. It directly classifies each candidate instance into one of the five DDI types (ADVICE, EFFECT, INT, MECHANISM and NEGATIVE for the negative instances). The two stage method divides the learning problem into two stages: first, all the dd is are detected and second, the detected dd is are classified into one of the four specific DDI types (ADVICE, EFFECT, INT and MECHANISM). In ddi extraction 2013 challenge, fb kirst team used a two stage method (). It employs a hybrid kernel to detect dd is and, then, assign them to one of the four DDI types by training four separate models one against all respectively. The method achieves an f score of 0.651, which ranks top in the challenge. later also proposed a two stage method based on linear SVM using rich features, and obtained a higher f score of 0.670 on the same corpus. The method uses the word feature, word pair feature, parse tree feature and noun phrase constrained coordination feature. In addition, its one against one multiclass classification strategy also contributes greatly to its performance while the other methods choose one against all strategy. An example of the one stage method is the one presented by u turku team () in ddi extraction 2013 challenge. It accomplishes DDI detection and classification tasks simultaneously by training a multiclass SVM () and classifies each candidate instance into one of the five DDI types (ADVICE, EFFECT, INT, MECHANISM and NEGATIVE). The method achieves the third best performance (an f score of 0.594) in ddi extraction 2013 challenge. Although many methods have been proposed, DDI extraction research is still at an early stage and its performance has much room to improve. For example, in ddi extraction 2013 challenge, the best performance achieved is 0.651 in f score (). In addition, the state of the art DDI extraction methods are all feature engineering based ones, i.e. they need to design effective features elaborately using various NLP tools and knowledge resources, which is still a labor intensive and skill dependent task. Therefore, the performance of these methods is heavily dependent on the choice of features. Finally, since ddi extraction 2013 challenge is a multiclass classification problem, a multiclass classifier is needed. However, most methods with top performance train several binary SVMs to solve the multiclass classification problem (). In fact, K or K (K-1)/2 (here K is the number of target classes) binary classifiers are needed when one against all or one against one strategies are chosen, respectively (). Although such methods can achieve better performances, they increase the complexity of the DDI extraction. To solve these problems, we propose a syntax convolutional neural network s cnn based DDI extraction method. The method uses a novel word embedding (word embedding is a parameterized function that maps words to high dimensional vectors and was first introduced by to fight the curse of dimensionality in the process of learning language model using neural network), the syntax word embedding, to introduce the syntactic information of a sentence which has proven to be helpful in boosting the performance of relation extraction (). Then the syntax word embedding is extended by the position feature () and the part of speech (POS) feature to introduce the position and POS information. The latter is first introduced in our method to capture the POS information of each word. Later, auto encoder () is introduced to transfer the traditional sparse 01 features to the dense real value features before they are combined with the embedding based convolutional features. Finally, the combined features are passed to the soft max () to learn the DDI classifier.
