Motivation: Drug repositioning, which aims to identify new indications for existing drugs, offers a promising alternative to reduce the total time and cost of traditional drug development. Many computational strategies for drug repositioning have been proposed, which are based on similarities among drugs and diseases. Current studies typically use either only drug related properties (e.g. chemical structures) or only disease related properties (e.g. phenotypes) to calculate drug or disease similarity, respectively, while not taking into account the influence of known drug disease association information on the similarity measures. Results: In this article, based on the assumption that similar drugs are normally associated with similar diseases and vice versa, we propose a novel computational method named mbi rw which utilizes some comprehensive similarity measures and bi random walk bi rw algorithm to identify potential novel indications for a given drug. By integrating drug or disease features information with known drug disease associations, the comprehensive similarity measures are firstly developed to calculate similarity for drugs and diseases. Then drug similarity network and disease similarity network are constructed, and they are incorporated into a heterogeneous network with known drug disease interactions. Based on the drug disease heterogeneous network, bi rw algorithm is adopted to predict novel potential drug disease associations. Computational experiment results from various datasets demonstrate that the proposed approach has reliable prediction performance and outperforms several recent computational drug repositioning approaches. Moreover, case studies of five selected drugs further confirm the superior performance of our method to discover potential indications for drugs practically. Availability and Implementation: http://github.com//bioinfomaticsCSU/MBiRW. Contact:

introduction the last decades have witnessed impressive advances in genomics, life sciences and technology. However, drug discovery process is still time consuming, risky and tremendously expensive (). Even with the continuously increasing investments of research and development (RD), the number of new drugs approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has been declining since the late 1990s (). In light of the challenge in traditional drug discovery, identifying new indications for existing drugs, also known as drug repositioning or drug repurposing, has attracted increasing interests from both the pharmaceutical industry and research community (). Drug repositioning can speed up the process of drug development and reduce risk, as repositioning candidates have already passed all necessary tests common to de novo drug discovery and development. Therefore, drug repositioning has consequently become a major strategy and played a key role in drug discovery and development. In addition, several successful repositioned drugs (e.g. Sildenafil, thalidomide, raloxifene) have generated historically high revenues for their patent holders or companies (). The goal of drug repositioning is to find potential new uses for existing drugs and apply the newly identified drugs to the treatment of diseases other than the drug's originally intended disease (). Recently, some computational methods have been proposed to predict direct drug disease associations for drug repositioning. For example, Chiang and Butte (2009) developed a network based guilt by association method, to predict potential drug disease associations. This methodology recommended the novel use of a drug based on the assumption that if two diseases share some similar treatment profiles, then the drugs used for only one of the two diseases could also be used for the other. However, the method is biased toward both older drugs with diverse uses and diseases with diverse treatments conducted multiple drug drug and disease disease similarity measures to construct discriminate features, and implemented a classification algorithm named PREDICT to predict novel drug indications constructed a weighted disease and drug heterogeneous network based on known disease gene and drug target relationships, and applied network clustering to identify drug candidates proposed a novel heterogeneous network model which integrated drug repositioning and target prediction into one unified computational framework. Based on the framework, an iterative algorithm was developed to rank candidate drugs for each disease developed a network based prioritization method named drug net which simultaneously integrated information about diseases, drugs and targets to perform drug disease and disease drug prioritization formulated drug disease association prediction problem as recommending preferable diseases for drugs and adopted two existing recommendation methods, ProbS and HeatS, to infer drug disease associations directly. Most of these approaches usually perform drug disease prediction by exploiting drug similarity and disease similarity, while similarity measures are often based on some important drug or disease related properties. However, previous studies seldom utilized the known drug disease interaction information of dataset for defining similarity measures, and yet can be exploited to improve similarity measures. In this study, we present a novel prediction method mbi rw which adopts effective mechanism to measure similarity for drugs and diseases, respectively, and applies bi random walk bi rw algorithm to predict potential indications for existing drugs. In the new similarity measures, similarity calculated based on drug or disease related properties is improved in two aspects. First, as previous studies () have found that weak similarity provides little information for interaction inference, we adjust those weak similarities which are not informative for drug disease prediction by correlation analysis. Second, two drugs are considered to be more similar if they have common indications, or there exist other drugs which have common indications with them simultaneously. Drugs and diseases are clustered based on their shared commons, and similarity for drugs or diseases which belong to the same cluster is adjusted. What's more, as it has been demonstrated better performance than other random walk methods on disease gene prioritization, bi rw algorithm () is adopted to predict potential associations between drugs and diseases in this study. Furthermore, we compare and evaluate the performance of mbi rw on various datasets by adopting common metrics. Experimental results demonstrate that mbi rw has the superior capability to discover potential disease indications for drugs.
