Elucidation of human disease similarities has provided new insights into etiology, disease classification and drug repositioning. Since dysfunctional regulation would be manifested as the decoupling of expression correlation, disease similarity (DS) in terms of dysfunctional regulation mechanism (DRM) could be estimated by using a differential coexpression based approach, which is described in a companion paper. Due to the lack of tools for estimating DS from the viewpoint of DRM in public domain, we implemented an R package ds via drm to identify significant DS via DRM based on transcript omic data. ds via drm contains five easy to use functions, dce a dc pathway DS, com dc gl and com dc gl plot for identifying disease relationships and showing common differential regulation information shared by similar diseases. Availability and implementation: ds via drm is available as an R package, with a users guide and source code, at http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/DSviaDRM/index.html.

introduction disease similarity (DS) study has emerged as an active research area, which helps to systematically investigate etiology, pathogenesis and even perform drug repositioning because drug clinical application can be appropriated from one disease to its similar ones. In recent years, scientists explored DS based on clinical manifestations (), electronic medical records (), disease related genes () and disease related differentially expressed genes (). Accordingly, several analysis tools and databases have been released to detect disease relationships, such as do sim (), disease connect (), Human Phenotype Ontology (), Comparative Toxicogenomics Database () and mala cards (). It has been realized that although clinical manifestations and electronic medical records supply valuable information for estimating DS, it is hard to unravel underlying mechanisms hidden in disease relationships. While, the disease relationships generated from disease related genes pathways are inevitably biased to well studied diseases and thus offer limited chance to discover novel findings. It has been well established that diseases are highly correlated to the rewiring of gene regulatory network or dysfunctional regulation, and differential coexpression analysis dce a has proved to be useful in exploring potential differential regulation mechanism (i.e. dysfunctional regulation mechanism, drm shows the overall design and main outputs of ds via drm. First, dce a carries out differential coexpression analyses at both gene level and gene pair level (). Second, dc pathway transforms the calculation results from gene level to pathway level, based on which DS estimates disease similarities and outputs significantly similar diseases in the form of a disease network. Then, com dc gl extracts common differentially coexpressed genes (DCGs) and differentially coexpressed links/ pairs dc ls shared by similar diseases. Finally, by integrating transcriptional regulation information, the common DCGs and dc ls are presented as a gene network via com dc gl plot. Following this architecture, we introduce the above five functions one by one. dce a dce a includes DCp and DCe methods which were developed in our previous works to identify DCGs and dc ls (). DCp calculates differential coexpression values (dC) of N genes for M diseases, as well as their p and q values while DCe calculates correlation values of P gene pairs for M diseases, and their p-, q values (see the Supplementary File for more algorithmic information of DCp and DCe). dc pathway dc pathway includes a pathway library which comes from msi gdb and involves 6176 pathways and 21 075 genes. By calculating the dC of a pathway as the average dC of its component genes, dc pathway outputs the dC values of 6176 pathways for each disease as shown in. DS: DS is the core of the whole package. It computes the partial correlation coefficients of pathways' dCs between any two diseases as their DS measure. Partial correlation coefficient (Eq. 1) is evoked from an R package, ppc or
Description

conclusion ds via drm is released as an R package into the Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) and can be obtained at http://cran. r project org web packages ds via drm index html. Functions of. The overall design of ds via drm. ds via drm includes dce a dc pathway DS, com dc gl and com dc gl plot functions. In com dc gl dC  D n is short for the dC values of genes for disease n; similarly, corr d n is short for the correlation values of gene pairs for disease n
