Motivation: Given the growth of large scale protein protein interaction (PPI) networks obtained across multiple species and conditions , network alignment is now an important research problem. Network alignment performs comparative analysis across multiple PPI networks to understand their connections and relationships. However, PPI data in high throughput experiments still suffer from significant false positive and false negatives rates. Consequently, high confidence network alignment across entire PPI networks is not possible. At best, local network alignment attempts to alleviate this problem by completely ignoring low confidence mappings; global network alignment, on the other hand, pairs all proteins regardless. To this end, we propose an alternative strategy: instead of full alignment across the entire network or completely ignoring low confidence regions, we aim to perform highly specific protein to protein alignments where data confidence is high, and fall back on broader functional region to region alignment where detailed protein protein alignment can not be ascertained. The basic idea is to provide an alignment of multiple granularities to allow biological predictions at varying specificity. Results: dual aligner performs dual network alignment, in which both region to region alignment, where whole subgraph of one network is aligned to subgraph of another, and protein to protein alignment , where individual proteins in networks are aligned to one another, are performed to achieve higher accuracy network alignments. Dual network alignment is achieved in dual aligner via background information provided by a combination of Gene Ontology annotation information and protein interaction network data. We tested dual aligner on the global networks from IntAct and demonstrated the superiority of our approach compared with state of the art network alignment methods. We studied the effects of parameters in dual aligner in controlling the quality of the alignment. We also performed a case study that illustrates the utility of our approach. Availability and implementation:

introduction protein protein interaction (PPI) network models the cooperation between proteins to drive processes within a biological system. Advancement in high throughput technologies has led to rapid growth of large scale PPI networks obtained across multiple species or conditions, and therefore, comparative analysis to understand their connections and relationships is now an important research problem (). To this end, the network alignment problem aims to align a set of PPI networks belonging to different species to find conserved subnetworks within them. These conserved regions could explain mechanisms of function conservation and evolution beyond what is available to individual gene studies. The network alignment problem consists of two key steps: a scoring framework that captures the knowledge about module evolution and identification of high scoring alignments (conserved subnetworks or modules) from among exponentially large set of possible alignments. Unfortunately, finding conserved subnetworks in a group of networks is np hard (). Consequently, a range of heuristic based network alignment methods have been proposed that fall into two categories, namely, local () and global network alignment (). The local network alignment approach identifies multiple unrelated conserved regions between the input networks, each region implying a mapping independent of others. It is particularly useful in finding known functional components (pathways, complexes) in a new species. For instance, path blast () aligns linear pathways based on homology and interaction confidence. network blast m () finds highly conserved local regions greedily using inferred phylogeny. Another local alignment method is ma wish (), which is modeled on evolution of protein interactions. On the other hand, the global network alignment approach aligns every node in the smaller network to the larger network to find 'best' overall alignment between the input networks. Particularly, it enables species level comparisons and discovery of functional orthologs. For instance, iso rank () and iso rank n () identify a stationary random walk distribution to perform global network alignment. grae ml in 2.0 () uses a training set of alignments to learn phylogeny relationships before performing an *To whom correspondence should be addressed. alignment. migra al () is an alignment framework that could integrate multiple similarity measures to construct a global alignment model global network alignment as a graph matching problem with hard constraints given by a set of must link pairs of proteins. These must link pairs are identified by sequence orthologs. More recently, the ilp based Natalie proposes a Lagrangian relaxation approach to solve the problem approximately (). pina log combines both the similarities of protein sequence and protein function to compute an alignment between two PPI networks (). To this end, the Gene Ontology (GO) function similarity and sequence similarity are obtained independently and then combined using a linear combination of the independent similarities weighted by a factor. Despite considerable progress made by the bioinformatics community in devising high quality network alignment strategies, state of the art network alignment techniques suffer from a key drawback. Specifically, they depend on protein sequence similarity to facilitate network alignment. Unfortunately, sequence similarity is only relevant to a subset of highly conserved proteins, leaving significant network regions poorly specified by sequence homology. Furthermore, it is well known that structural information of PPI networks suffers either from high false positive rate of current high throughput experiments or from false negatives because of incomplete data (). Consequently, in significant regions of a network, high confidence alignment of proteins is not possible. At best, local network alignment attempts to alleviate this problem by completely ignoring low confidence mappings; global network alignment, on the other hand, pairs all proteins regardless. In this article, we address the aforementioned limitation by taking a GO annotation driven 'dual alignment' (Here 'dual' refers to the two step alignment process and not duality in optimization) strategy to align a pair of PPI networks. Instead of only performing protein to protein alignments, we perform high granularity protein to protein alignment where confidence is high and more general functional region to region alignment where detailed protein protein alignment can not be ascertained, which may still yield biologically informative conclusions. Consequently, our method not only aligns highly conserved protein pairs but also aligns functional subgraphs of one network to functional subgraphs of another. Informally, a functional subgraph is a connected component of the network whose nodes share a particular biological role or function (annotated using GO). The region to region and protein to protein alignments in our dual alignment strategy are not independent of each other, but inextricably linked. Specifically, region to region alignment sets the foundation for broad associations between functional regions. On the other hand, protein to protein alignment specifies detailed associations between nodes within each associated regions illustrates with an example on how functionally conserved subgraphs are first aligned, followed by alignment of the underlying interaction structure. First, functional subgraphs of the networks are identified. For instance, a subgraph that shares the transport role is identified in the human network. Alignment between pairs of functional subgraphs is carried out and high confidence pairs are identified based on the structural and sequence similarities of their underlying subgraphs. For instance, f 2 in(c) depicts an alignment between the transport associated subgraph and microtubule binding associated subgraph, highlighting the connection between the regions. Using region to region alignments, we model each region to region pair as soft constraints that probabilistically restrict protein to protein alignment within the regions. Following that, protein to protein alignments are computed using these soft constraints as priors. We refer to the aforementioned network alignment model as function constrained network alignment (The first step, i.e. region to region alignment, represents function constraints that restricts the second step, i.e. protein to protein alignment; detailed in Section 2). It is worth mentioning the salient feature of our model. By integrating the rich set of functional information as soft constraints with the 'hard' constraints () (e.g. known orthologs) in the alignment framework, our dual alignment strategy not only limits the search space of 'unconstrained' alignment to low knowledge regions but also guides alignment of functionally informative regions under a reduced search space. Consequently, our approach identifies a suitable alignment from a smaller search space compared with state of the art network alignment techniques, an important feature because of intractable nature of the network alignment problem. Additionally, by leveraging soft constraints, we have much lesser fine grained protein to protein alignment using the aligned regions in (c) as background information. protein to protein alignments are soft constrained within subgraph subgraph pairs, that is, any alignment between two proteins is probabilistically restricted within one or more subgraph subgraph pairs in (c) likelihood of generating alignments that conflict with known biological functions. Compared with network based approach, our approach considers both structural and functional information in defining subgraphs. network based methods rely purely on the assumption that densely connected proteins are likely to share similar function, and vice versa. However, there are cases where this assumption does not hold. In regulatory and signaling pathways, for example, proteins share similar function without being densely connected. An example is the MAPKKK cascade pathway. Such subgraphs can be uncovered via GO annotations but not topology alone because it is sparsely connected compared with protein complexes. To realize the function constrained network alignment problem, we propose an algorithm called dual aligner that uses the aforementioned dual alignment strategy, where region to region alignments are first made followed by detailed protein to protein alignment. region to region alignment establishes high level functional connections between the networks, while protein to protein alignment specifies the detailed connections within them. We demonstrate the utility and superiority of dual aligner over the state of the art global network alignment techniques using real world PPI networks in Section 3.
