Motivation: Network modelling in systems biology has become an important tool to study molecular interactions in cancer research, because understanding the interplay of proteins is necessary for developing novel drugs and therapies. De novo reconstruction of signalling pathways from data allows to unravel interactions between proteins and make qualitative statements on possible aberrations of the cellular regulatory program. We present a new method for reconstructing signalling networks from time course experiments after external perturbation and show an application of the method to data measuring abundance of phosphorylated proteins in a human breast cancer cell line, generated on reverse phase protein arrays. Results: Signalling dynamics is modelled using active and passive states for each protein at each time point. A fixed signal propagation scheme generates a set of possible state transitions on a discrete timescale for a given network hypothesis, reducing the number of theoretically reachable states. A likelihood score is proposed, describing the probability of measurements given the states of the proteins over time. The optimal sequence of state transitions is found via a hidden Markov model and network structure search is performed using a genetic algorithm that optimizes the overall likelihood of a population of candidate networks. Our method shows increased performance compared with two different dynamical Bayesian network approaches. For our real data, we were able to find several known signalling cascades from the ERBB signalling pathway. Availability: Dynamic deterministic effects propagation networks is implemented in the R programming language and available at

introduction studying the molecular biology of cells and tissues has developed from the investigation of few genes or proteins in one experiment to the analysis of the interplay of many components as a system. Various array techniques have been devised for analysing cellular behaviour on DNA, RNA and protein level that make it possible to generate thousands of measurements in a single experiment. These data can be plugged into de novo network reconstruction methods in order to infer regulatory interactions between the measured components. For this purpose, several approaches have been developed in the past. * To whom correspondence should be addressed bayesian Networks (BN;) have been frequently used to reconstruct gene regulatory networks from RNA expression experiments () as well as causal protein protein relationships for intensity data from protein quantification (). The latter is an example where directed perturbations of several measured proteins were performed in order to resolve the structure of the underlying interactions. External interventions can be introduced by multiple means, for example, changing environmental conditions, applying drugs or using gene silencing methods such as RNA interference. Another example for BN usage under perturbation conditions is given in. Besides BNs, there are several related approaches to infer networks from perturbation data derived networks after knocking out specific genes by analysing expression patterns in the discretized gene expression measurements extended this approach to perform inference on non discretized expression levels suggested iterative perturbation of the system in order to reveal the underlying network structure. They modelled perturbations as a linear combination of inputs and inferred weights for the pairwise node to node influences improved this idea by using nonlinear perturbation effects and modelled the interaction behaviour of a number of components after several single and combinatorial perturbations. Time resolved measurements provide insight into the dynamical behaviour of the system and do not restrict modelling to a 'snapshot' of the system's state. A suitable approach for network inference from time resolved data are dynamic Bayesian networks (DBN), a family of reconstruction methods including Boolean network models, state space models or regression models (). While these methods model the dynamics of the system over time, they do not model perturbation effects directly. however studied reverse engineering methods on simulated data for time courses and external perturbations and came to the conclusion that additional perturbation of the system is beneficial. So methods that explicitly include perturbations in the modelling approach for time course analysis are still needed. In addition, most of the current network reconstruction methods are tailored to the analysis of gene regulatory networks based on gene expression data from microarray experiments. Rather few studies deal with the signalling flow between proteins based on the analysis of protein activation and abundance coupled with intervention effects developed a network inference method for protein networks after knockdown of the measured components that allows of the approach: given a network hypothesis (A), we generate a set of reachable system states by applying a fixed signal propagation scheme (B) which in effect reduces the number of possible system states. An optimal path through these reachable system states over time is identified by an HMM (C). Using the series of system states from the HMM, model parameters for two Gaussian distributions for each protein (one for active, one for passive) are estimated (D) and a total likelihood of our measurements given the network and model parameters is calculated (E). We use this likelihood score in a GA in order to optimize the overall score for an evolving population of candidate networks (F) and generate a final network from this population, after we found convergence in the GA. time series measurements, too. But their method treats each time point as independent measurement and does not model the time dependent behaviour of the system explicitly. However, using only few perturbations and gathering information on the signal flow through longer time series would be desirable, too. In this study, we set up a framework for reconstructing signalling networks from time course measurements after external perturbation (both inhibitory and stimulating shows an outline of the proposed workflow. Networks are represented as directed cyclic graphs with distinct edge types for activating and inhibiting interactions. We model signalling dynamics by a Boolean signal propagation mechanism defining state transitions for a given network structure. An optimal state transition series is found in a hidden Markov model (HMM;) and the fit of the data to such a transition matrix is assessed by our proposed likelihood score. Network structure search is performed in a genetic algorithm (GA) optimizing the overall likelihood of a population of candidate networks. Our method shows good performance for reconstructing signalling networks from artificial data and outperforms two current DBN approaches. As an application of the algorithm, we used protein phosphorylation measurements for 16 ERBB signalling related phosphoproteins. The data were generated on reverse phase protein arrays rpp a in the human breast cancer cell line HCC1954, which over expresses the ERBB2 receptor that is associated with reduced disease free and overall survival in breast cancer patients (). Note that dynamic deterministic effects propagation networks dde pn was developed for protein phosphorylation data, but in principle is also applicable to other types of high throughput data, e.g. for RNA microarrays. We stimulated the cells with two ligands [epidermal growth factor (EGF) and here gulin (HRG)], both as separate and combined stimulation experiments. All three experiments were combined to infer a signalling network which was compared with current literature knowledge. dde pn was able to identify several well known signalling chains from the MAPK and AKT signalling pathways, some of which originally were found in ERBB2 overexpressing cells. This shows the ability of our method to identify meaningful interactions from experimental proteomics data.
