Motivation: high accuracy de novo assembly of the short sequencing reads from rnase q technology is very challenging. We introduce a de novo assembly algorithm, e bar de novo which stands for Extension, Bridging And repeat sensing de novo. This algorithm uses an efficient chimera detection function to abrogate the effect of aberrant chimeric reads in rnase q data. Results: e bar de novo resolves the complications of rnase q assembly arising from sequencing errors, repetitive sequences and aberrant chimeric amplicons. In a series of assembly experiments, our algorithm is the most accurate among the examined programs, including de Bruijn graph assemblers, Trinity and Oases. Availability and implementation: e bar de novo is available at http:// e bar de novo sourceforge net. This software package (with patent pending) is free of charge for academic use only.

introduction rnase q technology has revolutionized transcript omic studies in recent years. In comparison with microarrays, this high throughput sequencing technology allows the detection of novel transcripts. It also has a wider dynamic range in detecting transcript abundance than tiling arrays (), serial analysis of gene expression () and cap analysis of gene expression (). rnase q is especially important for studying organisms without reference genomes. With reference genomes, accurate reads can be identified and mapped to the reference for accurate and sensitive quantification of even lowly expressed transcripts. However, for organisms without reference genomes, the short reads from rnase q have to be assembled into contigs representing the transcripts before the expression level can be determined from the read coverage. In this case, sequencing errors may cause mis assembly create artificial contigs and consequently produce inaccurate interpretation of transcript abundance (). De novo assembly of short reads faces computational challenges from classical sequencing problems such as sequence repeats, homologous genes and artificial chimeric reads () (). Most de novo rnase q assemblers, including trans abyss (), Oases () and Trinity (), are de Bruijn graph based methods. In de Bruijn graphs, reads are either represented as km er nodes or as km er edges, and Eulerian paths between end nodes are examined for assembling sequences (). Both sequence repeats and artificial chimeric reads will cause erroneous km er nodes. Most of de Bruijn genome assemblers, such as Velvet () and all paths (), filter out low frequency km er nodes to improve accuracy, as low frequency km er nodes are more likely to be sequencing artifacts. However, de novo assembly of rnase q data is more difficult because the abundance of RNA transcripts varies significantly (). Although de bruijn based algorithms have been successfully used to construct many transcriptome s using rnase q data, it has always been difficult to keep the assembly both accurate and sensitive. low frequency km er nodes are important for discovering low abundance transcripts. For sensitive detection of novel transcripts, rnase q assemblers usually do not eliminate low frequency km er nodes. Unfortunately, retaining low frequency km er nodes would reduce assembly accuracy. In this study, we introduce an efficient algorithm for rnase q assembly, with special emphasize on detecting chimeric reads and *To whom correspondence should be addressed. assembly errors. We showed that our new de novo assembly algorithm, designated e bar de novo has enhanced accuracy, while it still maintains high sensitivity in determining transcript abundance.
