A gene tree species tree reconciliation explains the evolution of a gene tree within the species tree given a model of gene family evolution. We describe ec cetera a program that implements a generic parsimony reconciliation algorithm, which accounts for gene duplication, loss and transfer (DTL) as well as speciation, involving sampled and un sampled lineages, within undated, fully dated or partially dated species trees. The ec cetera reconciliation model and algorithm generalize or improve upon most published DTL parsimony algorithms for binary species trees and binary gene trees. Moreover, ec cetera can estimate accurate species tree aware gene trees using amalgamation. Availability and implementation: ec cetera is freely available under

introduction reconciling gene trees with a species tree () is a crucial step in many phylo genomics problems (), from the reconstruction of gene trees (; Sz oll} osi and) to the reconstruction of ancestral genomes (). Internal gene tree nodes, representing ancestral genes, are assigned to species (extant or extinct) and evolutionary events such as gene duplications or horizontal transfers. This results in evolutionary histories (or reconciliations) for gene families explaining apparent discordance s with the speciation history. There exist several reconciliation software packages such as not ung (), ranger dtl (), Mowgli (), Eucalypt (), AngST () and Jane ()whose algorithms and models, differ, sometimes in subtle ways, in terms of the evolutionary events they consider (). Furthermore, an important difference lies in the nature of the species tree. First, some software packages assume that the considered species tree is fully dated (i.e. speciation dates are provided) and ensure that horizontal transfers are time consistent (i.e. that no transfer can occur between species that did not exist at the same time, see), while others ensure only local time consistency (). But other software packages do consider undated species trees (i.e. the timing of speciation events is not known), and, as ensuring time consistency with undated trees is an np hard problem (), these programs sometimes fail to find a consistent, parsimonious scenario and either output an inconsistent one or produce no output. This disparate body of parsimony models and algorithms makes it difficult to assess if discrepancies between the results provided by different software is due to differences in the model, the algorithm or the implementation.
