Motivation: Recent studies suggested that a combination of multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) could have more significant associations with a specific phenotype. However, to discover epistasis, the epistatic interactions of SNPs, in a large number of SNPs, is a computationally challenging task. We are, therefore, motivated to develop efficient and effective solutions for identifying epistatic interactions of SNPs. Results: In this article, we propose an efficient cloud based Epistasis cOmputing e ceo model for large scale epistatic interaction in genome wide association study g was. Given a large number of combinations of SNPs, our e ceo model is able to distribute them to balance the load across the processing nodes. Moreover, our e ceo model can efficiently process each combination of SNPs to determine the significance of its association with the phenotype. We have implemented and evaluated our e ceo model on our own cluster of more than 40 nodes. The experiment results demonstrate that the e ceo model is computationally efficient, flexible, scalable and practical. In addition, we have also deployed our e ceo model on the Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud. Our study further confirms its efficiency and ease of use in a public cloud. Availability: The source code of e ceo is available at

introduction it is becoming increasingly important and challenging in genome wide association study g was to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with phenotypes such as human diseases (e.g. breast cancer, diabetes and heart attacks). Traditionally, researchers focused on the association of individual SNPs with the phenotypes. Such methods can only find weak associations as they ignore the genomic and environmental context of each SNP (). However, SNPs may interact (known as epistatic interaction) and jointly influence * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the phenotypes. As such, there has been a shift away from the one snp at a time approach toward a more holistic and significant approach that detects the association between a combination of multiple SNPs with the phenotypes (). In the meantime, the number of discovered SNPs is becoming larger and larger. For example, the dataset from the Hapmap project () contains 3.1 million SNPs and the 1000 genome project () provides 15 million SNPs. From a computational perspective, it is very time consuming to determine the interactions of SNPs. Given n SNPs, the number of k locus is n C k = n! k!(nk)!. This renders existing statistical modeling techniques (which work well for a small number of SNPs) () impractical. Likewise, techniques that enumerate all possible interactions () are not scalable for a large number of SNPs. To reduce the computation overhead, heuristics () have also been developed. These schemes add a filtering step to select a fixed number of candidate epistatic interactions and fit them to a statistical model. However, these approaches risk missing potentially significant epistatic interactions that may have been filtered out. Therefore, a scalable and efficient approach becomes attractive for such a computationally intensive task in a large scale g was. A promising solution to the computation challenge is to exploit parallel processing. There are a variety of high performance computing solutions. For example, in, a tool is provided for processing single locus and two locus SNPs analyses using a supercomputer. However, it is not easy for researchers to rewrite their own programs on specialized hardware. As another example, in, two locus SNPs analysis is performed using the graphics processing units (GPU). However, this requires the users to understand the GPU architecture well to fully exploit the computation power of the GPU. Instead, we aim to develop a cloud based solution which has a number of benefits. First, the map reduce framework (available in most cloud services) offers high scalability, ease of programming and fault tolerance. Secondly, most software can be easily deployed on the cloud and made accessible to all. Thirdly, there are already low cost commercially available cloud platforms [e.g. Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (. Fourthly, the pay as you use model of such commercial platforms also makes them attractive

conclusion this article aims at providing an efficient epistasis computing model for large scale epistatic interaction in g was which can be run on a computing cluster (local or cloud based. We have proposed an efficient and feasible solution, called e ceo based on the map reduce framework. As such, e ceo inherits the nice properties of map reduce which is high scalability and good fault tolerance. Moreover, it can leverage cloud computing with almost unlimited elastic computing resources. We have demonstrated the practical advantage of using e ceo model to exhaustively search two locus and three locus epistatic interactions. Our e ceo model can also retrieve top k most significant interactions. We have conducted extensive experimental study on a local cluster of over 40 nodes and 20 instances on Amazon EC2. The results showed that our e ceo model is computationally efficient, flexible, scalable and practical. As future work, we plan to implement more test statistics. We also plan to explore the possibility of integrating e ceo as a filtering step to other methods, e.g. those based on statistical model fitting. Finally, we plan to develop pruning strategies based on domain knowledge, and integrate these into our scheme. For example, by knowing that certain SNPs do not interact, their computations can be avoided totally.
