ecogene org is a genome database and website dedicated to Escherichia coli K-12 sub strain MG1655 that is revised daily using information derived from the biomedical literature and in house analysis. EcoGene is a major source of annotation updates for the MG1655 Genbank record, one of only a few Genbank genome records that are updated by a community effort. The Reference Sequence (RefSeq) database, built by The National Center for Biotechnology Information, comprises a set of duplicate Genbank genome records that can be modified by the NCBI staff annotators. ecogene refseq is being developed as a stand-alone internet resource to facilitate the usage of ecogene based tools on any of the 42400 completed prokaryotic genome records that are currently available at the RefSeq database. Availability: The web interface of ecogene refseq is available at

introduction new sequencing technologies have significantly increased the volume of genomic sequence data that are being generated. The NCBI RefSeq collection is a curated sequence database providing a comprehensive, non-redundant and annotated set of sequences representing naturally occurring DNA, RNA and proteins (). Included are taxonomically diverse sequences from plasmids, organelles, viruses, archaea, bacteria and eukaryotes. The Escherichia coli K-12 MG1655 genome was the third sequenced genome and is represented by the Genbank U00096 complete genome record (), which has been extensively revised since its original submission (). EcoGene was developed to maintain, display, query and document the revised genome and proteome sequences and annotations. EcoGene is the modern version of the historical E.coli K-12 genetic maps (). A suite of customized tools has been developed for EcoGene, providing functionality that is unavailable elsewhere. We are now making these tools available for viewing and retrieving genomic maps and sequences for any prokaryotic genome sequence through ecogene refseq the applications ported from EcoGene to ecogene refseq include (i) primer pairs a tool for automatically designing genome wide sets of primers to engineer either a clone library or a deletion strain library (), (ii) Search and Download, a search interface for querying and downloading gene information, (iii) gene pages web pages displaying individual genes as well as dynamic gene maps and restriction sites maps for genome navigation and (iv) Cross Reference Mapping and Download, a tool for accessing many additional gene identifiers. ecogene refseq is powered by the open source content management platform Drupal and supported by a MySQL database. All data stored in the ecogene refseq MySQL database are faithfully parsed from RefSeq for efficient retrieval. refreshed monthly to reflect annotation changes of the genomes. Currently there are 2268 bacterial genomes and 148 archaeal genomes in the ecogene refseq database.

conclusion ecogene refseq is developed to facilitate the usage of a set of tools available at EcoGene with any prokaryotic genome. In the future, we can add capabilities into ecogene refseq including manual curation tools enabling an individual or interested group to build and re annotate an ecogene like database for any prokaryotic genome.
