next generation sequencing platforms for measuring digital expression such as rnase q are displacing traditional microarray based methods in biological experiments. The detection of differentially expressed genes between groups of biological conditions has led to the development of numerous bioinformatics tools, but so far, few exploit the expanded dynamic range afforded by the new technologies. We present edge run an R package that implements an unconditional exact test that is a more powerful version of the exact test in edgeR. This increase in power is especially pronounced for experiments with as few as two replicates per condition, for genes with low total expression and with large biological coefficient of variation. In comparison with a panel of other tools, edge run consistently captures functionally similar differentially expressed genes. Availability and implementation: The package is freely available under the MIT license from CRAN (http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/edgeRun).

introduction next generation sequencing technologies are steadily replacing microarray based methods, for instance transcriptome capture with rnase q () and cage seq capture for the promote rome (). All of these approaches result in digital expression data, where reads or tags are sequenced, mapped to the genome and then counted. The discrete nature of the data has required the development of new bioinformatics tools for their analysis that address discrete count data. Once the expression has been quantified, an important next step is the statistical significance testing of differential expression between two or more groups of conditions. By the far the simplest and most popular approach reduces differential expression to a pairwise comparison of mean parameters, resulting in a fold change measure of change and a p value to ascertain statistical significance of the finding to address this problem, tools such as edgeR (), DESeq2 () among many others have been developed and can be applied to any experiment in which digital count data is produced. This vast array of tool choices can be bewildering for the biologist since it is generally not clear under which conditions a tool is more appropriate than its alternates. Traditional metrics used when benchmarking methods such as the false positive rate and power are useful but limited as they are purely statistical concepts that can only be tested on simulated data. Moreover, they do not help in determining to what extent methods deliver truly biologically important genes. This is a major challenge because in the vast majority of cases, we do not know what the true positives and negatives are. In this article, we propose a novel metric to determine the number of functionally relevant genes reported by a differential expression
