Motivation: The recently proposed Systems Biology Graphical Notation s bgn provides a standard for the visual representation of biochemical and cellular processes. It aims to support more efficient and accurate communication of biological knowledge between different research communities in the life sciences. However, to increase the use of s bgn tools for editing, validating and translating s bgn maps are desirable. Results: We present sbg ned a tool which allows the creation of all three types of s bgn maps from scratch or the editing of existing maps, the validation of these maps for syntactical and semantical correctness, the translation of networks from the KEGG and meta crop databases into s bgn and the export of s bgn maps into several file and image formats. Availability: sbg ned is freely available from http://vanted.ipk-gatersleben.de/addons/sbgn-ed. The web site contains also tutorials and example files.

introduction the Systems Biology Graphical Notation s bgn http://sbgn.org) () is an emerging standard for the visual representation of biological networks. This standardization aims to improve information exchange and to support the collaborative creation of large maps based on individual modules. Such unified graphical representation should overcome the current situation in which many different styles of networks are used in biochemical, biological and medical books, articles and online resources. Especially in the growing field of systems biology, where increasingly complex and large networks have to be investigated, s bgn offers a promising approach for creating more intuitive and unambiguous visualizations. Three different views of biological processes cover different levels of detail 1 Process Description (PD), which shows the temporal dependencies of biological interactions in a network in detail 2 Entity Relationship (ER), which displays the relationships in which a given entity participates in a network (without consideration of temporal aspects); and 3 Activity Flow (AF), which shows the flow of information between biological entities in a network in an abstract way. * To whom correspondence should be addressed drawing large interaction maps is a time consuming task. To enhance the usability of s bgn tool support for creating, editing and validating such maps is required. Currently, several tools support or have started to consider s bgn for an overview see http://sbgn.org/SBGN_Software. Here we present sbg ned a van ted () add-on for editing, validating and translating of s bgn maps. sbg ned contains a unique combination of features from s bgn map creation and editing to syntactic and semantic validation of s bgn maps, to automatic translation of existing non s bgn networks from KEGG () and meta crop () into s bgn and to the export of s bgn maps in different file and image formats. Furthermore, all methods of the van ted system for integration and network based analysis of high throughput data, data visualization and network layout as well as constraint based model simulation are fully accessible to the s bgn maps. The van ted system and the sbg ned add-on form a comprehensive platform for s bgn supported analysis and visualization of biological networks.
