Motivation: Targeted mass spectrometry comprises a set of powerful methods to obtain accurate and consistent protein quantification in complex samples. To fully exploit these techniques, a cross platform and open source software stack based on standardized data exchange formats is required. Results: We present TAPIR, a fast and efficient Python visualization software for chromatograms and peaks identified in targeted proteomics experiments. The input formats are open, community driven standardized data formats mzm l for raw data storage and tram l encoding the hierarchical relationships between transitions, peptides and proteins). TAPIR is scalable to proteome wide targeted proteomics studies (as enabled by swath ms allowing researchers to visualize high throughput datasets. The framework integrates well with existing automated analysis pipelines and can be extended beyond targeted proteomics to other types of analyses. Availability and implementation: TAPIR is available for all computing platforms under the 3 clause BSD license at https://github.com/msproteomicstools/msproteomicstools.

introduction in mass spectrometry based proteomics, most currently available analysis and visualization software is focused on discovery proteomics workflows and, consequentially, on the representation of fragment ion spectra (). Recent advances in targeted proteomics such as the development of high throughput selected reaction monitoring (SRM) and swath ms have sparked interest in the computational analysis of chromatographic traces (). These methods have substantially increased the number of transitions that can be concurrently analyzed in a single lcms ms run from a few hundred to several hundred thousand. Although multiple algorithms have been proposed in the literature to analyze such data (), insufficient visualization capability and inability to manually verify the results have hampered their adoption in the research community. The lack of common data formats and missing cross platform support are some of the main challenges for targeted proteomics analysis, which make combining and integrating multiple analysis workflows difficult. Often, a user is thus restricted to a single software environment, causing lock in effects and preventing optimal data analysis. In addition, most currently available software tools were developed with low throughput targeted proteomics data srm mrm data) in mind and may not scale well to the large data volumes generated by next generation high throughput targeted proteomics pipelines such as swath ms. Here, we present TAPIR, a fast and efficient cross platform software for visualizing chromatograms and corresponding peaks identified in targeted proteomics experiments. TAPIR uses standardized and open file formats for data access mzm l and tram l and is able to visualize V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com experiments whose size substantially exceeds system memory through efficient access to the raw data.
