Motivation: Structural information of macromolecular complexes provides key insights into the way they carry out their biological functions. The reconstruction process leading to the final 3D map requires an approximate initial model. Generation of an initial model is still an open and challenging problem in single particle analysis. Results: We present a fast and efficient approach to obtain a reliable, low resolution estimation of the 3D structure of a macromolecule, without any a priori knowledge, addressing the well known issue of initial volume estimation in the field of single particle analysis. The input of the algorithm is a set of class average images obtained from individual projections of a biological object at random and unknown orientations by transmission electron microscopy micrographs. The proposed method is based on an initial non lineal dimensionality reduction approach, which allows to automatically selecting representative small sets of class average images capturing the most of the structural information of the particle under study. These reduced sets are then used to generate volumes from random orientation assignments. The best volume is determined from these guesses using a random sample consensus (RANSAC) approach. We have tested our proposed algorithm, which we will term 3D-RANSAC, with simulated and experimental data, obtaining satisfactory results under the low signal to noise conditions typical of cryo electron microscopy. Availability: The algorithm is freely available as part of the xmi pp 3.1 package [http://

introduction single particle Analysis (SPA) techniques can obtain 3D maps of biological complexes at near atomic resolution by combining tens of thousands of projection images obtained with a transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (). In general, the reconstruction process leading to the final 3D map requires the use of an approximate initial model. The fully automatic and efficient determination of this initial volume, either for symmetric or asymmetric structures, is still an open and challenging problem in SPA, as indicated by the existence of an ample literature on this matter. Many previous attempts to the 'initial model problem' have been reported. On the one hand, in the Random Conical Tilt and orthogonal tilt methods (), the alignment problem is simplified by acquiring micrographs as tilt pairs, or by using multiple different tilts with known tilt angles. On the other hand, we observe a large variety of methods based on common lines () that, in principle, they allow for an initial model estimation without tilting of the specimen. computer generated shapes (), or reconstructions from one image of a particle assuming a certain symmetry (), have also been used to define initial volumes. Another line of research is based on the introduction of a 'random model' strategy based on first assigning random orientations to class averages (). In this latter case, an initial 3D reconstruction is obtained from these random angular assignments, which is finally refined by a projection matching strategy. Following this approach, sanz presented a random model method that allows ab initio generation of starting models from raw experimental images. Several initial models were generated, assigning initially a random orientation to each imaged particle. Recently,, have presented a method based on a probabilistic initial 3D model generation procedure, which uses projection images instead of class averages. Furthermore, in, it presented optimo d a method that incorporates multiple automated algorithms for determining orientations using common lines methodologies and, at the same time, provides criteria for scoring their results. This approach generates multiple maps using algorithm specific randomization. The 'initial model problem' is still, and in spite of the multiple algorithms so far proposed, widely accepted as a real issue in SPA (), with methods demanding no trivial choices of input parameters and being computationally expensive. Indeed, in the way of defining high throughput approaches in 3D-EM, we really need fast, simple and accurate methods, which are, indeed, the motivation of this *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com work. In this way, we will describe in detail 3D-RANSAC, presenting its good performance on a wide range of specimens, using the same parameters for all cases (making the case of 'simplicity'), and obtaining final results in a matter of minutes on a typical laptop computer. Our proposed approach consists in a novel random modelling strategy based on an initial dimensionality reduction method together with the RANSAC algorithm, which makes this approach efficient from a computational point of view. The method can be used to produce low resolution initial volumes of symmetric or asymmetric biological complexes.
