Motivation: Finding biologically causative genotype phenotype associations from whole genome data is difficult due to the large gene feature space to mine, the potential for interactions among genes and phylogenetic correlations between genomes. Associations within phylo gen tically distinct organisms with unusual molecular mechanisms underlying their phenotype may be particularly difficult to assess. Results: We have developed a new genotype phenotype association approach that uses Classification based on Predictive Association Rules (CPAR), and compare it with net car a recently published association algorithm. Our implementation of CPAR gave on average slightly higher classification accuracy, with approximately 100 time faster running times. Given the influence of phylogenetic correlations in the extraction of genotype phenotype association rules, we furthermore propose a novel measure for down weighting the dependence among samples by modeling shared ancestry using conditional mutual information, and demonstrate its complementary nature to traditional mining approaches.

introduction variation in an organism's observed physical and environmental attributes, known as its phenotype, is determined in part by its gene composition, known as its genotype. Organismal traits are often influenced not by a single gene, but by combinations of genes. Comparing profiles of orthologous genes or proteins () with profiles of phenotypes is a common method for identifying gene correlations (). Genes that confer a particular phenotype can be inherited from ancestors, created through duplication of existing genes and mutation, or acquired from other organisms through lateral gene transfer (LGT) events. Once thought to be restricted to a few exceptional events, LGT is now known to have played a central role in bacterial evolution, including in the emergence of traits such as * To whom correspondence should be addressed. thermo phil y (), photosynthesis () and antibiotic resistance (). The genomes of prokaryotic organisms typically contain 10006000 genes. Many have studied methods of associating single genes or clusters of genes to phenotypes, including with direct distribution comparisons (), analysis of neural network parameters (), statistical significance () and mutual information (MI;). These approaches did not consider combinations of genes that do not share a similar pattern of distribution across genomes; if there is a gene that is only important when other genes have already been taken into consideration, it could be missed looked at several set theoretic methods of combining cluster profiles. Several studies used more advanced machine learning techniques to build up multigene associations, such as recursive feature elimination () and filter () methods on cancer microarray data. recently used metabolic profiles with wrapper, filter and embedded methods of feature selection. Depending on the classifier used, wrapper methods can be computationally expensive on feature rich datasets as a classifier must be trained multiple times on various subsets of features. Association rule mining (ARM;) is an alternative method to mine multi feature associations. ARM is a data mining technique that finds associations among features, constructing rules of the general form. Classification using ARM is the basis of net car (), a mi based method of pruning the huge search space of gene combinations to identify genotype phenotype relationships that would not be otherwise detected. Feature selection is often used to find these predictive combinations of genes; however, good predictors do not necessarily have a causal influence on the property, but can simply be correlated with it (). Common correlated factors, such as dependence among samples due to shared ancestry, can confound predictive analyses. One of the strongest confounding patterns in phenotype prediction is the evolutionary ancestry of the organism (). The default mode of genetic inheritance is vertical, with organisms typically acquiring genes from their direct ancestors. If a particular phenotypic trait is common or ubiquitous within a taxonomic group, then genes that correlate significantly with the presence of the trait may in fact be characteristic of the taxonomic group rather than causal of the trait shows the uneven distribution of temperature environment preference over 387 bacteria and 40 archaea, subdivided by phylum. In this, grouped by phylum. The bars represent the proportion of thermo philes (dark) and non thermo philes (light). The number next to each bar is the number of microbes in that group. The uneven distribution of the phenotype class labels over the taxonomic groupings demonstrates the dependence among samples. dataset, 62% of thermo philes are within three phyla: cren archaeo ta (21%), eur archaeo ta (20%) and Firmicutes (20%). The other 38% of thermo philes are unevenly distributed (from 0% to 8%) over 15 other phyla. As identifying predictors is a needle in a haystack problem, with tens of thousands of possible genes over only hundreds of examples, ignoring confounding shared ancestry can lead to predictors of overrepresented groups (such as, in this case, the three main phyla). Clostridium thermo cell um is a thermophilic member of an otherwise mesophilic genus. In this case, we would like to pay particularly close attention to those differences between c thermo cell um and the other clostridia. By subtracting genes common among all close relatives, we amplify the importance of genes that are different among closely related thermo philes and non thermo philes. If these genes are present in other thermo philes they will be further emphasized. By down weighting genes that are expected to be present due to common descent, we emphasize the genes with unusual distributional patterns due to selective gene loss or LGT and may therefore play a particularly important determining role in the phenotype. Phylogenetic dependency networks () have been used to mitigate shared ancestry of HIV viral proteins by constructing Bayesian networks conditioned on a phylogenetic tree. With our approach we do not depend on fine grained and uncertain relationships within strict evolutionary hierarchies of microorganisms, as may be necessary with closely related viral samples such as HIV, and instead allow the exploration of shared ancestry within large clusters at various taxonomic depths. We apply a predictive rule mining approach, which has not previously been tested on genotype phenotype mapping problems, that achieves better predictive accuracy than net car and has lower running time. To mitigate the effect of shared ancestry, we also propose a novel metric based on conditional MI (CMI) (Section 2.2) for incorporating information regarding shared ancestral descent into genotype phenotype analyses. While this approach does not improve the overall classification accuracy, it highlights sets of genes with relevant biological functions, and highlights the strong influence of phylogenetic correlation.
