Motivation: The inference of local ancestry of admixed individuals at every locus provides the basis for admixture mapping. Local ancestry information has been used to identify genetic susceptibility loci. Results: In this study, we developed a statistical method, efficient inference of local ancestry eil a which uses fused quantile regression and k means classifier to infer the local ancestry for admixed individuals. We also conducted a simulation study using HapMap data to evaluate the performance of eil a in comparison with two competing methods, hap mix and LAMP. In general, the performance declined as the ancestral distance decreased and the time since ad-mixture increased. eil a performed as well as the other two methods in terms of computational efficiency. In the case of closely related ancestral populations, all the three methods performed poorly. Most importantly, when the ancestral distance was large or moderate, eil a had higher accuracy and lower variation in comparison with the other two methods. Availability and implementation: eil a is implemented as an R package , which is freely available from the Comprehensive R Archive Network (http://cran.r-project.org/).

introduction since the completion of human genome project in 2003 (), it is feasible to conduct a case control study to identify disease susceptible loci using millions of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Unlike the family based linkage analysis, the case control design provides an easier way to access large samples for studying complex diseases. The case control design is especially useful when dealing with a late onset disease in which the parental genotype is usually difficult to obtain. However, a genome wise association study based on the case control design may yield false positive findings because of population admixture that is attributed to individuals descended from multiple ancestral population groups. Specifically, alleles that differ in frequency between ancestral populations may be falsely found to be associated with diseases that are also more prevalent in one ancestral population than the other. Several approaches have been developed to account for population admixture in genetic association studies. One approach is the genomic control (), which calculates an inflation factor to adjust the testing statistic and hence the p value. Another approach is to identify the genetic background using principle component analysis and then adjust the testing statistic using significant eigenvectors (). However, it is challenging to infer local ancestry for admixed individuals because the true ancestral information is a mixture of haplotypes with varied lengths, each of which can be traced back to its original ancestry. To infer local ancestry using SNP data, we face the following challenges. First, given that most SNPs only have three different genotypes, if we only use the genotype information at a given locus, we would have limited power to infer local ancestry for that locus and also such power would depend on whether the SNPs differ in frequency between the ancestral groups. Second, the number of generations since admixture occurred must be taken into account in this kind of analysis because it is inversely related to the length of genomic regions derived from any given group. Although the number of generations is rarely known, we can infer the boundaries of these ancestral blocks by identifying regions where the ancestral haplotypes differ on either side. Therefore, the challenge becomes how to identify the breakpoint or transition point for ancestral blocks within an individual's genome. Third, the majority of existing models assume linkage equilibrium under which the analysis only needs to use unlinked markers but is at risk of losing power because of excluding potential ancestral informative markers. This simple approach is particularly questionable for the SNPs that are genotyped on platforms with dense coverage. In this study, we developed a new method for efficient inference of local ancestry eil a in admixed individuals based on three steps that were designed to deal with the existing methodological challenges. The first step assigns a numerical score (with a range of 01) to genotypes in admixed individuals to better quantify the closeness of the SNPs to a certain ancestral population. The second step uses fused quantile regression to identify breakpoints of the ancestral haplotypes. In the third step, the k means classifier is used to infer ancestry at each locus. The major strength of eil a is that it relaxes the assumption of linkage equilibrium and uses all genotyped SNPs rather than only unlinked loci to increase the power of inference. Another important strength of this method is its higher accuracy and lower variation in comparison with competing methods. These strengths are demonstrated by the simulation study in Section 4.
