Motivation: The urgent need for efficient and sustainable biological production of fuels and high value chemicals has elicited a wave of in silico techniques for identifying promising novel pathways to these compounds in large putative metabolic networks. To date, these approaches have primarily used general graph search algorithms, which are prohibitively slow as putative metabolic networks may exceed 1 million compounds. To alleviate this limitation, we report two methods sim index (SI) and sim zyme which use chemical similarity of 2D chemical fingerprints to efficiently navigate large metabolic networks and propose enzymatic connections between the constituent nodes. We also report a byers waterman type pathway search algorithm for further paring down pertinent networks. Results: Benchmarking tests run with SI show it can reduce the number of nodes visited in searching a putative network by 100-fold with a computational time improvement of up to 10 5-fold. Subsequent byers waterman search application further reduces the number of nodes searched by up to 100-fold, while sim zyme demonstrates $90% accuracy in matching query substrates with enzymes. Using these modules, we have designed and annotated an alternative to the methyl erythritol phosphate pathway to produce isopentenyl pyrophosphate with more favorable thermo-dynamics than the native pathway. These algorithms will have a significant impact on our ability to use large metabolic networks that lack annotation of promiscuous reactions. Availability and implementation: Python files will be available for download at http://tyolab.north western edu tools
introduction metabolic reaction networks have been the focus of intense study in recent years. Unravelling the topology of metabolic networks has been used to gain a deeper understanding of metabolism, in addition to identifying opportunities for engineering the production of drugs, fuels, and chemicals. For this task, numerous in silico utilities, such as metabolic flux analysis (), have been developed to optimize existing pathways, engineer novel pathways and identify drug targets by simulating the effect of remodeling the underlying metabolic network and analyzing its topology (). However, the emergence of evidence that many enzymes exhibit promiscuous activities, acting on several different substrates or carrying out disparate reactions () tends to obfuscate the well defined topology of metabolic networks. The putative nodes and edges contributed by these promiscuous activities to the metabolic network both increase its overall size and number of unannotated edges. We will focus on two significant challenges that exist in exploiting the functionality of putative metabolic networks with potentially nebulous topology. First, finding pathways in a metabolic network linking two compounds, reactions or enzymes of interest is a time consuming task using traditional graph searching algorithms due to the large number of nodes in extant metabolic networks (). Hence, a more efficient mode of traversing possible pathways to a specific target must be developed. Native metabolic networks, such as that of iAF1260, are composed of $10 3 compound nodes, with an additional 10 3 reaction nodes (). Comprehensive reaction databases such as the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) also have a network like structure, and contains upwards of 15 000 compounds with $8700 reactions (). At the largest scale, putative metabolic networks with sizes in excess of 10 7 compounds and reactions can also be generated thanks to several computational tools (). These algorithms use a library of generalized biochemical transformations and apply them where possible to successive generations of compounds, starting with one or more compounds in the zeroth generation. These computer generated networks are useful because they elucidate all potential transformations that can be performed on a compound, which can be added to a growing putative metabolic network containing numerous novel pathways to a desired end product. Tools exist that can cap the size of putative networks () by prescribing a putative number of intermediate steps, but if a long pathway is predicted yielding networks with 10 7 nodes or more, the networks quickly become infeasible to analyze, limiting our ability to discover and design novel metabolic pathways. A second challenge in exploiting large metabolic networks is associating a given metabolic reaction with a specific enzyme or set of enzymes capable of carrying out that reaction. Although most biochemistry literature is built on the assumption that one enzyme acts on one substrate, it is known that many similar substrates can often be catalyzed by one particular enzyme (). An example of such a phenomenon is acetate secretion in Escherichia coli strains that have had the acetate producing enzymes pta ack and pox b knocked out; enzyme promiscuity has been conjectured to be the responsible factor in this and similar situations with other metabolites (). This significant problem most likely occurs on the genome scale as it is believed that $40% of enzymes have promiscuous function (). This is most likely exacerbated in engineered cells, where enzyme and metabolite concentrations may be far away from standard concentrations found through evolution. In addition, enzymes with similar sequences may catalyze reactions on different substrates or have different activities for the same set of substrates, thereby leading to improperly annotated genes. In general, enzymes whose activity extends to substrates other than their 'native' substrates will act on compounds with a similar structure or substructure. Determining which enzyme can fill these roles, then, requires search algorithms that consider the molecular structure of the substrates. Searching these networks with a basic depth or breadth first search algorithm is time intensive and impractical for moderately long pathways, and several algorithms have been developed to explore the space of known reactions in a probabilistic manner (). In the past, much success has been reported in using 2D chemical fingerprints in exploring the substrate and inhibitory promisc ui ties of cytochrome P450s () and in assessing the verisimilitude of enzyme substrate complexes (). We present here a molecular structure biased search algorithm based on smarts type (Daylight Theory) (Supplementary) fingerprint similarity measured using the Tanimoto coefficient () (s) to guide the network search, making the use of traditional pathway search algorithms a more tractable undertaking. Similar successful approaches have been taken to enable rapid searching of extant metabolic networks such as KEGG for links to known pathway mapping () and validation of biochemical reactions in large databases (). Our approach applies the chemical similarity comparison on the fly to foster efficient convergence on a target molecule and subsequent annotation of the edges in the resultant network. In a metabolic network, nearby metabolites are more chemically similar than distant metabolites (). Therefore, proceeding towards a particular product via a metabolic pathway should see the intermediates generally becoming more similar to the final product. We have used this property of increasing chemical similarity in metabolic pathways to bias our search through metabolic networks. This algorithm of searching for increased chemical similarity can not only be used for reaction metabolite bipartite networks, but also can be utilized to search for promiscuous substrates an enzyme may act on within a metabolic network. An additional improvement to pathway searching utilizes the searching algorithm developed by to expedite pathway searching by ensuring that only pathways that have the capability of meeting certain additional criteria are explored (). For the work in this article, we utilize the criteria of path length with the assumption that short paths are, in general, easier to engineer into a cell. However, this technique is capable of expediting pathway searching by utilizing additional criteria such as the number of reactions that are novel to an organism, the thermodynamic favorability of a pathway, or the number of energy carriers expended by the pathway. To our knowledge, this is the first use of this technique to search for pathways in putative metabolic networks.. The Tanimoto coefficient moves towards 1 as the pathway distance between a 'product' node and an 'intermediate' approaches 0, but can have deviations from this trend in cases where large cofactor modifications are carried out. The pathways shown are tryptophan synthesis (Trp), the MEP pathway, glycolysis (EMP), u ridin yl synthesis (UMP), a synthetic 14 butanediol pathway b do (), and caffeine synthesis (Caf). Pathway distance is defined as the number of transformations linking two metabolites. Tanimoto coefficient shows a general increasing trend on average as a function of pathway distance (dashed line using these methods, we present a fast and efficient strategy for exploring metabolic networks generated by making use of known biological transformations to suggest alternative pathways based on the expansion of known enzymatic activities. As a test case, we apply the tools developed to a problem that was previously impractical using the Biochemical Network Integrated Computational Explorer b nice (), a program that creates a metabolic network by simulating all combinations of possible biochemical reactions on a starting compound. Searching this large network is intractable with previous graph search approaches. We show that our new algorithms overcome these limitations by predicting a novel pathway linking methyl erythritol phosphate (MEP) and isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP). The results should enable the analysis of metabolic networks that are orders of magnitude larger than current networks. Applying these tools will allow for the development of many novel synthetic routes to previously unattainable chemicals.
