Motivation: The first step for clinical diagnostics, prognostics and targeted therapeutics of cancer is to comprehensively understand its molecular mechanisms. large scale cancer genomics projects are providing a large volume of data about genomic, epi genomic and gene expression aberrations in multiple cancer types. One of the remaining challenges is to identify driver mutations, driver genes and driver pathways promoting cancer proliferation and filter out the un functional and passenger ones. Results: In this study, we propose two methods to solve the so called maximum weight submatrix problem, which is designed to de novo identify mutated driver pathways from mutation data in cancer. The first one is an exact method that can be helpful for assessing other approximate or and heuristic algorithms. The second one is a stochas-tic and flexible method that can be employed to incorporate other types of information to improve the first method. Particularly, we propose an integrative model to combine mutation and expression data. We first apply our methods onto simulated data to show their efficiency. We further apply the proposed methods onto several real biological datasets, such as the mutation profiles of 74 head and neck squamous cell carcinomas samples, 90 glioblastoma tumor samples and 313 ovarian carcinoma samples. The gene expression profiles were also considered for the later two data. The results show that our integrative model can identify more biologically relevant gene sets. We have implemented all these methods and made a package called mutated driver pathway finder, which can be easily used for other researchers.

introduction cancer is a complex disease which has been one of the most serious threats to human health. People have realized that cancer is related to genome aberrations that include gene mutations, copy number alterations and so on (). Through these aberrations, the cancer cells can acquire the ability of infinite proliferation while normal cells don't due to the self correction mechanism. Another dreadful feature of cancer cells is that some of them can spread to other tissues through blood circulation or lymphatic system (). This largely reduces the effectiveness of surgery to treat cancer. Generally, the genome aberrations in cancer cells can be divided into two types: one type is neutral to cancer proliferation and the other can promote the cancer cell to proliferate infinitely and diffuse (). We usually call the former type of mutations as 'passenger mutation' and the latter as 'driver mutation'. Undoubtedly, finding out the driver mutation, driver gene as well as driver pathway is a key to understand the molecular mechanisms of cancer progression, which further aid in designing effective drugs to treat cancer (). With the development of high throughput sequencing technologies, a huge number of mutation profiles of samples for many cancer types are available now (). Designing effective bioinformatics tools to mine useful information from these data is a challenging task. In gene level, much effort has been devoted to detect the genes with significantly higher mutation rate across samples than background mutation rate (). Several studies have detected some important gene mutations in cancer progression, but they can't capture the heterogeneity of genome aberrations. Many studies found that there is little overlap between the gene mutations of two samples even if they come from the same patient (). It is well known that different gene mutations may target the same pathway (). Therefore, it is necessary to shift the point of view from gene to pathway level, which is helpful to capture the heterogeneous patterns in cancer. There have been several studies to discover the mutation patterns in pathway level (). Most of them are based on known information about pathways and try to find out which ones are significantly perturbed. However, this kind of methods has one obvious limitation: they only consider those known pathways. Taking into account the incompleteness of knowledge about pathways, it is indispensable to develop new algorithms to discover mutated driver pathways or gene sets without relying on prior knowledge. Given the huge number of genes in the whole genome, it seems to be an unsolvable problem to enumerate and test all the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. candidates due to the enormous number of possible gene combinations. Several recent studies about combinatorial patterns of mutations in cancer shed light on how to solve this problem (). They found that driver pathways often cover a large number of samples. More importantly, usually a single mutation is enough to perturb one pathway. In other words, the mutation of genes in one pathway usually exhibit mutual exclusivity. There have been several studies using these rules to expand the existing pathway based methods and identify completely new gene sets ().proposed the method Mutual Exclusivity Modules (MEMo) to detect modules that obey the mutual exclusivity rule within a gene functional network constructed based on prior knowledge. In contrast proposed a method that identifies functional modules without any information other than patterns of recurrent and mutually exclusive aberrations. More recently introduced a novel scoring function by combining two measures (i.e. 'coverage' and 'exclusivity') to identify the mutated driver pathway using the mutation data. The maximization of this scoring function is defined as the maximum weight submatrix problem, which was solved by a stochastic search method. However, there is still no exact algorithm for solving this problem. Moreover, considering the noise of the mutation data, it's interesting to incorporate more information into this framework to improve this model. In this study, we propose two methods to solve the so called maximum weight submatrix problem (), which is designed to de novo identify mutated driver pathways from mutation data in cancer. The first one is based on a binary linear programming (BLP) model, which is an exact method. This method can be employed for assessing other approximate or and heuristic algorithms. The second one is based on the genetic algorithm (GA), which is a stochastic and flexible method. It can be employed to optimize other scoring functions or incorporate other types of information to improve the first method. We have integrated the gene expression data to achieve this. To test the efficiency of our methods, we first apply them onto simulated data and compare them with another method. We further apply our methods onto five biological datasets. The results show that our integrative model can identify more biologically relevant gene sets than the one without expression data.
