Motivation: Identification of functionally equivalent genes in different species is essential to understand the evolution of biological pathways and processes. At the same time, identification of strings of conserved orthologous genes helps identify complex genomic rearrangements across different organisms. Such an insight is particularly useful, for example, in the transfer of experimental results between different experimental systems such as Drosophila and mammals. Results: Here, we describe the Encapsulated gene by gene Matching (EGM) approach, a method that employs a graph matching strategy to identify gene orthologs and conserved gene segments. Given a pair of genomes, EGM constructs a global gene match for all genes taking into account gene context and family information. The Hungarian method for identifying the maximum weight matching in bipartite graphs is employed, where the resulting matching reveals one to one correspondences between nodes (genes) in a manner that maximizes the gene similarity and context. Conclusion: We tested our approach by performing several comparisons including a detailed Human versus Mouse genome mapping. We find that the algorithm is robust and sensitive in detecting orthologs and conserved gene segments. EGM can sensitively detect rearrangements within large and small chromosomal segments. The EGM tool is fully automated and easy to use compared to other more complex methods that also require extensive manual intervention and input. Availability: The EGM software, Supplementary information and other tools are available online from http://vbc.

introduction inferring orthology relationships and identifying conserved gene segments are essential tasks in genome comparison. Identification of matching genes and their contiguous strings provide a perspective * To whom correspondence should be addressed. on how genomes are related, how they function and how the species evolve. Segments of conserved homologous genes across species are termed as conserved synteny (). A core task in identifying conserved synteny is the assignment of putative orthologous genes. The presence of several homologous genes across the species makes this a complex task. However, global genome properties used in comparative studies have shown that strings of genes are well preserved, especially in closely related organisms (). Further, genes with evolutionary relationship tend to conserve their genomic context, especially in closely related species (). Therefore, gene context and neighborhood provides important information for assigning the best orthologs. Commonly, methods used to identify orthologs and synteny between a pair of genomes work by identifying homologous genes, followed by their expansion to build larger collinear blocks of similar genes (). These techniques can be grouped into two categories from an algorithmic perspective (): (i) the first category is similar to an 'alignment' of molecular sequences. semi automated techniques have been used to align genome sequences mainly when information regarding the conserved regions is known, such as, in the comparison of Mycoplasma genitalium and m pneumo nio ae species presented in. Often, these semi automated techniques work by initially identifying conserved regions using all against all gene comparisons. Manual identification of conserved regions is challenging, especially when larger genomes with complex rearrangements are involved (). These regions are then separated and aligned using standard tools such as BLAST (). In addition, automated methods to determine conserved regions based on the comparison of fixed length segments (string of genes) have been developed, such as those used to compare the genomes of Caenorhabditis briggsae and c elegans in. However, they can not be efficiently applied in the case of large sequences (The second classification of techniques can be categorized as 'matching' of corresponding homologous genes. Unlike alignments, where the precedence of the nodes (genes) is maintained, matching based techniques work

discussion egm presents a further step towards fully automating the complex process of gene by gene matching. EGM is a powerful tool capable of identifying the best one to one gene correspondences between a pair of genomes that leads to the identification of conserved homologous segments, a crucial step in the identification of syntenic regions. We have shown the EGM tool to be a useful method that integrates several pieces of information through the pipeline to produce a global comparative map. A series of complex genome comparison, including a Human and Mouse comparison, were performed using EGM. The results clearly show its effectiveness in providing a detailed comparison. The results include information about the putative gene orthologs, protein families, their context and organization on the genomes. Our experiments show that EGM is able to sensitively identify conserved gene segments and reveal complex evolutionary rearrangement events in large scale species level and small scale chromosome level data. The combination of data provided by EGM comparison is a useful tool in the prediction of protein function. With respect to conserved gene segments, encapsulated genomes allow easier detection of identical cluster labels rather than individual proteins. Encapsulation also makes it easy to comprehend gene context and topology information, especially in highly conserved regions; we believe this has a potential to help researchers explain their functional significance and possible interactions. Comparison with dag chain er ad hore and os finder revealed eg ms ability to consistently detect more orthologs while maintaining high similarity. dag chain er works by utilizing the diagonal properties from the anchors, and similar to the findings of, the precision to identify accurate orthologs diminishes when comparing distant species (such as the comparisons involving the Zebrafish) as non orthologous anchors significantly out number the orthologous anchors in the input; therefore, resulting in fewer gene matches in smaller syntenic regions. ad hore a quality based method, determines orthologous segments by iteratively increasing the inter-segmental distance threshold for sets of anchors that fit diagonal linear regressions. The quality of these diagonals is assessed by the goodness of their fit. Overall, dag chain er ad hore and os finder performed well in the comparisons between the Human, Mouse and Rat genomes, but to a lesser degree in comparisons involving more distantly related organisms such as the Zebrafish genome. However, from a point of view of the methodology, a practical limitation with dag chain er and ad hore is their reliance on quality parameter scoring schemes that are not well characterized and difficult to ascertain when little is known about the genomes being compared. Further, dag chain er and ad hore gene matches reveal many to many relationships, and in many cases this leads to many variations of the same conserved segments being reported (). The EnsEMBL compara database tool curates multi-species comparative data. We utilized these compara curated orthologs to evaluate the precision of the four methods mentioned here. EGM showed high precision in detecting true positive orthologs for species at varying evolutionary distances. Identification of best one to one gene matches between a pair of genomes is a pivotal step in characterizing unknown proteins, as such relationships help identify genes with common ancestors (). In the case of EGM, the identification of best orthologs relies on sequence similarity and conservation of genome context and not on any quality based measure or threshold. The use of similarity scores in detecting functional orthologs remains a preferred method used in several studies, and was found to perform significantly well in comparison to other more sophisticated techniques (). Further, as mentioned earlier, one to one orthologs are important in several studies ranging from protein protein interactions in multiple species to identification of biological pathways. However, as thousands of new proteins are sequenced from increasingly complex genomes, the task of assigning orthologs is becoming more complex. In addition, the presence of large protein families (paralogs), evolutionary processes such as speciation and gene duplications or both are not uncommon (). Therefore, it is a non-trivial, yet important task, to identify co orthologs as opposed to only the 'best' orthologs, and homologous segments to paint a more comprehensive evolutionary picture. As future directions, we are pursuing to evolve our EGM approach to perform this task. Deploying an iterative strategy, where at every iteration, a new set of matching can be reported, while eliminating the possibility of identifying the previously reported matching. We believe, collectively from all iterations we can extract sets of co orthologs and syntenic regions. A bottleneck that remains in most of the current methods is the reliance on external tools (such as BLAST) to assign initial similarity relationships. This is often time consuming and involves manual processing. We believe that alignment free methods () can be employed to significantly accelerate this task with reasonable sensitivity. We are also pursuing this as a future direction. Similarly, visualizing comparative maps remains complicated. Much of these data are generated as long text files unrolling complex information. Recently, resources such as the Synteny Database () along with other web technologies such as HTML5, have demonstrated their usefulness to simplify the visualization. Development of efficient visualization tools can greatly improve the analysis of such data.

conclusion gene similarity, gene context and order are a common theme when searching for functionally related genes and overall conservation of proteins. Analyzing these properties often requires manual intervention (). We believe that EGM with its modular approach is able to help automate these tasks. We have found EGM to be a powerful method that identifies gene matching at the one to one level. The EGM tool is a simple to use and fully automated. Our results indicate that EGM has a great potential in its competitive performance in comparison with other popular approaches based on comparisons between several species. The resulting comparative maps have also shown EGM to be sensitive in detecting complex rearrangement events. In addition, the output produced by EGM clearly depicts how individual genes match across a pair of genomes, their genomic context and protein family information. EGM is able to perform two major integrated tasks: (i) finding the best ortholog for each gene and (ii) identifying homologous segments shared between the compared species.
