A large number of genomes have been sequenced, allowing a range of comparative studies. Here, we present the eukaryotic Gene Order Browser with information on the order of protein and non-coding RNA (ncRNA) genes of 74 different eukaryotic species. The browser is able to display a gene of interest together with its genomic context in all species where that gene is present. Thereby, questions related to the evolution of gene organization and non-random gene order may be examined. The browser also provides access to data collected on pairs of adjacent genes that are evolutionarily conserved. Availability: ego b as well as underlying data are freely available at

introduction the large number of eukaryotic genome sequences currently available has made extensive comparative analysis possible. For instance, studies of the conservation of gene order will help to understand genome evolution in general and what factors restrict the shuffling of genes. Databases and genome browsers have therefore emerged to compare genomes and gene order in different species. Some focus on specific organelles such as the OGRe () and Plastid Gene Order Database (), while others cover a specific phylogenetic group like y gob () and genomic us (). Typically gene comparisons between species are possible. We here present the eukaryotic Gene Order Browser ego b which is useful for comparing and displaying genes with respect to their genomic environment. There are features that distinguishes ego b from previously available 'gene order browsers'. First, non-coding RNA (ncRNA) genes are considered in addition to protein coding genes. Secondly, gene orthologs homologs are identified using both OrthoMCL and Pfam. Thirdly, we consider a wide range of eukaryotic species representing all important eukaryotic phylogenetic groups; 19 metazoans, the choa no flagellate mono siga brevi collis 27 fungal species, 7 viridiplantae, 6 al veo lata 5 hetero kont s 2 a moe bozo ans 4 eu glen oz oans and the three deep branching organisms Giardia lamblia, Naegleria gruber i and Trichomonas vaginalis. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
