We present a significantly improved version of the flow type and RchyOptimyx bioconductor based pipeline that is both 14 times faster and can accommodate multiple levels of biomarker expression for up to 96 markers. With these improvements, the pipeline is positioned to be an integral part of data analysis for high throughput experiments on high dimensional single cell assay platforms, including flow cytometry, mass cytometry and single cell rt qpcr. Availability: flow type and RchyOptimyx are distributed under the Artistic 2.0 license through Bioconductor.

introduction flow cytometry has undergone a 'chromatic explosion' over the past decade and can now measure 17 markers at once for each of hundreds of thousands of individual cells (). Since then, mass cytometry has enabled measurement of 3045 markers cell (), whereas single cell multiplexed rt qpcr can measure 5096 messenger rnas cell (). The growth in high throughput single cell data continues to outpace development of corresponding bioinformatics techniques (). To answer this challenge, we previously developed flow type () and RchyOptimyx (). flow type uses partitioning of cells, either manually or by clustering, into positive or negative for each marker to enumerate all cell types in a sample, e.g.. RchyOptimyx measures the importance of these cell types by correlating their abundance to external outcomes, such as disease state or patient survival, and distills the identified phenotypes to their simplest possible form. These packages have been used to identify several novel cell populations correlated with HIV outcome (). More recently, this pipeline has been used to evaluate standardized immunological panels (), to optimize lymphoma diagnosis () and to analyze a range of other clinical data (unpublished data). However, the higher dimensionality of data produced by mass cytometry generates up to 3 45 % 10 21 possible cell types, with an even greater number (up to 3 96 % 10 45 ) for single cell qPCR; these magnitudes are beyond the capabilities of flow type and RchyOptimyx. Furthermore, flow type and RchyOptimyx have thus far only treated cells as being either positive or negative for a marker. In practice, many biomarkers can have a range of expression levels such as 'dim' and 'bright'. In this application note, we detail architectural improvements to flow type and RchyOptimyx to overcome these limitations.
