Motivation: In high throughput screens (HTS) of small molecules for activity in an in vitro assay, it is common to search for active scaffolds, with at least one example successfully confirmed as an active. The number of active scaffolds better reflects the success of the screen than the number of active molecules. Many existing algorithms for deciding which hits should be sent for confirmatory testing neglect this concern. Results: We derived a new extension of a recently proposed economic framework, diversity oriented prioritization (DOP), that aims by changing which hits are sent for confirmatory testing— to maximize the number of scaffolds with at least one confirmed active. In both retrospective and prospective experiments, DOP accurately predicted the number of scaffold discoveries in a batch of confirmatory experiments, improved the rate of scaffold discovery by 8–17%, and was surprisingly robust to the size of the confirmatory test batches. As an extension of our previously reported economic framework, DOP can be used to decide the optimal number of hits to send for confirmatory testing by iteratively computing the cost of discovering an additional scaffold, the marginal cost of discovery.

introduction all screeners must decide which initial positives ('hits') from a high throughput screen (HTS) to submit for confirmatory experiments (). In HTS of small molecules for biological activity, several hits are often experimentally confirmed by ensuring they exhibit the characteristic dose response behavior common to true actives. Sending the wrong molecules for confirmatory testing wastes resources, reducing the amount of useful information in screening results; this is especially true in the context of small molecule screens which are often very noisy. * To whom correspondence should be addressed most commonly used hit selection methods focus on maximizing the number of successfully confirmed molecules in subsequent confirmatory experiments. These methods include correcting time and well position dependent systematic error in measurements (), exploiting chemical information (), better normalizing screening data (), choosing better experimental controls () or bypassing hit selection entirely by testing all molecules in dose response experiments (). These methods are effective, increasing the number of successful confirmations, but largely ignore the fact that screeners are often looking to maximize the total number of clusters groups of molecules with similar structure containing examples with confirmed activity (). Some methods use molecular clustering to improve the design of HTS experiments. For example, molecular clusters have been used to reduce the total number of molecules in the primary screen by about two thirds (). Similarly, other studies pick molecules for follow-up using statistical tests on the data from a single dose screen to find clusters of active molecules (). These methods favor clusters that contain several active molecules, and attempt to send all these active molecules for confirmatory testing. As intended, these methods successfully increase the number of active molecules identified in confirmatory testing. In contrast, diversity oriented prioritization (DOP) aims to maximize the diversity of confirmed actives by maximizing the number of clusters with at least one successfully confirmed active. Rather than picking groups of similar molecules, DOP picks molecules from as many different groups as possible given the cost constraint. This aim is motivated by the fact that screeners often cluster confirmed active molecules to pick series of molecules to optimize, and that the number of series with at least one confirmed active is a reasonable way of measuring the information obtained from a screen (). The DOP method extends a recently described economic framework for interpreting HTS data, initially introduced to decide how many hits to send for confirmatory testing (). This framework is used to iteratively choose each batch of hits to be sent for confirmatory testing so as to maximize the expected surplus of the batch. The expected surplus is computed using three mathematical models: utility, cost and predictive. The utility model specifies the preferences of the screener, the cost model tracks

discussion in both retrospective and prospective experiments, DOP increased the rate of scaffold discovery from an HTS experiment. The key result of this study is that screeners preferences, when more accurately modeled, can be applied to change the order in which molecules are tested so as to increase the rate at which active scaffolds are discovered confirmatory tests run on the same set of molecules, sorted by DOP with different batch sizes. The table indicates the number of confirmatory experiments required before some percentage (75 or 100%) of the total active scaffolds in the set were discovered. Percentages in parenthesis indicate improvement with respect to confirmatory tests run in order of HTS results several additional issues arise when using DOP in practice. First, there will be several molecules that are very likely active but will not be sent for confirmatory testing. These molecules are de prioritized because they belong to scaffold groups with at least one example already confirmed active. This is not the behavior some might expect from a prioritization algorithm. One extension to address this concern would be to report the probability of activity the output of LR or nn1 for all the molecules from scaffold groups with at least one confirmed active. A succinct way to summarize this information is to report the total number of actives and inactives expected if all the molecules in the group had been tested (). DOP could be used as the first stage of a two stage prioritization protocol, where the first few batches are selected to maximize scaffold discovery. In the second stage, with the screener's input, a number of scaffolds could then be selected for follow-up experiments based on their structures, the initial results from the confirmatory experiments and the predicted number of actives and inactives associated with them. Additional examples of the selected scaffold would then be sent for confirmatory testing to build enough
