We developed a modular and scalable framework called eo ulsan based on the had oop implementation of the map reduce algorithm dedicated to high throughput sequencing data analysis. eo ulsan allows users to easily set up a cloud computing cluster and automate the analysis of several samples at once using various software solutions available. Our tests with Amazon Web Services demonstrated that the computation cost is linear with the number of instances booked as is the running time with the increasing amounts of data.

introduction high throughput sequencing data analysis requires large computer clusters associated with expensive costs that are only profitable for large genomics centers. Outsourcing data analysis over cloud computing infrastructure is one alternative. Nevertheless, software that use distributed algorithm are not common among bioinformatics developers, and only few solutions have been made available for sequencing data (). Here we present eo ulsan an open source framework, to facilitate high throughput sequencing data by the use of distributed computation. This software has been developed in order to automate the analysis of a large number of samples at once, simplify the configuration of the cloud computing infrastructure and work with various already available analysis solutions.

conclusion with our framework, we aimed to facilitate high throughput sequencing analysis on cloud computing services with an automatic, modular and efficient tool. This approach differs from other solutions already available for distributed calculation such as Myrna, CloudBurst or Crossbow (), where the cloud computing implementation is made around a unique analysis solution. In addition, eo ulsan is also complementary to the customizable Galaxy server solution as it allows for batch analyses and it contains a full automation process able to handle external file locations and distributed file system more generally, we have first implemented an automated rnase q analysis pipeline but all the tools are already included within eo ulsan for other applications such as SNP calling or ChIP Peak analysis. The Java plug-in system we developed as well as the full documentation we provide, allow for user contribution by the integration of other available solution in eo ulsan. The distributed calculation process we used is based on had oop and it can be installed on numerous cluster server configurations. We made our proof of concept using AWS solution as it includes EMR, an advanced service based on EC2 that easily allows had oop distributed computation solutions to be deployed. However, we are working to make our software independent of EMR to work directly on EC2 services. Such an evolution will allow eo ulsan to be run on any other cloud computing solutions such as Open Source initiatives like open nebula or open stack. This would open future possibilities by creating regional genomic computer infrastructures (like i plant for example) to be shared among several local high throughput sequencing users. With a dedicated high speed network, this can speed up the time transfer process. In addition, this could also favor the standardization of analysis pipelines developed from the bioinformatics community, making high throughput sequencing technologies really accessible for a wide audience.
