epi toolkit is a virtual workbench for immunological questions with a focus on vaccine design. It offers an array of immuno informatics tools covering MHC genotyping, epitope and neo epitope prediction, epitope selection for vaccine design, and epitope assembly. In its recently re-implemented version 2.0, epi toolkit provides a range of new functionality and for the first time allows combining tools into complex workflows. For inexperienced users it offers simplified interfaces to guide the users through the analysis of complex immunological data sets. Availability and implementation: http://www.epitoolkit.de Contact

introduction epitope based vaccine design offers novel and rational ways to develop vaccines based on genomic information. The design process undergoes several steps. The first step aims at identifying antigenic peptides (called epitopes) that induce a t cell mediated immune reaction after presentation on the cell surface by proteins of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). In the second step a subset, usually of size 1020 epitopes, is selected forming the basis of the vaccine. Due to the high polymorphism within the MHC cluster, each individual possesses a unique set of MHC alleles and therefore presents a different set of epitopes. Hence, it is not only necessary to identify the individuals MHC genotype but also to tailor the epitope selection to match the MHC allele restrictions of a population population optimized vaccine) or that of an individual (personalized vaccines). The third step of the design pipeline is concerned with the delivery of the selected epitopes. A common strategy concatenates the epitopes into a so called string of beads polypeptide. The epitope order within a string of beads plays a crucial role especially in degradation. Therefore it is necessary to optimize the ordering such that the recovery probability of the epitopes is maximal. Since the underlying data and the interdependencies of the design pipeline are complex and require bioinformatics tools to obtain optimal results, we developed a web based platform epi toolkit et k to make such approaches accessible to a broader audience. et k extends its predecessor by supporting MHC genotyping, and epitope assembly besides epitope discovery and epitope selection. Thus, it covers each of the described design steps and can be used for personalized or population optimized vaccine development as well as for other immunological applications (e.g. large scale epitope prediction). Additionally, functionalities such as the supported prediction methods and input formats have been extended. Also et k is now based on a customized version of the open source platform Galaxy (), which allows a flexible combination of tools into workflows, a reliable recording and sharing of results, and the integration with high performance computing resources.

conclusion with et k we provide a flexible and yet easy to use platform for rational vaccine design. Beyond the presented application et k can be used to tackle a manifold of other immunological questions and thus should not only be valuable for applied medical but also for basic immunological research.
