Motivation: t cell epitope identification is a critical immuno informatic problem within vaccine design. To be an epitope, a peptide must bind an MHC protein. Results: Here, we present epi top the first server predicting MHC class II binding based on proteo chemometrics a QSAR approach for ligands binding to several related proteins. epi top uses a quantitative matrix to predict binding to 12 HLA-DRB1 alleles. It identifies 89% of known epitopes within the top 20% of predicted binders, reducing laboratory labour, materials and time by 80%. epi top is easy to use, gives comprehensive quantitative predictions and will be expanded and updated with new quantitative matrices over time.

introduction t cell epitope identification is a challenging immuno informatic problem within vaccine design. To be an epitope, a peptide should bind a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) protein. For MHC class I, epitopes typically comprise 810 residues. The MHC class II binding site is open ended allowing much longer peptides to bind, although only nine amino acids occupy the site. Many computational methods have been developed for t cell epitopes: see Flower (2008). Many work well and are widely used by immunologists and vaccin olo gists. Most available epitope prediction methods separately address peptides binding particular MHC proteins, developing models for a single target allele. For MHC class II, only the generalized artificial neural network ann based server net mhc ii pan uses both peptide and human leukocyte antigen (HLA) sequence information (). Recently, we developed a proteo chemometrics based approach to MHC class II prediction (). proteo chemometrics a quantitative structure activity relationships (QSAR) approach originally developed by wik berg (), deals with ligands binding to several related proteins. In conventional QSAR, the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. X matrix of descriptors includes only information from ligands. In proteo chemometrics the X matrix contains information from proteins and ligands. A single proteo chemo metric model could potentially predict peptide binding to many MHC proteins. We have developed and validated several models for binding to several HLA-DRB1 alleles, and now make the best model available in the server epi top. It uses a quantitative matrix (QM) to predict peptide affinity to 12 HLA-DRB1 proteins: DRB1*0101, DRB1*0301, DRB1*0401, DRB1*0404, DRB1*0405, DRB1* 0701, DRB1*0802, DRB1*0901, DRB1*1101, DRB1*1201, DRB1*1301 and DRB1*1501.

discussion we undertook a rigorous evaluation of the performance of epi top across three datasets, comparing it to that of either four or eight other servers, using either recall statistics or ROC analysis. Overall, epi top compares very favourably with other more specialized models. For the anti jen and ie db datasets, epi top performs sub optimally only at the highest specificity; since it is strongly inclusive and much broader in its predictive potential, other much more highly focused, allele specific models outperform it at this highly stringent level. At more permissive thresholds, and within statistical error, epi top performs identically to best in class servers. For Lin's dataset, the five tested binders were much close in performance: within the limits of error, epi top performs sub optimally only for DRB1*0101. It is interesting to note that epi top is very much the best model for DRB1*0301. For the identification of binding cores, epi top again performs well, but interestingly core identification correlates inversely with overall statistical perform, perhaps suggesting that much remains to be understood regarding class mhc peptide interaction. Taken together, results from these various benchmarking exercises both validate epi top and indicate that development of a synergistic meta server which integrates results from several servers should prove a useful exercise, hopefully yielding significant overall enhancements.

conclusion epi top is the first proteo chemometrics based server for t cell epitope prediction. It is a tool for performing preliminary computational analyses of large datasets for accelerated epitope based vaccine design. It is easy to use, gives comprehensive quantitative predictions and will be expanded and updated with new QMs.
