Motivation: Epistasis is the interactions among multiple genetic variants. It has emerged to explain the missing heritability that a marginal genetic effect does not account for by genome wide association studies, and also to understand the hierarchical relationships between genes in the genetic pathways. The Fishers geometric model is common in detecting the epistatic effects. However, despite the substantial successes of many studies with the model, it often fails to discover the functional dependence between genes in an epistasis study, which is an important role in inferring hierarchical relationships of genes in the biological pathway. Results: We justify the imperfect ness of Fishers model in the simulation study and its application to the biological data. Then, we propose a novel generic epistasis model that provides a flexible solution for various biological putative epistatic models in practice. The proposed method enables one to efficiently characterize the functional dependence between genes. Moreover, we suggest a statistical strategy for determining a recessive or dominant link among epistatic expression quantitative trait locus to enable the ability to infer the hierarchical relationships. The proposed method is assessed by simulation experiments of various settings and is applied to human brain data regarding schizophrenia. Availability and implementation: The MATLAB source codes are publicly available at: http://biome cis uta edu epistasis
introduction epistasis the interaction effect among unlinked loci or between genes, makes a considerable contribution to phenotypic variation in the polygenic mechanism of complex human diseases such as psychiatric disorder, diabetes and cancer. Nonetheless, many studies that identify the genetic susceptible factors tend to ignore the interaction effects between loci (). It is not surprising at all that the investigations of the genetic variability of individual genes by genome wide association study give the explanation only up to 40% in psychiatric disorder (). This fact implies that there should indeed be a 'missing heritability'. The missing heritability may include the interaction between multiple genes and environmental factors ().Although epistasis studies traditionally take into account qualitative categories of phenotypes, the recent rapid development of high throughput technologies, such as gene microarray, enables one to characterize the quantitative interaction, e.g. gene expression. Gene expression is an intermediate molecular phenotype between genotype and the higher level phenotypes such as human diseases. For the quantitative analysis, the expression quantitative trait loci e qtl mapping studies have prevailed to identify susceptible genetic loci and capture the insight of the genetic architecture of gene expression. Furthermore, the importance of detecting the quantitative epistasis analysis is recently being emphasized in many studies (). When William Bateson created the terminology, epistasis, it described the non independent prediction of segregation ratios by the action of individual gene (). However, epistasis has been interpreted in various ways to describe different phenomena for the last 100 years (). The uses of the term, epistasis, were viewed with three different perspectives: (1) compositional epistasis, (2) statistical epistasis and (3) functional epistasis (). To be short, compositional epistasis represents the biological phenomena that one allelic effect masks an allele at another locus, which describes the traditional meaning of epistasis. The presence of the compositional epistasis can be interpreted in the biological hierarchy between genes (). Statistical epistasis takes into account Fisher's model and its deviations, which describe the combinatory genetic effect within a population. The functional epistasis, which is also called protein protein interaction, is not dealt with in this article since the functional epistasis considers the molecular interactions between protein without genetic description. Compositional epistasis emphasizes the functional dependence between genes. It aims to infer gene regulatory networks or signaling pathways. Epistasis occurs when one allelic effect is modified or blocked by an allele at another locus, or when the combined multiple genetic variants produce non mendelian segregation ratios against the individual genetic effect. Since genes must be interacting with others, at least on the same pathway, the interactive effect to phenotype is clear. When a genetic mutation has the 'stopping' or 'standing above' effect to another mutation, the mutation is said to be epistatic and can be interpreted as the gene is downstream of the other. The epistatic relationship between the Melanocortin 1 receptor (Mc1r) and agouti on the coat color genetic pathway of a mouse is a good example to show the epistatic relationship () (). As shown in the 3  3 genotype contingency table in, the body colors of the offspring were investigated with all the combinations of knockout mutations of the genes. Mc1r seems to regulate the functionality of the genetic effect of agouti. That is, mc1r is the downstream gene of agouti in the melanocyte pathway. The melanocyte pathway can elucidate the epistatic relationship between the genes in. The quantitative epistasis analysis, e qtl epistasis, holds significant promise in inferring the hierarchical relationships between genes in biological pathways and its enrichment as well as the qualitative epistasis study (). The hierarchical interpretation of the epistatic gene pairs enables one to construct or enrich the biological pathways. A number of regression based methods have been suggested for inferring the gene regulatory network and their hierarchical relationships. As the classical quantitative epistasis analysis, the regression based approaches investigated the data that include reciprocal effects on the triplet combination of deletion mutant of a gene (). The studies have succeeded in inferring the hierarchical pathways of the genes as well as a rule between the interaction, for example, activating or repressing the downstream gene. However, the experiments were required tremendously expensive experiments for gene deletions, which is unfeasible to measure the effects of all possible gene deletions in practice. Most epistasis studies have been performed by using the statistical approach of Fisher's. Recently, the limitations of the statistical epistasis have been argued, and the development of a new approach has consistently been demanded (). In this article, we develop a novel method to solve two problems: (i) detecting the compositional epistasis and (ii) identifying the genetic hierarchical relationship between genes based using a regression model. We first present the biologically putative epistasis models and Fisher's model in Sections 2.1 and 2.2. Then, a generic epistasis model (GEM) is suggested to represent the biological models in Section 2.3. The optimal solutions for the parameter estimation of GEM are derived in Section 2.4. For the second problem, we propose a statistical approach to determine the hierarchical relationships when an epistasis occurs in the multiple genes in Section 2.5. In the simulation studies in Section 3.1, we show the performance of GEM, comparing Fisher's model on the various designed settings. We also apply GEM to the human brain data of schizophrenia, where the epistasis findings are described and a gene hierarchy on schizophrenia is inferred.

conclusion in this article, we proposed a novel GEM to detect the quantitatively compositional epistasis as well as the statistical epistasis. Fisher's model has been commonly used to detect epistasis as a tool for the statistical epistasis in many studies. However, many argue for the limited usage of Fisher's model due to the lack of the biological interpretation. The proposed method is designed to provide a flexible tool that detects epistasis on various biological models. The individual genetic effect size on the interactive effect of the GEM enables one to infer the hierarchical relationships between the genes. The optimal solutions for best fitted parameters to the data and the statistical approach for identifying the hierarchical relationship are provided. To justify the lack of Fisher's model and to assess the proposed model, we conducted simulation studies designed with the various epistatic settings. In the simulation studies, we showed the epistatic situations that Fisher's model lacks the ability to detect, and the outstanding performance of the proposed model comparing Fisher's model. Furthermore, we applied the model to human brain data on schizophrenia. The assessment with the real biological data is not easy due to the lack of a well known grounded truth. However, the clear epistatic evidences are shown by the significance test the expansion of the proposed method to the epistasis study with more than two genes can be easily achieved in terms of a theory by adding more terms to the model. However, the genetic interaction effects with more than two would make the epistasis very complicated, and would need more biological putative scenarios. Furthermore, the interpretation of the hierarchical relationship would be challenging. Intensive future research is necessary for this issue. This exhaustive search approach is extremely expensive on a whole large scale genome study. However, it gives description al information of the epistatic model on multiple genes when certain designed targeting genes are given. In this article, the total scanning of the human brain data of schizophrenia between 35 698 SNPs and 76 genes (only susceptible genes) in the schizophrenia human brain data experiment was completed in several minutes with the program implemented by MATLAB on a personal computer. For the whole large scale genome study, the total search space will be (number of SNPs)  (number of SNPs1)  (number of genes 2 i.e. 852 963(SNP)  852 962(SNP1)  25 833(Gene)/2, which is intractable to investigate whole e qtl epistasis interactions. The improvements of its performance can be possible with parallel computing and distributed systems as well as extending it to a semi exhaustive approach for future research. Conflict of interest: none declared.
