Motivation: Molecular dynamics simulations provide detailed insights into the structure and function of biomolecular systems. Thus, they complement experimental measurements by giving access to experimentally inaccessible regimes. Among the different molecular dynamics techniques, native structure based models (SBMs) are based on energy landscape theory and the principle of minimal frustration. Typically used in protein and RNA folding simulations, they coarse grain the biomolecular system and or simplify the Hamiltonian resulting in modest computational requirements while achieving high agreement with experimental data. esb mtools streamlines running and evaluating SBM in a comprehensive package and offers high flexibility in adding experimental or bioinformatics derived restraints. Results: We present a software package that allows setting up, modifying and evaluating SBM for both RNA and proteins. The implemented workflows include predicting protein complexes based on bioinformatics derived inter protein contact information, a standardized setup of protein folding simulations based on the common PDB format, calculating reaction coordinates and evaluating the simulation by free energy calculations with weighted histogram analysis method or by phi values. The modules interface with the molecular dynamics simulation program GROMACS. The package is open source and written in architecture independent python 2
introduction energy landscape theory and the principle of minimal frustration stipulate that biomolecular evolution results in an effective overall bias of a macromolecule's energy landscape being funnel shaped toward its global minimum at the native folded state (). Native structure based models (SBMs, also often referred to as G " o models realize an idealized minimally frustrated folding funnel devoid of any energetic traps by a simple Hamiltonian () that allows molecular dynamics simulations to reach biologically relevant timescale. The SBM potential is based on the native folded structure and native contact information. The number of formed native contacts in a structure is the dominant reaction coordinate typically called Q. The Q value can be used as a reaction coordinate to investigate folding paths or as an order parameter for the weighted histogram analysis method (). The SBM can be combined with coarse graining approaches. Proteins can be represented by single beads at the positions of their C atoms. Accordingly, there exist formulations of the SBM at an all atom () and C () graining level (see Supplementary Information). bioinformatics derived contact information () or experimental measurements () can be added as restraints to SBM. Eventually, the SBM defines a force field that results in computationally tractable simulations that facilitate simulations on the effective timescale of seconds (for small proteins even on single CPUs) in combination with extensive sampling. Existing web based solutions like the smog server () allow a straightforward setup and evaluation of standard SBM. Our open source esb mtools extends the customization options enabling the setup of automatized workflows and strong modifications of SBM by, e.g. adding arbitrary additional contacts, protein rna structures, novel ligand topologies or manipulating force field parameters.
