Motivation: Very large studies are required to provide sufficiently big sample sizes for adequately powered association analyses. This can be an expensive undertaking and it is important that an accurate sample size is identified. For more realistic sample size calculation and power analysis, the impact of unmeasured aetiological determinants and the quality of measurement of both outcome and explanatory variables should be taken into account. Conventional methods to analyse power use closed form solutions that are not flexible enough to cater for all of these elements easily. They often result in a potentially substantial overestimation of the actual power. Results: In this article, we describe the Estimating sample size and Power in R by Exploring Simulated Study Outcomes tool that allows assessment errors in power calculation under various biomedical scenarios to be incorporated. We also report a real world analysis where we used this tool to answer an important strategic question for an existing cohort. Availability and implementation: The software is available for online calculation and downloads at

introduction a critical question to answer when designing or extending large scale studies and bio banks is what sample size is required to achieve adequate statistical power (i.e. the ability to detect the true determinants of the outcome). For a large study aimed at exploring weak effects, the answer can have major implications for funding and resources because the number of participants to be recruited (sample size) depends critically on the desired level of power; the higher the desired power, the larger the required sample size. Among other things, the answer also depends on the quality of the measurements of the variables of interest since assessment errors, in both outcome and explanatory variables, can substantially reduce the power of association studies (). Failure to take account of such assessment errors in power analyses at the design stage of a study may lead to a serious over-estimation of its true statistical power and result in a research platform that is critically underpowered when it comes to analysis. Most conventional approaches to estimating the sample size required to achieve adequate statistical power fail to account rigorously for the sensitivity and specificity of the assessment of categorical outcome and explanatory variables or the reliability of quantitative variables (). Furthermore, proper incorporation of the impact of assessment error in multiple variables, and of the analytic disturbance that may arise from variables that have not been measured at all, generally demands non-trivial extension of the methods being used and so is not attempted. But given the
