Motivation: The relative abundance of retroviral insertions in a host genome is important in understanding the persistence and pathogenesis of both natural retroviral infections and retroviral gene therapy vectors. It could be estimated from a sample of cells if only the host genomic sites of retroviral insertions could be directly counted. When host genomic DNA is randomly broken via sonication and then amplified, amplicons of varying lengths are produced. The number of unique lengths of amplicons of an insertion site tends to increase according to its abundance, providing a basis for estimating relative abundance. However, as abundance increases amplicons of the same length arise by chance leading to a non-linear relation between the number of unique lengths and relative abundance. The difficulty in calibrating this relation is compounded by sample specific variations in the relative frequencies of clones of each length. Results: A likelihood function is proposed for the discrete lengths observed in each of a collection of insertion sites and is maximized with a hybrid expectation maximization algorithm. Patient data illustrate the method and simulations show that relative abundance can be estimated with little bias, but that variation in highly abundant sites can be large. In replicated patient samples, variation exceeds what the model implies requiring adjustment as in Efron (2004) or using jackknife standard errors. Consequently, it is advantageous to collect replicate samples to strengthen inferences about relative abundance. Availability: An R package implements the algorithm described here. It is available at http://soniclength.r-forge.r-project.org/

introduction the new deep sequencing methods allow longitudinal tracking of DNA sequence variation in cell populations. These methods have been applied extensively to studies of activation of host cell genes by integration of retroviral DNA. In human gene therapy, vectors derived from retroviruses have been used to treat a sizeable and growing number of diseases, but there have been several cases of insertional activation of cancer genes, leading to intense interest in the relationship of vector integration sites in the human genome to the size of cell populations harboring that clone (). In infections by human t cell leukemia viruses, the relationship between integration site position and cell clone size is likely to be important for leukemia, but the full importance remains to be clarified (). Distributions of large numbers of integration sites can be determined using the new deep sequencing methods, but use of this information to estimate abundance is complicated by several types of recovery biases (). In a typical experiment, blood cells are obtained from an htlv1 infected subject or gene therapy patient, genomic DNA is purified from the heterogeneous populations of cells and then DNA is cleaved, ideally by a relatively random method such as DNA shearing. Short DNA linkers are ligated onto the DNA ends, then host virus junctions are amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using one primer that binds the linker and another that binds the viral DNA end. PCR products are then sequenced in bulk, and the resulting reads are aligned to the human genome. Here we present computational tools for relating this type of data to the relative abundance of each cell clone, as marked by integration sites, in the starting cell population. Suppose that the number of cells in a patient that could harbor a viral insertion is C and the number of sites or locations in the genome of each cell (determined by chromosome, position and strand) is L. Then there are C L places in which such an insertion might be found. Use M il to indicate whether there is an insertion in site i in cell l. Let M il = 1 for an insertion and M il = 0 for no insertion there. The abundance of an insertion at one of the L sites is the number of cells hosting an integrated retroviral DNA at that site. That is,is the fraction of the places harboring an insertion whose site is i. The collection of relative abundances is used to characterize a retroviral infection and monitor it for changes. As examples, the number of different insertion sites, the appearance of a highly abundant site, an increase in the number of different sites and measures of the diversity of sites such as the Shannon Information or Gini coefficient all indicate features of the disease or its response to treatment. Previous work has tracked such measures to understand disease progression after infection with human t cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) (), latency in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infections () and cell dynamics after human gene correction with integrating vectors (). Cleaving the DNA from a sample of cells using restriction enzymes or mu transposons () and sequencing the fragments hace in be y potentially allows characterization of the relative abundance of cell clones marked by distinct integration sites (), but variation in the genomic distribution of restriction sites or sites favored by mu transposons introduces biases that can be hard to correct. Breaking DNA by sonication is nearly random (), so that if those fragments could be directly counted, estimates of abundance could be obtained. However, it is necessary to amplify the fragments by PCR before they can be sequenced, and variation in the number of fragments that each parent fragment generates vastly inflates the variance of estimates or abundance (Section 12 in Supplementary Material) based on the read count the number of fragments whose sequence is mapped to a single site. In data such as report where most insertion sites only contribute one or two parent fragments to the sequencer, simple read counts are useless. However, when multiple cells contain an insertion at the same site, random shearing by sonication usually produces fragments of different lengths. The number of different lengths associated with each integration site tends to increase with its abundance, but the increase is non-linear due to coincidental shearing at the same site in multiple genomes empirically fitted a calibration curve for this non-linear function using three dilutions of genomic DNA from an HTLV-1 infected individual, and used it to estimate the number of parent fragments of each site in their samples. Below, estimation of the relative abundance of a retroviral insertion site in an infected patient using the collection of fragment lengths for each integration site is considered. We introduce some notation for referring to data on retroviral insertions and mention some measures that may be of interest in studying populations of sites. Then we describe a maximum likelihood estimator based on the distinct lengths of clones recovered. A brief review of procedures for collecting fragment length data for retroviral insertions is given in Section 2, see for more details. We devise a statistical approach for estimating the abundances of retroviral insertion sites and an algorithm to implement it. The algorithm is applied to real and simulated data and the accuracy of the approach is assessed and compared with the method of. Supplementary Material provides extensive notes and more details, including studies of estimators of number of unseen species proposed by Chao (1987) and by, of the Shannon Information and the chaos hen coverage adjusted entropy () and the Gini Coefficient.

discussion we addressed the problem of estimating the abundance of insertion sites from data on fragment lengths by a maximum likelihood approach. Simulations showed that the method works well, when the estimated probabilities of fragment lengths are not too variable. When a glm is used to fit the fragment length distribution, the abundance estimates have little bias and the asymptotic standard errors accurately portray the variability in simulated data. These standard errors are available for single replicates, and provide a check on the model: empirical variations in triplicate s from patient data varied more than expected, showing over dispersion of abundance estimates. Further, the z statistics for the change in relative abundance have a broader distribution than the theory suggests. These observations emphasize the value of replication and mandate the use of standard errors derived empirically from replicates (as with a jackknife standard error) or by application of the large scale hypothesis testing approach (). Inspection of the data as histograms and as normal probability plots suggests that the large scale hypothesis testing framework is suitable for testing changes in relative abundance. The standard errors associated with relative abundances increase dramatically as the relative abundances increase 10% using the current setup. This makes it rather difficult to detect changes in the relative abundance of insertion sites that are highly abundant. For example, a change from 40% to 50% is below the limit of detection in data like those shown here in which there are three replicates. The standard errors of abundant sites would diminish if a sample were divided into more replicates. Jackknife corrections for bias in the total number of insertion sites, the entropy of abundances and their Gini coefficient due to unseen insertion sites were successful in simulations (Sections 4, 7 and 8 in Supplementary Material) in spite of a large fraction of unseen sites. These corrections were enabled by the replicates, which also allowed the computation of jackknife standard errors. Some heterogeneity of fragment lengths across sites was observed, the increase in power of added replicates to detect this also emphasizes the importance of replication. Even more replicates than the three used here may be needed for careful monitoring of patient status; the power to detect change in the abundance of highly abundant insertion sites is limited even with three replicates of each sample. In clinical monitoring in which highly abundant sites play a key role, an obvious way to increase power is to increase the number of replicates beyond the three replicates used here. Going forward, these methods allow much more detailed assessment of clonal behavior during HTLV-1 infection. In the first analysis of these data, abundances could only be estimated roughly and standard errors had to be empirically determined. Using the methods described here, combined with ongoing data acquisition, it will be possible to relate much more fine grained information on clonal abundance to clinically relevant parameters such as viral gene expression and leuke mo genesis
