Motivation: In profiling the composition and structure of complex microbial communities via high throughput amplicon sequencing, a very low proportion of community members are typically sampled. As a result of this incomplete sampling, estimates of dissimilarity between communities are often inflated, an issue we term pseudo b diversity. Results: We present a set of tools to identify and correct for the presence of pseudo b diversity in contrasts between microbial communities. The variably weighted Odum dissimilarity (D w odum allows for down weighting the influence of either abundant or rare tax a in calculating a measure of similarity between two communities. We show that down weighting the influence of rare tax a can be used to minimize pseudo b diversity arising from incomplete sampling. down weighting the influence of abundant tax a can increase the sensitivity of hypothesis testing. otus huff is an associated test for identifying the presence of pseudo b diversity in pairwise community contrasts. Availability and implementation: A Perl script for calculating the D w odum score from a tax on abundance table and performing pairwise contrasts with otus huff can be obtained at

introduction the size and diversity of microbial populations pose challenges to characterizing and contrasting communities. For instance, sequence based analyses of bacterial populations in soil frequently suggest the presence of more than 10 6 10 9 individuals distributed across thousands of distinct tax a per gram of soil (). Although the advent of high throughput sequencing technologies has increased the depth at which we are able to survey microbial community composition, in many cases sampling still detects only a fraction of the diversity present at a given site. For instance, working with rhizosphere soil samples from a grass host plant species obtained 30 00060 000 sequence reads per sample, yet estimated that they were able to detect only 90% of the OTUs that could have been observed at greater sampling depth. tax a that are present at low abundance may nevertheless be important to understanding community dynamics. For instance have demonstrated from analyses of time series in several different environments that many tax a are only conditionally rare, and may be present at dramatically higher abundances at other time points. While there is debate over the relative benefits of increasing sampling depth versus increasing the number of samples analyzed () it is becoming increasingly common to trade sample depth for more extensive replication. For instance, in a recent characterization of the arabidopsis associated microbio me researchers analyzed 1248 samples at 1000 sequence reads per sample (). These developments highlight the need for analytical approaches that are specifically designed to account for effects attributable to shallow sampling. It should be noted that incomplete sampling will be a more pressing issue for environments that harbor the most diverse microbial communities, such as soil. Beyond simply creating a census of which bacterial tax a are present in a given environment, researchers frequently desire to compare two or more species assemblages for differences in species composition and structure. A large number of indices are available for such purposes [summarized in (, but many of these were developed in systems for which it is possible to be nearly comprehensive in detecting species that are present in a given location (i.e. plant and animal communities). In contrast, the majority of species are likely to go undetected in shallow sequence based surveys of complex microbial communities. Indices for describing the resemblance between communities are often based either on species composition (i.e. presence absence measures) or on community structure (i.e. taking into consideration the relative abundance of species within each community). Both index types are sensitive to incomplete sampling (). When dealing with complex microbial communities, the inflation of dissimilarity due to incomplete sampling is a concern; differential detection of low abundance tax a may be simply due to insufficient sampling, and not to true absence from the community (). Furthermore, rare sequence variants may not always reflect true tax on presence or abundance; rather, they may be introduced through errors in DNA replication or sequencing (). Thus, the ability to adjust the influence of low abundance tax a on a measure of community resemblance is desirable. Indices that give less weight to low abundance community members exist within the current suite of community resemblance metrics (). For instance compared 14 different measures of b diversity and concluded that measures with high dependency on the distribution of abundant tax a were the least sensitive to under sampling (e.g. moris it a horn. However, differences among microbial communities, or microbial community response to experimental manipulation, may lie in changes in tax on abundance anywhere across the distribution from dominant to rare community members. Thus, a measure of dissimilarity should ideally be tunable in its sensitivity toward rare or dominant members. Among non phylogenetic measures of community resemblance, the only method that we are aware of that is tunable in sensitivity to rare tax a is the Normalized Expected Species Shared method of Grassle and Smith (1976). However, this method adjusts the influence of rare tax a by re-sampling an observed tax on abundance table at varying depths. Thus, this method relies upon the very problem we are trying to address (incomplete sampling), and leaves room for improvement. A variably weighted version of the phylogenetic distance measure uni frac has been proposed (), and will be discussed below. Recent parallel developments in the field of community diversity assessment have come to similar conclusions regarding the utility of calculating diversity indices across a range of sensitivities toward low abundance community members (). A number of statistical tests are available to assess the significance of differences in microbial community structure, including uni frac Parsimony, a mova and homo va. Schloss (2008) has provided a comparison of these methods, and suggests that each carries distinct benefits. However, the effects of incomplete sampling have not been well explored for statistical tests that contrast microbial community structure. Here, we present a new analytical method to contrast two samples, which indicates the likelihood that the observed samples were drawn from a common community. We illustrate the method using simulated data, as well as bacterial sequence data (partial 16S rRNA gene fragments) derived from 51 soil samples, collected across a range of geographic locations, plant communities and land uses.
