Motivation: Association analysis is the method of choice for studying complex multifactorial diseases. The premise of this method is that affected persons contain some common genomic regions with similar SNP alleles and such areas will be found in this analysis. An important disadvantage of GWA studies is that it does not distinguish between genomic areas that are inherited from a common ancestor [identical by descent (IBD)] and areas that are identical merely by state [identical by state (IBS)]. Clearly, areas that can be marked with higher probability as IBD and have the same correlation with the disease status of identical areas that are more probably only IBS, are better candidates to be causative, and yet this distinction is not encoded in standard association analysis. Results: We develop a factorial hidden Markov model based algorithm for computing genome wide IBD sharing. The algorithm accepts as input SNP data of measured individuals and estimates the probability of IBD at each locus for every pair of individuals. For two g degree relatives, when g≥ 8, the computation yields a precision of IBD tagging of over 50% higher than previous methods for 95% recall. Our algorithm uses a first order Markovian model for the linkage disequilibrium process and employs a reduction of the state space of the inheritance vector from being exponential in g to quadratic. The higher accuracy along with the reduced time complexity marks our method as a feasible means for IBD mapping in practical scenarios. Availability: A software implementation, called ibd map is freely available at

introduction association analysis is the method of choice for studying complex multifactorial diseases with low penetrance. The basic idea is to compute a correlation between each measured SNP and the affection status, and then further study areas that contain SNPs with high scores. The premise of this method is that affected persons contain some common genomic regions with similar SNP alleles and such areas will be found in this analysis. The large number of tests ( 500000) requires correction for multiple testing (). To capture the fact that dense SNPS are not independent, one can use various blocks of linked SNPs and find correlation to the blocks rather than to individual SNPs (; Greenspan * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and). The main advantage of association analysis is that it can potentially identify small suspect areas provided that sufficiently many individuals are sampled. An important disadvantage of this method is that it does not distinguish between genomic areas that are inherited from a common ancestor. Clearly, areas that can be marked with higher probability as IBD and have the same correlation with the disease status of identical areas that are more probably only IBS, are better candidates to be causative, and yet this distinction is not encoded in standard association analysis. The popular Plink program for association analysis, among its many functions, provides a method that challenges this common practice (). Plink accepts SNP data of affected and healthy individuals, then infers the IBD areas for each pair and consequently uses a score (Equation 6) to evaluate the extent to which a SNP is suspected to predispose or cause a disease. The input of this formula relies on inferring the IBD status of the SNP for each pair of input individuals. The inference is done via an hidden Markov model (HMM) with a small hidden state space that encodes the IBD status at the current locus using three states. The power of this mapping method highly depends on the precision of the IBD inference. Our work herein replaces the part of inferring IBD with an improved method using a more accurate HMM model with a state space that grows quadratically with the number of generations g that distinguish two individuals. We develop a factorial hmm based algorithm for computing genome wide IBD sharing. The algorithm accepts as input SNP data of measured individuals and estimates the probability of IBD at each locus for every pair of individuals. To estimate performance, we measure precision, which is the number of correctly identified IBD positions divided by the total number of position inferred as IBD, and recall, which is the number of correctly identified IBD positions divided by the number of IBD positions. For two g degree relatives, when g  8, the computation yields a precision of IBD tagging of over 50% higher than previous methods for 95% recall. Our algorithm uses a reduction of the state space of the inheritance vector used in Merlin from being exponential in g to quadratic and combines it with a first order Markovian model for the linkage disequilibrium (LD) process. In essence, we apply sophisticated techniques from linkage analysis to genetic studies without pedigree input. The application of our method to gene mapping shows a noticeable improvement. The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 defines HMMs and explains the inferences done with them. Section 3
