Motivation: In rapidly evolving pathogens, including viruses and some bacteria, genetic change can accumulate over short time frames. Accordingly, their sampling times can be used to calibrate molecular clocks, allowing estimation of evolutionary rates. Methods for estimating rates from time structured data vary in how they treat phylogenetic uncertainty and rate variation among lin-eages. We compiled 81 virus data sets and estimated nucleotide substitution rates using root to tip regression, least squares dating and Bayesian inference. Results: Although estimates from these three methods were often congruent, this largely relied on the choice of clock model. In particular, relaxed clock models tended to produce higher rate estimates than methods that assume constant rates. Discrepancies in rate estimates were also associated with high among lineage rate variation, and phylogenetic and temporal clustering. These results provide insights into the factors that affect the reliability of rate estimates from time structured sequence data, emphasizing the importance of clock model testing.

introduction reliable inference of molecular evolutionary time-scales depends on accurate estimates of substitution rates. The simplest way to estimate these rates is to assume that the divergence of nucleotide or amino acid sequences occurs constantly over time (), a model known as the strict molecular clock. Under this model, the rate of evolution corresponds to the amount of sequence divergence between a pair of lineages, divided by the time to their most recent common ancestor. For data sets in which appreciable genetic change has accumulated during the window of sampling, such that the sequence data are time structured, the sequence ages can be used as calibrations to estimate the rate (reviewed by). Sequence data from rapidly evolving pathogens and ancient specimens often meet these conditions (). There has been a surge in phylogenetic methods that can explicitly handle time structured sequence data. These methods include root to tip regression (implemented in), least squares dating (implemented in LSD;), and Bayesian phylogenetic inference (e.g. BEAST;). These methods differ in how they treat phylogenetic uncertainty and in their assumptions about rate variation among lineages. root to tip regression uses a phylogenetic tree with branch lengths in units of genetic divergence (e.g. substitutions site. A regression of the root to tip number of expected substitutions as a function of the sampling times is fitted (). The slope of the regression corresponds to the rate, the x intercept is the time to the most recent common ancestor, and the R 2 value can be used as a measure of clock like behavior. Crucially, however, the data points in the regression are not phylogenetically independent (). In particular, deep branches in the tree contribute to multiple root to tip distances, leading to pseudo replication. least squares dating also requires a phylogenetic tree. Instead of fitting a regression, it estimates the rate using a normal approximation of the langley fitch algorithm (). Both root to tip regression and least squares dating assume clock like evolution and use rooted trees, but they are able to estimate the position of the root as part of the analysis. However, the two methods do require a fixed tree, such that phylogenetic uncertainty is not explicitly taken into account, although this can be done indirectly by conducting the analysis over a set of bootstrap trees. Bayesian approaches to estimating evolutionary rates require a model of rate variation to be specified. In most Bayesian dating programs, such as BEAST, several clock models are available. The strict clock (SC) model assumes rate homogeneity throughout the tree. In contrast, relaxed clock models allow a different rate along each branch in the tree, although these are assumed to follow a chosen statistical distribution. For example, branch rates can be treated as independent and identically distributed samples from a lognormal distribution or an exponential distribution in the uncorrelated lognormal ucl d and uncorrelated exponential (UCED) relaxed clock models, respectively (). An advantage of Bayesian methods is that the rate estimate is integrated over the uncertainty of all of the other parameters, including the phylogenetic tree. The fundamental differences among the three methods might be expected to result in different estimates of evolutionary rates (). To test for congruence in rate estimates we collected sequence data sets for 81 different RNA and DNA viruses. For each data set we estimated the evolutionary rate using root to tip regression in TempEst v1.5 (), least squares dating in LSD v0.2 (), and Bayesian phylogenetic inference in BEAST v1.8 (). We found some discrepancies in the estimates, most of which were explained by high among lineage rate variation, and phylogenetic and temporal clustering. As such, these factors should be routinely assessed in empirical data to improve estimates of evolutionary rates and time scales.
