Motivation: Elementary flux mode (EFM) is a useful tool in constraint based modeling of metabolic networks. The property that every flux distribution can be decomposed as a weighted sum of ef ms allows certain applications of ef ms to studying flux distributions. The existence of biologically infeasible ef ms and the non uniqueness of the decomposition, however, undermine the applicability of such methods. Efforts have been made to find biologically feasible ef ms by incorporating information from transcriptional regulation and thermo-dynamics. Yet, no attempt has been made to distinguish biologically feasible ef ms by considering their graphical properties. A previous study on the transcriptional regulation of metabolic genes found that distinct branches at a branch point metabolite usually belong to distinct metabolic pathways. This suggests an intuitive property of biologically feasible ef ms i.e. minimal branching. Results: We developed the concept of minimal branching EFM and derived the minimal branching decomposition (MBD) to decompose flux distributions. Testing in the core Escherichia coli metabolic network indicated that MBD can distinguish branches at branch points and greatly reduced the solution space in which the decomposition is often unique. An experimental flux distribution from a previous study on mouse cardiomyocyte was decomposed using MBD. Comparison with decomposition by a minimum number of ef ms showed that MBD found ef ms more consistent with established biological knowledge, which facilitates interpretation. Comparison of the methods applied to a complex flux distribution in Lactococcus lactis similarly showed the advantages of MBD. The minimal branching EFM concept underlying MBD should be useful in other applications.

introduction metabolic networks consisting of biochemical reactions and compounds in a cell have proven to be an extremely useful in silico tool to study cellular metabolism (). The structure of a metabolic network is reflected in the stoichiometric matrix S, and the state of the network is embodied in the flux distribution (FD) v, which is a vector containing all reaction rates in the network. Based on the well established quasi steady state assumption, v can be constrained in a polyhedral cone (Sv=0; v ub ! v ! v lb ) and studied using a series of so called constraint based reconstruction and analysis (COBRA) methods (). One of the approaches of theoretical importance and application value is the elementary flux mode (EFM) analysis (). An EFM is a FD with a minimal number of active reactions that together satisfy the steady state condition. It is thus a minimal metabolic pathway in a metabolic network. ef ms have been successfully applied to examine network structures, explore new metabolic pathways, suggest rational strain design, etc. (reviewed in). Another property of ef ms useful for studying FDs is that every FD v is a non-negative sum of ef ms where e 1    e K are all ef ms of the network, and k is the corresponding weight coefficient. This decomposition of FDs from ef ms or extreme pathways (another type of pathways with a similar definition) has been investigated and applied to certain biological studies by choosing particular decompositions [reviewed in Chan and. The usefulness of these methods, however, is limited for two main reasons. First, the practical computation of the decomposition requires the set of all ef ms a priori, which is usually not available in large scale networks owing to combinatorial explosion. This computational issue can be overcome in two ways, either by sampling ef ms () or by finding ef ms with particular properties to solve for the decomposition without requiring the entire set of ef ms (). The second limitation is the non uniqueness of decomposition and its dependence on the choice of algorithms or optimization objective (). The ambiguity severely weakens the biological significance of decomposition has proposed a method to obtain unique decompositions by combining ef ms with variable weights into compound modes with unique weights. Another method for unique decompositions is the minimization of the sum of squares of weights (), but the resulting decomposition can be dependent on how ef ms are scaled the usefulness of ef ms can be enhanced by finding biologically feasible ef ms. Attempts have been made to incorporate transcriptional regulatory information to enumerate biologically feasible ef ms () and to rule out thermodynamically infeasible ef ms (). These approaches integrating information other than stoichiometry did give promising results. The information, for instance, metabolomics data and transcript omics data, however, is not always available. Surprisingly, all the proposed methods to find ef ms or to choose decomposition have not made full use of their graphical properties, which should be intuitively important for interpreting ef ms. An earlier study on the co regulation of metabolic pathways found that transcriptional regulation tends to favor linear metabolic flow by co expressing only distinct branches at metabolic branch points (). This means, in where 'A' is a hypothetical branch point metabolite, the genes for the linear pair of reactions 'R1' and 'R3', or the pair 'R2' and 'R4', are more likely to be co-expressed than 'R3', 'R4' and 'R5', which are distinct branches. When decomposing a FD containing 'R1' to 'R4', two ef ms containing pair r1 and 'R3' and pair 'R2' and 'R4' are thus a more preferable choice than one EFM containing all 'R1' to 'R4', as there are probably two distinct pathways. This suggests the rationale of minimizing branching pathways to choose ef ms that are more likely to be biologically feasible. This rationale is also expected to allow clearer interpretation of the roles of the chosen ef ms because they are expected to contain fewer distinct pathways. We believed that such ef ms can have wide applicability. As the first attempt based on this rationale, in this article, a new optimization objective called minimal branching decomposition (MBD) is proposed to identify more biologically relevant ef ms to decompose FDs using stoichiometric information alone.

conclusion mbd to decompose a FD into a set of ef ms was derived. The ef ms contain as few branching pathways as possible. MBD advances the analysis of FD by decomposition into ef ms in three aspects. First, it originates from the consideration of the branching structure in metabolic network based on experimental evidence, which is a novel attempt. Second, MBD results in more biologically relevant ef ms leading to clearer interpretation. Third, MBD showed good performance regarding uniqueness. It diminishes the ambiguity of decomposition. The minimal branching EFM concept underlying MBD can be useful in further applications, e.g. identifying metabolic pathways for engineering by acting as an estimate for biologically feasible ef ms. Scaling up the method to genome scale networks is necessary for practical applicability. In conclusion, MBD is able to bring useful insights when analyzing FDs. Combining information from e.g. transcriptional regulation and thermodynamics, wider application of ef ms can be anticipated.
