Most proteins lack experimentally validated functions. To address this problem, we implemented the Evolutionary Trace Annotation (ETA) method in the Cytoscape network visualization environment. The result is the et as cape plugin, which builds a structural genomics network based on local structural and evolutionary similarities among proteins and then globally diffuses known annotations across the resulting network. The plugin displays these novel functional annotations, their confidence, the molecular basis for individual matches and the set of matches that lead to a prediction.

introduction the Structural Genomics Initiative (SGI) generates abundant structural data (), but many of these structures lack annotation (). Computational methods that match small structural motifs of functionally important residues (a template) and suggest a function when the geometry is close enough () are an especially promising way to approach this problem. A template can be constructed from prior knowledge of functional residues and mechanisms, or it can be created de novo by Evolutionary Trace (ET) analysis, which predicts functionally relevant amino acids and pinpoints functional sites using evolutionary principles (). ET accuracy has been thoroughly tested both experimentally () and computationally (). Evolutionary Trace Annotation (ETA) first maps the evolutionary importance of each residue onto a structure and selects a cluster of important surface residues as the template. It then seeks a match that is similar both geometrically and evolutionarily in protein structures with known function. These ETA templates usually overlap with  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. catalytic sites () and identify function with 87% accuracy at 61% coverage (). Using a network in which structures form the nodes and ETA matches form the edges helps to overcome limitations from sparse functional data. We make predictions by allowing Enzyme Commision (EC) numbers to 'diffuse' through the network according to the cost function where the elements of y are 1, 0 or 1 depending on whether a protein is known to have, known not to have or is unknown to have a particular EC number. After minimization, f contains the 'diffused' values. The first term reflects the desire to not lose known information, and penalizes nodes whose function differs before and after diffusion. The second term reflects the fact that we expect neighboring proteins in this network to have similar functions, and punishes neighbors where this is not the case according to the edge weight. Repeating this process for all ECs yields a prediction for each possible function at each node. By normalizing the prediction scores across all nodes with unknown function, we create a prediction confidence. In benchmarks, the accuracy of this ETA diffusion network was 97% at 50% coverage, allowing the prediction and experimental confirmation of the function of an unannotated Staphylococcus aureus protein (). This method is now made widely available and more transparent by embedding it into the Cytoscape network visualization environment (). The et as cape plugin allows users to view ETA networks, add proteins, make novel predictions, as well as view annotations, ETA templates and protein structures, adding to a public suite of ET tools that make functional site analysis and function prediction transparent ().
