Motivation: molecule based prediction of drug response is one major task of precision oncology. Recently, large scale cancer genomic studies, such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), provide the opportunity to evaluate the predictive utility of molecular data for clinical drug responses in multiple cancer types. Results: Here, we first curated the drug treatment information from TCGA. Four chemotherapeutic drugs had more than 180 clinical response records. Then, we developed a computational framework to evaluate the molecule based predictions of clinical responses of the four drugs and to identify the corresponding molecular signatures. Results show that mRNA or miRNA expressions can predict drug responses significantly better than random classifiers in specific cancer types. A few signature genes are involved in drug response related pathways, such as DDB1 in DNA repair pathway and DLL4 in Notch signaling pathway. Finally, we applied the framework to predict responses across multiple cancer types and found that the prediction performances get improved for cisplatin based on miRNA expressions. Integrative analysis of clinical drug response data and molecular data offers opportunities for discovering predictive markers in cancer. This study provides a starting point to objectively evaluate the molecule based predictions of clinical drug responses.

introduction molecular polymorphisms and alterations play important roles in heterogeneous anti-cancer drug responses (). The relationships between molecular features and clinical drug responses lay the foundation for optimizing drug therapies based on a patient's genomic context. For example, metastatic breast tumors with HER2 overexpression are sensitive to trastuzumab (); EGFR mutations in non small cell lung cancer predict response to gefitinib (). With the fast development and reduced costs of high throughput technologies, more efforts are made to identify genomic markers that can predict drug responses (). As precision medicine takes into account the genomic variability of individuals in oncology practice (), accurately predicting response to cancer drugs based on molecules becomes a critical issue. Cancer cell lines have been used to find gene expression signatures which can predict in vitro drug sensitivities (). However, whether cell lines can capture the complex molecular alterations in real cancer patients is still in debate (). A few large scale cancer genome projects, such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), not only provide diverse molecular data but also clinical information of cancer patients. By now, TCGA has comprehensively characterized tens of cancer types via the multi-dimensional analysis of gene mutation, copy number alteration, DNA methylation, mRNA, miRNA and protein expression (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/). TCGA has also expanded the knowledge about genomic similarities among multiple cancer lineages via V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com the pan cancer studies (). Its molecular data promotes the development of oncology practices, such as targeted therapeutics () and prognosis prediction (). However, the predictive utility of the diverse molecular data for clinical drug responses has not been explored. In this study, we aim at evaluating the utility of molecular data for predicting clinical drug responses in cancer based on TCGA data. First of all, we carefully curated the clinical data of drug treatments from TCGA, extracted 152 drugs and 2572 patients with drug response records, and then focused on four drugs (cisplatin, paclitaxel, carboplatin and fluorouracil) with relatively more clinical response records. Then we constructed a computational framework to evaluate the performances of the molecule based prediction of clinical drug responses using copy number alterations (CNAs), DNA methylation s miRNA expressions and mRNA expressions. Compared to random classifiers, expression data shows significantly better performances on cisplatin or paclitaxel in specific cancer types. Also, we found that some signature genes are involved in important cellular processes known to mediate drug responses, such as DDB1 in DNA repair pathway and DLL4 in Notch signaling pathway. In the following multiple cancer analysis, it was found that miRNA expressions exhibit good predictive performances across cancer types and the classifier fitted to multiple cancer data can improve the predictions on certain single cancer types. Our work offers the opportunity to study diverse molecular features of clinical drug responses in primary tumors. It is a starting point to objectively evaluate the molecule based predictions of clinical anti-cancer drug responses.

discussion predicting clinical drug responses by molecular data in human cancer is one important goal of precision oncology. In this study, we carefully curated drug response records from TCGA and evaluated the performances of diverse molecular data types on predicting the clinical drug responses. In single cancer type analyses, mRNA and miRNA expressions achieve significantly better performances in specific cancer types than random classifiers. Many identified signature genes play important roles in the cellular processes known to mediate drug resistance. We also found that miRNA expressions improve performances for predicting cisplatin responses based on multiple cancer type analysis. On the contrary, CNAs and DNA methylation s show limited predictive capabilities either in single or multiple cancer type analyses. Overall, the predictive performances of molecule based classifiers are not so good, although some of them performed significantly better than random classifiers. The following problems may cause current limitations: first, molecular patterns are highly complex due to the tumor heterogeneity among patients (). The available datasets can not represent the whole picture of molecular alterations in cancer. Thus, the classifiers trained on limited data could perform poorly on predicting new patients. Second, the molecular features far out number the patients. Many irrelevant features may be selected by accident, although the sparse linear model was used to reduce features and avoid model over-fitting. Thirdly, the non-responders are usually much fewer. We observed that the numbers of non-responders are significantly correlated with the average a ucs (Spearman rank correlation 0.988, p value 0.0016) of the mRNA datasets regardless of the drug cancer pairs. The predictive utility of mRNA expressions has also been reported in cancer cell lines. According to a DREAM competition, which aimed at identifying what methods and to what extent molecular data can predict in vitro drug sensitivities, mRNA expressions are found to provide the best predictive performance among all molecular data types (). It is also reported that protein, mRNA and miRNA abundances provide the best performance when modelling the GI50 endpoint (). The identified signature genes and miRNAs based on mRNA or miRNA expression data can provide novel insights of the mechanisms of drug resistances. DDB1 belongs to the cisplatin resistance correlated nucleotide excision repair pathway, which is regarded as potential therapeutic targets (). DLL4, down-regulation of which inhibited tumor growth (), can be targeted by de mci zum ab a drug in phase I clinical trial (). Other signature genes including INTS5, HNRNPA3 and HNRNPA3P1 also show prognostic power, but the molecular mechanisms are still unclear. miR-30c, a homolog of signature miR-30e and located in the same primary transcript, regulates paclitaxel resistance in breast cancer cells (). To our knowledge, our work is the first study to investigate the predictive utility of the molecular data for clinical drug responses from TCGA. Also, the curated pharmacogenomics data provides an important resource for future studies.
