Motivation: Insertion of DNA segments is one mechanism by which genomes evolve. The bulk of genomic segments are now known to be transcribed into long and short non-coding RNAs nc rnas promoter associated transcripts and enhancer templated transcripts. These various cryptic nc rnas are thought to be dispersed in the human and other genomes by retro position. Results: In this study, I report clear evidence for dissemination of cryptic nc rnas transcribed from intronic and intergenic segments by retro position. I used highly stringent conditions to find recently retro posed nc rnas that had a poly(A) tract and were flanked by target site duplication. I identified 73 instances of retro position in the human, mouse, and rat genomes (12, 36 and 25 instances, respectively). The inserted segments, in some cases, served as a novel exon or promoter for the associated gene, resulting in novel transcript variants. Some disseminated sequences showed sequence conservation across animals, implying a possible regulatory role. My results indicate that retro position is one of the mechanisms for dispersion of nc rnas. I propose that these newly inserted segments may play a role in genome evolution by potentially functioning as novel exons, promoters or enhancers.

introduction insertion of DNA segments into a genome is one of the mechanisms underlying genome evolution. Inserted DNAs include genomic segments derived from other locations in the genome (), repetitive elements (), organ ella r chromosome fragments, such as nuclear mitochondrial DNAs (), and retroviruses (). Duplication of genomic segments is common in eukaryotic genomes. These duplications are produced either by dna mediated or rna mediated mechanisms. dna mediated duplication includes inter chromosomal recombination and tandem duplication by non allelic homologous recombination or non-homologous end joining (). Many DNA insertion events are mediated by a retro position mechanism, which involves transcription of genomic segments into RNA molecules, reverse transcription of these RNAs to cDNAs and insertion of the cDNA segments into new genomic locations (). retro position of RNAs of various origins has contributed abundant innovations for genome evolution (). The most common retro posed DNA segments are retro transposable elements, such as Alu, SVA, L1, MIR and endogenous retroviruses; the inserted segments can be ex apted as novel exons for protein coding genes (), act as alternative promoters of nearby genes or induce de novo transcription () and contribute to regulatory elements, such as enhancers (). retro position of fully or partially processed protein coding genes is a well known mechanism for gene duplication, and results in generation of either non-functional retro pseudogenes or functional retro copies retro genes of the original parental genes (). Functional RNA molecules, such as small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) and small Cajal body specific RNAs scar nas are also to be subject to retro position and have been reported to generate novel sn oscar nas during evolution (). It is now known that the bulk of human and other eukaryotic genomes, other than protein coding genes or RNA genes, is transcribed pervasively (). Although a lot of these transcripts, which are collectively known as non-coding RNAs nc rnas or untranslated RNAs u trnas were thought to be simply transcriptional noise, some of them were reported to play important roles in genome regulation (). Enhancer regions have been reported to be bidirectionally transcribed to produce a distinct class of nc rnas enhancer templated nc rnas or ern as which are involved in transcriptional control of nearby genes (). I hypothesized that various cryptic nc rnas that were pervasively transcribed from intronic or intergenic segments would be subject to retro position. There are many genomic dupl icons that originated from intronic or intergenic regions in the human and other genomes. However, it is difficult to determine whether these dupl icons are generated by rna mediated retro position or DNA recombination mediated by non-homologous end joining. retro genes and retro pseudogenes are easy to identify because they usually lack introns compared with their source genes. retro posed intronic or intergenic segments, in contrast, would not show any splicing features, but would still exhibit other signatures of retro position namely, a poly(A) tract and target site duplication (TSD). In this study, I devised a bioinformatics procedure to identify retro posed nc rnas originating from intronic or intergenic segments in the human, mouse and rat genomes. The signature of retro position such as the poly(A) tract decays over time (). Loss of the retro position signature would make it difficult to judge whether a duplic on originated by retro position or dna mediated recombination. Therefore, in this study, I used highly stringent conditions to detect only recently retro posed nc rnas. To collect clear evidence for retro position of nc rnas I designed a procedure to identify only recently retro posed segments that retained the following retro position signatures: (i) strong sequence similarity between the source and the insert copies; (ii) a poly(A) tract at the end of the insert; and (iii) a TSD at both boundaries of the insert. By using these criteria, I identified 73 recent retro position events of nc rnas in the human, mouse and rat genomes. Furthermore, I comprehensively explored and discussed the impact of these retro position events on nearby genes.

discussion this report presents clear evidence for dissemination of cryptic nc rnas by retro position in the human, mouse and rat genomes because retro posed nc rnas have no spliced out segments, the gradual loss of retro position signatures, such as a poly(A) tract and a TSD make them practically indistinguishable from dna mediated segmental dupl icons. In this study, therefore, I used highly stringent conditions to collect 73 recent retro position cases. Considering the rapid shortening of poly(A) tracts of retro posed transcripts () and the decay of retro position signatures over time, there are likely many more 'aged' retro posed nc rnas that I did not detect using my screening procedure. There is also a distinct class of retro po sons that lack poly(A) tails named tailless retro pseudogenes (), which also could not be detected in this study. Therefore, it is highly likely that the dissemination of nc rnas is more common than observed here. It has been shown that the bulk of the eukaryotic genome is pervasively transcribed (). Several distinct classes of nc rnas have been observed. Enhancer elements have been reported to be bidirectionally transcribed to produce ern as in human neuronal cells (Kim et al of the human and the gorilla rb pj gene is shown. The inserted sequence is underlined. The poly(A) tail and the TSD at the target site are shown on gray and black background, respectively. The start position of EST DC397179 and the splice donor (GT) are marked with a greater than sign and two number signs, respectively 2010;). Stable intronic sequence RNAs sis rnas were detected in the nucleus of Xenopus tropicalis oocytes (). Polyadenylated promoter upstream transcripts are produced upstream of active human promoters (). Many other types of promoter associated RNAs have also been described (). Short polyadenylated RNAs transcribed from highly conserved regions in the human genome have been reported (). These nc rnas especially when polyadenylated, can serve as substrates for line 1 reverse transcriptase. Therefore, it is highly probable that these distinct classes of nc rnas are disseminated in the genome by retro position. In this study, I identified the source of four retro posed nc rnas inserted into the human rb pj gene (ID H004,), mouse Dab1 gene (ID M011, Supplementary), rat Abcb1b gene (ID R012) and rat Trim16 gene (ID R018, Supplementary) as originating from the 5 0 region of known genes, indicating that these were promoter associated transcripts (). The human rb pj gene case is particularly interesting because the retro posed promoter associated ncRNA retains promoter activity, generating a novel transcript variant of the rb pj gene (). Nineteen retro posed nc rnas were highly conserved across animals: an example is the rat Lnx2 gene case (ID R020,). A possible source of these retro posed sequences is short polyadenylated RNAs transcribed from conserved genomic the target region is shown. The inserted sequence is underlined. The poly(A) tail and the TSD at the target site are shown on grey and black background, respectively. The putative poly(A) signal for the source transcript is marked with six o marks. Potential effects of retro posed cryptic nc rnas on the insertion region are depicted regions (). Another possibility is that these sequences were derived from ern as (), although there is no direct evidence that these regions have enhancer activities. The steps for retro position of nc rnas are likely to be identical or similar to those of retro position of retro pseudogenes and repetitive elements (). First, the transcript is polyadenylated at an authentic or cryptic poly(A) site. Then, the polyadenylated RNA molecule is recognized by the enzymatic machinery of line 1 retrotransposons and inserted into a new location, generating a TSD during the insertion process. The inserted segments can serve as novel exons or promoters to produce novel transcript variants and novel protein isoforms. If the retro posed ncRNA originates from a regulatory element, such as an enhancer, it could potentially play a role in genome regulation. In summary, I developed a procedure to identify recently retro posed nc rnas in the human, mouse and rat genomes and provided clear evidence for retro posed nc rnas. I strongly argue that the dissemination of nc rnas by retro position is common. The inserted segments can create novel transcript variants of the associated genes and play a role in genome regulation.
