Motivation: The analysis of molecular coevolution provides information on the potential functional and structural implication of positions along DNA sequences, and several methods are available to identify co evolving positions using probabilistic or combinatorial approaches. The specific nucleotide or amino acid profile associated with the coe-volution process is, however, not estimated, but only known profiles, such as the watson crick constraint, are usually considered a priori in current measures of coevolution. Results: Here, we propose a new probabilistic model, co ev to identify co evolving positions and their associated profile in DNA sequences while incorporating the underlying phylogenetic relationships. The process of coevolution is modeled by a 16 Â 16 instantaneous rate matrix that includes rates of transition as well as a profile of coevolution. We used simulated, empirical and illustrative data to evaluate our model and to compare it with a model of independent evolution using Akaike Information Criterion. We showed that the co ev model is able to discriminate between co evolving and non co evolving positions and provides better specificity and specificity than other available approaches. We further demonstrate that the identification of the profile of coevolution can shed new light on the process of dependent substitution during lineage evolution.

introduction coevolution is defined as 'the modification of a biological object triggered by the change of a related object' (). This process of dependent evolution has been described in various biological systems and can be an essential process behind changes occurring at both morphological level, e.g. coevolution of female and male genital morphology (), and molecular level (), e.g. ligand receptor interactions (). At the molecular level, studies of dependent substitutions have gained importance in evolutionary biology because of the potential functional and structural interpretations that can be made on the positions identified as co evolving. For example, co evolving positions in proteins are known to be involved in allosteric communication, to create physically connected networks that link distant functional positions in the tertiary structure, and to modify the structure of the protein (). Further, it has been shown recently that co evolving fragments within protein sequences can also be involved in binding specificity and folding constraints (). They are thus good indicators to explain folding intermediates, peptide assembly and key mutations with known roles in genetic diseases (). Coevolution within RNA sequences also revealed structurally and functionally important positions (), which are often located on helices and are subject to watson crick constraint (i.e. guanine cytosine and adenine thymine complementarity). For example, the positions 245 and 283 of the 16S ribosomal RNA in Thermus thermophilus co evolved under the specific watson crick profile {CC, UU}, respectively, to maintain the specific hydrogen bonds necessary for the stability of the helix hairpin like structure (). Current methods designed to detect coevolution focus primarily on the identification of pair of positions along the aligned sequence by evaluating a score of coevolution. Some methods consider solely the set of aligned sequences to estimate these co evolving positions (), while others take into account the evolutionary history of the observed sequences (). The score of coevolution usually represents the correlation of the nucleotide or amino acid patterns found at two different positions along a multiple alignment. This correlation can be considered as the outcome of the dependent evolutionary process that is depicted by coevolution and the correlated pairs constitute the set of co evolving nucleotides or amino acids. This set is defined here as the profile of coevolution and is similar to the profile of site classes present in phylogenetic mixture models (e.g.). While current methods designed to detect co evolving positions have proven very useful, they do not estimate the co evolving profile that corresponds to the structural or functional constraints involved in the evolutionary process (). This lack of a mechanistic component induces the use of arbitrary rules to identify the profile of coevolution for protein coding sequences, such as using the most frequent pattern within a pair of co evolving positions (). Alternatively, the profile of *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com coevolution can be set a priori, like in the case of RNA sequences where watson crick profiles are known to be important. Setting a profile a priori was done in a Bayesian context () by constraining the mapping of substitutions that occurred independently at each site on the branches of the phylogenetic tree using, as weights, the biochemical properties of the nucleotides defining the watson crick constraint. Similarly, this constraint was used as modifiers of the rate parameters of a dependent model describing the process of coevolution (). State transitions that establish or maintain Watson Crick base pairs were favored and coevolution under this specific constraint was assessed through likelihood ratio tests. These two approaches confirmed that a well known co evolving pair was constrained by a watson crick profile in 16S RNA sequences (). However, other known types of constraints, such as the hoogste en base pairing (), were not explicitly incorporated in the model and thus not identified in these analyses. Furthermore, the integration of particular constraints in the models may be difficult in the case of amino acid or protein coding DNA sequences, for which little a priori information is available regarding the co evolving profiles. Thus, the co evolving profile should be considered as a parameter to be estimated from the data, rather than being defined on the basis of the frequencies of co evolving patterns or of known constraints. Methods that estimate co evolving profiles in DNA, RNA or protein sequences are currently not available. However, some methods have been developed for binary encoded data where co evolving profiles represent presence or absence of characters such as genes, restriction sites, introns, indels and methylation sites (). Identifying the profiles of binary character states involved in correlated evolution is also an important part of the analyses of phenotypic data. These approaches have progressed from using maximum parsimony criteria () to a full probabilistic framework () in which the dynamics of presence and absence of events are assumed to follow a continuous time Markov process along the phylogenetic tree. In this context, it is possible to define a dependent substitution model, which is expressed as a 4  4 matrix of instantaneous transition rates, to explain the correlated evolution of two binary characters (). Each row and column of this matrix specifies a pair of character states built on an alphabet of size 2 (i.e. the character states of binary traits), which defines two possible profiles of coevolution {00, 11} or {01, 10}. This model can be compared to an independent model of evolution, which assumes a single 2  2 substitution matrix, through likelihood ratio tests (). It is possible to apply the ideas used for binary data to identify profiles in molecular data. The nucleic (or protei c alphabet can be reduced to an alphabet of size two using the physico-chemical properties behind the nucleotides or amino acids (). This reduction is, however, arbitrary and could omit important factors that play a role in the evolution of the molecular sequences. For this reason, we propose in this study a new Markov model that describes the evolutionary process of co evolving positions along DNA sequences. Because correlated positions within nucleotide and protein sequences are the result of an evolutionary process, a better understanding of the co evolving profile should be obtained by incorporating the underlying evolutionary history of the sequences (i.e. their phylogenetic relationships and the associated profile;). We thus developed a dependent model of nucleotide substitutions based on a 16  16 instantaneous rate matrix that includes four substitution rates s, d, r1, r2 and a fifth parameter representing the profile of coevolution. We implemented the model in maximum likelihood and Bayesian frameworks. The performance of the model was tested simulated datasets and we compared the model's predictions with existing methodologies on empirical data.

discussion we presented a new dependent model of evolution, co ev based on the broad class of Markov models. co ev can reliably identify the co evolving pairs of nucleotide positions and their molecular footprint, expressed by the profile of coevolution. The co ev model incorporates free parameters that are easily interpreted from an evolutionary perspective and that govern the change of one combination into another within pairs of co evolving positions. Our model is mechanistic and describes the process of evolution that is responsible for the simultaneous evolution of dependent sites along DNA or amino acid sequences. The profile of coevolution is explicitly incorporated in the model as a discrete parameter and thus can be estimated from the data. It is an essential parameter in our model since it shapes the instantaneous rate matrix at the base of co ev (Supplementary; Supplementary Material 1) and defines the number of occurrences of the rate parameters s, d, r1 and r2 (Supplementary; Supplementary Material 1). The parameter s is the rate of transition from a co evolving combination to a non co evolving one. This parameter thus represents the rate of a necessary step (yielding conflict) that precedes the shift to a new co evolving combination. A new substitution is then required to re-establish the co evolving profile, and this event is modeled by the parameter d. This parameter d therefore represents the rate of transition from a non co evolving combination to a co evolving one. Parameters s and d describe the two temporally successive substitutions that are the minimum requirement to shift from one co evolving combination to another in the profile. The additional parameters r1 and r2 represent the rates of independent substitution between non co evolving combinations.. Performance: sensitivity and specificity plots. Sensitivity and specificity plots comparing the performance of the co ev model to co map S comp and CO. For each dataset (110, 67 and 33 tips), we simulated an alignment of 180 positions (20 co evolving positions and 160 independently evolving). s comp I is the performance of S comp method when only maximal scores of 1 are considered, whereas s comp II considered the 1% top scores. co maps performance where evaluated when considering co evolving pairs with a stat score 40.75 and a p value 50.05. While the specificity does not strikingly change across datasets and methods, the sensitivity is higher for the co ev when compared to the other methods Conflictual substitutions in each site are modeled by a single independent rate regardless of the type of substitution, e.g. transition transversion thus resembling a JC model. The model can however be extended to incorporate more complex nucleotide substitution models such as the GTR ().

conclusion we presented a new, fully mechanistic, model that describes the processes governing the coevolution of a pair of positions conserved sites have been extracted from gene families for more than 40 years (), but we propose that the evolutionary profile of co evolving sites should be added to these known signatures. This will help the community to classify highly divergent sequences and better interpret the function of new ones.
