Motivation: Structural alignment methods are widely used to generate gold standard alignments for improving multiple sequence alignments and transferring functional annotations, as well as for assigning structural distances between proteins. However, the correctness of the alignments generated by these methods is difficult to assess objectively since little is known about the exact evolutionary history of most proteins. Since homology is an equivalence relation, an upper bound on alignment quality can be found by assessing the consistency of alignments. Measuring the consistency of current methods of structure alignment and determining the causes of inconsistencies can, therefore, provide information on the quality of current methods and suggest possibilities for further improvement. Results: We analyze the self consistency of seven widely used structural alignment methods (SAP, tm align frt malign MAMMOTH, DALI, CE and FATCAT) on a diverse, non-redundant set of 1863 domains from the SCOP database and demonstrate that even for relatively similar proteins the degree of inconsistency of the alignments on a residue level is high (30%). We further show that levels of consistency vary substantially between methods, with two methods (SAP and frt malign producing more consistent alignments than the rest. Inconsistency is found to be higher near gaps and for proteins of low structural complexity, as well as for helices. The ability of the methods to identify good structural alignments is also assessed using geometric measures, for which FATCAT (flexible mode) is found to be the best performer despite being highly inconsistent. We conclude that there is substantial scope for improving the consistency of structural alignment methods.

introduction despite its apparent simplicity, the problem of aligning pairs of protein structures has attracted a significant level of research effort. Methods vary in the details of their objective function, problem representation, null model of comparison statistics and approaches to searching alignment space (; * To whom correspondence should be addressed.;;), Reviewed in car ugo (2007). Common variations include the use of flexible alignment () or using fragments and topological filters for initial alignments to improve quality and speed (). Two previous benchmarks of pairwise structure alignment methods have been published in the last decade (). These considered the degree to which the methods tested find a good solution as judged by geometric criteria () and the agreement of the aligned residues with a set of manually curated 'gold standard' alignments (). Both studies are important contributions but a recent study which covers current methods is lacking, as is a study which considers both geometric performance and ability to find homologous relationships between positions simultaneously. We would ideally like to assess the ability of these aligners to find homologous relationships as well as geometric similarities for a large number of proteins but this is problematic since for distantly related proteins we rarely know how individual positions are related. As an alternative to using gold standards and limiting the size of the dataset, we propose to make use of the fundamental property that homology is transitive: if A and B are homologous, B and C are homologous then A and C must also be homologous. Homology, therefore, establishes a set of equivalence classes over the residues in sets of related protein structures (symmetry and self identity being obvious properties) and the more closely a structural alignment method approaches this situation the better its performance. The exception to this occurs only if a set of residues are related by a star phylogeny for example where a gene duplication has resulted in duplicate internal structures such as are found in repeat proteins (). In this study, we use this idea to compare the most widely used methods for pairwise structural alignment, in addition to considering alignment accuracy relative to other annotation sources: DSSP structural classes () and solvent access i bilities. Additionally, following we consider the quality of the scores implemented by the methods with respect to external annotations [SCOP folds (), GO annotations () and topological distances ()] and several geometric scores. Seven methods were chosen: the choice was based on their free availability for general academic use, their importance for publicly available resources or being widely used as judged by

discussion we have assessed seven popular methods for pairwise structural alignment using geometric measures and inconsistency (as a proxy for homology) and found a wide range of independent variation on these measures: some methods (e.g. FATCAT) produce good
