Motivation: In vitro and in vivo selection of vaccines is time consuming, expensive and the selected vaccines may not be able to provide protection against broad spectrum viruses because of emerging antigenically novel disease strains. A powerful computational model that incorporates these protein dna or RNA level fluctuations can effectively predict antigenically variant strains, and can minimize the amount of resources spent on exclusive serological testing of vaccines and make wide spectrum vaccines possible for many diseases. However, in silico vaccine prediction remains a grand challenge. To address the challenge, we investigate the use of linear and non-linear regression models to predict the antigenic similarity in foot and mouth disease virus strains and in influenza strains, where the structure and parameters of the non-linear model are optimized using an evolutionary algorithm (EA). In addition, we examine two different scoring methods for weight-ing the type of amino acid substitutions in the linear and non-linear models. We also test our models with some unseen data. Results: We achieved the best prediction results on three datasets of SAT2 foot and mouth disease), two datasets of serotype A foot and mouth disease) and two datasets of influenza when the scoring method based on biochemical properties of amino acids is employed in combination with a non-linear regression model. Models based on substitutions in the antigenic areas performed better than those that took the entire exposed viral capsid proteins. A majority of the non-linear regression models optimized with the EA performed better than the linear and non-linear models whose parameters are estimated using the least squares method. In addition, for the best models, optimized non-linear regression models consist of more terms than their linear counterparts, implying a non-linear nature of influences of amino acid substitutions. Our models were also tested on five recently generated FMDV datasets and the best model was able to achieve an 80% agreement rate.

introduction vaccines can be effective in preventing viral diseases and improving the health of millions. However, there are many viral diseases for which vaccine production deployment is a challenge because of extensive antigenic variability [Antigenic variability is the mechanism by which infectious organisms (bacteria, virus or protozoa) alters its surface protein to evade a host immune system (. Infection and or vaccination by an antigenically variable virus do not necessarily confer protection to subsequent exposure of the disease, e.g. Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), Influenza and Foot and Mouth Disease Virus (FMDV) (). Hence, upon an outbreak of an antigenically variable virus, a rapid response to reduce the spread of the virus is needed. In other words, the rapid selection of the most effective vaccine, against the particular strain of virus, is imperative. However, the in vitro serological tests that measure the cross reactivity of vaccines to outbreak strains are time consuming and expensive. An in silico predictor that can accurately predict vaccine efficacy would be invaluable. With the advent of high throughput sequencing, it is now possible to obtain the sequence of a virus within hours. The computational exploitation of this sequence information for vaccine design/ selection is therefore attractive. Yet to date, most computational research on viral vaccines has focussed on developing tools for identifying epitopes (). From our literature search, only three previous studies attempting to predict antigenic variability and therefore vaccine efficacy, for Foot and Mouth Disease and Influenza were identified (). Foot and Mouth Disease and Influenza are both socioeconomically important, highly infectious diseases caused by antigenically variable viruses. As DNA sequences and associated serological test data are available for these viruses, they are obvious candidates for the development of an in silico vaccine selection predictor. Thus far, in silico approaches for predicting vaccine efficacy have focussed on the use of linear and logistic regression techniques used linear mixed effects models to relate estimated antigenic differences to sequence variation in FMDV and used stepwise and logistic regression to predict antigenic variants in. However, as vaccine efficacy relies on the interaction of amino acid residues within or outside an antigenic site (loop) () that may result in unusual (non-linear) patterns in antigenic distance () it is likely that non-linear models, that can handle complex interdependencies between variables, will be better suited. Furthermore, as biological data can be noisy and or viral strains partially labelled (dataset contains only sequence data but not serological data) (), a predictor that can be trained with imperfect data is needed. Here we present a genetic algorithm (GA) optimized quadratic non-linear regression model that is able to accurately (98% accuracy) predict the vaccine efficacy for FMDV and Influenza A strains taking amino acid sequences as input. We show that our model is an improvement to the approaches previously taken. Furthermore, to examine whether there are differences in the influence of amino acid changes in different capsid proteins on the Virus Neutralization (VN) titre haemagglutination inhibition (HI) assay value we compare two approaches for calculating amino acid changes, one reporting the total number of changes across all capsid proteins (three capsid proteins in FMDV and one in influenza), while the other reporting specific capsid changes. Finally, we study two methods for weighting the importance of amino acid changes, one based on the characteristics and structure of amino acids and the other based on amino acid substitution scores pam blosum
