We previously developed dmg was to search for dense modules in a human protein– protein interaction (PPI) network; it has since become a popular tool for network assisted analysis of genome wide association studies g was. dmg was weights nodes by using g was signals. Here, we introduce an upgraded algorithm, ewd mg was to boost g was signals in a node and edge weighted PPI network. In ewd mg was we utilize condition specific gene expression profiles for edge weights. Specifically, differential gene co-expression is used to infer the edge weights. We applied ewd mg was to two diseases and compared it with other relevant methods. The results suggest that ewd mg was is more powerful in detecting disease associated signals. Availability and implementation: The algorithm of ewd mg was is implemented in the R package dmGWAS_3.0 and is available at http://bioinfo.

introduction over the past decade, genome wide association studies g was have successfully uncovered many susceptibility loci for common diseases. However, the identified loci only explain a small portion of the genetic risk (). It is challenging to uncover the remaining risky loci as their association signals are likely to be moderate or weak. One potential solution to this challenge is to incorporate other functional information, such as protein protein interaction (PPI) networks, to investigate joint association signals beyond single markers (). We previously developed a network assisted approach, dmg was to address this problem (). dmg was applies a greedy algorithm to search for dense modules in a PPI network in which nodes are weighted by using g was signals. After its initial release, dmg was received much attention from the research community and has become quite popular for network assisted analysis of g was signals motivated by the strong demand, we enhanced dmg was by integrating and enabling gene expression profiles to assign edge weights, and denoted the new algorithm ewd mg was. Differential gene co-expression d gce which measures the change of gene co-expression between case and control samples, is one important feature of transcriptional information, reflecting cellular dynamics and contributing to pathogenesis (). Thus, we utilize d gce to infer the weight of each edge and combine the association signals of its two nodes to assess the overall disease risk of network modules within the human PPI network.
