Motivation: For biological pathways, it is common to measure a gene expression time series after various knockdowns of genes that are putatively involved in the process of interest. These interventional time resolved data are most suitable for the elucidation of dynamic causal relationships in signaling networks. Even with this kind of data it is still a major and largely unsolved challenge to infer the topology and interaction logic of the underlying regulatory network. Results: In this work, we present a novel model based approach involving Boolean networks to reconstruct small to medium sized regulatory networks. In particular, we solve the problem of exact likelihood computation in Boolean networks with probabilistic exponential time delays. Simulations demonstrate the high accuracy of our approach. We apply our method to data of Ivanova et al. (2006), where RNA interference knockdown experiments were used to build a network of the key regulatory genes governing mouse stem cell maintenance and differentiation. In contrast to previous analyses of that data set, our method can identify feedback loops and provides new insights into the interplay of some master regulators in embryonic stem cell development.

introduction the inference of signaling networks from biological data is of fundamental importance for a systemic understanding of regulatory processes. The statistical methods that have been developed for that purpose can be grouped according to the type of data that they expect as input. Many approaches use gene expression data. Some methods are based solely on static observations of the unperturbed system; they exploit the fact that fluctuations of interacting components are dependent (). The use of perturbation data greatly improves network reconstruction (). To resolve the order of events in a signaling cascade, time resolved measurements after perturbation yield further improvements (). Boolean networks are an appropriate tool for dealing with this type of data (). The most difficult problem lies in accounting for the mostly unknown time delays with which the signal is propagated through the network (). In this work, we propose Boolean networks with probabilistic time delays as a novel statistical network inference method. There have been attempts to calculate the likelihood of a Boolean network in special cases by using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling () and for dynamic nested effects models (). Exact results were so far obtained only under strong restrictions on the logic functions involved, as in the context of conjunctive Bayesian networks (). By analytically marginalizing over the unknown delay times, we derive our main result, an exact and efficient recursive likelihood formula for a broad class of Boolean networks with exponentially distributed time delays that may include feedback loops. We evaluate our method in various simulation scenarios for its ability to recover the unknown topology. The method is then applied to a murine stem cell knockdown data set by, which consists of a set of whole genome gene expression time series after the knockout of six genes es srb Sox2, Nanog, Tcl1, Oct4 and Tbx3) that are considered key regulators in the maintenance and differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells. Our analysis reveals more feedback loops than previously detected.

conclusion in this work, we developed an algorithm that permits us to analyze gene knockdown time series experiments, which have high dimensional readouts (such as gene expression). To elucidate the interplay of the major regulators, all of them need to be perturbed and measured individually. On the side of methods development, we have solved the problem of calculating the likelihood function for data generated from a Boolean network with probabilistic exponentially distributed time delays (Algorithm 2). The likelihood function can be used for network reconstruction, as has been demonstrated in our simulation studies. Having a closed form solution for the likelihood has several further applications that we did not mention so far. It is possible to sample the joint distribution PBj, F ,  rather efficiently, because many observations B can be excluded a priori knowing  and F. This allows for accounting for some hidden variables B k among the observed B by integrating them out. Furthermore, it is possible to calculate the expectation of a certain B j to be on or off in a given time interval. As an application, we have devised a method to apply it to data in which the values of the Boolean network can only be observed indirectly (Algorithm 1). We analyzed murine stem cell differentiation data off or the purpose of signaling network reconstruction. Comparison with a previous reconstruction attempt in revealed a much richer feedback structure than expected. Our method suggests regulatory feedback loops that lead to a better understanding of the dynamic interplay of some master regulators in murine embryonic stem cell development. We expect our method to find numerous applications, as protein abundance data become increasingly available ().
