Motivation: Robustness, the ability of biological networks to uphold their functionality in spite of perturbations, is a key characteristic of all living systems. Although several theoretical approaches have been developed to formalize robustness, it still eludes an exact quantification. Here, we present a rigorous and quantitative approach for the structural robustness of metabolic networks by measuring their ability to tolerate random reaction (or gene) knockouts. Results: In analogy to reliability theory, based on an explicit consideration of all possible knockout sets, we exactly quantify the probability of failure for a given network function (e.g. growth). This measure can be computed if the networks minimal cut sets (MSCs) are known. We show that even in genome scale metabolic networks the probability of (network) failure can be reliably estimated from MSCs with lowest cardinalities. We demonstrate the applicability of our theory by analyzing the structural robustness of multiple Enterobacteriaceae and blatt i bacteria cea e and show a dramatically low structural robustness for the latter. We find that structural robustness develops from the ability to proliferate in multiple growth environments consistent with experimentally found knowledge. Conclusion: The probability of (network) failure provides thus a reliable and easily computable measure of structural robustness and redundancy in genome scale metabolic networks.

introduction a major characteristic of biological systems is their 'robustness', i.e. the ability to perform normally under the presence of perturbations (). Despite its fundamental importance, robustness is hard to quantify and a comprehensive, quantitative understanding of robustness has yet to be developed (). The problem is augmented by the fact that robustness is an extremely general concept which obstructs efforts for an exact definition (). Clearly, robustness arises as a consequence of the interactions between the components in a system. It therefore requires a network based approach for its analysis (). In the following, we study a key aspect of cellular robustness, namely structural robustness in metabolic networks (), which is a measure of the apparent redundancy in metabolic networks. Redundancy is one reason why specific (network) functions may persist in spite of changes in the networks' topologies. Metabolic networks are particularly suitable to study structural robustness as their topologies are either well known or can be reliably reconstructed by well established protocols (). An unbiased way to characterize all topologically feasible flux distributions in a metabolic network can be achieved in terms of elementary flux modes ef ms (). ef ms are steady state pathways that use a minimal set of reactions (enzymes) in the appropriate thermodynamic directions. Biologically, they can be interpreted as simple, indivisible functional building blocks, which represent all feasible metabolic capabilities of the organism. Thus, ef ms are likely candidates to be used in a definition of structural robustness. In fact were the first to define structural robustness by counting the number of ef ms in different situations. An alternative approach to ef ms is minimal cut sets (MCSs) (). These are minimal sets of reaction (enzyme) knockouts that completely disable a particular network functionality. MCSs are intimately connected to ef ms. Any network function can be represented by a set of ef ms. Thus, MCSs can equivalently be defined as the minimal set of reaction knockouts that prevent a set of target ef ms from carrying a steady state flux. An MCS is therefore a so called minimal hitting set of the target ef ms (). If the ef ms or the MCSs are known, the respective other can be calculated. Mathematically, this relationship is known as duality (). While ef ms describe the possibilities to achieve a particular function, MCSs describe the effort it takes to remove that function from the network. Thus, the size distribution of the MCSs provides a measure for the structural fragility of a network (). One major disadvantage for both measures, the efm based structural robustness measure as well as the mcs based structural fragility measure, is that they presuppose the availability of the complete set of ef ms and MCSs, respectively. This is a computationally intractable problem in genome scale metabolic models gsm ms. Here, we present a novel method that overcomes the computational limitations and allows one for the first time to estimate the structural robustness even in gsm ms. We use MCSs to calculate the exact (structural) probability of failure p of of a network. This puts the estimation of structural robustness on a theoretically sound fundament.

discussion here we developed a new general measure to quantify the structural robustness (or fragility) of metabolic networks based on the op of. Both, p of F(d) as well as op of F are based on MCSs and share analogies with the previously defined structural robustness measures R(d) and R which rely on ef ms (). In contrast to R, the op of remains computationally feasible even in gsm ms for two reasons: (i) the op of can be well estimated from the shortest MCSs with up to d 0 reaction cuts; and (ii) these d 0 shortest MCSs can be calculated with a MILP even in gsm ms (von). Previously, it was shown that MCSs in the (primal) network are ef ms in a network dual to the original network (). Thus, finding the shortest ef ms in this dual network is equivalent to finding the low cardinality MCSs in the primal gsm m (von). A high performance computing infrastructure is not required for this task. Thus, the op of is in principle an easily computable measure. However, due to the combinatorial explosion of the number of summands in F(d), see Equation (4), the evaluation is practically limited to low cardinalities. This does not cause practical problems for the op of F as the impact of high cardinality MCSs on F quickly decreases (see). The slope of this decrease depends on the selected probability density that models the number of deletions that occur per mutation. Here, we used a Poisson distribution which is typically used for the study of rare events, like mutations (, and references therein). We were able to show that up to k 1 our analysis is computationally feasible on standard computer infrastructure. This is sufficient for the study of naturally occurring mutations. For instance, in E. coli a mutation rate of about 10 3 per genome and generation was found (), which is far below our limit of k 1, as we can assume that not all mutations lead to a loss of function of metabolic enzymes. All our conclusions remained valid (data not shown) if we used other probability densities like a binomial distribution or the one used by, see Equation (7). Previously, MCSs were already used to compute a so called fragility coefficient which characterized the sensitivity of a metabolic network to deletions (). Fragility was defined for each reaction as the inverse of the average cardinality of all MCSs that were supported by that reaction. Upon averaging the reaction specific fragility over all reactions one obtained a measure for the overall network fragility. In contrast to the here introduced concept of the op of network fragility lacks a rigorous probabilistic definition and more importantly requires the complete set of MCSs for its calculation. Network fragility is therefore not applicable to gsm ms. A clear difference between the p of and structural robustness is that the former is function oriented while the latter characterizes the network. F is calculated with respect to some particular function that fails. Typically, networks perform multiple functions at the same time, which may be differentially robust. Thus, the op of is not only a topological property but also a property of the associated function. For instance, it is interesting to ask (and scope of further analysis) whether two essential functions like cellular energy production and BM production are similarly robust. R on the other hand characterizes the network topology by essentially measuring the proportion of short ef ms in a network. This definition is independent of any functions performed by the network. R counter intuitively identified growth on acetate to be more robust than growth on glucose which indicates that the length of ef ms may not be an appropriate proxy for structural robustness. Even if we selected only those ef ms that support a particular target function (like BM production), and calculated R for the reduced set of ef ms we had misidentified growth on acetate as the most robust growth environment as growth supporting ef ms on acetate were on average 'shorter' than on glucose (see Supplementary). For better understanding we illustrated this effect in a toy network in Supplementary. Thus, we propose to use the complement of the op of R new  1  F as a new measure for structural robustness in metabolic networks. po fs can be calculated equally well on the basis of reaction deletions as well as on the basis of gene deletions. Some reactions in an organism are not associated with a gene (e.g. non catalyzed reactions, reactions with unknown annotations) and can therefore not be knocked out. Other reactions are catalyzed by several different enzymes and are therefore more difficult to knock-out. However, our analysis indicates that the question if an organism or a growth condition is more robust than another can be identically answered in both approaches. It was criticized that structural robustness (as defined by) lacks the ability to identify critical enzymes, such as knot enzymes (). This is true for the op of as well. For instance, according to our measure, network A in was correctly identified to be more robust than network B. The cause for the lack of structural robustness is not apparent from the numerical value of the op of proposed to solve this dilemma by considering the number of independent (i.e. non-overlapping) ef ms which are not available in gsm ms. However, by measuring the specific p of f R d for each individual reaction (enzyme) R we are at least able to identify critical enzymes. For this purpose, we define the (reaction) specific p of f R d to be the ratio between all specific CSs, c d R , that are supported by reaction R and the number of all possible CSs, C d (and similarly for f R ). By ranking reactions according to their impact on the network we are able to identify critical reactions which may be useful drug targets. We calculated op of s in ms mms and gsm ms of multiple Enterobacteriaceae growing on minimal media to illustrate our concept. Among these, the ordinary lab strain E. coli K-12 MG1655 growing on glucose was found to be most robust. This was consistently observed in ms mms and gsm ms in agreement with expectations (). Moreover, catabolite repression mechanisms support this observation of glucose as a preferential growth source. Escherichia coli K-12 MG1655 was also found to be more robust than the pathogenic E. coli O157:H7 Sakai, and the least Exact quantification of cellular robustness robust S. flexneri 2a 2457T. While the difference between K-12 MG1655 and O157:H7 Sakai was small (but larger than the possible error), S. flexneri was clearly set apart. Due to its adaption to a specific growth niche, S. flexneri has lost many catabolic pathways for various nutrient sources (). It was demonstrated computationally as well as experimentally that the number of growth supporting conditions is larger for E. coli K-12 MG1655 than for E. coli O157:H7 Sakai than for S. flexneri 2a 2457T (). In contrast we here investigated the op of as a measure of structural robustness for these organisms in a single growth condition. Yet we found the same ranking as obtained from counting the number of growth supporting conditions. Structural robustness is thought to come about from the need to survive in multiple environments. Many of these adaptations occur through rewiring of existing enzymes (), thus increasing the connectivity in the network, and as a by product also introducing many alternative routes. These topological alternatives can be exploited for other growth sources as well and were mirrored in our analysis in low op of s. The two strains of the highly specialized endosymbiont B. cue not i which for millions of years have lived in the relatively constant environment provided by specialized cells of cockroaches (), were found to be extremely sensitive to loss of function mutations (). This was confirmed by an extremely high op of of 26%. B. cue not i was more than three times less robust than E. coli. It is known that B. cue not i grows only on an extremely limited palette of metabolic substrates (), which results in their low structural robustness as documented here. Consistent with our findings above on S. flexneri this lack of structural robustness is thought to be shaped by massive gene loss (). A characteristic difference between B. cue not i Pam and Bge is a defunct TCA cycle in the former due to the absence of the first three enzymatic steps (). This fact was mirrored in a lower structural robustness of B. cue not i Pam compared with Bge. Thus, we conclude that the op of is indeed an appropriate measure to correctly assess the structural robustness of cells here we analyzed the structural robustness of multiple organisms in several growth environments. Consistent with previous findings our results confirm that structural robustness is correlated with the ability to utilize multiple carbon sources (). They concluded that structural robustness is not a trait selected by evolution but a by product of environmental flexibility. However, very recently showed that structural redundancy also impacts a cell factory s ability to produce a product of interest in the presence of perturbations. Based on predictions from gsm ms they argue that pathway diversification leads to robust production capabilities under large perturbations. For instance, we show in Supplementary Table S5 two strain designs with different op of s but identical production growth characteristics. Thus, calculating the op of will identify promising designs for cell factories. Interestingly, we found that the raise in F(d) with increasing d was well approximated by an exponential function in all investigated models and independent of the investigated organism. Whether this is an expression of some general topological properties of metabolic networks or a coincidence will be scope of further work.

conclusion we developed a consistent theory of cellular redundancy based on a rigorous probabilistic definition of failure in metabolic networks. The new measure, called op of allows quantification of the structural robustness of biochemical reaction networks with respect to certain functionalities. op of can be reliably estimated even in gsm ms from low cardinality MSCs. In contrast to other measures, the op of quantifies structural robustness and fragility of cellular metabolism concurrent with current biological paradigms and experimental findings. More specifically we showed that the number of growth supporting nutrients indirectly correlates with the organisms' op of. As the op of is easily computable, we expect that it will be useful in increasing our understanding of key properties of metabolic networks.
