Motivation: Phylogenies are increasingly used in all fields of medical and biological research. Because of the next generation sequencing revolution, datasets used for conducting phylogenetic analyses grow at an unprecedented pace. We present exam l version 3, a dedicated production level code for inferring phylogenies on whole transcriptome and whole genome alignments using supercomputers. Results: We introduce several improvements and extensions to exam l Extensions of substitution models and supported data types, the integration of a novel load balance algorithm as well as a parallel I/O optimization that significantly improve parallel efficiency, and a production level implementation for Intel mic based hardware platforms.

introduction exam l ex a scale Maximum Likelihood) is a relatively new code for large scale phylogenetic analyses on supercomputers. It implements the ra xml () search algorithm and replaces ra xml light () which was inefficient for large, partitioned phylo genomic datasets that currently represent the typical use case. Hence, in exam l (v. 1) we implemented a radically different parallelization approach () that improved parallel efficiency by up to a factor of 3 and also increased scalability. For two large alignments that were recently published in Science, we identified and resolved further performance bottlenecks. Note that, exam l can also be used for analyzing datasets with 10-20 genes and up to 55 000 tax a but scalability will be limited to at most 100 cores. For exam l (v. 2), we developed and integrated algorithms for improved load balance () and also optimized the parallel I/O for reading multiple sequence alignments. We also started exploring if and how exam l can be ported to the Intel MIC (Many Integrated Core) hardware architecture () in a proof of concept setting. Here, we present exam l (v. 3) which offers a part from new models and data types a production level implementation for the Intel MIC architecture that required a substantial amount of reengineering. We also present a novel parallel alignment I/O method. Finally, we completely re-wrote the user manual. exam l is a stable and well documented code for large scale phylogenetic inference on x86 linux mac clusters (compiles with gcc icc clang. It addresses and provides generally applicable solutions for several performance bottlenecks in parallel phylo gen tic likelihood calculations on partitioned alignments.
