Motivation: Logic modeling is a useful tool to study signal transduc-tion across multiple pathways. Logic models can be generated by training a network containing the prior knowledge to phospho proteomics data. The training can be performed using stochastic optimization procedures, but these are unable to guarantee a global optima or to report the complete family of feasible models. This, however, is essential to provide precise insight in the mechanisms underlaying signal transduction and generate reliable predictions. Results: We propose the use of Answer Set Programming to explore exhaustively the space of feasible logic models. Toward this end, we have developed cas po an open source Python package that provides a powerful platform to learn and characterize logic models by lever-aging the rich modeling language and solving technologies of Answer Set Programming. We illustrate the usefulness of cas po by revisiting a model of pro growth and inflammatory pathways in liver cells. We show that, if experimental error is taken into account, there are thousands (11 700) of models compatible with the data. Despite the large number, we can extract structural features from the models, such as links that are always (or never) present or modules that appear in a mutual exclusive fashion. To further characterize this family of models, we investigate the input output behavior of the models. We find 91 behaviors across the 11 700 models and we suggest new experiments to discriminate among them. Our results underscore the importance of characterizing in a global and exhaustive manner the family of feasible models, with important implications for experimental design. Availability: cas po is freely available for download (license GPLv3) and as a web service at http://caspo.genouest.org/.

introduction predictive models of biological networks are a main component of systems biology. For a certain system of interest, if enough information is available about the biomolecules that constitute it and their interactions, one can convert this prior knowledge into a mathematical model (e.g. a set of differential equations or logic rules) that can be simulated. If experimental data are available, the model can be fitted (trained) to the data. That is, one determines the model parameters (for example, kinetic constants in a biochemical model) to obtain the most plausible model given the data. This is normally achieved by defining an objective function that describes the goodness of the model based on the data that is subsequently optimized (). This training process is not a trivial task owing to factors including experimental error, limitations in the amount of data available, incompleteness of our prior knowledge and inherent mathematical properties of the models. Thus, in general, there is no single solution but rather multiple models that describe the data equally (or similarly) well. In those cases, the model is said to be non identifiable (;). In some cases, deterministic methods that guarantee the identification of the optimal models can be applied, but these methods are often limited by the exponential growth of the search space. Thus, usually one needs to use stochastic methods that may identify the optimum or at least exhibit suboptimal models (). However, an incomplete characterization of the set of plausible models limits significantly the insight that can be gained about the underlying molecular mechanisms. In this article, we investigate this issue in the context of logic modeling of signaling networks. These models have been applied recently to analyze signal transduction in a variety of contexts (). In particular, given a network encoding our knowledge of signal transduction and a dataset measuring the activation of proteins in this network on various perturbations, one can derive from the network (Boolean) logic models fitted to the data. Models are simulated assuming that the network reaches a pseudo steady state at a certain time on stimulation, and the identification of the network that best fits the data is posed as an optimization problem. This problem can be solved using meta-heuristics (e.g. a genetic algorithm), and their application suggests that there are multiple alternative models that explain the data (). However, stochastic search methods can not characterize the models precisely: they are intrinsically unable not just to *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. provide a complete set of solutions, but also to guarantee that an optimal solution is found. To overcome this limitation, approaches based on Integer Linear Programming (ILP) () and Answer Set Programming (ASP) () have been applied, providing a proof of concept that a global optimum can be identified. Here we present cas po a free open source tool to learn (Boolean) logic models of signal transduction in a complete and global fashion. cas po uses cell no pt pre and post-processing routines. It can handle feedback loops in the prior knowledge network (PKN), numerical datasets and tolerance in the score owing to experimental uncertainty. We use cas po to exhaustively explore the space of optimal and suboptimal models for a real case describing pro growth and inflammatory pathways in a liver cancer cell. We find that, even with small tolerance, thousands of models can be compatible with the data and use ASP's flexibility to further analyze them: we categorize them according to their input output behavior and identify subsets of modules that are interchangeable with respect to the score. The multiple possible combinations of these modules are responsible for the large number of models found.

conclusion a useful approach to model large scale signaling networks consists on training Boolean logic models from prior knowledge and dedicated experimental data. The problem of training these models is an optimization task that can be solved with stochastic search methods (), which have the important limitation that they do not guarantee global optimality nor an exhaustive solution. In this article, we show how recasting this problem in a highly declarative language allows us to is highlighted, as well as the two most common ones (85 and 77). The most common GTT is close to the optimal one, whereas the second most common GTT has a different behavior. Distribution of suboptimal models. The suboptimal models are ordered (from left to right) first according to their MSEs, and then according to their 91 gtt s. The number of different models leading to the same GTT is plotted in vertical bars. gtt s are ordered and colored by their MSE. The 16 optimal models correspond to MSE 0.0499. The two most common gtt s describe the response of 3126 and 2090 models 2324 identify the complete family of feasible models and query them to obtain insight into model degeneracy. In a real case study, we have seen that there is a family of feasible models with a deep combinatorial structure: several combinations of internal submodules, with equal or similar scores, can equivalently explain the observed behavior of the system. This leads to a rapid growth of the family of suboptimal models. Taking into account the inherent noise in data, we showed that 11 700 different models can be considered as plausible representations of the PKN and an experimental phospho proteomics dataset. Thanks to our exhaustive characterization of these models, we could determine unambiguously which hyper edges (biological links) are functional, based on their distributions across the models and determine whether groups of hyper edges are exclusive from each other. To further characterize this family of models, we introduced the concept of gtt s and used it to explore their input output behavior. Compared with the model topologies, the variability is much lower; the 11 700 models can be grouped in 91 gtt s and for 30% of the 16 384 possible perturbations, all models gave the same predictions. Interestingly, the distribution of models among gtt s is far from being equi distributed and two gtt s comprise almost half of the models, while the GTT corresponding to the optimal score is specific (0.1% of the models). While the most common GTT is similar to the GTT with optimal score, the second most common GTT is different. However, a single experiment is able to discriminate these models. These results underscore the importance of exploring exhaustively the family of models and take into account experimental error to obtain an adequate picture of the feasible model solutions. Our formal approach based on ASP allows a precise characterization of the information that can be inferred from the confrontation of prior knowledge with experimental observations over protein signaling networks. It also permits the study of the internal combinatorics leading to the variability of the system functioning and provides a tool toward experimental design. Owing to the complexity of signaling networks and the limitations of existing experimental technologies (in terms of which nodes can be measures and or perturbed), models typically show an important lack of identifiability. This is a general limitation of models in systems biology (). In the context of Boolean models, we expect that further development of experimental design (), in intimate coordination with advances in experimental techniques will allow us to tackle this issue. This work opens the way to several prospective tracks. First, it would be useful to evaluate our ASP formulation and those based on ILP from () and () to understand their strengths and complementary features. In contrast to ILP, ASP is a relatively new tool for problem solving in biology. ASP, having its roots in knowledge representation and reasoning, has proven to be well suited to address highly combinatorial search and discrete optimization problems, with at least comparable performance with well established ILP solvers. On the other hand, ILP as a mathematical programming framework may be more suitable to study problems based on calculus over large domains of integer or rational numbers. Therefore, combining the expressiveness and power of several solving technologies instead of selecting one of them seems a promising option for the future (). Second, we plan to study the extension of our approach to time series data, although switching from a steady state to a dynamical viewpoint implies a growth of the search space. Fitting models whose steady states evolve between clearly separated time-scales () should be of similar complexity to the problem studied in this article. Fitting to the actual time courses of a Boolean model has a higher level of complexity, as it requires to adjust the time step of the Boolean model to the real time of the measurements. More generally, we need to develop a rigorous framework to study models of biological networks as a family of plausible realizations, not of single networks. A first approximation could be to compare experimental data (ideally a distribution across individual cells) with a distribution of simulated results across a family of single logical models. The comparison of the distribution of feasible models with single cell data emerges as longer term follow-up of this work that should provide deep insight into the cell to cell heterogeneity of signal transduction (). Altogether, we have implemented an open source tool based on ASP providing a powerful framework to analyze networks models in systems biology. Further, several prospective tracks will certainly lead to future developments to extend and improve the functionalities of cas po
