Motivation: Fragmented RNA immunoprecipitation combined with RNA sequencing enabled the unbiased study of RNA epi genome at a near single base resolution; however, unique features of this new type of data call for novel computational techniques. Result: Through examining the connections of RNA epi genome sequencing data with two well studied data types, chips eq and rnase q we unveiled the salient characteristics of this new data type. The computational strategies were discussed accordingly, and a novel data processing pipeline was proposed that combines several existing tools with a newly developed exo me based approach exo me peak for detecting, representing and visualizing the post-tran-scriptional RNA modification sites on the transcriptome. Availability: The MATLAB package exo me peak and additional details are available at

introduction despite the unprecedented prosperity in epigenetics studies of DNA and histone modifications with next generation sequencing data (), the RNA epigenetics remains a largely uncharted territory () and has not benefitted as much from the advancement in sequencing technology until lately. Two recent studies of transcriptome wide mRNA m 6 A methylation () proposed a new powerful protocol (differently named as 'm 6 a seq and merip seq where mRNA is fragmented before the immunoprecipitation with an tim 6 A antibody, and the immunoprecipitated and input control fragments are then sequenced for reconstructing transcriptome wide m 6 A methylation sites. This protocol in theory enabled the transcriptome wide unbiased study of a repertoire of 4100 known post-transcriptional RNA modifications () at a near single base resolution, provided the corresponding antibody is available. To unify the nomenclatures, we call this protocol fri p seq which stands for 'Fragmented RNA ImmunoPrecipitation Sequencing'. fri p seq is different from rip seq (), where full length RNA is subjected to immunoprecipitation for detection of protein rna interaction. In contrast, the immunoprecipitation of fragmented RNA in fri p seq enables the precise prediction of RNA modification sites on the transcriptome. From a technological perspective, fri p seq can be considered a marriage of two relatively well studied techniques: chips eq () and rnase q (). This new technique brings a host of new computational challenges yet to be adequately addressed. Next, we discuss briefly the best practice for fri p seq data analysis estimating the background from the neighborhood genomic regions, fri p seq peak calling does require a paired input control sample of preferably fragmented RNAs before immunoprecipitation as supposed to an immunoglobulin G control sample. Peak Annotation, Gene and Isoform Transcripts: The association between detected RNA modification sites and the specific mRNA transcripts can be highly problematic. Recent study shows that with an average of 1012 isoforms per gene, most genes tend to express multiple isoforms simultaneously (). Since the sequencing read length is mostly 5100bp, isoform quantification can be difficult, not to mention calling peaks for each individual isoform transcript. Nevertheless, an mRNA methylation site may be uniquely associated with a transcript when the site spans across the nearest exon(s) that uniquely belong to that transcript.
