Motivation: We introduce a novel method for visualizing high dimensional data via a discrete dynamical system. This method provides a 2D representation of the relationship between subjects according to a set of variables without geometric projections, transformed axes or principal components. The algorithm exploits a memory type mechanism inherent in a certain class of discrete dynamical systems collectively referred to as the chaos game that are closely related to iterative function systems. The goal of the algorithm was to create a human readable representation of high dimensional patient data that was capable of detecting unrevealed sub clusters of patients from within anticipated classifications. This provides a mechanism to further pursue a more personalized exploration of pathology when used with medical data. For clustering and classification protocols, the dynam-ical system portion of the algorithm is designed to come after some feature selection filter and before some model evaluation (e.g. clustering accuracy) protocol. In the version given here, a univariate features selection step is performed (in practice more complex feature selection methods are used), a discrete dynamical system is driven by this reduced set of variables (which results in a set of 2D cluster models), these models are evaluated for their accuracy (according to a user defined binary classification) and finally a visual representation of the top classification models are returned. Thus, in addition to the visual-ization component, this methodology can be used for both supervised and unsupervised machine learning as the top performing models are returned in the protocol we describe here. Results: Butterfly, the algorithm we introduce and provide working code for, uses a discrete dynamical system to classify high dimensional data and provide a 2D representation of the relationship between subjects. We report results on three datasets (two in the article; one in the appendix) including a public lung cancer dataset that comes along with the included Butterfly R package. In the included R script, a univariate feature selection method is used for the dimension reduction step, but in the future we wish to use a more powerful multivariate feature reduction method based on neural networks k riesel 2007).

introduction there is an n dimensional geometry associated with any given dataset consisting of any number of subjects and n variables. Depending on the choice of which variables to include or emphasize, the geometry changes. For example, consider a dataset consisting of two clusters, e.g. responders and non-responders to some treatment. Under optimal circumstances, a small set of variables (e.g. a subset of gene expression values) can be used to separate the groups. These selected variables determine the relationship between patients in a geometrical way: via the distance between patients. How can one explore this space in an efficient, accurate and reproducible way so that one can study different scenarios, i.e. different sets of variables and the corresponding relationships between subjects in two dimensions Butterfly's most powerful feature is its ability to reveal sub clusters of data points even within apparently homogeneous main clusters. Thus, Butterfly provides a tool for the bottom up exploration of data in addition to a procedure that can be used for standard training and testing protocols. real life datasets are invariably heterogeneous and many powerful nonlinear data exploration tools over fit the data due to the presence of noise. Mainly, this is because conventional tools require the establishment of complex frontiers to separate classes. In the case of Butterfly, the data points are transformed into a 2D representative space, which is the attractor space of the dynamical system, and clusters are separated by straight lines. Thus, non-linear correlations are identified between features, whereas the relationship in space between subjects (e.g. patients) remains simple. The main purpose of this work is to introduce Butterfly and its efficacy in handling molecular profiling datasets. We present it as a data exploration and machine learning classification tool that can be applied to high dimensional data following any feature reduction step, which brings down the dimensionality to around 50 or below. We do not discuss the technical nuances behind the algorithm nor compare it with other methods in this article. We introduce the algorithm and highlight its ability to accurately classify data. Future research will focus on Butterfly's ability to *To whom correspondence should be addressed. conserve the relationships between high dimensional data points even after they are projected to a 2D plane. The main use of Butterfly in the research setting is the ability to view the relationship between subjects, e.g. patients, from the vantage of a set of (!5) interesting variables, with the specific goal of identifying homogeneous subgroups. Further, the identification of the main variables that lead to a particular classification is returned to the user. Many of the modern non-linear clustering dimensional reduction methods rely on the mathematics that drives principle component analysis () or k means (). Because the mathematics that drives Butterfly is fundamentally different from these methods, we have found that exploratory analyses based on Butterfly and one of these other approaches provides comprehensive analyses and that Butterfly complements these established approaches effectively.

conclusion in this article we presented an algorithm for the visualization, clustering and classification of data that is based on a simple discrete dynamical system. The novel aspect of the classification protocol is the dynamical system portion sandwiched between a feature selection filter and model evaluation algorithm. The iterative dynamical system transforms a multidimensional dataset into a 2D representation without using typical geometric and algebraic approaches found in other methods. Thus, Butterfly is ultimately a data visualization tool that allows researchers to probe their data by reviewing a set of high ranking models and observing the relationships between subjects in a 2D space. Each model is based on giving priority to a set of features and providing a human readable representation of the resulting relationships between subjects. However, our methodology allows for both supervised and unsupervised machine learning. The main benefits of using Butterfly to build predictive models is that only a simple linear split in a 2D space is required to separate groups, and this minimizes the chances of over fitting noise in data and its ability to provide a human readable representation of the structure of the data including sub clusters within expected clusters. The benefit over support vector machines () is that with Butterfly this is always done in a 2D space, where as the support vector machine has to establish the separating contour in a space whose dimension is equal to the number of variables considered. Butterfly has a lot in common superficially with principal components analysis (), but they are sufficiently different mathematically to justify using both as data exploration tools. In fact, principal components analysis can be used as a variable reduction tool before using Butterfly to examine subgroups. Butterfly's ability as an effective multivariate feature selection tool will be the subject of a future publication.
