Motivation: In silico methods to classify compounds as potential drugs that bind to a specific target become increasingly important for drug design. To build classification devices training sets of drugs with known activities are needed. For many such classification problems, not only qualitative but also quantitative information of a specific property (e.g. binding affinity) is available. The latter can be used to build a regression scheme to predict this property for new compounds. Predicting a compound property explicitly is generally more difficult than classifying that the property lies below or above a given threshold value. Hence, an indirect classification that is based on regression may lead to poorer results than a direct classification scheme. In fact, initially researchers are only interested to classify compounds as potential drugs. The activities of these compounds are subsequently measured in wet lab. Results: We propose a novel approach that uses available quantitative information directly for classification rather than first using a regression scheme. It uses a new type of loss function called weighted biased regression. Application of this method to four widely studied datasets of the co epra contest (Comparative Evaluation of Prediction Algorithms, http://coepra.org) shows that it can outperform simple classification methods that do not make use of this additional quantitative information. Availability: A stand alone application is available at the web page http://agknapp.chemie.fu-berlin.de/agknapp/index.php?menu= software page peptide classifier that can be used to build a model for a peptide training set to be submitted.

introduction molecular classification problems are common in many fields of chemistry, biochemistry, pharmacy, medicinal diagnostics and other applications in modern life sciences. In an empirical regression or classification problem, one considers objects that possess a specific common relationship characterized by object specific target values. For drug molecules, these target values may relate to a property that characterizes binding. In a regression problem, these target values vary continuously in an interval. These can for instance be binding affinities of drugs that bind to the same receptor. For a classification problem, the objects are labeled according to the group * To whom correspondence should be addressed. they belong to using discrete target values. To solve a classification or regression problem, we need to correlate the individual objects with their respective target values. Target values for a two class classification problem are for instance t = +1/1 that can be used to characterize objects of the positive negative class. To construct an empirical device (regressor or classifier) to predict unknown target values one needs a training set of related objects with known target values. Such molecular regression and classification problems are addressed in the Comparative Evaluation of Prediction Algorithms co epra 2006 competition (http://www.coepra.org/). The co epra competition can be seen in analogy to CASP (Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction) () that focuses on protein structure prediction, while co epra deals with regression and classification problems of biological active molecules. On an average, 15 research groups participated in the four co epra 2006 classification contests. To solve the classification tasks different approaches were used by the participating groups ranging from applications of support vector machine (SVM) (), artificial neural networks (), naive Bayesian decision theory (), least square optimization (), decision trees (), random forest methods () and new classification methods such as k score (). co epra considers exclusively oligopeptides from which the sequences and alternatively physico-chemical descriptors comprising many different features were provided at the co epra web page. In a way a classifier (regressor), 'observes' the objects (molecules) through eyes that are defined by the features used as descriptor. Other sets of features considering global physicochemical and steric al properties of the whole peptide (such as volume, molecular weight, or solvent accessible surface area) or evolutionary residue similarities such as Blosum Matrices () can be used alternatively. Since the number of peptides for each classification and regression task of co epra is very small, the number of descriptors has to be small as well to avoid over parameterization. This was solved by the participants in different ways. Some used small feature sets like the peptide sequence based features, others massively reduced the number of physico-chemical features by applying principal component analysis (), genetic algorithms (), ant colony optimization () or simple filters (). This wide range of methods applied by different groups makes the co epra contest an ideal test ground to explore different training and prediction schemes. When predicting a certain property of a molecule, researchers are often just interested whether the value of this property is below or above a certain threshold. Thus, one can classify candidate molecules from a large set of molecules. For the most interesting molecules, the property values are subsequently measured in wet lab. However, when building predictors the exact property (or target) values are often available. This information is routinely used when building a regressor, which tries to predict the property values for new molecules. But, predicting property values is more demanding than to predict just the classes to which the molecules belong to. Hence, predicting a property value by regression with subsequent classification is expected to introduce larger uncertainties than solving the classification problem directly. But, the additional information of the specific property values could be of use to solve the classification problem more reliably. The classification methods used in this study consider such quantitative information of the target value directly that is normally only used for regression. Thus, improving classification results considerably.
