Motivation: Protein domains are fundamental units of protein structure , function and evolution; thus, it is critical to gain a deep understanding of protein domain organization. Previous works have attempted to identify key residues involved in organization of domain architecture. Because one of the most important characteristics of domain architecture is the arrangement of secondary structure elements (SSEs), here we present a picture of domain organization through an integrated consideration of SSE arrangements and residue contact networks. Results: In this work, by representing SSEs as main chain scaffolds and side chain interfaces and through construction of residue contact networks, we have identified the SSE interfaces well packed within protein domains as SSE packing clusters. In total, 17 334 SSE packing clusters were recognized from 9015 Structural Classification of Proteins domains of 540 sequence identity. The similar SSE packing clusters were observed not only among domains of the same folds, but also among domains of different folds, indicating their roles as common scaffolds for organization of protein domains. Further analysis of 14 small single domain proteins reveals a high correlation between the SSE packing clusters and the folding nuclei. Consistent with their important roles in domain organization, SSE packing clusters were found to be more conserved than other regions within the same proteins.

introduction the 3D structure of a protein is crucial for understanding its physiological function in living cells. Since 1958, numerous efforts have been spent on determination of protein structures, and the number of proteins with known structure is increasing with an exponential speed. By the end of 2013, over 96 000 protein structures have been determined and deposited in the Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/) (). Given the complexity of protein structures, researchers have attempted to decompose them to compact and fundamental units, so called domains, and thus several databases including CATH () and Structural Classification of Proteins (SCOP) () have been generated to provide valuable resources for the understanding of protein structure and function at domain level. As the fundamental units of proteins, understanding the organization of domain architectures would deepen our insight into the relationship between protein structure and function, which could further facilitate protein structure prediction, design and simulation. Previously, a number of efforts have been devoted to identifying key residues involved in organization of domain architecture, and these works could fall into two categories. One was to identify a specific group of residues based on structural features like hydrophobicity and compactness (). For example,) examined the compactness of hydrophobic clusters within proteins and revealed a certain correlation between the hydrophobic clusters and protein folding units. The other attempted to characterize domain architecture by identifying tertiary packing motifs within domains based on geometric properties (). For example applied the Delaunay tessellation to define the tetrahedral packing motifs within proteins and found the general repetitive tetrahedral packing motifs in protein tertiary structures. All of these works mainly focused on residue level contacts, but they did not explicitly consider the important roles of SSE packing in the organization of domain architectures. As we know, one of the most important characteristics of domain architecture is the spatial arrangement of secondary structure elements (SSE), especially of these regular ones like helix and strand (). The SSE arrangements have been well explored in many protein families, including helix turn helix motif in a class of dna binding proteins called BZIP family proteins (), four helix bundles present in many hormones () and the Rossmann fold ( unit) present in nucleotide binding proteins (). Many works have been developed in mining SSE motifs in protein structures (); however, most of them treated an SSE as a *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors. simplified vector representation and did not uncover the details of underlying residues mediating SSE packing. To gain a comprehensive picture of domain organization, our work integrated the previous efforts at both residue level and SSE level by considering the SSE interfaces as the basic units for packing of SSEs. We first constructed an effective contact network among side chains within a protein domain, and then identified the well packed SSE interfaces within the network as an SSE packing cluster. Such SSE packing clusters not only characterize the domain organization but also shed lights into the molecular mechanisms underlying domain formation.

discussion in this study, through recognition of interfaces mediating SSE packing, we have attempted to identify the structural and physicochemical features underlying the organization of domain architecture. The packing clusters identified not only depicted the pie chart showing the distribution of PC sites within different -value classes. Three -value classes (low with value 501 medium with -value between 0.1 and 0.4 and high with value 404 were colored with blue, purple and red, respectively. (B) Histogram showing the percentages of PC sites with medium high -values in 14 different small single domain proteins. (C) Comparison of the distribution of the relative distance to the centroid of SSE packing clusters for PC sites with low -values (blue) and PC sites with medium high -values red dg Correlations between -values and PC sites for f add domain (D), Im7 domain (E), Acp domain (F) and SH3 domain (G). PC sites with low -value were colored with blue, medium -value colored with purple and high -value colored with red arrangement of structure elements in domain architecture, but could also capture the underlying residues mediating SSE packing patterns in domain formation. Previously, hydrophobic cores have been analyzed within domains (). We compared the structure model for recognition of hydrophobic core (left panel of Supplementary) with that for identification of SSE packing clusters (right panel of Supplementary). A hydrophobic core usually consists of densely packed hydrophobic residues within a protein domain. While in SSE packing clusters, only the residue pairs in effect contact are considered (see Section 2) and thus the hydrophobic residues involved are less densely packed (comparing left and right panels of Supplementary). Moreover, as shown in Supplementary, for a protein domain with complex architecture, SSE packing clusters can give a better structural delineation than hydrophobic cores do. There arose an interesting phenomenon, when domain architectures were decomposed into SSE packing clusters. It was found that 480% of domains of different folds in SCOP could be related by sharing at least one SSE packing pattern, resulting in a high connectivity network in protein fold space (Supplementary). The SSE packing clusters could also be derived based on CATH database, and we found that the recognition of SSE packing clusters is not drastically affected by different domain assign algorithm (see Supplementary Results for details). So, what puzzles us is why the SSE packing patterns are commonly shared among domains of different fold. Because the domains of different folds usually originate from different ancestors and perform different functions, the sharing of SSE packing clusters across domains of different fold could indicate the important role of physical constraints rather than evolutionary or functional constraints on formation of SSE packing clusters as common structural scaffolds. Furthermore, we observed a high correlation between the SSE packing clusters and the folding nuclei for single domain proteins. As most of the small single domain proteins used in this study was found to fold via a nucleation condensation mechanism (N  ol ting and), several key residues would form a folding nucleus that serves as a scaffold for directing the rapid folding of the whole domain. The good correspondence between SSE packing clusters identified and folding nuclei for these single domain proteins suggest the important roles of the SSE packing clusters in initiating folding and organizing structure elements. Moreover, through investigation of the distribution of 729 disease related mutations on 16 different the distribution of conservation scores for SSE packing clusters within different families is displayed as a solid line, compared with that of other regions shown as a dash line kinase domains, it was observed that SSE packing clusters could account for 29.2% (213 of 729) of previously reported disease related mutations on kinases. The association between SSE packing clusters and diseases reinforces the importance of SSE packing clusters in domain organization not only in terms of structural scaffolds but also in terms of functionality.

conclusion in this work, by considering the SSE interfaces as the basic interaction units for the packing of SSEs, we developed a new descriptor named SSE packing cluster to characterize domains of different fold. Moreover, our analysis showed that SSE packing clusters were more conserved in domain architectures and corresponded well with folding nuclei in small single domain proteins. Therefore, SSE packing clusters could be regarded as common structural scaffolds underlying the diverse protein structure space.
