Motivation: The binding between a peptide and a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is one of the most important processes for the induction of an adaptive immune response. Many algorithms have been developed to predict peptide mhc pm hc binding. However, no approach has yet been able to give structural insight into how peptides detach from the MHC. Results: In this study, we used a combination of coarse graining, hierarchical natural move Monte Carlo and stochastic conformational optimization to explore the detachment processes of 32 different peptides from HLA-A*02:01. We performed 100 independent repeats of each stochastic simulation and found that the presence of experimentally known anchor amino acids affects the detachment trajectories of our peptides. Comparison with experimental binding affinity data indicates the reliability of our approach (area under the receiver operating characteristic curve 0.85). We also compared to a 1000 ns molecular dynamics simulation of a non-binding peptide aaa ktp viv and HLA-A*02:01. Even in this simulation, the longest published for pm hc the pep-tide does not fully detach. Our approach is orders of magnitude faster and as such allows us to explore pm hc detachment processes in a way not possible with all atom molecular dynamics simulations. Availability and implementation: The source code is freely available for download at

introduction presentation of protein fragments on the surface of antigen presenting cells is a fundamental part of the human immune system. In virus infected cells, proteo some s degrade viral proteins into peptides. These peptides are then transported via the transporter associated with antigen processing into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum where the peptides are loaded on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules. These peptide mhc pm hc complexes are then presented on the surface of antigen presenting cells to the t cell receptors (TCR) of T cells (). The linkage between MHC, peptide and TCR determines if an immune reaction is triggered against this peptide (van der). Only if the binding affinity between peptide and MHC is strong enough, a peptide can be presented to TCR and a productive immune response against this peptide can take place. A wide range of pm hc binding affinity prediction methods have been developed (reviewed in). sequence based methods usually achieve high accuracy if sufficient training data are available. structure based methods are often worse at predicting binding affinity but give insight into the binding mode of the peptide (). Prediction methods V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

discussion a large number of MD studies have investigated the structural interaction between peptide and MHC (reviewed in). In none of these studies has full detachment of the peptide been observed. The longest reported pm hc MD simulation was 400 ns by (). In this study, we ran a 1000-ns simulation of an experimentally known non-binding peptide in complex with MHC and observed only partial peptide detachment. This shows that current standard MD simulations are not giving insight into the pm hc detachment processes within a reasonable time frame. Consequently, most structural analysis has been carried out on bound pm hc () and tcrp mhc structures () or empty MHC binding grooves (). To obtain insight into the peptide detachment processes, we used the combination of three technologies. First, the coarse grained 3 point model () which allowed for a reasonable runtime while keeping specific features of the amino acid side chains. Second, hierarchical segmentation () of the protein which further restricted the degrees of freedom and prevented global denaturation or local spoiling at high amplitudes third repeated simulated annealing () which allowed for an efficient sampling of low energy states along the energy surface. In this way, we were able to bypass the bottleneck of computational power and show how a detachment process of a peptide from MHC may occur. There are alternative techniques to our 'coarse grained hierarchical Monte Carlo simulated annealing approach' that could also enhance the sampling (see introduction). However, to our knowledge, none of these methods have been employed for pm hc detachment yet. Structural sampling methods will always produce a diverse collection of conformations of the structure under investigation. These movements are based on several parameter choices in the simulation setup. How meaningful these conformations are can be determined by comparison to experiments. Therefore, we compared our detachment data to two different types of experimental data. First, we compared the detachment process with preferred anchor amino acids deduced from the ie db (). While anchor residues are not exclusively responsible for pm hc binding, we found frequent agreement between an N-or c terminal detachment and the presence absence of preferred anchor residues (E). Second, we investigated if our detachment trajectories can discriminate between experimentally known binders and non binders. We achieved high agreement () between predicted detachment speed and experimental binding affinity data of (). An a roc of 0.85 of our training free approach is roughly in the range of sequence trained pm hc binding prediction methods () and superior to structural ligand protein docking methods applied to pm hc (). These findings demonstrate that our coarse grained hn mmc pm hc model is bio physically accurate and can capture the main factors contributing to the outcome of binding. Even if methods such as temperature modulation (Zhang et al., 2012a) or hn mmc () are used, there is a finite probability that simulations will get trapped in local minima or run outlier trajectories leading to a questionable convergence (). Therefore, we decided to run a total of 100 replica simulations with different initial seeds per pm hc. On the basis of a boot strapping analysis, we found that about 2550 replicas are needed for reliable conclusions. This is in agreement with recent studies that showed that the comparison between few MD simulations can yield to misleading results () and that 50 replicas are necessary for reliable binding free energy prediction of HIV drugs to HIV-1 Protease () and peptides to MHC ().

conclusion in this study, we showed that hn mmc is able to give insight into the peptide detachment process from MHC. For the first time, we were able to analyse peptide detachment trajectories and thereby provide new views of the MHC structural landscape.
