Motivation: The reconstruction of metabolic networks at the genome scale has allowed the analysis of metabolic pathways at an unprecedented level of complexity. Elementary flux modes ef ms are an appropriate concept for such analysis. However, their number grows in a combinatorial fashion as the size of the metabolic network increases, which renders the application of ef ms approach to large metabolic networks difficult. Novel methods are expected to deal with such complexity. Results: In this article, we present a novel optimization based method for determining a minimal generating set of ef ms i.e. a convex basis. We show that a subset of elements of this convex basis can be effectively computed even in large metabolic networks. Our method was applied to examine the structure of pathways producing lysine in Escherichia coli. We obtained a more varied and informative set of pathways in comparison with existing methods. In addition, an alternative pathway to produce lysine was identified using a detour via propionyl coa which shows the predictive power of our novel approach. Availability: The source code in C++ is available upon request.

introduction during the last decade, different approaches have been proposed to explore the structure of complex metabolic networks from a pathway oriented perspective (). As in other methods (), these approaches are mainly built upon the steady state condition and irreversibility (thermodynamic) constraints, which define a polyhedral cone, typically referred to as the flux cone. In particular, pathway based methods search for solutions in the flux cone that satisfy a simplicity condition, technically the non de composability condition. These properties were condensed in the definition of elementary flux mode (EFM) in the work of Schuster and hil get ag (1994). Since its introduction, the concept of EFM has received much attention, showing that a wide range of questions in bioengineering and bioinformatics can be addressed using such an approach (). In particular, the prediction of novel biologically meaningful pathways constitutes one of the most important applications of EFM analysis. An example is the in silico prediction via EFM analysis of the pep glyoxylate cycle (), which was later confirmed experimentally (). However, due to combinatorial explosion (), the computation of ef ms is not easy and, until recently, their analysis has been restricted to small metabolic networks. In this context,, have presented an improved method that expands the applicability of the ef ms approach to moderate size metabolic networks; however, large metabolic networks remain beyond the capabilities of current algorithms. We have recently shown that the k shortest ef ms (for small K values) can be calculated in large networks, even at the genome scale, using integer linear programming (). The use of optimization introduces more flexibility into EFM computation and, therefore, the direct exploration of a particular subset of ef ms of interest can be accomplished without having first to compute the full set of ef ms. This represents a clear advantage with respect to previous methods (). A concept related to ef ms is that of convex basis. First introduced in, it was defined as a minimal set of ef ms that generate the solution space. This means that any vector in the flux cone, in particular any other EFM not included in this minimal set, can be written as a non-negative linear combination of the elements of the basis. For this reason, a convex basis is typically referred to as a minimal generating set and elements of this basis as generating flux modes, GFMs (). However, the convex

conclusion in this article, we have presented a novel theoretical method to compute a convex basis based on the recent work of de and la rh limi and bock may r (2009). Our method was effectively applied to determine a subset of GFMs in large metabolic networks, where classical approaches fail. Though the computation of k shortest GFMs is more expensive than the k shortest ef ms method presented in, we here obtained a more diverse and informative set of pathways. In the analysis of pathways producing lysine obtained by the k shortest GFMs method, we identified a new cycle via propionyl coa that produces one molecule of pyruvate and consumes one Page: 540 534540
