Motivation: The number of sequenced genomes rises steadily, but we still lack the knowledge about the biological roles of many genes. Automated function prediction (AFP) is thus a necessity. We hypothesize that AFP approaches which draw on distinct genome features may be useful for predicting different types of gene functions, motivating a systematic analysis of the benefits gained by obtaining and integrating such predictions. Results: Our pipeline amalgamate s 5,133,543 genes from 2,071 genomes in a single massive analysis that evaluates five established genomic AFP methodologies. While 1,227 Gene Ontology terms yielded reliable predictions, the majority of these functions were accessible to only one or two of the methods. Moreover, different methods tend to assign a GO term to non-overlapping sets of genes. Thus, inferences made by diverse AFP methods display a striking complementary, both gene-wise and function wise. Because of this, a viable integration strategy is to rely on a single most confident prediction per gene function instead of enforcing agreement across multiple AFP methods. Using an information theoretic approach, we estimate that current databases contain 29.2 bits gene of known E. coli gene functions. This can be increased by up to 5.5 bits gene using individual AFP methods, or by 11 additional bits gene upon integration, thereby providing a highly ranking predictor on the CAFA2 community benchmark. Availability of more sequenced genomes boosts the predictive accuracy of AFP approaches and also the benefit from integrating them.

introduction even though the number of sequenced genomes rises steadily, we still lack the knowledge about the biological roles of many genes. Gene function may be determined experimentally, for instance by observing a phenotype of a mutant organism with an altered or deleted gene of interest (), allowing curators to annotate the gene with Gene Ontology (GO) terms () or with other controlled vocabularies. Experimental essays coupled to manual curation result in high quality function assignments, but are costly, time consuming, and can not keep up with the deluge of new genome sequences. Reliable automated function prediction (AFP) methods are, therefore, of key importance for functional annotation of newly sequenced genomes and meta genomes (). The most common approach to AFP is transferring functions from homologs genes with shared ancestry estimated by sequence similarity using BLAST () or other tools. In addition to homology, there exist many AFP methods that exploit additional information extracted from the genome sequence, e.g., conserved gene neighborhoods (), phylogenetic distribution (), protein motifs and biophysical properties (), codon usage biases (), remote homology (), and composition of protein domains (). Moreover, inference using genomic information can be further supplemented by experimental data: gene expression (), protein protein interactions () or protein structure (), and also by text mining the scientific literature (). Combining diverse AFP models leads to higher accuracy. This was made evident in the analyses of gene protein functional association networks, constructed using various sources of large scale data. Integrating the individual networks resulted in gene modules that were more functionally consistent () and could thus more accurately predict gene function () or phenotypic effects of gene perturbation (). One explanation for the benefits of integration is that random error from individual data sources cancels out, enabling the signal of gene function to surface. In addition, different sources of genomic or experimental data may be intrinsically better suited for predicting some gene functions than for others. For instance, physical protein protein interactions more directly correspond to the 'Cellular component' domain of the GO, while genetic interaction experiments relate to the 'Biological process' GO domain. Such rules may, however, also extend to the deeper, more informative levels of the GO. A known example is the contrast between ribosomal proteins and membrane proteins in yeast, where the former are predictable from gene coexpression, while in the latter case, protein compositional features are more relevant (). More generally, assigning function specific weights to integrated gene networks inferred from biological experiments improves AFP accuracy (). Thus, different high throughput experimental assays appear to be better suited for predicting different aspects of a gene's role in the cell. Given that AFP methods often draw on analysis of genome sequences to predict gene function, it is thus important to systematically characterize the benefits to combining genomic methods. We therefore investigate to what extent five well known sequence based methodologies differ in their ability to assign particular gene functions across many organisms. One known example are stress response genes, where phylogenetic profiling was shown to be accurate for heat, osmotic and DNA damage responses, but codon usage biases were superior for starvation and oxidative stresses (). We search for broader trends of this sort by examining the overlap and complementarity between purely genome based AFP methods. An advantage of these approaches is that they apply to any organism with a genome sequence of sufficient quality and do not require costly and time consuming large scale experimentation that is restricted to a handful of model organisms. Relying exclusively on genomic data enabled us to perform AFP on a massive scale, considering 2,000 bacterial and archaeal genomes with 5 million genes in a single analysis, assigning 4,145 different GO functions. Since the amount of sequenced genomes will continue to rise rapidly, there is a need to characterize the contribution of various genomic AFP methodologies towards resolving particular functions of poorly described genes. Crucially, we investigate to what extent the methods will benefit from future availability of more genomes. Using information theoretic measures, we quantify the current knowledge on gene function in model microorganisms, and suggest that common AFP methods applied to the already available genome sequences can provide very high confidence predictions that increase this knowledge by at least 20%. The results of our analysis provide guidelines to researchers on how to best integrate predictions of diverse AFP methods. In particular, one simple but surprisingly accurate strategy is to rely on a single most confident prediction for a given gene and function, thus best exploiting the complementarity between individual genomic predictors.
