Motivation: Gene ontology (GO) is a widely used resource to describe the attributes for gene products. However, automatic GO maintenance remains to be difficult because of the complex logical reasoning and the need of biological knowledge that are not explicitly represented in the GO. The existing studies either construct whole GO based on network data or only infer the relations between existing GO terms. None is purposed to add new terms automatically to the existing GO. Results: We proposed a new algorithm go extender to efficiently identify all the connected gene pairs labeled by the same parent GO terms. go extender is used to predict new GO terms with biological network data, and connect them to the existing GO. Evaluation tests on biological process and cellular component categories of different GO releases showed that go extender can extend new GO terms automatically based on the biological network. Furthermore, we applied go extender to the recent release of GO and discovered new GO terms with strong support from literature. Availability and implementation: Software and supplementary document are available at

introduction gene ontology (GO) has been widely used to capture the functional information and attributes for gene products, such as predicting gene functional associations (), inferring gene functions in genome wide association studies (), predicting protein functions () and predicting subcellular localizations (). GO consists of three independent categories: biological process, molecular function, and cellular component. In each category, GO terms are organized in a directed acyclic graph (DAG) to represent a complex hierarchy of biological events, functions or locations (). Till September 2014, GO has represented a total of 41 775 terms and 4 185 487 gene annotations from more than 80 species (). However, despite the rapid increase of the GO content, the GO structure is still manually curated by teams of domain experts of the participating databases (), regardless of continually growing and improving requests for new ontological terms (). Manual construction of ontology, as a complex and time consuming process, has encountered a series of problems that are becoming increasingly difficult to solve (). First, given the large volume of biological papers published in every year, it has been difficult to maintain consistency in how literature and domain expertise can be translated to terms and relationships in GO even with stringent curation standards (). Second, although knowledge can be effectively retrieved from the literature using advanced text mining tools, the gap between biological knowledge and new GO terms and relationships still has not been met (). Finally, there has been a strong bias in coverage within GO toward well studied processes, resulting in the lack of coverage problem (). During the last decade, tools have been developed to define new ontology terms and to discover new relationships between existing GO terms using natural language processing, graph mining, and data integration methods (). These tools aim to facilitate the effective expansion of GO while ensuring validity, uniqueness and proper relationships to the existing GO. However, automatic GO maintenance remains to be a difficult task because of the complex logical reasoning and the need of biological knowledge that are not explicitly represented in the GO (). Furthermore, the complicated GO structure, which allows for multiple ancestors and multiple descendants for new GO terms, increase the level of difficulty for GO update. For example, statistics shows that, in the 1980 new biological process terms that have been added to the GO between 2008 and 2013, 992 new terms share at least 25% gene annotations with the existing terms (without gene annotation prorogation), indicating that it is necessary to fully consider the complex multi parent relationships when adding new terms to the GO. In this article, we present a new algorithm called go extender to automatically identify new GO terms from the existing biological network data, annotate the new GO term with new genes, and connect them to the existing GO structure. Comparing to the existing approaches, go extender has the following advantages: @BULLET To the best of our knowledge, go extender is the first approach to automatically add new terms to the existing GO, rather than generating a new GO structure; @BULLET A novel edge based clustering method is developed to effectively connect new GO terms with multiple parent terms; @BULLET Experiments on both biological process and cellular component show that go extender is able to identify novel GO terms from biological networks; @BULLET Applying go extender to recent release of GO has discovered new GO terms with solid supports from literature we expect that applying go extender on the newest version of GO can help curators rapidly generate new terms and connect them to the GO structure, to fill the gap between massive biological data and the biological knowledge represented in GO.
