

introduction research in the biomedical domain aims at furthering our knowledge of biological processes and improving human health. Major contributions toward this goal can be achieved by sharing the results of research efforts with the community, including datasets produced in the course of the research work. While such sharing behavior is encouraged by funding agencies and scientific journals, recent work has shown that the ratio of data sharing is still modest compared with actual data production. For instance found the deposition rate of microarray data to be 50% for work published in 2007. p iwo war and show that data deposition results in increased citation of papers reporting on data production. While this * To whom correspondence should be addressed. should serve as an incentive to deposit data and announce it to the community, in a more recent study these same authors () show that data deposition is significantly associated with high profile journals and experienced researchers. In the course of this work, these authors have found the identification of data deposition statements to be a challenging task that can be addressed using natural language processing and machine learning methods (). Information about the declaration of data deposition in research papers can be used in different ways. First, for data curation: databases such as MEDLINE use accession numbers for certain databases as metadata that can be searched with PubMed queries using the field. Journals can benefit from such a tool to check whether their data deposition policies are enforced. This aspect is also important for researchers looking to re-use datasets and build on existing work. Second, for the analysis of emerging research trends: the type of data produced gives indications on current important research topics. In a study based on the analysis of Medical Subject Headings (MeSH ) indexing show that such metadata may be used to predict future research trends, including recommendations of main headings to be added to the MeSH thesaurus. Our long term research interest is in assessing the value of using deposition statements for predicting future trends of data production. The initial step of automatically identifying deposition statements could then lead to an assessment of the need for storage space of incoming data in public repositories. In this study, we aim at identifying articles containing statements reporting the deposition of biological data. As explained above, the study of data deposition has generated a growing interest in the past few years. In response to a Nature Methods editorial () describing the deposition of data such as genome sequence or microarrays as routine used a manually built query to retrieve articles likely to report the production of microarray data in 2007 publications. They manually analyzed 398 articles reporting the production of microarray data and concluded that only 50% report deposition of microarray data in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) or other databases. p iwo war and Chapman (2008a) further studied the links existing between microarray data deposition in public repositories (e.g. GEO and array express and reports of data deposition in the literature. They used machine learning to build a query suitable for retrieving research articles in PubMed Central reporting on data deposition. p iwo war and Chapman (2008b) also addressed the classification of articles (at the article level) for data sharing in five databases (GenBank, Protein DataBank, GEO, array express Stanford Microarray Database). The authors compared pattern matching versus machine learning. The best results were obtained with a J48 decision tree on array express (96% f measure page 3307 33063312

discussion choice of features: interestingly, the difference in performance with and without component tags observed in the cross validation was greatly magnified on the test sets both for sentence level and article level classification. We think this is due to the more challenging nature of the test data. In previous work (e.g.) on MEDLINE abstract sentence classification, structure information has proved to be a useful feature when it is available. Our position feature was intended to serve as a substitute for structure information, but had little impact. Structure information could be considered for future improvement of the sentence classifier; however, this information is not trivial to extract from abstracts (); similar issues with added complexity can be anticipated for full text. Portability of the method: although trained mainly on microarray data deposition statements, the method adapts well to the identification of statements reporting on the deposition of other data such as gene sequences or protein coordinates. This is evidenced Page: 3312 33063312

conclusion we presented a method to automatically identify biological data deposition statements in biomedical text. The method, an SVM (or, equivalently, NB) classifier using crf determined features characterizing data deposition components, was able to correctly identify articles containing data deposition statements with 81% f measure. Our analysis shows that deposition statements are scored high for all types of databases and biological data types, even those not currently curated in MEDLINE. This shows the potential impact of our method for literature curation. In addition, we believe it provides a robust tool for future work assessing the need for storage space of incoming data in public repositories.
