Motivation: As a natural consequence of being a computer based discipline, bioinformatics has a strong focus on database and software development, but the volume and variety of resources are growing at unprecedented rates. An audit of database and software usage patterns could help provide an overview of developments in bioinfor-matics and community common practice, and comparing the links between resources through time could demonstrate both the persistence of existing software and the emergence of new tools. Results: We study the connections between bioinformatics resources and construct networks of database and software usage patterns, based on resource co occurrence that correspond to snapshots of common practice in the bioinformatics community. We apply our approach to pairings of phylogenetics software reported in the literature and argue that these could provide a stepping stone into the identification of scientific best practice. Availability and implementation: The extracted resource data, the scripts used for network generation and the resulting networks are available at http://bionerds.sourceforge.net/networks/ Contact: robert stevens manchester ac uk
introduction scientific research is defined by its use of available methods. We continually refine existing methods and develop new ones, and this cycle of innovation, implementation and confirmation is at the heart of scientific progress. The merits of a piece of research, i.e. its contribution and impact, are a direct consequence of the methods used (). In this article, we focus on the discipline of bioinformatics and the use of computers in the analysis of biological data. Knowledge of the relationships between the most widely used resources within bioinformatics ('common practice') permits a representation of the contribution of software and databases to biological research, potentially enabling researchers to identify and select the most appropriate approaches for their data analysis. Resource selection is a particular problem within bioinformatics, where the resource ome () has been growing at an unprecedented rate since nucleic acid sequencing became widespread in the 1980s, leading to the emergence of key tools such as BLAST, which is still widely used (). Managing this overwhelming resource portfolio requires identifying which ones are commonly used, how they are used and for what they are used. While there are repositories of bioinformatics resources (e.g. The Bioinformatics Links Directory;) and services (e.g. bio catalogue the biomedical literature is still the most suitable place to look for patterns of database and software usage to provide an overview of developments in the community, and thus help identify common practice (). In this article, we use several well established techniques in text mining to extract, filter, combine and analyse frequently reoccurring resource name pairs in articles' methods sections. We use these pairs to build resource networks, thus providing a snapshot of database and software common usage patterns within the bioinformatics literature. A few previous studies exist in this area, but they focus on a specific subdomain or task, e.g. phylogenetics () or natural language processing (), and not resource usage across bioinformatics. We build our work on a previously developed named entity recognizer for databases and software within bioinformatics (), which we use to automatically extract resource names mentioned across a large corpus of full text documents.

conclusion we have demonstrated that it is feasible to automatically extract resource usage patterns from a large corpus of. Usage network for all resource pairs (databases  red, software  yellow), mentioned within the methods section. All edges have a minimum confidence of 99%. The edges are colour coded: green  correct, orange  partial, red  incorrect and blue  same. Note that there is a same link between Ensembl and the UCSC Genome Browser, as they are both genome databases this is despite the fact that the Genome Browser is labelled as software, which is an automated classification error. For presentation purposes, we only include pairs (edges) that had at least 10 mentions i605 bioinformatics articles. The networks formed from these patterns show a general overview of core bioinformatics tasks and steps. Although our technique used for network extraction focuses on only the most used resources, it successfully captures what may be termed 'bioinformatics 101 that is, the core bioinformatics tasks of selection and alignment of sequences, along with a common pattern of biological analysis: that DNA sequences lead to proteins, which then form more complex 3D structures. Our results are an important first step in validating the long held assumption that this forms the basis of all bioinformatics research and usage. Our networks also highlight some of the ways that bioinformatics has changed over time, with the recent emergence of the fields of next generation sequencing and proteomics. Sequence alignment has maintained an important central role within the field and is often used as a link between other analyses and or domains. The results help provide an overview of the resource patterns used within bioinformatics, which can be considered an approximation of domain method. Comparing our usage patterns for phylogenetics with the model previously published by shows that our method extraction enables exploration of common practice within particular fields. For example, if a researcher has some particular data, tool or task in mind, our results could be used to generate suggestions on what has and can been done with the data, or what programs could be used for further research. Specifically, given any name pair, we can link back to where in the literature this pair was mentioned, offering the opportunity to discover what types of research could be performed with those resources. Future work could involve refining the pattern extraction process, perhaps to enable sentence level pairing using more sophisticated association techniques (e.g. dependency parsing or syntactic structure). Though our method can provide a generalized overview of the resources used (and their order of use), such a refinement could enable more fine grained workflow extraction an important step towards method validation and reproduction, as well as having implications for the spreading of knowledge and the monitoring of trends within methods. This could have implications in establishing or suggesting scientific 'best practice', using a variety of criteria, for example time (the more recent tools databases the better), author (focusing on 'domain experts'), journal (preference for higher impact or specialist journals) or popularity (common practice). As such, if we restrict our network links to just those that adhere to a given 'best' criteria, this will limit the suggestions we would provide to just those within a network of best practice.
