Motivation: bi clustering of transcript omic data groups genes and samples simultaneously. It is emerging as a standard tool for extracting knowledge from gene expression measurements. We propose a novel generative approach for bi clustering called FABIA: Factor Analysis for bi cluster Acquisition. FABIA is based on a multiplicative model, which accounts for linear dependencies between gene expression and conditions, and also captures heavy tailed distributions as observed in real world transcript omic data. The generative framework allows to utilize well founded model selection methods and to apply Bayesian techniques. Results: On 100 simulated datasets with known true, artificially implanted bi clusters FABIA clearly outperformed all 11 competitors. On these datasets, FABIA was able to separate spurious bi clusters from true bi clusters by ranking bi clusters according to their information content. FABIA was tested on three microarray datasets with known sub clusters where it was two times the best and once the second best method among the compared bi clustering approaches. Availability: FABIA is available as an R package on Bioconductor

introduction recent technologies such as the Affymetrix array plates and next generation sequencing open up new possibilities for high throughput expression profiling. These technologies in turn require advanced analysis tools to extract knowledge from the huge amount of data. If the experimental conditions are known, supervised techniques such as support vector machines are suitable to extract the dependencies between conditions and gene expression or to identify condition indicative genes. However, conditions may not be known or biologists and medical researchers are interested in dependencies * To whom correspondence should be addressed. within or across conditions. For instance, it could be possible to refine pathways across conditions or to identify new subgroups within one condition. For these tasks, unsupervised methods such as clustering are required, which are usually insufficient, because samples may only be similar on a subset of genes and vice versa. In drug design, for example, researchers want to reveal how compounds affect gene expression; the effects of compounds, however, may be similar only on a subgroup of genes. Under such circumstances, bi clustering is the proper unsupervised analysis technique. A bi cluster in a transcript omic dataset is a pair of a gene set and a sample set for which the genes are similar to each other on the samples and vice versa. If multiple pathways are active in a sample, it belongs to different bi clusters. If a gene participates in different pathways for different conditions, it belongs to different bi clusters too. Thus, bi clusters can overlap. A survey of bi clustering approaches has been given by. In principle, there exist four categories of bi clustering methods: (1) variance minimization methods, (2) two way clustering methods, (3) motif and pattern recognition methods and (4) probabilistic and generative approaches. transcript omic data are usually supplied as a matrix, where each gene corresponds to one row and each sample to one column; the matrix entries themselves are the expression levels. (1) Variance minimization methods: define clusters as blocks in the matrix with minimal deviation of their elements. This definition has been already considered by and extended by. The -cluster methods search for blocks of elements having a deviation ('variance') below . One example are -ks clusters (), where the maximum and the minimum of each row need to differ less than  on the selected columns. A second example are p clusters (), which are defined as 22 submatrices with pairwise edge differences less than . A third example are the Cheng and Church (2000) bi clusters having a mean squared error below  after fitting an additive model with a constant, a row and a column effect. FLexible Overlapped bi clustering (FLOC;) extend cheng church bi clusters by dealing with missing values via an occupancy threshold  and by using both l 1 and l 2 norms. (2) two way clustering methods apply conventional clustering to the columns and rows and (iteratively) combine the results. Coupled two way Clustering ctw c iteratively page 1521 15201527

conclusion we have introduced a novel bi clustering method that is a generative multiplicative model. It assumes realistic non gaussian signal distributions with heavy tails. The generative model allows to rank bi clusters according to their information content. Model selection is performed by maximum a posteriori via an EM algorithm based on a variational approach. On 100 simulated datasets with known true bi clusters FABIA clearly outperformed all 11 competing methods. On three gene expression datasets with previously verified sub clusters it was once Page: 1527 15201527 FABIA the second best and twice the best performing method. The biological relevance of the FABIA bi clusters has been demonstrated by GO and KEGG analyses. Finally, FABIA has been successfully applied to drug design to find compounds with similar effects on gene expression.
