For practical and robust de novo identification of genomic fusions and breakpoints from targeted paired end DNA sequencing data, we developed Fusion And Chromosomal Translocation Enumeration and Recovery Algorithm fact era. Our method has minimal external dependencies, works directly on a preexisting Binary alignment map file and produces easily interpretable output. We demonstrate fact eras ability to rapidly identify breakpoint resolution fusion events with high sensitivity and specificity in patients with non small cell lung cancer, including novel rearrangements. We anticipate that fact era will be broadly applicable to the discovery and analysis of clinically relevant fusions from both targeted and genome wide sequencing datasets. Availability and implementation: http://

introduction dna rearrangements resulting in gene fusions represent a major class of so matically acquired structural variation in human malignancies. Notable examples include the highly recurrent association of the Philadelphia chromosome in chronic myelogenous leukemia () and t(14;18)(q32;q21) translocations in follicular lymphomas (). More recently, recurrent fusions involving ALK, ROS1, RET or NTRK1 were identified in non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) () and TMPRSS2-ERG in prostate cancer (). Many structural rearrangements are oncogenic driver mutations and are increasingly therapeutically target able (). Owing to their unique junctional sequences, fusions can also serve as exquisitely sensitive biomarkers of tumor burden in cell free DNA, which is continuously shed into diverse body fluids (). Advances in targeted high throughput sequencing have enabled interrogation of virtually any genomic region at low cost, facilitating large scale analysis of genetic variation. Recently, we designed a 125 kb targeted sequencing panel for ultrasensitive assessment of circulating tumor DNA ct dna in NSCLC (). To capture fusions, we included intronic regions from genes known to participate in NSCLC rearrangements (e.g. ALK, ROS1) and developed a novel framework for fusion and breakpoint detection. Here, we describe and benchmark fact era a new software tool for the discovery of genomic rearrangements, including translocations, inversions and deletions. Because previous methods for fusion discovery perform well in simulated data but tend to overestimate breakpoints in real tumor genomes (), fact era was designed to detect fusion genes with high specificity without compromising sensitivity. Using data from NSCLC tumors and cell lines, we show that fact era compares favorably to previous approaches, achieves high sensitivity and specificity, and precisely and efficiently characterizes fusion genes and breakpoints in targeted sequencing data.
