Motivation: Although constraint based flux analysis of knockout strains has facilitated the production of desirable metabolites in microbes , current screening methods have placed a limitation on the number knockouts that can be simultaneously analyzed. Results: Here, we propose a novel screening method named fast pros. In this method, the potential of a given reaction knockout for production of a specific metabolite is evaluated by shadow pricing of the constraint in the flux balance analysis, which generates a screening score to obtain candidate knockout sets. To evaluate the performance of fast pros we screened knockout sets to produce each metabolite in the entire Escherichia coli metabolic network. We found that 75% of these metabolites could be produced under bio-mass maximization conditions by adding up to 25 reaction knockouts. Furthermore, we demonstrated that using fast pros in tandem with another screening method, opt knock could further improve target metabolite productivity. Availability and implementation: Source code is freely available at http://www-shimizu.ist.osaka-u.ac.jp/shimizu_lab/FastPros/, implemented in MATLAB and COBRA toolbox.

introduction metabolic engineering of microbes has been successfully used for the production of a variety of useful compounds in microbes (). Moreover, genetic modification techniques have enabled the disruption and 'rewiring' of metabolic fluxes to improve the production of target products (). Owing to the complexity of metabolic systems, however, achieving a desired metabolic state through genetic modification remains difficult. Given that several individual genetic modifications are often required to improve target productivity (), the selection of an appropriate set of modifications from a large number of possible combinations is challenging. To overcome this obstacle, tools based on computer simulation and mathematical modeling have been developed, which make possible screening for appropriate sets of genetic modifications to improve target productivity (). Flux balance analysis (FBA) is a widely used method for estimating metabolic fluxes using genome scale metabolic models gsm s (). In FBA, metabolic fluxes can be quantitatively estimated by assuming a steady state metabolic system and optimization of an objective function. Maximization of biomass production flux has been generally adopted as the objective function, and it has been demonstrated that metabolic fluxes estimated by maximizing biomass production are in agreement with experimentally obtained fluxes (). Therefore, quantitative flux predictions by FBA can accelerate the rational design of metabolic networks to improve the yield of target products (). In silico screening of genetic modifications is a widely used application of FBA for metabolic engineering, and to date several such algorithms have been proposed (). These algorithms can be classified into two categories: comprehensive screening and iterative screening. For example, the popular comprehensive knockout screening algorithm opt knock which has been used in both academic and industrial settings (), identifies the reaction knockouts that hold the most promise for achieving the highest target production yield among all possible sets of reaction knockouts (). However, as the calculation time increases exponentially as a function of the number of reaction knockouts that are simultaneously present in the original network, the maximum number of reaction knockouts to which this strategy can be applied is limited. Iterative screening for increasing the target productivity can be carried out at relatively low computational costs. In a simple iterative knockout screening method, the effects of all possible single reaction knockouts on metabolic fluxes are evaluated in the first iteration, and the reactions whose knockouts result in the highest score (e.g. highest production yields under biomass production maximization) are selected. In the second iteration, in addition to the reaction knockouts selected in the first iteration, the effects of additional single reaction knockouts are screened. This approach has a drawback, however, of in completely searching the knockout combinations. For example, when target production yields under biomass maximization are used as a score *for screening, iterative screening fails to identify the combinations of two knockouts that show higher production yields only when they are disrupted simultaneously. To overcome this drawback, several systematic screening methods have been developed, such as opt gene (), opt flux (), Genetic Design through Local Search g dls () and Strength Pareto Evolutionary Algorithm (). For example, opt gene uses a genetic algorithm to search the vast solution space to obtain optimal knockout sets. Using these approaches, sets of reaction knockouts that improve the target production have been successfully identified with relatively small computational costs. However, if the target production yields are used for the screening score, it is often difficult to identify which sets of multiple knockouts cause the target production that occurs only when the knockouts are done simultaneously. One possible strategy for this problem is to use a screening score that reflects the potential a knockout has to increase the production yields in concert with other knockouts. In the present study, we developed a new iterative screening algorithm, Fast algorithm of knockout screening for target Production based on shadow price analysis fast pros which uses biomass production maximization to identify sets of metabolic reactions whose simultaneous knockouts result in the production of a target metabolite. In this algorithm, we adopted a novel score for iterative knockout screening based on the change in biomass production flux caused by a slight increase in the target production flux, u TARGET. This value corresponds to the shadow price of the constraint of the target metabolite production flux in the linear programming problem. We demonstrate that u TARGET represents the potential of target production and increasing this value by iterative screening of the reaction knockouts generates sets of knockouts that realize the target production. Furthermore, we show that combining fast pros with another tool, opt knock provides further improvement of the target production.
