Motivation: Understanding exact structure of an individuals haplo-type plays a significant role in various fields of human genetics. Despite tremendous research effort in recent years, fast and accurate haplotype reconstruction remains as an active research topic, mainly owing to the computational challenges involved. Existing haplotype assembly algorithms focus primarily on improving accuracy of the assembly, making them computationally challenging for applications on large high throughput sequence data. Therefore, there is a need to develop haplotype reconstruction algorithms that are not only accurate but also highly scalable. Results: In this article, we introduce fast hap a fast and accurate haplotype reconstruction approach, which is up to one order of magnitude faster than the state of the art haplotype inference algorithms while also delivering higher accuracy than these algorithms. fast hap leverages a new similarity metric that allows us to precisely measure distances between pairs of fragments. The distance is then used in building the fuzzy conflict graphs of fragments. Given that optimal haplotype reconstruction based on minimum error correction is known to be np hard we use our fuzzy conflict graphs to develop a fast heuristic for fragment partitioning and haplotype reconstruction.

introduction all diploid organisms have two homologous copies of each chromosome, one inherited from each parent. The two DNA sequences of a homologous chromosome pair are usually not identical to each other. The most common DNA sequence variants are single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP). We refer to the sites at which the two DNA sequences differ as heterozygous sites. Current high throughput sequencing technologies () are incapable of reading the DNA sequence of an entire chromosome. Instead, they produce a huge collection of short reads of DNA fragments. The process of inferring two DNA sequences (i.e. haplotypes) from a set of reads is referred to as haplotype assembly, which has become a crucial computational task to reconstruct one's genome from these reads. Haplotype assembly methods usually involve three main stages before reconstruction phase. First, a sequence aligner is used to align the reads to the reference genome. Then, only the read alignments at the heterozygous sites are kept for haplotype reconstruction. Last, reads that span multiple heterozygous sites are used to infer the alleles belonging to each haplotype. The quality of the reconstructed haplotypes may be dramatically affected by errors in sequencing and alignment. The objective, therefore, is to design algorithms that mitigate this impact and rebuild the most likely copies of each chromosome accurately. This has led to development of accurate haplotype reconstruction algorithms in the past few years. We are, however, observing a critical shift in sequencing technology where larger datasets with longer reads and higher coverage become available. This shift necessitates the development of algorithms that not only reconstruct haplotypes accurately but also require low computation time and can scale to large datasets. In this article, we introduce a new framework for fast and accurate haplotype assembly.
