Motivation: Finding geometrically similar protein binding sites is crucial for understanding protein functions and can provide valuable information for protein protein docking and drug discovery. As the number of known protein protein interaction structures has dramatically increased, a high throughput and accurate protein binding site comparison method is essential. Traditional alignment based methods can provide accurate correspondence between the binding sites but are computationally expensive. Results: In this article, we present a novel method for the comparisons of protein binding sites using a visual words representation pbs word. We first extract geometric features of binding site surfaces and build a vocabulary of visual words by clustering a large set of feature descriptors. We then describe a binding site surface with a high dimensional vector that encodes the frequency of visual words, enhanced by the spatial relationships among them. Finally, we measure the similarity of binding sites by utilizing metric space operations, which provide speedy comparisons between protein binding sites. Our experimental results show that pbs word achieves a comparable classification accuracy to an alignment based method and improves accuracy of a feature based method by 36% on a non-redundant dataset. pbs word also exhibits a significant efficiency improvement over an alignment based method. Availability: pbs word is available at

introduction protein protein interaction, as an essential aspect of biological processes, plays a significant role in determining protein functions and forming protein complexes. The protein complexes consist of multiple subunits (domains or chains) that interact via protein protein interfaces pp is. The pp is are composed of geometrically and physicochemical ly complementary binding sites from the respective subunits. In a protein complex, each binding site corresponds to a * To whom correspondence should be addressed. region of residues that are in close spatial proximity and can interact with residues from another subunit. With the development of high throughput experimental techniques (e.g. yeast two hybrid screens), the size of data repositories of protein protein interactions has dramatically increased, which makes a comprehensive understanding of the protein interaction network feasible (). Several protein protein interaction related databases have been constructed, such as s coppi (), pi base (), IntAct (), i pfam () and dom mino (). Particularly, the s coppi database provides an evolutionary and structural classification of pp is based on SCOP family (), sequence similarity and geometric features of binding sites. To analyze the protein protein interaction mechanisms, an efficient method for comparing protein binding sites is an indispensible tool, with a potential impact on protein function prediction, protein protein docking, drug discovery and evolutionary studies (). Methods for comparing the protein binding sites can be generally classified into two categories: (i) alignment based and (ii) feature based. Early research works on alignment based methods focused on comparing binding sites by aligning the corresponding C  atoms from different protein complexes using global structural alignment tools (). This group of methods works well when sequence and structure are well conserved. However, as shown in an earlier work (), the limitation of global protein structure alignment is that it can not usually produce accurate interface alignment since the true interface may not be the first priority for a global structure alignment method. To overcome this issue, i align was developed to align the residues from pp is (). Another method, i2i site engine supports alignment of two binding sites based on the similarity of physicochemical properties and the shapes of surfaces (). The alignment based methods can provide accurate correspondence between two binding sites but are usually computationally expensive, which makes them infeasible when working with very large datasets. feature based methods, on the other hand, make comparison based on feature descriptor, which may be structural and or geometric properties of the binding site. Typically, the structural descriptors are distributions of distances between different types of functional atoms of the binding sites (), whereas the geometric descriptors include spin image mere lli the inputs include a query binding site and a database of binding sites. The outputs are similarity scores between the query and the database binding sites. For each binding site, geometric features are extracted and assigned to the nearest visual word from a vocabulary which is generated by a huge set of features collected from the entire database. Thus, each binding site can be represented by a histogram of occurrence of visual words. Two binding sites can be compared by the similarity of two visual words vectors. A color version of this figure is available as Supplementary), 3D-Zernike (), shape distribution (), moment invariants () and many others (). After generating surface features, two binding sites can be compared using various metric functions in the feature space to perform high throughput surface comparisons without explicit alignments. Existing feature based methods mainly focus on protein ligand binding sites, which have not been extensively applied or evaluated on protein protein binding site classification and related applications. This is important as protein protein binding sites are known to have some unique characteristics, such as relatively large areas and flat binding site surfaces (). To deal with very large datasets, one can employ the classic method from the information retrieval area of comparing the similarity between word frequency profiles of two documents, which has been successfully utilized in web search engines. Recently, this idea has been extended to the matching and retrieval of 3D objects (), in which a word is represented by a cluster of similar features. In the bioinformatics area, this technique has been applied in the alignment free genome sequence comparisons () and in the retrieval of similar protein structures (). In this article, we further extend the text comparison method and propose a novel approach, pbs word for characterizing protein binding sites with a collection of 'visual words' such that similar binding sites from the database can be efficiently and accurately identified. We conduct experiments to evaluate the performance of pbs word based classification and retrieval of protein binding sites. The experimental results show that pbs word can achieve comparable performance to an alignment based method, i align and significantly outperforms a feature based method using moment invariant descriptors (). More importantly, comparing pbs word vectors is orders of magnitude faster than the alignment based methods. Thus, pbs word can be used to quickly identify geometrically similar candidates of a query protein binding site from a large dataset.
