Motivation: Synthetic lethal sets are sets of reactions genes where only the simultaneous removal of all reactions genes in the set abolishes growth of an organism. Previous approaches to identify synthetic lethal genes in genome scale metabolic networks have built on the framework of flux balance analysis (FBA), extending it either to exhaustively analyze all possible combinations of genes or formulate the problem as a bi-level mixed integer linear programming (MILP) problem. We here propose an algorithm, fast sl which sur mounts the computational complexity of previous approaches by iteratively reducing the search space for synthetic lethal s resulting in a substantial reduction in running time, even for higher order synthetic lethal s. Results: We performed synthetic reaction and gene lethality analysis, using fast sl for genome scale metabolic networks of Escherichia coli, Salmonella enterica Typhimurium and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. fast sl also rigorously identifies synthetic lethal gene deletions, uncovering synthetic lethal triplets that were not reported previously. We confirm that the triple lethal gene sets obtained for the three organisms have a precise match with the results obtained through exhaustive enumer-ation of lethal s performed on a computer cluster. We also parallelized our algorithm, enabling the identification of synthetic lethal gene quadruplets for all three organisms in under 6 h. Overall, fast sl enables an efficient enumeration of higher order synthetic lethal s in metabolic networks, which may help uncover previously unknown genetic interactions and combinatorial drug targets. Availability and implementation: The MATLAB implementation of the algorithm, compatible with COBRA toolbox v2.0, is available at https://github.com/RamanLab/FastSL

introduction in the recent years, genome scale metabolic networks have been reconstructed for many organisms (). These networks have been studied using tools such as flux balance analysis (FBA) (), for the identification of drug targets (), targets for metabolic engineering () and to understand the robustness of organisms through systematic experimental evaluation of gene knockouts (). Another important aspect of analyzing these reconstructed metabolic networks is the identification of combinations of genes, which when simultaneously deleted, abolish growth in silico (). These sets, termed 'synthetic lethal s reveal complex interactions in metabolic networks. Synthetic lethal s have been analyzed in the past for prediction of novel genetic interactions and analyzing the extent of robustness of biological networks (). Prediction of phenotypic behavior on genetic perturbations has also been studied in many reconstructions () for model validation. FBA has been proven to accurately predict phenotypes following various genetic perturbations (); previous reports also suggest that FBA can reliably predict synthetic lethal genes in metabolic networks of organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae (). The identification of synthetic lethal genes in metabolic networks also finds application in combinatorial therapy, as combinatorial deletion strategies are more difficult for the organism to resist (). Since the systematic evaluation of these targets in vivo is challenging, computational approaches have been of great interest to overcome this difficulty (). Exhaustive enumeration of synthetic lethal s of higher orders was previously performed by parallelizing the deletions on a cluster of computers (). However, exhaustive enumeration is computationally very expensive, and even prohibitive, in case of larger metabolic networks. Another algorithm for identifying synthetic lethal reactions and genes is 'SL Finder', published by maran as and co-workers (). SL Finder elegantly poses the identification of synthetic lethal s as a bilevel Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) problem; the algorithm has been applied for the identification of synthetic lethal doublets and triplets in Escherichia coli. Reaction essentiality has been previously inferred using elementary modes and minimal cut sets (). Even though there are efficient algorithms to analyze minimal cut sets in a metabolic network, the MILP formulation is fundamentally np hard () and is prohibitive in case of large networks. Other methods also suggest ways for reduction of metabolic networks and alternate formulations to enumerate minimal cut sets for the identification of synthetic lethal sets (). We here propose an alternative algorithm, fast sl which circumvents the computational complexity of both exhaustive enumeration and bi-level MILP, through an iterative reduction of the search space for higher order synthetic lethal sets. We also present an efficient method to rigorously identify lethal gene sets, identifying up to quadruple lethal gene sets that were not previously identified. fast sl formulation for gene deletions also compares favorably with logical transformation of model (LTM) approach (), which transforms the stoichiometric matrix such that lethal gene deletion sets can be identified by merely identifying lethal reaction sets applying the fast sl algorithm on the transformed matrix (using the pre-print of an earlier version of this paper available at arxiv org. fast sl provides a rapid way to gain insights into the genetic robustness of organisms by identifying synthetic lethal sets even up to the order of four.

discussion in this study, we describe a new algorithm to rapidly identify synthetic lethal reaction gene sets in genome scale metabolic networks. The identification of synthetic lethal s in organisms can be used to understand complex genetic interactions between genes and identify drug targets for combinatorial therapy (). We build on the popular framework of FBA, extending it to identify synthetic lethal s our algorithm exploits the structure of the metabolic network better than previous algorithms, to eliminate combinations of reactions genes that are guaranteed not to produce a lethal phenotype under the conditions considered. Importantly, our algorithm also identifies synthetic lethal gene sets rigorously, by carefully considering the GPR associations in the metabolic model. fast sl therefore manages to identify 127 new lethal gene triplets in E.coli, which were not identified by a previous study () (indicated in Supplementary File S3). Further, we confirmed that our algorithm does not miss out on any synthetic lethal gene sets, by cross checking with an exhaustive analysis of triple gene deletions on a computer cluster. Our algorithm for finding synthetic lethal gene sets also outperforms the LTM method () which increases the problem size in the case of E.coli from 1668  2382 to 5372  7287. For the same model, our approach avoids this transformation and consequently solves far fewer LPs, thereby computing the lethal sets in much less time. fast sl utilizes the flux corresponding to ' 1-norm minimization, which can be easily formulated as an LP. It is important to note that there may be multiple J nz sets corresponding to the minimum sum of absolute values of fluxes (i.e. minimized ' 1-norm solution) and these J nz sets may also vary in terms of their sizes. It does not matter which J nz set one may begin the algorithm with, because in all the J nz sets, the arguments that J sl is completely contained in J nz and at least one of i or j of a lethal pair (i, j) belongs to J nz and so on, always hold true. However, smaller the size of the set J nz in each step, faster the algorithm would be. More importantly, minimization of the ' 1norm of the flux vector may not always converge to the sparse st possible solution, which is often denoted as the ' 0-norm solution. Here, it is also important to note that fast sl does not require the sparse st solution to work; a reasonably sparse solution already achieves a significant search space reduction, while circumventing the complexity of the ' 0-norm MILP formulation. Our work does have its limitations. As with any other metabolic network analysis technique, our method suffers from any inadequacies present in the model. Nevertheless, our algorithm can identify a list of lethal (and non-lethal) phenotypes, which can be used to refine the metabolic model, based on disagreements with experimental results. Further, the synthetic lethal s predicted by our algorithm are valid only in a particular environment growth medium; it is however straightforward to identify lethal sets for other environments, by altering the constraints suitably in sum, we see three main contributions of our method. First, fast sl achieves a massive reduction in the search space and obviates the need for performing an exhaustive analysis of combinatorial gene reaction deletions. This can facilitate the identification of combinatorial drug targets in organisms, even up to the order of four, which was previously nearly intractable (). Second, fast sl also compares favorably with the mcse numerator algorithm, eliminating the need to solve complex mil ps. Finally, fast sl also rigorously identifies lethal gene sets, uncovering lethal gene sets not previously identified by other algorithms. Overall, fast sl enables a rapid evaluation of combinatorial gene and reaction deletions in genome scale metabolic networks, which may help identify previously unknown genetic interactions and combinatorial drug targets.
