Motivation: Clustering protein structures is an important task in structural bioinformatics. De novo structure prediction, for example, often involves a clustering step for finding the best prediction. Other applications include assigning proteins to fold families and analyzing molecular dynamics trajectories. Results: We present Pleiades, a novel approach to clustering protein structures with a rigorous mathematical underpinning. The method approximates clustering based on the root mean square deviation by first mapping structures to Gauss integral vectors which were introduced by Røgen and coworkers and subsequently performing k means clustering. Conclusions: Compared to current methods, Pleiades dramatically improves on the time needed to perform clustering, and can cluster a significantly larger number of structures, while providing state of the art results. The number of low energy structures generated in a typical folding study, which is in the order of 50 000 structures, can be clustered within seconds to minutes.

introduction predicting the 3D fold for a given amino acid sequence remains one of the greatest challenge in computational biology today. While many of the driving forces behind the folding process are understood in principle, their calculation in the context of a folding study is still challenging. Most de novo prediction methods rely on sampling a large number of decoy structures from an approximate force field. Due to the effects of configurational entropy and of the folding pathway, the native structure is not necessarily the structure with the lowest energy, even with a perfect physical force field.point out that decoy clustering is the correct way to select the final prediction, since the native structure is typically located near the bottom of a broad well in the energy landscape. They showed that selecting the centroid structure of the largest cluster readily results in structures that are closer to the native structure than the structure with the lowest energy. Here, the centroid is the structure with the lowest average distance to all other structures in the cluster. Modern computer hardware allows to generate tens of * To whom correspondence should be addressed. thousands of low energy decoys in a few hours. These developments underline the demand for software that is able to clusters tens of thousands of structures in seconds or minutes. There are several clustering programs available in the public domain. They usually rely on an atomic representation of the decoys and subsequently cluster based on the pairwise root mean square deviation (RMSD), a standard measure of structure similarity (). The most popular programs, Calibur (), Durandal (), Scud () and s picker () follow the rosetta it asser procedure () and perform exact clustering. The structure with the most neighbors within a given cut off is chosen as the first centroid. The selected structure, along with all neighbors, is then removed from the set and the procedure is repeated to find the next largest cluster. Calibur applies pruning to exclude a large part of the decoy set from the costly pairwise comparison using auxiliary grouping with upper and lower bounds. Durandal similarly avoids large amounts of the pairwise calculations in the initial step of filling the distance matrix, by propagating the information gained in the exact measurement: knowing the RMSD values of structure pairs (A,B) and (A,C) allows to infer information about the RMSD value of (B,C). Both methods are substantially faster than s picker which evaluates all pairwise distances. Scud also applies exact clustering, but uses a reference root mean squared distance to calculate the pairwise distances. Here, all structures are aligned to a randomly selected reference structure. The approximate RMSD between two structures is then calculated based on their respective RMSD values with that reference structure, thereby avoiding the cost of an explicit superposition. With the exception of s picker (), the number of structures that can be clustered is not limited by any of the programs. However, extensive memory consumption becomes a limiting factor with growing numbers of decoys, as reloading the structures from the hard disk leads to a significant drop in performance. Currently, with a common desktop computer, 10 000 to 30 000 structures can be clustered, depending on the amount of main memory available (). Here we present Pleiades, a novel approach to protein structure clustering that uses Gauss integrals () to represent a protein's 3D structure. Gauss integrals allow to represent structures by 31 dimensional vectors, whose pairwise Euclidean distances correlate well with the RMSD of the corresponding structures (). Using this efficient representation, Pleiades is able to quickly page 511 510515

DISCUSSION

conclusion in this article, we present Pleiades, a novel approach to protein structure clustering using the GIT representation. Pleiades is able to quickly cluster a very large number of protein structures, a task that is highly relevant in the context of protein folding simulations. Using the efficient GIT representation, we were able to successfully cluster up to 1 million decoys resulting from protein folding studies on a common desktop computer in a few hours. One of the main advantages of Pleiades is its computational speed. The program is able to cluster the output of a regular folding simulation, up to 50 000 structures, in a matter of seconds runtime, while maintaining an accuracy comparable to state of the art programs. In order to use the convenient GIT representation of the protein fold, some preprocessing is necessary; all structures must first be converted to GIT vectors. Folding studies usually run for extended periods of time, occasionally saving structures to disk. The conversion of a single structure takes fractions of a second and can be performed in parallel with the actual folding simulation. The benefits of Pleiades are 2-fold: the increased efficiency and reduced memory consumption. Pleiades redefines the limits of how many protein structures can be clustered, routinely dealing with several hundred thousand structures in minutes run-time. At the same time, conventional clustering tasks involving only tens of thousands of structures can be performed in a few seconds, while maintaining an accuracy on par with state of the art clustering methods. Because of these features and the availability of an implementation under an open source license, Pleiades timely addresses a current bottleneck in structural bioinformatics.
