Motivation: Meaningful scores to assess protein structure similarity are essential to decipher protein structure and sequence evolution. The mining of the increasing number of protein structures requires fast and accurate similarity measures with statistical significance. Whereas numerous approaches have been proposed for protein domains as a whole, the focus is progressively moving to a more local level of structure analysis for which similarity measurement still remains without any satisfactory answer. Results: We introduce a new score based on binet cauchy kernel. It is normalized and bounded between 1 maximal similarity that implies exactly the same conformations for protein fragments and À1— mirror image conformations, the unrelated conformations having a null mean score. This allows for the search of both similar and mirror conformations. In addition, such score addresses two major issue of the widely used root mean square deviation (RMSD). First, it achieves length independent statistics even for short fragments. Second, it shows better performance in the discrimination of medium range RMSD values. Being simpler and faster to compute than the RMSD, it also provides the means for large scale mining of protein structures. Availability and implementation: The computer software implementing the score is available at http://bioserv.rpbs.univ-paris-diderot.fr/BCscore/

introduction when analyzing biological processes, similarity measures and statistical significance are one of the major means we have to establish relationships and infer models underlying observations. In the field of protein structure, the matter of quantifying similarity between two structures is a long standing objective, as it is an essential key to decipher protein sequence structure function relationships and further to classify them. Protein similarity search can be performed at a global and a local level. Whole structure comparisons provide general information about protein classification and protein functions. At a more local level, fragment comparison and identification has become a key step for protein structure analysis, annotation and modeling. Fragment similarities reveal functionally important residues (), similar structural motifs may indicate function preservation in remote homologs (), and more generally, recurring fragments may be used as building blocks to the construction of de novo models of protein structures (;). Scores used to quantify the 3D similarity are essential components at both global and local levels. A considerable amount of approaches has been developed for complete protein comparisons such as SSAP (), DALI (), CE (), MAMMOTH () or tm align () to cite some. However, progress in modeling and in the analysis of the significance of local differences in homologous proteins stresses the necessity to focus on smaller structure sizes. Yet none of the above scores used for structural alignment seems well adapted to the large scale comparison of short protein fragments (). First, speed is of the essence for large scale structure mining, and structural alignment may require heavy computations. Second, a crucial and difficult question remains that of the statistical significance of the scores applied to short fragments. The root mean square deviation (RMSD) () has been one of the first measures introduced. This long used criterion also has well known flaws, among which, RMSD dependence on the alignment length, possibly large values between homologous proteins, and above all, a poor classification performance for medium range RMSD values: small RMSD values imply correct similarity, but large RMSD values can hardly be related or not to the absence of similarity. Numerous studies have attempted to overcome these limitations such as,, maior ov and Crippen (1995) and many others since. Among these, the unit vector RMS distance u rms () has been reported to be rather length independent and insensitive to local structural dissimilarities for sufficiently long structures. The tm score () has been designed to be rather insensitive to small structural deviations. It is also normalized to be length insensitive, but its design was clearly focusing on sufficiently large proteins (480 amino acids here we introduce a new, fast and accurate scoring scheme for fragment mining. Contrarily to the RMSD, fragment superimposition is not required. This new measure is based on a binet cauchy kernel (BC score). This kernel has already been applied in unrelated context, in particular to the difficult problem of clustering video sequences and to the discrimination of an individual or a group of individuals in a video sequence (). In the context of protein structure comparison, the BC score can be seen as a shape similarity score corresponding to a correlation score between fragment shapes. Hence it is normalized and its values range from 1 measuring perfect shape anti similarity (one fragment is the mirror image of the second one) to 1 indicating perfect similarity (up to a linear deformation). The BC score has several interesting properties. In particular, it is independent to any rotation of the structures and consequently its computation does not involve a prior superimposition of the structures. It is also fast and simple to compute the score only requires the computation of 3  3 matrix determinants. Therefore, it is especially well adapted to perform large scale protein mining and is designed to compare short protein fragments. In this article, we simply assess a new gapless approach of structure similarity and we do not study the optimal structural alignment based on the BC score. After introducing the principle of the BC kernel, we review some of its important mathematical properties. We then present a statistical analysis of the scores and we finally assess the sensitivity and specificity in the context of large scale fragment mining with a comparison with the RMSD. We also apply the BC score to symmetry detection in proteins.
