Motivation: The need for efficient molecular docking tools for high throughput screening is growing alongside the rapid growth of drug fragment databases. auto dock Vina (Vina) is a widely used docking tool with parallelization for speed. quick vina qv in a 1) then further enhanced the speed via a heuristics, requiring high exhaustive ness. With low exhaustive ness its accuracy was compromised. We present in this article the latest version of quick vina qv in a 2) that inherits both the speed of qv in a 1 and the reliability of the original Vina. Results: We tested the efficacy of qv in a 2 on the core set of pdb bind 2014. With the default exhaustive ness level of Vina (i.e. 8), a maximum of 20.49-fold and an average of 2.30-fold acceleration with a correlation coefficient of 0.967 for the first mode and 0.911 for the sum of all modes were attained over the original Vina. A tendency for higher acceleration with increased number of rotatable bonds as the design variables was observed. On the accuracy, Vina wins over qv in a 2 on 30% of the data with average energy difference of only 0.58 kcal mol. On the same dataset, GOLD produced RMSD smaller than 2 A ˚ on 56.9% of the data while qv in a 2 attained 63.1%. Availability and implementation: The Cþþ source code of qv in a 2 is available at www qv in a org
introduction auto dock vina also referred to as vina employs the iterated local search global optimizer to search for the minimum energy docking conformations (). Subsequently, quick vina referred to as qv in a 1 hereinafter enhanced Vina's computation time via heuristics that prevents unnecessary local searches. As proof of concept, qv in a 1 needs high exhaustive ness level compared to the original Vina (). Here, we present the most recent quick vina referred to as qv in a 2 with improved reliability. qv in a 2 avoids the unnecessary local searches in a similar manner to qv in a 1. In contrast to qv in a 1, however, qv in a 2 misses fewer necessary local searches thanks to a new procedure to test if a randomized docked conformation is significant for local search. This improves qv in a 2's reliability in discovering the minimum energy docking conformation.

conclusion quick vina 2 is a fast and accurate molecular docking tool. Tested against 195 protein ligand complexes that compose the core set of the 2014 release of the pdb bind using default exhaustive ness level of 8, qv in a 2 successfully attained up to 20.49-fold acceleration over Vina. The Pearson's correlation coefficient between Vina's and qv in a 2's binding energy was 0.967 for the first predicted mode and 0.911 for the sum of all predicted modes. It is also witnessed that qv in a 2 is more accurate than GOLD 5.2 and is only slightly less accurate than Dock 6.6. This shows that qv in a 2 has paved the fast accurate, and reliable molecular docking with quick vina 2way for some high throughput and sufficiently accurate virtual screening of molecular libraries. This in turn brings great value to the fragment based computer aided drug design.
