Motivation: The three dimensional tertiary structure of a protein at near atomic level resolution provides insight alluding to its function and evolution. As protein structure decides its functionality, similarity in structure usually implies similarity in function. As such, structure alignment techniques are often useful in the classifications of protein function. Given the rapidly growing rate of new, experimentally determined structures being made available from repositories such as the Protein Data Bank, fast and accurate computational structure comparison tools are required. This paper presents sp align ns a non sequential protein structure alignment tool using a novel asymmetrical greedy search technique. Results: The performance of sp align ns was evaluated against existing sequential and non sequential structure alignment methods by performing trials with commonly used datasets. These benchmark datasets used to gauge alignment accuracy include (i) 9538 pairwise alignments implied by the homs trad database of homologous proteins; (ii) a subset of 64 difficult alignments from set (i) that have low structure similarity; (iii) 199 pairwise alignments of proteins with similar structure but different topology; and (iv) a subset of 20 pairwise alignments from the rip c set. sp align ns is shown to achieve greater alignment accuracy (lower or comparable root mean squared distance with increased structure overlap coverage) for all datasets, and the highest agreement with reference alignments from the challenging dataset (iv) above, when compared with both sequentially constrained alignments and other non sequential alignments. Availability and implementation: sp align ns was implemented in Cþþ. The source code, binary executable, and a web server version is freely available at: http://sparks

introduction the three dimensional tertiary structure of proteins at near atomic level resolution provides an indication of their function and evolutionary relationships. In particular, similarity in structure usually implies similarity in function. Accordingly, functions of a protein without annotated functions can be predicted if it is structurally similar to proteins with known functions. These comparisons are productive because protein structures are often more conserved than their sequences (). Accurate computational structure comparison is complementary to the much slower process of manual classification () which is unable to keep pace with newly determined structures from structural genomics projects (). As a consequence, protein structure alignment has become an important technique for computational biology researchers involved in protein classification, evolutionary relationship determination, protein functional prediction, molecular modelling and protein engineering ().Protein structure alignment has been studied for over thirty years, with a large number of computational tools and techniques developed to address the problem (). In general, protein structure alignment can be defined as generating the set of residue pair mappings which maximizes the detection of similarity whilst minimizing geometric divergence. To date this has been achieved in two ways: sequentially and non sequentially. A valid sequential alignment is achieved through adherence of the following two constraints: (1) exclusivity  no amino acid can be aligned with more than one amino acid in the other protein; and (2) ordering  the order of amino acids must be maintained with respect to the alignment. That is, if amino acids i and j in one protein are aligned with amino acids k and l in the other protein, then i  j if and only if k  l. (). Alternatively, non sequential alignments release the ordering constraint and only enforce the exclusivity constraint, which in some instances has been found to improve similarity detection performance compared with sequentially constrained alignments, potentially uncovering hidden or unexpected relationships assisting with evolution al and functional annotations (). Representative examples of sequential alignment methods in early studies include DALI (), SSAP (), CE (), FATCAT (), tm align ()/ frt malign () and s align (). A recent sequential alignment method is sp align () which optimizes a size independent score called sp score which fixes the cut off distance at 4 A  and removes size dependence by using a normalization pre-factor. sp align demonstrated improvements of alignment accuracy compared with (DALI, CE, tm align and frt malign as shown in (). Representative examples of non sequential alignment methods in earlier studies include: DALI (this tool can produce both sequential and non sequential alignments), Geometric Hashing (), SARF (), MASS (,b), MUSTANG (), GANGSTA  (), SNAP (), flex snap (), CLICK () and mi can (). Both GANGSTA  , and CLICK methods make use of combinatorial based approaches to produce non sequential structure alignments. GANGSTA  is an extension of the original Genetic Algorithm for non sequential and Gapped Structure Alignment (GANGSTA) () tool, and replaced their Genetic Algorithm component with a combinatorial approach providing improved efficiency and reliability. CLICK alignments are generated by grouping locally aligned representative atoms within a certain distance threshold and then matches these groups into the best combination that maximizes coverage with the least squares fit. flex snap uses a greedy algorithm for chaining aligned fragment pairs (AFPs), allowing for flexible alignments to be produced by introducing hinges between AFPs. mi can is based on the geometric hashing paradigm and focuses on SSEs for alignment, utilizing a multiple vector representation for each SSE. This study employed combinatorial optimization techniques, specifically a Linear Sum Assignment Problem (LSAP) () algorithm, to produce non sequential structure alignments of proteins. We developed the Asymmetrical Greedy Search (AGS) algorithm that locates an approximate LSAP solution efficiently with negligible difference from the global minimum. The new non sequential alignment software package, sp align ns is based on the optimization of sp score () for structure alignment. sp align ns achieves highly accurate alignment results with better or comparable RMSD at a higher number of aligned residue pairs in a significantly shorter computational time than CLICK.
