Motivation: Statistical analyses of genome wide association studies g was require fitting large numbers of very similar regression models, each with low statistical power. Taking advantage of repeated observations or correlated phenotypes can increase this statistical power, but fitting the more complicated models required can make computation impractical. Results: In this article, we present simple methods that capitalize on the structure inherent in g was studies to dramatically speed up computation for a wide variety of problems, with a special focus on methods for correlated phenotypes. Availability: The R package boss is available on the Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) at http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/boss/

introduction in analysis of genome wide association studies g was it is standard to fit very large numbers of very similar regression models. A general form of commonly used models is where 1  i  n indexes subjects in the study, y i is the subject's outcome of interest, X i is a vector of subject specific adjustment variables, g i is the set of genotype dependent variables and i is an error term. The genotype dependent variables g i vary from model to model, within one analysis, but the adjustment variables X i remain identical within each analysis. If the errors are uncorrelated, standard ordinary least squares (OLS) or generalized linear models (GLM) efficiently estimate genetic effects  g. However, when the errors are correlated notably, greater efficiency can be obtained, by incorporating this structure into the model. For instance, if repeated measures on an individual are available, either generalized estimating equations (GEE) or mixed models can increase power relative to an analysis that uses a single phenotype measure for each individual (). Similarly, when subjects are related, kinship can be incorporated into a mixed model to increase power (). A single GEE or mixed model analysis * To whom correspondence should be addressed involves negligible computing effort, but the number of analyses carried out often extends into several millions, meaning more complicated GEE and mixed models computation with standard methods can be infeasible. Some computational speedups are available, by capitalizing on the similarity of each regression, meaning one can obtain genome wide estimates at a substantially reduced computational cost. For example introduced an approximation to the Maximum Likelihood Estimate for mixed models which is currently implemented in pro babel. In their approach, both phenotypic correlation and non genetic effects are estimated once and assumed constant across all models in an analysis. When the inclusion of genotype does not change these parameters, the inference is close to that obtained from the full fit, but can be misleadingly inaccurate when genotype is correlated with non genetic covariates. In another example, rather than fixing both non genetic effects and variance structure,) proposed mixed model methods where the variance structure of phenotype is fixed over all markers in which case simple modifications to Generalized Least Squares procedures can give fast computation of the results. This is more complicated to implement and slower than the pro babel approximation, but makes less assumptions about the nature of the genetic association. However, one drawback of a mixed model approach is that results may be invalid if either the correlation structure or the covariate phenotype relationship is not well specified. If the phenotype correlation is due to repeated observations on an individual, then GEE models provide powerful testing, which does not require us to correctly specify either the correlation structure or the phenotype covariate relationships, that may be complicated (). However, there are no software packages that can currently implement this on a genome wide scale in reasonable amounts of time. In this article, we explore two approaches that substantially reduce the computation required for a broad class of statistical models. Each exploits two important features of g was analyses: (i) few covariates are different in each regression and (ii) little variation in phenotype is explained by genotype at a particular locus. Our first approach exploits symmetry in the estimation of single marker models. For ordinary least squares, it is 20 times faster than current implementations, and for mixed models it can reduce computation by a factor of a few hundred. Our second approach is based on matrix decompositions and applies to a broader class of models, including those with multiple markers, and allows model robust variance estimation. In the case of linear mixed models, it aligns with a proposal by

conclusion in this article, we provided general computational methods that capitalize on the structure of genome wide association studies to increase speed. BOSS is composed of two distinct procedures, but each takes advantage of two important features of genome wide association studies (i) few variables change from analysis to analysis and (ii) genotype at each locus explains a small component of variation in phenotype. Recognizing this, we demonstrated that one could perform nearly exact estimation and testing in a wide variety of statistical models fit with i wls including GLM, GEE and mixed models, for a lower computational cost than currently implemented least squares. This had also been noticed in mixed models, but our contribution allows the analyst to use a much b the error in the approximation, as a percent of the OLS coefficient, against the p value. Herein, the approximate coefficient, with its associated variance, yields identical inference to the OLS estimate broader set of tools, and for single marker models we provide a method which is substantially faster (). In particular, it is now feasible to take advantage of repeated measures with GEE and doubly robust standard errors on a genome wide scale.
