Motivation: How chromatin folds in three dimensional (3D) space is closely related to transcription regulation. As powerful tools to study such 3D chromatin conformation, the recently developed Hi-C technologies enable a genome wide measurement of pair-wise chromatin interaction. However, methods for the detection of biologically meaningful chromatin interactions, i.e. peak calling, from Hi-C data, are still under development. In our previous work, we have developed a novel hidden Markov random field h mrf based Bayesian method, which through explicitly mod-eling the non negligible spatial dependency among adjacent pairs of loci manifesting in high resolution Hi-C data, achieves substantially improved robustness and enhanced statistical power in peak calling. Superior to peak callers that ignore spatial dependency both methodologically and in performance, our previous Bayesian framework suffers from heavy computational costs due to intensive computation incurred by modeling the correlated peak status of neighboring loci pairs and the inference of hidden dependency structure. Results: In this work, we have developed fast hic a novel approach based on simulated field approximation , which approximates the joint distribution of the hidden peak status by a set of independent random variables, leading to more tractable computation. Performance comparisons in real data analysis showed that fast hic not only speeds up our original Bayesian method by more than five times, bus also achieves higher peak calling accuracy.

introduction the spatial organizations of chromosomes play a critical role in transcription regulation. In particular, regulatory elements such as enhancers, often contact with the promoters of targeted genes by forming long range DNA looping. Understanding such 3D chromatin conformation provides novel insights into the regulation mechanisms of gene expression (). The recently developed Hi-C technologies enable a genome wide measurement of chromatin interaction (). In the Hi-C data, the contact frequency between any two chromatin loci is measured by the number of paired end reads spanning across them. Higher read count indicates more frequent chromatin interaction and closer spatial proximity. The rapid accumulation of Hi-C data with high sequencing depth enables the study of chromatin interaction at the unprecedented resolution (). However, the detection of biologically meaningful long range chromatin interactions poses great challenges. Most existing methods () assume that the chromatin interaction frequencies for different loci pairs are independent, which is clearly invalid. If two loci show high interaction frequency, their adjacent loci will be more likely to interact with each other. To fill in this gap, we have recently developed a novel hidden Markov random field based Bayesian h mrf bayes method to explicitly model the spatial dependency among adjacent loci (). By borrowing information across neighborhood loci, h mrf achieves substantially improved robustness and enhanced statistical power. While extremely promising, h mrf bayes is based on a Bayesian framework which requires intensive computation. The key challenge is to efficiently and effectively infer the dependency structure underlying the hidden peak status. To address this challenge, we developed a novel algorithm named fast hic which approximates the joint distribution of the hidden peak status by a set of independent random variables. Under such approximation, we adopted an EM algorithm for statistical inference. Compared with h mrf bayes fast hic not only speeds up by more than five times, but also achieves higher peak calling accuracy.

conclusion in summary, we have developed fast hic a fast and accurate algorithm to detect long range chromatin interactions from Hi-C data. fast hic utilized the same hidden Markov random field model as in our previous work (), but with a novel implementation of the simulated field approximation, leading to more than five times speed up and higher peak calling accuracy. We believe that fast hic has potential to become a useful tool in studying chromatin spatial organization.
