Motivation: Imputation using external reference panels (e.g. 1000 Genomes) is a widely used approach for increasing power in genome wide association studies and meta analysis. Existing hidden Markov models hmm based imputation approaches require individual level genotypes. Here, we develop a new method for Gaussian imputation from summary association statistics, a type of data that is becoming widely available. Results: In simulations using 1000 Genomes (1000G) data, this method recovers 84% (54%) of the effective sample size for common (45%) and low frequency (1–5%) variants [increasing to 87% (60%) when summary linkage disequilibrium information is available from target samples] versus the gold standard of 89% (67%) for hmm based imputation, which can not be applied to summary statistics. Our approach accounts for the limited sample size of the reference panel, a crucial step to eliminate false positive associations, and it is computationally very fast. As an empirical demonstration, we apply our method to seven case control phenotypes from the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium wtc cc data and a study of height in the British 1958 birth cohort (1958BC). Gaussian imputation from summary statistics recovers 95% (105%) of the effective sample size (as quantified by the ratio of 2 association statistics) compared with hmm based imputation from individual level genotypes at the 227 (176) published single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the wtc cc (1958BC height) data. In addition, for publicly available summary statistics from large meta analyses of four lipid traits, we publicly release imputed summary statistics at 1000G SNPs, which could not have been obtained using previously published methods, and demonstrate their accuracy by masking subsets of the data. We show that 1000G imputation using our approach increases the magnitude and statistical evidence of enrichment at genic versus non genic loci for these traits, as compared with an analysis without 1000G imputation. Thus, imputation of summary statistics will be a valuable tool in future functional enrichment analyses.

introduction genome wide association studies g was are the prevailing approach for finding disease risk loci, having successfully identified thousands of variants associated to complex phenotypes (). An important component of the g was analysis toolkit is genotype imputation, an approach that leverages publicly available data [e.g. 1000 Genomes (1000G;)] to estimate genotypes at markers untyped in the study to increase power for finding new risk loci (). In addition to g was genotype imputation is a key component in meta analysis of studies that use different genotyping platforms, where single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that were genotyped in one study can be imputed in the other studies, thus increasing the association power (). Many approaches for genotype imputation have been proposed, with methods based on hidden Markov models (HMM) showing the highest accuracy in simulations and empirical data (). However, privacy and logistic constraints often prohibit access to individual level genotype data, thus precluding hmm based imputation, whereas summary association statistics are becoming widely available. For example, summary statistics are required to be publicly released for any g was published in Nature Genetics and have been *To whom correspondence should be addressed. publicly released for many traits (). In this work, we propose methods for testing association at SNPs untyped in the study when only summary association statistics are available at the typed SNPs. Unlike hmm based imputation from individual level genotypes, our proposed approach requires only the association statistics at typed variants as input. To accomplish this, we approximate the distribution of association statistics at a given locus using a multivariate Gaussian. Previous studies have shown that a Gaussian approximation of linkage disequilibrium (LD) leads to accurate inference across a wide range of problems (). In particular, () highlighted the potential utility of Gaussian imputation methods for individual level and pooled data, but that study did not provide methods or software for imputation from summary association statistics (see Section 4). Through extensive simulations based on 1000G data, we show that our approach is almost as powerful as the gold standard of hmm based imputation from individual level genotypes, and is able to avoid an increase in false positive associations by accounting for the limited size of the reference panel. Our approach recovers 84% (54%) of the effective sample size for common (45%) and low frequency (15%) variants versus 89% (67%) for hmm based imputation, with a reduction in running time of several orders of magnitude. When summary information on the pairwise LD structure among typed variants in g was samples is made available [as is also recommended in other contexts (, our method recovers 87% (60%) of the effective sample size, again with no increase in false positive associations. We validate our approach using real g was data from Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium wtc cc across seven phenotypes as well as a height g was from the 1958 Birth Cohort (1958BC), where we show that Gaussian imputation from summary statistics recovers the same signal as hmm based imputation from individual level genotypes, with no increase in false positive rate. For example, we attain an average 2 association statistic of 18.28 as compared with 19.17 for hmm based imputation at the 227 published SNPs in the wtc cc data and 4.76 (versus 4.55 for hmm based imputation) at the 176 published SNPs in the 1958BC height data. For publicly available summary statistics from large meta analyses of four lipid traits [triglycerides (TG), total cholesterol (TC), high density lipoprotein (HDL) and low density lipoprotein (LDL)], we publicly release imputed summary statistics at 1000G SNPs, which could not have been obtained using previously published methods. We validate the accuracy of the imputed statistics across the four studies using a masking approach and show that we attain a correlation of 0.98 (0.95) to masked summary statistics for common low frequency variants, consistent with simulations. Finally, we explore the utility of imputed association statistics to functional enrichment analysis (). For the four lipid traits, we find that imputed data increase the magnitude and statistical evidence of enrichment at genic versus non genic loci, as compared with an analysis without 1000G imputation ().
