Motivation: Searching for structural similarity is a key issue of protein functional annotation. The maximum contact map overlap (CMO) is one of the possible measures of protein structure similarity. Exact and approximate methods known to optimize the CMO are computationally expensive and this hampers their applicability to large scale comparison of protein structures. Results: In this article, we describe a heuristic algorithm al eigen for finding a solution to the CMO problem. Our approach relies on the approximation of contact maps by eigen decomposition. We obtain good overlaps of two contact maps by computing the optimal global alignment of few principal eigenvectors. Our algorithm is simple, fast and its running time is independent of the amount of contacts in the map. Experimental testing indicates that the algorithm is comparable to exact CMO methods in terms of the overlap quality, to structural alignment methods in terms of structure similarity detection and it is fast enough to be suited for large scale comparison of protein structures. Furthermore, our preliminary tests indicates that it is quite robust to noise, which makes it suitable for structural similarity detection also for noisy and incomplete contact maps.

introduction measuring the similarity of protein structures is a necessary step in several problems of bioinformatics, including the determination of structure conservation through evolution across species and or the relation among structure and function. Several similarity measures of protein structures are available albeit no general agreement on the best one has been achieved (). Routinely, each similarity measure relies on the choice of a scoring function and on the assumption that its optimum corresponds to the best possible match between two protein structures. The most widely adopted scoring measures are based on the root mean square deviation (RMSD;), distance map similarity (), contact map overlap (CMO; * To whom correspondence should be addressed.) and, recently, universal similarity metric (UMS;). The maximum CMO measure quantifies the level of similarity between two protein structures by measuring the maximum overlap of their contact maps and it is obtained by computing the sequence alignment that maximizes the number of corresponding contacts between pairs of aligned residues. The maximum CMO is one of the few measures for which exact algorithms are known. On the other hand, the maximum CMO problem is known to be NP hard (). Although not explicitly stated in previous papers dealing with CMO algorithms, the goal of the these tools is to address the problem of protein structure prediction. In practice, given a set of predicted contacts the basic idea is to look for the best possible physical contact map among the available ones by means of a CMO program: methods for contact prediction are presently not accurate enough () to allow protein structure reconstruction (). The main contribution of CMO algorithms is therefore to provide tools for template recognition when the native protein structure is unknown and not to substitute structural alignment methods (i.e. methods based on RMSD and distance map similarity measures), which perform quite well. The first exact algorithm for the maximum CMO problem, based on integer programming (IP), was developed in and improved in. Later, several other methods based on the same approach were proposed (). The IP approach consists in formulating the CMO as the maximization of some integer linear function and solving it with Lagrangian Relaxation (LR) and or Branch and Bound reduction techniques. The disadvantage of ip based methods is that, due to the intractability of the problem, they are exponential in the worst case. For a practical usage, the running time of these algorithms is bounded and the best solution within the time limit is returned. The counter part is that the ip based methods provide upper and lower bounds to the optimal solution and this makes it possible to evaluate the quality of the partial solution from the distance between the upper and lower bound. The best possible overlap is found when the upper and lower bounds coincide. Recently, two polynomial time approximation schemes for the protein structure alignment problem (in particular, contact map alignment) have been developed (). The approximation algorithm described in is polynomial in the protein length but it is exponential with respect to some constant parameters and its running time increases with decrease of an approximation factor. The method developed
