Motivation: Currently, the best rna rna interaction prediction tools are based on approaches that consider both the inter and intramolecular interactions of hybridizing RNAs. While accurate, these methods are too slow and memory hungry to be employed in genome wide RNA target scans. Alternative methods neglecting intramolecular structures are fast enough for genome wide applications, but are too inaccurate to be of much practical use. Results: A new approach for rna rna interaction was developed, with a prediction accuracy that is similar to that of algorithms that explicitly consider intramolecular structures, but running at least three orders of magnitude faster than rna up. This is achieved by using a combination of precomputed accessibility profiles with an approximate energy model. This approach is implemented in the new version of rna plex. The software also provides a variant using multiple sequences alignments as input, resulting in a further increase in specificity.

introduction the status of RNA in molecular biology has changed dramatically over the last decade. Instead of taking on a rather marginal role as messenger of genomic information, they are now considered as key regulatory elements in a wide spectrum of cellular processes. As of 2008, the number of known non-coding RNA sequences reached an overwhelming 29 million grouped into 1300 distinct families (). Non-coding RNAs nc rnas frequently function by binding to other RNAs. For example, snoRNAs mediate pseudo uri dy lation and methylation of rRNAs and snRNAs () and can influence the splicing of pre mrnas (). nc rnas are also involved in the editing of other RNA sequences (Benne, * To whom correspondence should be addressed. 1992), transcription and translation control (siRNA, miRNA, st rna () or plasmid replication control (). While siRNAs are often fully complementary to their targets, most other nc rnas interact in a more intricate manner, which does not involve perfect hybridization. For example in Escherichia coli., oxy s which is involved in oxidative stress response, interacts with its target mRNA, fhl a through formation of a two sites kissing complex (). Although there is statistical evidence that a plethora of nc rnas interacts with other RNAs (The Athanasius F.), targets remain unknown for most of them. The prediction of rna rna interactions, therefore, has become an important field in computational biology. rna rna interactions are primarily governed by the same types of hydrogen bonds and stacking interactions as RNA secondary structure formation. The problem can, therefore, be tackled by similar algorithmic approaches and the same parametrization of the interaction energies. We may distinguish two distinct ways of addressing the rna rna interaction problem. The most straightforward way consists in concatenating both sequences and subsequently folding them as a pseudo single sequence. The precision of this kind of approach depends greatly on how the concatenation is handled. The crudest approaches use linker sequences to connect both RNA strands (). This can lead to erroneous structure prediction as the linker may interfere with the interacting sequences. Alternatively, a small modification of the folding algorithm keeps track of the concatenation point(s) and uses adjusted energy parameters for the loops in which the junctions occur (). A combinatorially different model, known as rna rna interaction problem (RIP), covers a larger set of possible structures (). The second type of approaches conceptually decomposes the RNA hybridization process into two stages: (i) the unfolding of the interacting regions of the two partners and (ii) the direct interaction of the exposed binding sites. In practice, one first computes the probability of being unpaired for each region (sequence interval) in both sequences. These probabilities are equivalent to the free energy necessary to expose the regions. In the second step, the interaction energy between each combinations of regions is evaluated (). This approach was of the omp amica hybrids predicted with and without considering intramolecular structures. (a) Hybrid structure predicted with rna plex without considering the intramolecular structures of the RNA sequences. The hybrid extends over 67 and 69 nucleotides on ompA and micA, respectively, and has an hybridization energy of 42.3 kcal mol. Still the energy needed to unfold both binding regions on ompA and micA amounts 22.7+26.8 = 49.5 kcal mol larger than the energy gained through binding. (b) omp amica interaction predicted by rna up. omp amica hybrid is shown on the right hand side, with the micA sequence represented by a bold line. Even though the hybrid is much smaller than the interaction in (a), it has a lower total interaction energy (ddG) of 12.25 kcal mol due to the fact that the interacting regions are less structured. in particular, applied successfully to srna mrna interactions in bacteria. While both types of algorithms proved useful in predicting the correct interaction structure of a ncRNA with its (known) target, they are computationally expensive, requiring at least on m 3 ) operations, where n and m are the size of the target and query sequences, respectively, and hence are impractical for genome wide target predictions. A drastic reduction in computational complexity can be achieved by omitting the computation of secondary structures within the monomers, as demonstrated by rna hybrid (), which runs in om nl 2 ) when restricting the maximum loop length to L. rna plex a conceptually very similar approach (), further reduces the time complexity to O(mn) by using a modified energy model. Neglecting the internal structure of the interacting sequences leads to a drastic decrease in specificity; however, see. This issue is roughly addressed by rna plex in that it mimics the effect of the competition between intra and intermolecular interactions by adding a fixed per nucleotide penalty (). Currently, one therefore has to choose between precise but im practically slow methods or fast but imprecise methods for ncRNA target search, a situation that is quite unsatisfactory. In this contribution, we extend the rna plex approach tafe r and Hofacker (2008) to tackle this problem. We mimic the effect of the competition between intra and intermolecular interactions by adding a position dependent per nucleotide penalty instead of a fixed penalty. This penalty is derived from precomputed accessibility profiles produced by rna pl fold () or rna up (). More explicitly, these profiles contain the probabilities that any subsequence of arbitrary length is unpaired in thermodynamic equilibrium. These probabilities are converted to free energies that then enter as position dependent penalties in the computation of the interaction energies, preserving rna plex O(mn) run time. The main advantage is that the accessibility profiles can be precomputed and stored, making this approach particularly attractive for large scale screening studies. In addition, we extended rna plex so that it can also handle multiple alignment. This inclusion of comparative information into the target prediction process leads to a substantial increase in specificity.

application as an application example, we consider the genome wide prediction of sRNA targets in E.coli. As a reference set, we use the experimentally confirmed interactions published by. We expect that, for a given sRNA, the number of predicted interactions with other (false positive) targets should decrease when accessibility of the target mRNA in included. Ideally, it should reach the low levels observed for rna up (). For each sRNA, the amount of false positives was estimated by counting genome wide the number of srna target interactions that are more stable than the experimentally reported srna target duplex. For each 4463 E.coli genes, a mRNA of length 1200 nt, including 200 nt upstream and 1000 nt downstream of the start codon were defined. Accessibility profiles were computed with rna pl fold with a folding windows option w of 240 nt and a maximal base pair distance of 160 option l. An interaction was reported if the corresponding srna mrna interaction energy is smaller than the experimentally confirmed interaction, and if it occurs in region encompassing 80 nt, 50 nt upstream and 30 nt downstream of the start codon. The inclusion of the accessibility profiles in the new version of rna plex leads to a substantial improvement as can be seen from. All native interaction sites are among the predictions, and the detailed target site localization is improved. Most importantly, the number of predictions with better interaction energies, i.e. the false positives, is reduced to a level similar to that of rna up. In order to better assess the number of false positives, the same method was applied on the dinucleotide shuffled srn as and mRNAs. To this end, we compared the interaction energy of the non shuffled experimentally confirmed interactions, to the energy distribution of the shuffled sequences. Interestingly, in seven out of nine cases, the number of false positives is smaller (see Supplementary Material) in the shuffled case than in the non shuffled one. This can be explained by the fact that in various bacteria, the region around the ribosomal entry site, which is also the preferred region of sRNA binding, is more accessible than the rest of the mRNA (see Supplementary Material). This in turn implies that compared with shuffled sequences, srn as have a greater chance to bind to the region around the start codon in non shuffled mRNAs. Depending on the nc rnas one can expect between 7.510 7 false positives per nucleotide for micC and 1.5104 false positives for gc vb (see Supplementary Material).

discussion we presented a new version of rna plex a tool designed to rapidly and reliably predict rna rna interactions. Compared with the previously published version, rna plex now considers target site accessibility, by using accessibility profiles generated by rna pl fold to approximate the energy of removing a nucleotide from all intramolecular interactions. The introduction of position specific structure dependent extension cost allows to greatly improve the specificity of rna plex bringing it close to that of rna up without modifying the linear run time of the original rna plex. Clearly, the main feature of rna plex is its run time efficiency. On a dataset of 19 nc rnas and 100 target mRNAs on length 1200, rna plex runs 2400 faster than rna up without noticeably loss of specificity, thus making nc rnas target searches more affordable. In its present implementation, rna plex can be used not only to predict ncRNA targets in small genomes, but can also be used to find miRNA targets and siRNA off targets in large mammalian genomes and transcriptome s and it can be applied to microarray probes design. In contrast to rna up or rna hybrid rna plex can return suboptimal solutions efficiently on the fly without the need of recomputing the full recursion matrix. The ability of rna plex to perform comparative target search allows to discard poorly conserved interaction and to lend further credibility to interactions showing compensatory mutations. Based on a dataset of experimentally confirmed interactions, we show that rna plex in its present form is an useful tool to predict new sRNA targets. We further show that suboptimal predictions from rna plex may actually be real targets. Application of the comparative version
