Motivation: In eukaryotic cells, alternative splicing expands the diversity of RNA transcripts and plays an important role in tissue specific differentiation, and can be m is regulated in disease. To understand these processes, there is a great need for methods to detect differential transcription between samples. Our focus is on samples observed using short read RNA sequencing rnase q. Methods: We characterize differential transcription between two samples as the difference in the relative abundance of the transcript isoforms present in the samples. The magnitude of differential transcription of a gene between two samples can be measured by the square root of the Jensen Shannon Divergence (JSD*) between the genes transcript abundance vectors in each sample. We define a weighted splice graph representation of rnase q data, summarizing in compact form the alignment of rnase q reads to a reference genome. The flow difference metric (FDM) identifies regions of differential RNA transcript expression between pairs of splice graphs, without need for an underlying gene model or catalog of transcripts. We present a novel non-parametric statistical test between splice graphs to assess the significance of differential transcription, and extend it to group-wise comparison incorporating sample replicates. Results: Using simulated rnase q data consisting of four technical replicates of two samples with varying transcription between genes, we show that (i) the FDM is highly correlated with JSD* (r = 0.82) when average rnase q coverage of the transcripts is sufficiently deep; and (ii) the FDM is able to identify 90% of genes with differential transcription when JSD*  0.28 and coverage  7. This represents higher sensitivity than Cufflinks (without annotations) and rDiff (MMD), which respectively identified 69 and 49% of the genes in this region as differential transcribed. Using annotations identifying the transcripts, Cufflinks was able to identify 86% of the genes in this region as differentially transcribed. Using experimental data consisting of four replicates each for two cancer cell lines (MCF7 and SUM102), FDM identified 1425 genes as significantly different in transcription. Subsequent study of the samples using quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction qrt pcr of several differential transcription sites identified by FDM, confirmed significant differences at these sites.

introduction the transcriptome is a key vantage point for a molecular biologist's study of phenotypic differences between cells that result from environmental factors, cell specialization or disease. Classically, this study has been conducted largely by observing differential gene expression levels using microarrays or high throughput RNA sequencing technologies. However, detailed analysis of the transcriptome has shown that significant variation is also encoded in the diversity and relative abundance of a gene's constituent transcripts (). Consequently, beyond measuring differences in overall expression of genes between samples, there is a need to measure differences in expression at the transcript level. We define differential transcription of a gene between samples as a difference in the relative abundance of the gene's transcript isoforms in the samples. In this manner, differential transcription is independent of the overall gene expression in the samples. short read RNA sequencing technologies rnase q have evolved rapidly to sample the transcriptome at increasing depth and accuracy (). Using rnase q datasets obtained from samples, the locus and depth of coverage by reads aligned to a reference genome provide the starting point for the detection of differential transcription (). Recently, two approaches have emerged to detect differential transcription between samples. The first approach is based on transcript inference and abundance estimation of the transcripts, as performed by tools like Cufflinks (), r quant (), trans abyss () and Scripture (). Applying these methods to each of two samples, differential transcription can be determined directly for each gene using the estimated relative abundances of the gene's transcripts in the two samples. However, transcript inference algorithms rely on heuristics to resolve the transcript structure, because the inference problem is, in general, underdetermined. As a result, some transcripts may be missed or inferred incorrectly. Abundance estimation, in turn, is not able to correctly explicate

DISCUSSION

conclusion while splice graphs were introduced nearly a decade ago (), our definition is intended to record rnase q read coverage in such a graph (this is also the approach taken in the Flux Capacitor). To make such graphs efficient to analyze, we choose a specific representation that differs from classic splice graphs. Nodes are labeled with genomic coordinates which are unique and help address the ambiguities caused by overlapping exons and unannotated genomic regions. The node labels are also well suited for computing the union of graphs from which the edge set for comparison of coverages is easy to determine. The act graph representation can dramatically decrease the data storage requirement for rnase q data. It is not a lossless compression as the underlying reads can not be recovered from the act graph but it does suffice for the analysis of differential expression and transcription. The FSM captures the signal of differential transcription directly from a pair of act graphs without knowledge or inference of the underlying transcripts or need for normalization. The FDM has high correlation with JSD*, which is an independent measure of differential transcription. We showed that FDM can be used as classifier for differential transcription. We presented a statistical method using a permutation test on act graphs to find genes with significant differential transcription between pairs of samples or between groups of replicates.
