Motivation: The study of cancer genomes now routinely involves using next generation sequencing technology (NGS) to profile tumours for single nucleotide variant (SNV) somatic mutations. However, surprisingly few published bioinformatics methods exist for the specific purpose of identifying somatic mutations from NGS data and existing tools are often inaccurate, yielding intolerably high false prediction rates. As such, the computational problem of accurately inferring somatic mutations from paired tumour normal NGS data remains an unsolved challenge. Results: We present the comparison of four standard supervised machine learning algorithms for the purpose of somatic SNV prediction in tumour normal NGS experiments. To evaluate these approaches (random forest, Bayesian additive regression tree, support vector machine and logistic regression), we constructed 106 features representing 3369 candidate somatic sn vs from 48 breast cancer genomes, originally predicted with naive methods and subsequently revalidated to establish ground truth labels. We trained the classifiers on this data (consisting of 1015 true somatic mutations and 2354 non somatic mutation positions) and conducted a rigorous evaluation of these methods using a cross validation framework and hold out test NGS data from both exo me capture and whole genome shotgun platforms. All learning algorithms employing predictive discriminative approaches with feature selection improved the predictive accuracy over standard approaches by statistically significant margins. In addition, using unsupervised clustering of the ground truth false positive predictions, we noted several distinct classes and present evidence suggesting non-overlapping sources of technical artefacts illuminating important directions for future study. Availability: Software called mutations eq and datasets are available from http://compbio.bccrc.ca.

introduction the genome wide search for functionally important somatic mutations in cancer by emergent, cost effective next generation sequencing (NGS) technology has begun to revolutionize our understanding of tumour biology. The discovery of diagnostic mutations (), new cancer genes (ARID1A (), PBRM1 (), PPP2R1A (), IDH1 (), EZH2 (), insights into tumour evolution and progression () and definitions of mutational landscapes in tumour types), myeloma (), lymphoma (among many others, provide important examples of the power and potential of NGS in furthering our knowledge of cancer biology. Using NGS to interrogate cancers for somatic mutations usually involves sequencing tumour DNA and DNA derived from nonmalignant (or normal) tissue (often blood) from the same patient. Consequently, cancer focused NGS experiments differ considerably in experimental design from the study of Mendelian disorders or normal human variation. In cancer studies, sequence reads from the two matched samples are aligned to a reference human genome, and lists of predicted variants using single nucleotide variant (SNV) callers [e.g. sam tools (), soap snp (), vars can (), snv mix (), g atk (), vip r (are compared in the tumour and normal data. Using naive approaches, those variants appearing in the tumour, but not the normal sample would be considered putative somatic mutations and provide the investigator with a list of candidates to follow up for functional impact and clinical relevance. Unfortunately, such naive approaches often result in false predictions and we suggest herein that the problem of computational identification of somatic mutations from NGS data derived from tumour and matched normal DNA remains an unsolved challenge. As a result, labour intensive and often costly validation experiments are still required to confirm the presence of predicted somatic mutations for both research purposes and clinical interpretation. Although some false predictions may be due to under sampled alleles, most can be attributed to detectable artefacts that we argue can be leveraged in principled inference techniques to improve computational predictions. Many different approaches to

discussion we studied the use of feature based classifiers for the purpose of somatic mutation detection in tumour normal pair NGS data. Using an extensive set of ground truth positions, we trained four different machine learning classifiers using features extracted from existing software tools and novel features we computed ourselves. All four classifiers statistically significantly outperformed popular software packages used in a naive way to detect somatic mutations, treating the tumour and normal data independently. Results were consistent between a cross validation analysis of the training data and a completely independent test dataset derived from an orthogonal sequencing platform. Our results encapsulate three key results: (i) machine learning classifiers can be trained using principled machine learning techniques to significantly improve somatic mutation detection; (ii) feature selection analysis revealed that our classification method selects different features in the tumour and normal datasets to optimize classification ability, underscoring that simultaneous rather than independent analysis of the paired data is important; and (iii) we identified five distinct groups of false positive results. This last result indicates that feature based analysis of 'negative' or wild type positions can be helpful to guide future developments in software pipelines that operate upstream of variant calling.

conclusion our results underscore the advantages of developing cancer specific tools for NGS data that can capitalize on the unique experimental design of tumour normal paired data. Our conclusions support the notion that principled feature based machine learning classification frameworks will be well placed to leverage evolving trends in the cancer NGS field, thereby reducing the burden of downstream validation efforts with more accurate predictions.
