Motivation: RNA 3D motifs are recurrent substructures in an RNA subunit and are building blocks of the RNA architecture. They play an important role in binding proteins and consolidating RNA tertiary structures. RNA 3D motif searching consists of two steps: candidate generation and candidate filtering. We proposed a novel method, known as feature based RNA Motif Filtering frm f for identifying motifs based on a set of moment invariants and the Earth Movers Distance in the second step. Results: A positive set of RNA motifs belonging to six characteristic types, with eight subtypes occurring in HM 50S, is compiled by us. The proposed method is validated on this representative set. frm f successfully finds most of the positive fragments. Besides the proposed new method and the compiled positive set, we also recognize some new motifs, in particular a π-turn and some non-standard a minor motifs are found. These newly discovered motifs provide more information about RNA structure conformation. Availability: Matlab code can be downloaded from

introduction in recent years, non protein coding RNAs nc rnas in particular long nc rnas (200 nt), are receiving more and more attention (). Increasing evidences indicate that these RNAs have important regulatory functions, e.g. the regulation of epigenetic processes related to cell differentiation, etc. (). Starting from a nucleotide sequence, RNA will experience a process of hierarchical folding and finally form a unique compact 3D structure to perform certain functions. In the final 3D structure, some nucleotides that are originally remote from each other at the sequence level may be connected by chemical bonds or form tertiary interactions. Those nucleotides undergoing tertiary interactions, together with some related nucleotides, often compose special substructures that occur re currently in an RNA subunit. These recurrent substructures are called RNA 3D motifs. RNA 3D motifs have various functions, e.g. interacting with proteins and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. consolidating the RNA tertiary structures (). By characterizing these motifs, researchers can find a way to explore the possible functions of nc rnas. RNA 3D motifs are also important for predicting the possible tertiary structures for an RNA sequence, since they are the building blocks of RNA 3D structure. Understanding RNA structures relies on the ability to identify the component motifs (). Many fragment assembly approaches for RNA tertiary structure prediction, e.g. mc fold mc sym (), are based on the reconstructed base pairs and or motifs. Despite the efforts made in tRNA and medium size RNA structure prediction (), to our knowledge, no significant improvement has been reported in long nc rnas tertiary structure prediction. If suitable rules can be inferred from RNA 3D motif composition, methods for RNA tertiary structure prediction will be expected to benefit from these rules and may achieve higher accuracy. The goal of RNA motif searching is to identify the complete set of motifs in an RNA subunit, which have similar structures to the query motif. Query motifs are often observed recurrent substructures reported in previous publications. In early studies, RNA motif searching algorithms are based on the secondary structure of RNA (). These algorithms first produce 2D symbolic representations of the RNA 3D structures. Then, recurrent motifs are manually determined using the 2D representations generated in the first step. Some methods that identify RNA motifs from sequences were also developed find local motifs from sequences based on a probabilistic model, and finds motifs from homologous sequences based on Genetic Programming. However, motifs discovered by the above approaches are actually 2D motifs like hairpins and contiguous base pairs, and 3D motifs based on tertiary interactions are quite difficult to discover through these methods. In order to find RNA 3D motifs, new methods are proposed and can be categorized into two types. The first type of methods is based on geometrical matching (;). These methods use the root mean square deviation (RMSD) and other distance metrics to calculate the distance between the two RNA fragments. Among these geometry based approaches, FR3D () is an effective method that is mainly used for RNA 3D motif searching. When comparing two structures, it first superimposes the candidate and the query motif in 3D space, and then uses the fitting error and the orientation error to measure the distance between the two fragments. On the other hand,

discussion when evaluating the three methods, we discover a number of new motifs in the experiments. The first discovery is a new -turn motif G269-G273, the structure of which is shown in. The RMSD between the backbone of this new motif and the standard -turn G1873-G1877 is 0.56  (The RMSD values of the other five -turns to G1873-G1877 range from 0.31  to 0.55 . Structure alignments are shown in). Beside this new -turn, we also discovered a motif, U866-G870, which has a structure similar to a -turn (). U866-G870 also connects two helices and forms a  shape. Compared with the standard -turns, the first nucleotide on the 5 side (U866) is elongated and far away from the neighboring nucleotide A867. The vacancy between U866 and A867 is occupied by a remote nucleotide A776. The RMSD between the backbones of u866g870 and G1873-G1877 is 0.6  (). U866-G870 can be regarded as a special case of -turn because U866 is far away from its standard position. It can also be regarded as a possible composite -turn if U866 is replaced by A776. Another main discovery is the observation of some instances of non-standard type I a minor motif. Standard type I a minor motif consists of four hydrogen bonds (). However, the examples presented in consist of fewer hydrogen bonds than the standard type, which indicates that these non-standard instances are easier to form, but could be less stable than the standard ones. In, an adenosine is inserted into an AU pair instead of a GC pair. No hydrogen bond is formed between N3 of the inserted A and the bases of the AU pair. in and c, the bases of the inserted A rotate by a certain angle (180 @BULLET in bullet in). After rotation, N3 is far away from the watson crick base pair and fails to form a hydrogen bond. In, the ribose sugar and phosphate of the inserted A are raised from their typical positions. As a result, only N1 and N3 of the inserted A interact with the N2 and 2-OH of G. Through the experiments, 38 standard instances and 22 non-standard instances are observed. The large number of non-standard cases indicates that type I a minor motifs are not as stable as previously supposed. These newly observed motifs lend evidence to the possible variations of -turns and type I a minor motifs. They also provide additional information about the RNA tertiary structures and functions.

conclusion in this article, we compile a set of positive RNA 3D motifs occurring in HM 50S. This set includes six characteristic types and eight subtypes of RNA 3D motifs. In addition to the published motifs, this set also contains a new -turn motif and 22 non-standard instances of type I a minor motifs discovered by us. frm f FR3D and the method used in have been evaluated on this positive set. The experimental results suggest that: (i) the method used in does not achieve the best result for any of the motifs; (ii) frm f outperforms FR3D in the case of searching tetra loops with deletion, local kink turns -turns and ribose zippers au cpr value of frm f is greater by 27, 1, 20 and 8 percentage points, respectively); (iii) FR3D outperforms frm f in the other cases. As a result, the advantage of frm f lies in serving as an important complementary approach to FR3D for particular types of RNA motifs and its capability to find new motifs. In this work, we have adopted the simplified criterion that, if the distance between the candidate and the query motif is lower than a threshold, the candidate is considered to be of the same type as the query motif. While this notion may not necessarily be the standard one used in motif searching, its adoption makes it easier to compare the performance and rankings of different approaches. In practice, since the measures disc 1 , disc 2 and disc 3 are decoupled, we can set the corresponding thresholds t 1 , t 2 and t 3 separately by selecting from a suitable transition region between a group of small and more cohesive discrepancy values, and a group of comparatively large and less cohesive values based on their overall distribution. Another possible way is that the thresholds can be determined through an adaptive example based learning approach based on a set of representative samples for different types of motifs. In addition, parameters used by frm f for searching different motifs are not standardized. In future, we shall focus on normalizing the discrepancies of the candidates from different types of motifs to the same range to facilitate the selection of a suitable set of parameters. Finally, distance histograms, apart from its use in the candidate filtering step, could also serve as a computationally efficient approach during the candidate generation step to distinguish between substructures with grossly different shapes. We shall investigate this approach for candidate generation in our future work.
