Motivation: carbohydrate binding modules (CBMs) share similar secondary and tertiary topology, but their primary sequence identity is low. Computational identification of ligand binding residues allows biologists to better understand the protein carbohydrate binding mechanism. In general, functional characterization can be alternatively solved by alignment based manners. As alignment accuracy based on conventional methods is often sensitive to sequence identity, low sequence identity among query sequences makes it difficult to precisely locate small portions of relevant features. Therefore, we propose a feature incorporated alignment (FIA) to flexibly align conserved signatures in CBMs. Then, an fia based target template prediction model was further implemented to identify functional ligand binding residues. Results: Arabidopsis thaliana CBM45 and CBM53 were used to validate the fia based prediction model. The predicted ligand binding residues residing on the surface in the hypothetical structures were verified to be ligand binding residues. In the absence of 3D structural information, FIA demonstrated significant improvement in the estimation of sequence similarity and identity for a total of 808 sequences from 11 different CBM families as compared with six leading tools by Friedman rank test. Contact:

introduction carbohydrate binding modules (CBMs) are defined as a set of protein domains capable of recognizing and binding polysaccharide ligands. With the exception of some lectins and sugar transport proteins, most CBMs mediate the interaction between the substrate and the enzyme, which in turn increases local substrate concentration at the active site of the catalytic domain (). CBMs are protein domains sharing low sequence identities that possess conserved structure topology. Up to now, CBMs have been classified into 59 families (still growing) by ca zy * To whom correspondence should be addressed. database (http://www.cazy.org/). Among these families, CBM20, CBM21, CBM25, CBM26, CBM34, CBM41, CBM45, CBM48 and CBM53 are reported to possess starch binding activity. The most recent review comprehensively introduces the importance of functions and structures of CBM20 (). The primary sequence identities of CBM families are low; however, bioinformatics analysis suggests that some CBMs constitute a CBM clan such as CBM20s, CBM21s, CBM48s and CBM53s. A better understanding of ligand binding residues in CBMs can boost protein engineering for industrial development in food processing and biofuel production (Guzman). To predict ligand binding residues in a protein domain, protein ligand docking programs are typically applied to simulate the binding site of a target protein relative to a ligand conformation and orientation. In general, docking programs require precise atom coordinate information to calculate the optimal geometric pose under stereo-chemical restraints and are usually based on certain criteria such as binding affinity and minimal free energy (). Nevertheless, the time complexity of the optimized procedure is extremely high such that docking programs are commonly solved by heuristic algorithms like the genetic algorithm. Besides, real protein ligand interactions always involve conformational change. When the structural flexibility is also taken into account, the computational complexity becomes prohibitively complicated. Furthermore, although more than 10.1 million protein sequences are currently available in uniprotkb trembl database (), as of January 2010, only 62 926 protein structures have been deposited in Protein Data Bank (). Thus, the number of resolved protein structures is far behind that of protein sequences. In reality, it is expensive and time consuming to resolve a protein structure and non-productive to determine all protein structures. Nevertheless, the lack of a resolved protein structure does not hinder researchers from identifying crucial functional residues governing reaction mechanisms. When tertiary structural information is not available, it is still possible to predict ligand binding residues from sequence alone. Recently, some pure sequence based prediction methodologies applied sequence alignment to generate a column of conserved residues and calculated the residue conservation score based on training with known functional residues (). In terms of page 1023 10221028

discussion the original motivation of this study was to locate conserved regions possessing hydrophilic aromatic residues and -stranded structures in CBMs. Based on accurate alignment results from FIA, we further applied the idea to predict ligand binding residues for CBM45 and CBM53 family proteins lacking resolved structures demonstrates the strength of FIA and in that -stranded structures and aromatic residues appeared to be well aligned. Low sequence identity makes it difficult to recognize the core regions in most cases, which implies that not every region in the query sequence is equally important for molecular recognition. Alternatively, if the key conserved regions can be well aligned or anchored, the alignment quality will not drop substantially. Indeed FIA successfully predicts four experimentally confirmed ligand binding residues in AtCBM45 and AtCBM53. In addition, sequence alignment is a preliminary analysis tool and is the foundation of advanced research topics such as classification (CATH), secondary structure prediction (DSC) and structure modeling swiss model. As shown in lists the performance comparison of FIA and the other six outstanding alignment tools. FIA achieved the highest average sequence similarity and identity among all tested families. FIA significantly improved sequence similarity and sequence identity at a high confidence level by Friedman rank test. These improvements suggest that the incorporated biological features are informative for increasing alignment accuracy. Besides, an excellent alignment tool should insert fewer gaps to minimize alignment length. As shown in, with the exception of FIA, maff t outperforms the other five tools, by which five more averaged gaps were inserted as compared with FIA (refer to Supplementary). These findings suggest that FIA reports high alignment accuracy with minimized alignment length. A similar knowledge incorporated approach was applied in constrained multiple sequence alignment (). The problem was that the constrained positions rely on experts' prior knowledge. In contrast, FIA is based on biological properties inside sequence content contained within CBMs. Nevertheless, the hydrophilic aromatic residues in other protein families including hsp20 like chaperones superfamily and E2 regulatory transactivation domain can be also identified and correlated with functional roles. Thus, FIA is easy to be generalized without specialist intervention. Furthermore, advanced tools usually rely on plain alignment, and the alignment quality directly affects the performance of future studies. The advanced tools require accurate alignment to increase their robustness. This requirement emphasizes the importance of alignment accuracy. In practice, FIA is based on the experimentally confirmed ligand binding residues. More annotated sequences trend to increase the PPV. Furthermore, the template structures were pre classified by CATH. A more plentiful and accurate structure classification is believed to extend protein categories that FIA can predict. For implementation, FIA requires secondary structure prediction. When more accurate secondary structure prediction tool is available, the performance can be further improved.
