Motivation: The fractional fetal DNA concentration is one of the critical parameters for non-invasive prenatal diagnosis based on the analysis of DNA in maternal plasma. Massively parallel sequencing (MPS) of DNA in maternal plasma has been demonstrated to be a powerful tool for the non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of fetal chromosomal aneuploid ies. With the rapid advance of MPS technologies, the sequencing cost per base is dramatically reducing, especially when using targeted MPS. Even though several approaches have been developed for deducing the fractional fetal DNA concentration, none of them can be used to deduce the fractional fetal DNA concentration directly from the sequencing data without prior genotype information. Result: In this study, we implement a statistical mixture model, named fetal quant which utilizes the maximum likelihood to estimate the fractional fetal DNA concentration directly from targeted MPS of DNA in maternal plasma. This method allows the improved deduction of the fractional fetal DNA concentration, obviating the need of genotype information without loss of accuracy. Furthermore, by using Bayes rule, this method can distinguish the informative single nucleotide polymorphism loci where the mother is homozygous and the fetus is heterozygous. We believe that fetal quant can help expand the spectrum of diagnostic applications using MPS on DNA in maternal plasma.

introduction the discovery of circulating cell free fetal DNA in maternal plasma in 1997 has opened up new possibilities for non-invasive diagnosis (). To date, a wide variety of noninvasive diagnostic applications have been developed, including fetal RhD blood group genotyping (), fetal sex determination for sex linked disorders (), chromosomal aneuploidy detection () and detection of monogenic diseases (). In a number of these applications, the accurate deduction of the fractional concentration of fetal DNA is critical for the diagnostic algorithms (). For example, for the prenatal diagnosis of autosomal recessive diseases, the relative concentrations of the mutant and wild type sequences in maternal plasma are used to infer if a maternal mutation is passed onto the fetus () because the maternal allele inherited by the fetus would be present in a slightly higher concentration. In this diagnostic approach, the fetal DNA concentration is an essential parameter for determining if an apparent allelic imbalance in maternal plasma is statistically significant. There are several existing approaches for inferring the fractional fetal DNA concentration in a maternal plasma sample. For instance, the ratio of the concentrations of sequences located on chromosome Y and an auto some was used for estimating the fractional fetal DNA concentration in pregnancies carrying male fetuses (). However, these approaches are not applicable for pregnancies with female fetuses. An alternative approach would be the analysis of fetal specific alleles in maternal plasma. In this approach, the fractional fetal DNA concentration is calculated by determining the ratio of DNA fragments carrying the fetal specific alleles and the alleles shared between the mother and the fetus (). In previous studies, the genotype information of the fetus and the mother was used for identifying the fetal specific alleles (). However, in actual clinical scenarios during non-invasive prenatal diagnosis, the fetal genotypes would not be available beforehand. Alternatively, the comparison between the maternal and paternal genotypes can be used for identifying obligate ly heterozygous polymorphisms in the fetus for this purpose. However, paternal DNA may not be available for analysis and the approach would add cost and additional steps to the analysis. As an alternative, fetal specific epigenetic changes, such as methylated RASSF1A and unmethylated SERPINB2 sequences, can be used as fetal markers irrespective of genotype information *). However, the analytical process used for quantifying these epigenetic markers involves either bisulfite conversion or digestion with methylation sensitive restriction enzymes, and thus might potentially affect the precision of these methods. Massively parallel sequencing (MPS) of plasma DNA fragments can produce millions of short reads that can be aligned to the reference genome. The fractional fetal DNA concentration (also referred as the fetal DNA proportion or fetal DNA fraction) can be determined by quantifying fetal specific alleles and alleles shared between the fetus and the mother (shared alleles) in the maternal plasma based on their genotype information (). This kind of analysis is thought to be a gold standard for fetal DNA fraction estimation. In previous studies (), prior knowledge of at least the maternal genotype was obtained through additional laboratory analyses. In clinical practice, it would be ideal to have new methods to determine fetal DNA fraction directly from the sequencing data that provide the diagnostic information without additional laboratory steps. The emergence of targeted MPS technology makes it possible to obtain the sequencing data with high sequencing depth coverage in a cost effective manner. It permits efficient and unbiased detection of fetal specific alleles at genomic regions of interest as well as fetal DNA proportion inference in maternal plasma when using maternal and fetal genotypes (). In this study, we present a new approach, named fetal quant using a statistical binomial mixture model to deduce the fractional fetal DNA concentration directly from targeted MPS data. In this method, the allelic counts are inferred from aligned plasma DNA reads at each single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) sites annotated in the dbSNP 130 (UCSC Hg18). fetal quant is implemented in C  which is available for non-commercial users. The major advantage of this approach over existing methods is that it can directly determine the fractional fetal DNA concentration by sequencing the DNA in maternal without using any fetal or paternal genotype information.
