filt us is a stand-alone tool for working with annotated variant files, e.g. when searching for variants causing Mendelian disease. Very flexible in terms of input file formats, filt us offers efficient filtering and a range of downstream utilities, including statistical analysis of gene sharing patterns, detection of de novo mutations in trios, quality control plots and auto zygosity mapping. The auto zygosity mapping is based on a hidden Markov model and enables accurate detection of auto zygo us regions directly from exo me scale variant files. Availability and implementation: filt us is written in Python and runs on Windows, Mac and Linux. Binaries and source code are freely available at

introduction recent years have seen a revolution in Mendelian disease gene identification thanks to high throughput sequencing (HTS) methods, in particular whole exo me sequencing (WES). Most of the released software for downstream analysis is aimed at bioinformatic ally trained users, thus posing a challenge for many medical researchers wanting to do hands on analysis of HTS data. To accommodate this, we introduce a program filt us offering advanced tools for identifying disease causing variants in an easy to use graphical environment. Several programs for manipulating variant files have been published, including var sifter () and the web based EVA (). In addition to efficient browsing and filtering, filt us offers several specialized analysis tools aimed at Mendelian disease projects. These include statistical evaluation of variant sharing among patients, de novo detection in trios and auto zygosity mapping. filt us accepts virtually any variant files, in contrast to most existing programs which are limited to Variant Call Format (VCF) or other specific input formats. Typical examples of non-standard formats are VCF files with additional columns, and files produced by an novar (). Although filt us is primarily intended for wes scale data, whole genome data can be analyzed by using the built in pre filtering functionality. Some countries have strict regulations requiring offline handling of all human sequencing data, thus making it impossible to use web based tools or to download information during analysis. filt us is ideal for such working conditions, requiring no installation, being completely self contained and offline. In summary, the main features of filt us include:
