Motivation: Many RNAs, such as ribo switches can fold into multiple alternate structures and perform different biological functions. These biologically functional structures usually have low free energies in their local energy landscapes and are very stable such that they can not easily jump out of the current states and fold into other stable conformations. The conformational space of feasible RNA secondary structures is prohibitively large, and accurate prediction of functional structure conformations is challenging. Because the stability of an RNA secondary structure is determined predominantly by energetically favorable helical regions (stacks), we propose to use configurations of putative stacks to represent RNA secondary structures. By considering a reduced conformational space of local optimal stack configurations instead of all feasible RNA structures, we first present an algorithm for enumerating all possible local optimal stack configurations. In addition, we present a fast heuristic algorithm for approximating energy barriers encountered during folding pathways between each pair of local optimal stack configurations and finding all the stable local optimal structures. Results: Benchmark tests have been conducted on several RNA ribo switches whose alternate secondary structures have been experimentally verified. The benchmark results show that our method can successfully predict the native on and off secondary structures, and better rank them compared with other state of art approaches.

introduction rna molecules play important roles in many biological activities. The structures of RNAs are key to understanding their functionalities. The native secondary structures of RNA molecules are usually the minimum free energy (MFE) structures. However, many regulatory RNAs may form multiple alternate metastable structures, each of which, performs a different function (). For example, the cis regulatory RNAs (called as ribo switches are widely present at the non-coding regions of mRNAs in bacteria, and regulate both transcriptional and translational expression of their cognate * To whom correspondence should be addressed. metabolic genes and thus comprise a metabolite sensing system. ribo switches can selectively bind with small metabolites and form alternative structure conformations, in order to exert control over translation initiation or formation of a transcription terminator (or an anti terminator helix and thus turn 'off' (or 'on') the gene transcription (). Alternate structure conformations of RNA ribo switches can be experimentally verified using in-line probing (), X-ray crystallography () or Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy (). However, these methods are usually time consuming and expensive. Computational approaches for accurately predicting alternate conformations are in need. The alternate functional structures are usually also energetically favored and are stable in their local energy landscapes. The conformational transitions between any pair of alternate structures may involve high energy barriers, such that RNAs can easily become kinetically trapped by these structures. Accurate predictions of alternate structures of an RNA molecule should be conducted by exploiting the energy landscape and the folding dynamics of the RNA, in combination with the binding of the target metabolites. The ideal approach is to construct an exact energy landscape on all possible suboptimal secondary structures, then analyze every possible local optimal structures as well as all possible folding pathways in the landscape, and finally determine the most significant structures. In the following, we will briefly review existing methods for enumerating suboptimal structures and predicting alternate structures for RNA molecules devised the first algorithm, m fold for predicting the MFE structure and multiple suboptimal structures. For a given sequence, it generates, for each admissible base pair, the energetically best structure containing that base pair. For a sequence of length n, m fold produces at most n(n1)/2 suboptimal structures, which are a very small fraction of all the candidate suboptimal structures, and may miss some of the functional structures. In addition, m fold uses a filter based on the base pair metric to remove structures that are similar to one another. The filter is based on base pair difference, while it might be better to infer stability of structures in the context of energy landscape and remove unstable structures proposed the first exact solution, rna sub opt for predicting all possible suboptimal structures between the MFE and an arbitrary upper limit using a mathematical model proposed by based on the Turner energy model ().devised mc fold a similar solution to the same problem that takes into account both non-canonical base pairings and pseudo knotted structures. In addition presented BARRIERS, an algorithm for constructing the exact energy landscape on all possible

conclusion in this article, we designed an approach rnas lopt for predicting stable local optimal stack configurations of an RNA molecule we first predict all possible local optimal stack configurations that are significantly different from one another. With each stack configuration representing a set of similar RNA secondary structures, we are able to greatly reduce the size of the conformational space considered, and make applications on longer sequences with a higher energy range possible. In addition, we also employ a fast heuristic to compute pairwise energy barriers among LOpt stack configurations. Finally, we filter out unstable structures based on their pairwise energy barriers, obtain stable structures and rank them either according to their free energies or their minimal associated energy barriers. rnas lopt can produce interesting stable local optimal stack configurations for an RNA, and can be used to predict alternate structure conformations for ribo switches. We benchmarked rnas lopt on seven ribo switches and the results show that rnas lopt is able to successfully predict both native 'on' and 'off'
