Several methods and computational tools have been developed to design novel metabolic pathways. A major challenge is evaluating the metabolic efficiency of the designed pathways in the host organism. Here we present find path a unified system to predict and rank possible pathways according to their metabolic efficiency in the cellular system. This tool uses a chemical reaction database to generate possible metabolic pathways and exploits constraint based models (CBMs) to identify the most efficient synthetic pathway to achieve the desired metabolic function in a given host microorganism. find path can be used with common tools for CBM manipulation and uses the standard SBML format for both input and output files. Availability and implementation: http://metasys.insa-toulouse.fr/ software find path
introduction broadening the spectrum of compounds that microorganisms are able to convert into biomass or other valuable products is attracting increasing interest in biotechnology and synthetic biology. Metabolic pathways are introduced in the organism to enable the conversion of the desired compound into host metabolites, which, in turn, can be further converted into biomass or other valuable products. Computational tools are already available to design such pathways, using the large repertoire of reactions and pathways found in the microbial world, or from novel synthetic reactions or combinations of both. These tools use different strategies to identify all possible metabolic pathways able to support the desired metabolic function and to select the most suitable among the many possibilities. To search for all possible pathways, methods such as FMM () and de sharky () rely on databases of known chemical reactions and compounds, whereas b nice RDM and others capture all biochemical transformations in the form of reaction rules extracted from known biochemical reactions (). Alternatively, retro path (uses a molecular signature based approach. The best pathway(s) are then identified using algorithms allowing to rank all the pathways generated based on scoring criteria such as thermodynamic feasibility, pathway length, energetic costs, genetic loads, etc. (). However, the metabolic efficiency of the identified pathways in the host metabolism is rarely included in scoring criteria despite its critical importance (). Here we introduce find path a standardized framework for the prediction of metabolic pathways enabling the conversion of one or more novel compounds into any host metabolite. The tool combines a database of all reactions associated with the metabolism of the novel compound, a constraint based model (CBM) of the host organism, and tools to explore, prioritize and score metabolic pathways. Pathways are scored based on both topological feature (i.e. pathway length) and metabolic efficiency in the host organism, thus making it possible to tackle pathway design from a quantitative and functional point of view. find path is an easy to use Matlab package to streamline the design of novel synthetic pathways. Finally, find path predicts and ranks pathways in a single package that can be run in a couple of minutes.

conclusion find path is a simple unified workflow for the in silico design of pathways to convert novel compounds into any host metabolites. find path rapidly identifies the best solution but also alternative solutions with topological and efficiency interest. It provides additional features to the cobra toolbox and can also be used in addition or in parallel to other computational tools that accept SBML formats. find path is a flexible tool that can be used for many purposes, including: (i) prediction of pathways involved in the conversion of a carbon source that is not naturally consumed by the host organism; (ii) design of degradation pathways for the detoxification of toxic compounds; (iii) curation of CBMs, by providing candidate pathways when experimental evidence points to metabolic conversion, but the pathway has not been identified; and (iv) choice among a large set of compounds, the most suitable starting compound (e.g. carbon source) to achieve the high yield synthesis of the desired product. This new tool should speed up the development of efficient microbial cell factories.
