Metals are essential for the structure and function of many proteins and nucleic acids. The geometrical arrangement of the atoms that coordinate a metal in a biological macromolecule is an important determinant of the specificity and role of that metal. At present, however, this information can be retrieved only from the literature, which sometimes contains an improper or incorrect description of the geometry, and often lacks it altogether. Thus, we developed find geo to quickly and easily determine the coordination geometry of selected, or all, metals in a given structure. find geo works by superimposing the metal coordinating atoms in the input structure to a library of templates with alternative ideal geometries, which are ranked by RMSD to identify the best geometry assignment. Availability: find geo is freely available as a web service and as a stand-alone program at

introduction it is well established that some metals are essential for living organisms (). A major reason for this is that a considerable fraction of proteins are metalloproteins (). Metals can play diverse roles in metalloproteins, in part, because proteins are able to form metal binding sites that modulate the properties of metals so as to achieve specific functions (). The geometric structure is recognized to be crucial for the specificity and activity of metal sites (). Metals are also closely involved in nucleic acid chemistry. Besides being essential to stabilize the phosphate sugar backbone of DNA and RNA, metals serve crucial functions, e.g. in RNA folding and ribozyme catalysis (). Nucleic acids can also achieve a remarkable degree of metal selectivity, which depends, among other factors, on coordination geometry (). In this scenario, it is perhaps surprising that there is no tool available to determine the coordination geometry of metals in biological macromolecules (or in small complexes) with known structure. We thus present here find geo a tool for this purpose which is freely available both as a web service and as a stand-alone program. At present, information on metal coordination geometry can be retrieved only by exploring the primary literature, which however sometimes contains * To whom correspondence should be addressed. an improper or incorrect description of the geometry, and often lacks it altogether. Therefore, the use of find geo will benefit scientists by:(1) minimizing errors in the assignment of geometries, (2) promoting a uniform terminology and classification of geometries and thus (3) providing a reliable basis for structure function relationship studies where coordination geometry is a relevant parameter.
