Motivation: high throughput nucleotide sequencing technologies provide large amounts of quantitative genomic data at nucleotide resolution, which are important for the present and future biomedical researches; for example differential analysis of base level RNA expression data will improve our understanding of transcriptome, including both coding and non-coding genes. However, most studies of these data have relied on existing genome annotations and thus are limited to the analysis of known transcripts. Results: In this article, we propose a novel method based on a marked point process model to find differentially expressed genomic regions of arbitrary length without using genome annotations. The presented method conducts a statistical test for differential analysis in regions of various lengths at each nucleotide and searches the optimal configuration of the regions by using a Monte Carlo simulation. We applied the proposed method to both synthetic and real genomic data, and their results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

introduction next generation nucleotide sequencing technologies, such as Illumina, ABI SOLiD and 454 sequencing technologies, have been revolutionizing biology and medicine by providing massive amounts of quantitative genomic data at nucleotide resolution in a relatively short time and at a relatively low cost. This revolution has been making progress on, for instance, transcriptome including RNA expression rnase q () and RNA expression in transcription start sites (TSS) (5-SAGE and CAGE) (, protein DNA binding chips eq ()) epi genomics including DNA methylation () and nucleosome organization (). These vast amounts of quantitative genomic data have led to qualitative progress in our biomedical understanding. Because we now have large amounts of genome wide expression data at nucleotide resolution, there is an increasing interest in differential analysis, which is a process to compare the expressions between different biological conditions, of the quantitative genomic data; however, most previous studies of the differential analysis have depended on existing genome annotations and were conducted by each gene (; Robinson and Smyth, * To whom correspondence should be addressed 2007. The differential expression analysis by smaller regions is important for a research on transcript isoforms () which are significant for understanding the regulation of gene transcription. Thus, it is important to develop a reliable method for differential analysis of base level quantitative genomic data in order to proceed with the research on the regulation of gene transcription. Therefore, in this article, we propose a novel method to find differentially expressed regions of arbitrary length in the quantitative genomic data. The presented method searches the optimal configuration of non overlapped genomic regions with differential expression between distinct biological conditions. For this purpose, we use a point process () which is a statistical theory of point patterns and can model and analyze spatial data of points in many fields, including ecology (), epidemiology (), seismology () and computer vision (). In this study, we use one dimensional marked point process which is an extension of a point process and has marks in each point of a point process, to model the genomic data. In our methodology, each point corresponds to each nucleotide, and the points have attributes, which are called marks, representing the genomic regions of various lengths illustrates the gist of the proposed method and b shows virtual expression data in a certain gene in two biological conditions. Short red line segments in and d denote particular regions corresponding to a specific nucleotide; there are many candidates of the regions and some of them overlap one another in. The proposed method removes overlapped regions and regions that are not differentially expressed; it thus finds the optimal configuration of non overlapped regions with differential expression, as shown in. Note that it can detect the differentially expressed regions that are shorter in length than this gene which has almost the same expression level as a whole in the two conditions. To search a good configuration of the regions, we define a Gibbs energy function consisting of two terms: data energy and prior energy. The data energy is based on a statistical test for differential expression analysis and the prior energy incorporates penalty for overlapping regions. The Gibbs energy is minimized by using the Reversible jump Markov chain Monte Carlo rj mcmc () or the birth and death dynamics () coupled with the traditional simulated annealing () to find the optimal configuration of the marked points. We use the birth and death dynamics in this study because the computational cost is much more effective in the birth and death dynamics than rj mcmc and we also present a multiple birth and death dynamics to deal with the regions of various lengths. Moreover, we apply a novel smoothing method () based on the second generation wavelets () to find b Virtual expression data in a certain gene in two biological conditions. (c) Horizontal red line segments denote candidates of differentially expressed regions. The left edge of the segments corresponds to a nucleotide. (d) The proposed method finds differentially expressed non overlapped regions from the candidates candidates of the boundaries of the genomic regions prior to conducting the proposed method for finding differentially expressed regions. Although this process is not necessary in principle, it is useful to reduce the number of the candidates of the regions in advance in order to lower computational cost. The second generation wavelet based smoothing method is more effective than the classical wavelet based smoothing methods because it can smooth data and yet preserve sharp edges which can be regarded as the boundaries of the regions. In addition, the presented method is versatile because it can be used to detect any kind of regions of interest by incorporating suitable data energy and analyze every type of nucleotide level quantitative genomic data, such as DNA methylation () and nucleosome organization () data.

conclusion in this article, we have presented a novel method based on a marked point process model to find differentially expressed regions of arbitrary length in quantitative genomic data without depending on genome annotations. The proposed method is effective because it can locate differentially expressed regions that previous approaches, such as genome segmentation, fail to find. This is highly important for genome science because we currently have large amounts of quantitative genomic data at nucleotide resolution. For instance, i637 and (b). (d) Differential analysis using the previous methods. The y-axis represents z-score of each region in (c) and (d). Z-score between (a) and
