Rare copy number variations cn vs are frequent causes of genetic diseases. We developed a graphical software package based on a novel approach that can consistently identify cn vs of all types (homozygous deletions, heterozygous deletions, heterozygous duplications) from exo me sequencing data without the need of a paired control. The algorithm compares coverage depth in a test sample against a background distribution of control samples and uses principal component analysis to remove batch effects. It is user friendly and can be run on a personal computer. Availability and implementation: The main scripts are implemented in R (2.15), and the GUI is created using Java 1.6. It can be run on all major operating systems. A non gui version for pipeline implementation is also available. The program is freely available online: https://sourceforge.net/projects/fishingcnv/

introduction many sporadic and Mendelian disorders are caused by exonic mutations that alter the amino acid sequence of the affected gene. exo me sequencing has so far shown great util ty in elucidating single nucleotide mutations that contribute to these diseases. However, using exo me sequencing to detect rare copy number variations cn vs that contribute to diseases remain a challenge. We developed fishing cnv a graphical software package for comprehensive analysis of cn vs in exo me sequencing data. We included a matched case control analysis feature adapted from exo me cnv but more importantly, we implemented a new CNV detection algorithm that prioritizes rare variants for non matched sample analysis. Many sequencing centers have by now accumulated large internal sets of exo me samples that can be used as controls for CNV detection in new unmatched samples. Our method relies on pooling such a control set, comparing the exonic read depth of the test sample against the distribution of read depths in the control set. To remove batch to batch variations in the control set, we applied principal component analysis pc a and removed the top contributing principal components (210) from the data. We bundled g atk () into our program to extract coverage information. Read depth information is then converted to Reads Per Kilobase per Million mapped reads rp km (), and the test sample is segmented into regions of similar rp km ratios using circular binary segmentation (CBS) before comparison against the control distribution (). The output is a file that contains segmented CNV calls ranked by statistical confidence (See Supplementary Materials for details on method). We tested our algorithm on simulated and actual exo me data and show that it is effective in identifying homozygous as well as heterozygous cn vs of varying length. We also show that principal component removal is effective in reducing false positives. A summary of the program workflow is presented in. We compared our algorithm against exo me cnv () and Conifer () and show that fishing cnv consistently outperforms previous approaches (See Supplementary Materials for data).

conclusion we believe that looking for rare cn vs in exo me sequencing data can be a powerful way of detecting new disease causing mutations.
