Motivation: Feedback circuits are important motifs in biological networks and part of virtually all regulation processes that are needed for a reliable functioning of the cell. Mathematically, feedback is connected to complex behavior of the systems, which is often related to bifurcations of fixed points. Therefore, several approaches for the investigation of fixed points in biological networks have been developed in recent years. Many of them assume the fixed point coordinates to be known, and an efficient way to calculate the entire set of fixed points for interrelated feedback structures is highly desirable. Results: In this article, we consider regulatory network models, which are differential equations with an underlying directed graph that illustrates in dependencies among variables. We introduce the circuit breaking algorithm (CBA), a method that constructs one dimensional characteristics for these network models, which inherit important information about the system. In particular, fixed points are related to the zeros of these characteristics. The CBA operates on the graph topology, and results from graph theory are used in order to make calculations efficient. Our framework provides a general scheme for analyzing network models in terms of interrelated feedback circuits. The efficiency of the approach is demonstrated on a model for calcium oscillations based on experiments in hepatocytes, which consists of several interrelated feedback circuits.

introduction ordinary differential equations are used in essentially all scientific fields to describe dynamic behaviors of physical, biological or technical systems. An analysis of these systems usually starts with an investigation of their limit sets, in particular, the fixed points and their local phase portraits. In order to calculate the fixed points of a system  x = f (x) with x  R n , algorithms such as Newton's method and related approaches () are commonly used. Besides the well known problems of those methods concerning convergence, they require the calculation of the Jacobian matrix in each step, which can in most cases only be done via numeric approximations. Consequently, these methods are often computationally expensive, especially if n is large. It is thus difficult to investigate, for example, the dependence of fixed point coordinates on model parameters, which requires calculating the fixed points for multiple parameter values. In many applications the differential equation system describes the dynamics of interacting components, and a component is usually not influenced by all other components, but by a subset of these. These dependencies can be illustrated by a directed graph: if  x i is influenced by x j , we indicate this with a directed edge from vertex v j to vertex v i in the graph, and the dynamics, in particular, the fixed point coordinates of x i , depend on x j. Thus, all fixed point coordinates of components in a circuit are dependent, and the idea of our approach is to exploit these dependencies in order to reduce the dimension of the fixed point equations f ( x) = 0. The concept of our approach will be explained in the context of biological networks. More precisely, we consider intracellular regulation processes with underlying directed graph structure, such as gene regulatory networks (RNs). These systems are commonly based on chemical reaction kinetics, resulting in nonlinear models that can not be solved analytically. Fixed points play an essential role in those models, since the emergence of complex behavior is often related to local bifurcations of those points. bi or multi stability which comes along with phenomena such as switching behavior, decision processes or memory effects, are generically caused by saddle node bifurcations. Biological examples for these phenomena are numerous: switching mechanisms in multisite protein phosphorylation, which play a role in eukaryotic signaling cascades (), lysis or lysogenic pathway selection by phage -infected Escherichia coli cells (and references therein) cellular differentiation processes () or epigenetic differences caused by transient signals such as the state of the lactose operon in Escherichia coli (). Oscillations are generically created by Hopf bifurcations of fixed points () and all those behaviors have been related to circuits in the underlying interaction graphs i graphs (). Besides a calculation of fixed points for constructing bifurcation diagrams, investigating the fixed points of intracellular networks is also facilitated by experimental data, since in many settings only fixed point measurements under different perturbations are available, while kinetic data are missing (). Along these lines, analysis methods which operate on the fixed points of these networks have been developed in recent years. Examples are robustness analysis with respect to kinetic perturbations, that is page 2875 28742880

conclusion this article considers RN models, which are described as systems of ordinary differential equations with an underlying directed graph structure, the i graph. We have introduced the CBA for the characterization of fixed points of these models. The CBA exploits the dependencies of the fixed point coordinates in a connected graph in order to find a minimal characterization. Based on this idea, we constructed a one dimensional circuit characteristic by breaking all circuits in the graph and iteratively closing them again. These circuit closing steps correspond to solving implicit equations, whose dimensions are related to the circuit structure of the graph. We demonstrated that this dimension is bounded from below by the cardinality of a minimal subset of vertices that covers the elementary circuits and explained how to construct the fixed point set of the system from the zeros of this circuit characteristic. Our approach has several advantages over purely numerical methods: first, in comparison to solving an n dimensional equation f (x) = 0,x  R n , the dimension of the equations in the CBA can be much smaller, especially for sparse graphs. Second, we have demonstrated on a biological network model of interlocked feedback circuits that the influence of parameter variations on the fixed points can also be investigated by our algorithm. Thus, the constructed characteristics are, for example, useful to find bifurcations and parameter regions in which the system has a certain number of fixed points. In this article, we applied the CBA to a network of four components. It can also be used to investigate fixed points of larger networks. The efficiency and superiority to newton type methods depend on the graph topology and increase when the cardinality of the minimal circuit covering vertex sets decrease. We expect this to correlate with the sparsity of the graph, but it is not yet clear how we can further characterize the topology and behavior of such graphs. For larger networks, we expect that the computation of the SCCs, their circuit sets and especially the minimal circuit covering vertex sets, is not negligible any more and increases the running time. We believe that our approach can especially facilitate the analysis of fixed point sets of smaller network models, and their dependence on parameter values. If the network consists of several interrelated feedback structures, it is in practice applicable to models of only few (say 10) components. Finally, our approach is based on a very general framework and can be applied to a large class of differential equations. Complex dynamic behavior is related to circuits in the i graphs and the CBA provides an analysis method in terms of subnetworks with interrelated circuit structure. While in the past methodology has been developed for single feedback circuits, only few approaches exist that can handle complex feedback, and our method is a contribution in this direction. Recent studies indicate that complex network structures are often related to functional robustness, and methods to analyze these networks are thus highly relevant also from a biological point of view. Several interesting question will guide our future work, most importantly, we believe that the circuit characteristics contain information about asymptotic properties of the system such as stability of the fixed points.
