Motivation: Recent discoveries show that most types of small non-coding RNAs snc rnas such as miRNAs, snoRNAs and tRNAs get further processed into putatively active smaller RNA species. Their roles, genetic profiles and underlying processing mechanisms are only partially understood. To find their quantities and characteristics, a proper annotation is essential. Here, we present fla i mapper a method that extracts and annotates the locations of s ncrna derived RNAs sn cd rnas. These sn cd rnas are often detected in sequencing data and observed as fragments of their precursor s ncrna. Using small rnase q read alignments, fla i mapper is able to annotate fragments primarily by peak detection on the start and end position densities followed by filtering and a reconstruction process. Results: To assess performance of fla i mapper we used independent publicly available small rnase q data. We were able to detect fragments representing putative sn cd rnas from nearly all types of s ncrna including 97.8% of the annotated miRNAs in mir base that have supporting reads. Comparison of fla i mapper predicted boundaries of miRNAs with mir base entries demonstrated that 89% of the start and 54% of the end positions are identical. Additional benchmarking showed that fla i mapper is superior in performance compared with existing software. Further analysis indicated a variety of characteristics in the fragments, including sequence motifs and relations with RNA interacting factors. These characteristics set a good basis for further research on sn cd rnas. Availability and implementation: The platform independent GPL licensed Python 2.7 code is available at: https://github.com/yhoogstrate/flaimapper. Corresponding linux specific scripts and annotations can be found in the same repository.

introduction sequencing of small non-coding RNAs snc rnas aiming at the quantification and discovery of microRNAs (miRNAs), small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs), transfer RNAs (tRNAs) and vault RNAs v trnas has revealed that most types of snc rnas get processed into smaller RNAs (). Initially, it was suggested that these smaller RNAs are degradation products of the turnover of their precursors. Nevertheless, evidence accumulating over the last years demonstrates that some RNA fragments are). Such fragments find their origin in tRNAs, v trnas and snoRNAs and are assumed to have a variety of functions. Most importantly, deregulation and involvement of different types of fragments have been demonstrated in different types of cancer (). A description of commonly detected fragments and their precursors is given below: @BULLET A pre mirna is an approximately 75 nt long RNA molecule produced from its primary precursor transcript primi rna by dr osha (). pre mirnas adopt a hairpin structure recognized by Dicer that cleaves the terminal loop to release an approximately 22-nt long double stranded miRNA duplex. One of the strands (miRNA) is loaded into AGO to generate the functional mi risc complex (Lin He, 2004; Fabian and). The remaining strand (miRNA*) is usually degraded. Often both strands are found as fragments in small rnase q (). @BULLET Fragments originating from mature tRNAs are commonly classified into two subgroups (), tRNA halves and trna derived RNA fragments tr fs bullet tRNA halves are most probably produced by angio gen in that cleaves the tRNA near its anticodon, resulting into halve tRNAs ($ 35 nt). It is believed that some tRNA halves contribute to translational repression and cell stress response (). @BULLET The smaller ($ 20 nt) tr fs are derived from the tRNAs 5 0 and 3 0-end and from the pre trnas 3 0-end. It is not completely understood which proteins are involved in the production of tr fs although evidence for associations with both Dicer and rnase z are reported (;). Although the putative functions of the majority of tr fs are unclear, evidence suggests that some are involved in RNA interference, with effects on cell proliferation and gene regulation (). @BULLET snoRNA are (60250 nt) small RNAs found in the nucleolus. They comprise the subtypes haca box cd box and small Cajal body specific RNAs scar nas (). Putative functions such as regulation of alternative splicing, post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression and associations with cancer have been proposed for their fragments (). Currently, studies on fragments other than miRNA and miRNA* are restricted to (often visual) interpretation of alignments. Consequently, the data are inspected only at a global ncRNA level. Not making use of the annotation of exact fragment coordinates is a shortcoming, since it restricts analysis at the level of individual fragments. Additional benefit of such analysis is the gained statistical power. Here, we describe Fragment Location Annotation Mapper fla i mapper that predicts the locations of s ncrna fragments in small rnase q alignments. Prediction is based on the densities of start and end positions of aligned reads. It is important to state that the goal is not to predict any particular subtype of fragment but to annotate data for subsequent quantitative analysis, by making use of sequencing data only. Therefore, fla i mapper does not use 2D structure prediction or classification based on heuristics of previous discoveries as often is used for the prediction of pre mirnas ().

discussion we set out a method able to extract and annotate ncRNA fragments, because such annotations can be helpful in further high throughput. Relation between sequencing depth and offset in predicted mir base annotations for dataset SRP002175. The horizontal axis represents the offset for the start (left) and end (right) positions between a miRNA annotation and a predicted fragment. Predictions with exact matches are located at 0, offsets  0 are predicted upstream the miRNA's boundaries and offsets  0 downstream. The vertical axis represents the number of reads corresponding to a start (left) or end (right) position. The figure indicates that the higher the number of corresponding reads, the lower the offset. Overall, the predicted start positions have a lower offset than the end positions, for the same sequencing depth research. We designed fla i mapper a computer program to predict ncRNA fragments using small rnase q alignments. Benchmarking indicated that fla i mapper is able to predict 97.8% of the miRNAs with corresponding reads. 95% of the miRNAs 5 0-end and 82% of the 3 0-end predictions were concordant with mir base annotations. For this analysis, data from the Illumina Genome Analyser II was used. A similar accuracy was observed for sequencing data derived from the Ion Torrent PGM and Illumina HiSeq2000 (Supplementary information), indicating fla i mapper can perform well on data from different platforms. We demonstrated that fla i mapper performs better than existing similar software (). fla i mapper predicts fragments by looking at the most common start and end positions in alignments. It can be argued whether the most common start and end positions should indeed provide the evidence for the prediction of a fragment, since the most common read could be used instead. However, the most common start and end positions should usually be covered by a higher number of reads. This corresponds to a higher resolution, which is especially advantageous for the prediction of fragments with a low read coverage, and should therefore also be more robust towards noise. Together with the demonstrated high performance, this implies that predictions based on start and end position densities provide a more appropriate solution for fragment annotation the weights used in the filtering step are based on a normal distribution with an arbitrary chosen r. These parameters probably find their optimum in relation with sequencing protocols, 5 0 =3 0end specific processing factors or different families of fragments. Therefore, once there is a better understanding of the processing of. Summary of predicted fragments on datasets SRP002175 (), SRP006788 (), SRP028959 (), SRP034013 () and SRP041082 (fragments, it is recommended to spend effort in optimizing these parameters. Additional analysis indicated that fla i mappers performance in miRNA annotation is positively correlated to sequencing depth. Predicted 3 0-ends of miRNAs have a larger offset compared with mir base annotations than the 5 0-ends, even for the same sequencing depth. The higher variability of the miRNAs 3 0-ends has earlier been reported (). In addition, research on the classification of snc rnas indicated that metrics corresponding to the variability in the alignment are indeed higher for the 3 0-end in miRNAs (). They were able to indicate that different levels of variability correspond to specific types of snc rnas. Possible explanations could be RNA postprocessing or RNA editing. This means that alignments over the entire fragment can be asymmetrical because of a larger variation observed at miRNAs 3 0-ends. Since BlockBuster assumes reads to be symmetrically distributed over a fragment, this might explain why (i) its accuracy is lower, (ii) its predictions are longer and (iii) shifted with respect to mir base. Although it seems counter-intuitive that an ncRNA can produce different fragments that originate from an overlapping region, there are situations where overlapping fragments can be expected. This can be stressed by recalling the not fully understood tRNA processing mechanism(s), where tRNA halves and tr fs spanning similar regions have been reported. Therefore, fla i mapper has no restriction to the prediction of overlapping fragments, similar to the method of. Sequence logos indicated that the ACA box, as part of the the
