New software tools for graphical genotyping are required that can routinely handle the large data volumes generated by the high throughput single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) platforms, genotyping by sequencing and other comparable genotyping technologies. Flapjack has been developed to facilitate analysis of these data, providing real time rendering with rapid navigation and comparisons between lines, markers and chromosomes, with visualization, sorting and querying based on associated data, such as phenotypes, quantitative trait loci or other mappable features. Availability: Flapjack is freely available for Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X, Linux and Solaris, and can be downloaded from

introduction the concept of a graphical genotype to visualize haplotype diversity between chromosomes has been widely adopted since Young and used it in the context of restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) mapping populations. Existing software tools to display graphical genotypes include GGT (van) and gene flow gene flow inc com. The advent of new high throughput genotyping technologies have given a renewed stimulus to the concept of graphical genotyping, through a combination of dramatic reduction in cost per data point and vastly increased marker density and throughput. The resultant high density data underpin new genetic approaches such as genome wide association analysis (). It also leads to the possibility of visually comparing many lines (e.g. samples or individuals) or sorting and selecting based on phenotype, identified groupings and genome features, such as quantitative trait loci (QTL) or gene models mapped to the genetic or physical genome. However, the ability to generate datasets with many thousands of markers () on many thousands of lines imposes a significant demand on both software tools and the underlying computer hardware. Flapjack provides a high performance visual interface into graphical genotyping applications in genetics and plant breeding. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
