flow density facilitates reproducible, high throughput analysis of flow cytometry data by automating a predefined manual gating approach. The algorithm is based on a sequential bivariate gating approach that generates a set of predefined cell populations. It chooses the best cut off for individual markers using characteristics of the density distribution. The Supplementary Material is linked to the online version of the manuscript. Availability and implementation: R source code freely available through BioConductor

introduction flow cytometry (FCM) is the predominant technique used to identify and quantify the widest variety of cell types. However, it is widely recognized that FCM data analysis, primarily in the identification of clusters of homogenous cells in high dimensional space, has become a rate limiting step in application of the technology. Researchers currently use a manually intensive and subjective process of serial inspection of one or two characteristics (dimensions) at a time (a process termed 'gating'). There is widespread demand for the development of software tools as the ability to organize, analyze and exchange FCM data is lagging far behind the ability to run samples, to the detriment of health research (O'). One reason that end users are still relying on manual analysis is the absence of a systematic way to formulate and transfer their expert knowledge to automated software in order to provide satisfactory results on hard to gate cell populations. Although unsupervised clustering algorithms have been developed for FCM data, they often fail to replicate a human expert's gating results due to their generalized, global approach and often return as a result of a number of clusters that can not be interpreted readily without more sophisticated cluster matching methods (). Supervised approaches have also focused on setting global parameters that are difficult to appropriately set for all clusters and requiring tuning of parameters that are not linked to researchers' biological understanding of the data (). To address these issues, we developed flow density an automated gating approach that emulates an expert's sequential 2D gating strategy to identify predefined cell populations using a sequential bivariate gating algorithm. The innovation of our approach is to use customized threshold calculations for different cell subsets, based on expert knowledge of hierarchical gating order and 1D density estimation. Using this approach, cell populations can be defined once using a gating strategy as a guide, which also enables clusters to be easily compared across samples.
