Motivation: A fundamental computational problem in the area of metabolic engineering is finding metabolic pathways between a pair of source and target metabolites efficiently. We present an approach , namely FogLight, for searching metabolic networks utilizing Boolean and or operations represented in matrix notation to efficiently reduce the search space. This enables the enumeration of all pathways between metabolites that are too distant for the application of brute force methods. Results: Benchmarking tests run with FogLight show that it can reduce the search space by up to 98%, after which the accelerated search for high accurate results is guaranteed. Using FogLight, several pathways between eight given pairs of metabolites are found of which the pathways from CO 2 to ethanol are specifically discussed. Additionally, in comparison with three path-finding tools, namely PHT, FMM and route search FogLight can find shorter and more pathways for attempted source target metabolite pairs.

introduction as time passes on, our knowledge of metabolism is being developed and metabolic databases such as KEGG (), MetaCyc (), and similar databases are evolving as this information advances. However, our insight is still incomplete and the gaps are being filled gradually. Metabolic engineering, emerged in the early 1990s, is defined as the directed modulation of metabolic pathways using methods of recombinant technology for the purpose of (over)production or accelerated production of fuels, chemical and pharmaceutical products (). Metabolic pathways are the roadmaps in which a biomolecule, namely metabolite, undergoes possible biotransformation s either under the action of enzymatic catalysis or by spontaneous reactions. The problem of synthesizing these roadmaps is more complex than the one referring to a tree structured search network. Hypergraphs are better representations for metabolic networks. Since finding k shortest hyper paths of a hypergraph is an np complete problem (), the problem should be solved heuristically. Research on metabolic pathways is done in two complementary categories. The analysis of metabolic pathways is motivated by the rapidly increasing quantity of available information on the pathways. Some researchers try to analyze the pathways with certain properties, like elementary flux modes () and thermodynamic feasibility (). On the other hand, some algorithms have been proposed to find or predict possible pathways in order to convert a given source metabolite to a given target metabolite. Some of these algorithms are based on one), evolutionary algorithms (), machine learning (), etc.), some algorithms have been proposed to find or predict possible pathways in order to convert a given source metabolite to a given target metabolite. K ff ner and his coauthors in () applied an informed searching method, which is similar to (), on Petri nets derived from metabolic databases to find and enumerate all valid pathways satisfying additional user defined constraints. Petri nets, directed bipartite graphs and state transition graphs are the main tools to model metabolic networks and apply some informed and uninformed approaches to them (). In addition to these approaches, various mathematical methods have emerged in the post genomic era to search for metabolic pathways. In the literature (), the authors detailed optimization models, based upon integer linear programming (ILP) to search for plausible metabolic pathways. Algorithms incorporating concepts from retro synthesis have been developed to search in the metabolic space, represented by hypergraphs for desired pathways (). These algorithms borrowed an idea from the allied field of synthetic chemistry in which reversed chemical transformations are iteratively applied starting from a target product to reach precursors that are endogenous to the chassis. In, two methods, one based on elementary modes and the other based on a direct enumeration algorithm were presented. As other approaches using retro synthesis model, novel metabolic routes have been efficiently screened by probabilistic selection of metabolic pathways in. A brute force method is an exhaustive search approach which systematically enumerates all possible candidates for the exact solution. This is an effective approach in finding pathways but it can not be used for large networks, as the execution time of the algorithm grows exponentially with the size of the network. One approach to ameliorate the exponential time problem of the brute force search is often to reduce the search space. Sometimes a heuristic method is used to obtain dramatic reduction of the candidates to all satisficing solutions and speed up the process of finding the proper pathway. However, on the contrary to brute force the heuristic approaches do not guarantee to find a pathway even if there is one. On the other hand, one can reduce the search space by first constructing a small sub-network without losing all candidates, and then applying the brute force method to find all the proper pathways. The approach proposed in this article follows this strategy using an analytical method. This article presents an innovative solution to find all possible distinct sets of coherent enzyme catalyzed biochemical reactions (i.e. metabolic pathways) through which the source compound is turned into the target compound. To this end, an analytical processing technique based on matrix operations helps us to provide a search space reduction strategy and find all desired metabolic pathways. Moreover, our proposed algorithm can even find the k shortest paths by setting proper parameters. Given that our proposed approach is based on matrix operations, the operational complexity of these operations depends on the matrix dimensions. While the use of bipartite graphs challenges the complexity in this context, we preferred to employ a more appropriate model instead of the bipartite graph. Indeed, using the directed bipartite graph causes our approach to bear large spatial and temporal costs (i.e. size of the memory and the amount of time required to search through it) which stem from intensive increase in the number of vertices and edges. For these reasons, we formulate the biochemical reactions contained in the metabolic pathway databases, e.g. KEGG, MetaCyc, by an and or graph model. and inverter Graph, majority inverter Graph, and and or Graph are three different internal network representations used to provide a suitable environment for modeling in a wide area of problem domains, such as logic optimization and synthesis (). Among these graph models, the use of and or graph and the search through it were proposed earlier than the others (). The and or graph is a typical graph in which the types of relations between vertices, which can be either 'AND', 'OR' or a function of them, determine the types of searching process steps that should be followed through. The relations, i.e. 'AND' and 'OR', has been inspired by two simple Boolean gates (i.e. Boolean operations) with the same names, and finally, the graph can be conceived as a Boolean circuit. Among the aforementioned models, and or graphs can better represent metabolic reactions. Since the introduction of the AND/ OR graph, it has been used in various applications and algorithms. To this end, we visualize the network of the biochemical reactions as the Boolean functions consisting of two variable and or operations. For example, in the metabolic reaction m 1  m 2 ! m 3 , the metabolite m 3 is produced if the metabolites m 1 and m 2 are both present. That is,
