Motivation: Owing to the size and complexity of large multi-component biological assemblies, the most tractable approach to determining their atomic structure is often to fit high resolution radio-graphic or nuclear magnetic resonance structures of isolated components into lower resolution electron density maps of the larger assembly obtained using cryo electron microscopy cry oem. This hybrid approach to structure determination requires that an atomic resolution structure of each component, or a suitable homolog, is available. If neither is available, then the amount of structural information regarding that component is limited by the resolution of the cry oem map. However, even if a suitable homolog can not be identified using sequence analysis, a search for structural homologs should still be performed because structural homology often persists throughout evolution even when sequence homology is undetectable, As macromolecules can often be described as a collection of independently folded domains, one way of searching for structural homo-logs would be to systematically fit representative domain structures from a protein domain database into the medium low resolution cry oem map and return the best fits. Taken together, the best fitting non-overlapping structures would constitute a mosaic backbone model of the assembly that could aid map interpretation and illuminate biological function. Result: Using the computational principles of the scale invariant Feature Transform (SIFT), we have developed fold ema computational tool that can identify folded macromolecular domains in medium to low resolution (4–15 A ˚) electron density maps and return a model of the constituent polypeptides in a fully automated fashion. As a by product fold em can also do flexible multi-domain fitting that may provide insight into conformational changes that occur in macromolecular assemblies.

introduction recent technological advances have resulted in exponential growth of the amount of data available at each level of the sequence structure function relationship. Along with this expansion of available data comes the need for systematic and objective methods for its analysis and interpretation. For example, the amount of information that can be extracted from the structure of an isolated macromolecule is limited; to fully understand how a macromolecule functions in a cell requires knowledge of not only its interaction partners, but also how mutually induced conformational changes that occur upon complex formation give rise to integrated biological function. Toward this end, structural biology continues to tackle larger and larger targets, ranging from radiographic structures of binary protein complexes to cry oem image reconstructions of large macromolecular complexes and cryo electron to mo grams of entire cells. Unfortunately, cryo elec ron microscopy tomography cry oem et maps typically have low signal to noise ratios, making their analysis and interpretation challenging and somewhat subjective, depending on the skill of specialized investigators. Hence, there is a need for computational methods to systematically and quantitatively analyze maps of macromolecular assemblies, organelles and whole cells. In particular, tools capable of (i) identifying individual proteins within larger complexes and (ii) characterizing conformational rearrangements relevant to macromolecular function, would provide nonstructural specialists access to structural data, thus allowing for enhanced biological perspectives. We recently reported the development of a new computational tool, motif em that solves a critical structural comparison problem, P, in a fully automated fashion (). P is defined as follows: compare a non atomic resolution structure (e.g. a cry oem map) with another structure (either another map or an atomic resolution structure) and identify conserved structural domains motifs or structurally equivalent sub volumes between the input pair. motif em solves P (Supplementary), and thus detects conserved sub-structures in a pair of structures, by using a novel algorithm inspired by a recent breakthrough in 2D object recognition, the scale invariant feature transform' or SIFT (). Because of its unmatched effectiveness in carrying out feature detection, adaptations of SIFT are being used in a wide range of scientific applications including tracking of robots, 3D scene/ object modeling recognition tracking human action recognition *To whom correspondence should be addressed. and human brain analysis in 3D Magnetic Resonance images and so forth (). Based on the feature recognition principles used in motif em we have now created a new software tool, fold em to automatically identify macromolecular folds in electron density maps and to characterize conformational changes that accompany different biological states of macromolecules. fold em systematically searches an input electron density map of a macromolecular assembly for sub volumes that are structurally homologous to one or more protein domains present in the SCOP protein database. By recursively repeating this procedure, a modular structure incorporating all the fitted domains is returned, thus providing a preliminary c backbone model of the macromolecular assembly under investigation. Similarly, using our approach, it is possible to automatically determine if different transformations are necessary for fitting different regions when comparing a multi-domain structure to an input electron density map of a macromolecule that can adopt different conformations. As a result, sift based feature detection is inherently capable of performing flexible multi-domain fitting and characterizing conformational differences between the structures being compared. Our program assumes no a priori knowledge of the type or relative orientation of macromolecular folds present in the input electron density map, and thus provides a fully automated means of analyzing electron density maps of macromolecules and their assemblies. Although the program was developed for the analysis of medium to low resolution electron density maps obtained via cry oem it should work equally well, if not better, with higher resolution electron density maps such as those obtained by X-ray crystallography. Here, we (i) discuss the computational challenges that needed to be overcome to develop fold em (ii) demonstrate the effectiveness of fold em in carrying out flexible multi-domain and large scale fittings using synthetic and real data; and (iii) consider some advantages of fold em compared with existing softwares that fit atomic resolution structures into medium to low resolution electron density maps.

conclusion inspired by SIFT's broad applicability and driven by the current need in structural biology to effectively and efficiently interpret structures from electron microscopy, we have developed a new software tool, fold em to automatically and systematically identify protein folds and fit atomic resolution macromolecular structures into cry oem electron density maps without any prior knowledge. fold em is based on motif em our previous adaptation of the SIFT algorithm for interpretation of cry oem maps. We have adapted and extended the motif em algorithm to automatically identify folds and characterize conformational changes in cryo electron density maps of large macromolecular assemblies. The underlying algorithm in motif em and fold em works by constructing rotationally invariant low dimensional representations of local regions in the input atomic resolution structures and cry oem maps. Correspondences are established between the reduced representations by comparing them using a simple metric. These correspondences are then clustered using hash tables and graph theory to identify structurally equivalent domains or motifs. The motivation to develop fold em from motif em came from the recognition that the sift based comparison module builds rigid body docker fitter (Section 3.1) Partial matching () Yes SITUS, fold hunter Chimera, MODELLER, mol rep co an etc.: No Flexible fitter (Section 3.3) Level of automation Independent of starting conformation, as it is based on global search. (details: Section 3.3, last paragraph) NORMA, DIREX, md ff flex em etc.: Require users to provide appropriate starting conformations, as they are based on local search. Backbone modeller (Section 3.4) Level of automation fold em is fully automated. e match FREDS: Not fully automated. For instance, FREDS required approximate domain region segmentation. (details: Section 3.4, last paragraph) Backbone modeller (Section 3.4) Dependency None e match FREDS: Depend on availability of third party modules, such as helix detectors, fitters, etc. (details: Section 3.4, last paragraph) A given row (#X) refers to a method in fold em. (Row #X, Column #1) lists the name of the method, (Row #X, Column #2) lists one of it's critical distinguishing property, (Row #X, Column #3) elaborates that property for that fold em method, and (Row #X, Column 4) elaborates that property for existing competing methods. For instance, Row #2 refers to the method 'Rigid Body Docker' (Row #2, Column #1) in fold em. (Row #2, Column #2) lists the particular property (partial matching of) in question. (Row #2, Column #3) states the existence of that property in the fold em docker. (Row #2, Column #3) states the non-existence of that property in any other existing docker that we are aware of. correspondences by matching smaller structural units, and hence the algorithm should work even if only portions of the structures being compared are homologous. Thus, the method is well suited for building backbone models of large complex macromolecular assemblies by systematically fitting smaller independent domain structures into a cry oem map of the larger assembly. fold em accomplishes this task by recursively fitting representative domain structures from the SCOP structural database into the input cry oem map and returning the best fitting non-overlapping structures. fold em succeeds at least partially because it is inherently capable of carrying out partial matching; unlike other fitting software, the fold em fitting module is not affected by extraneous structure in either the target map or the search structure. Similarly, fold em will also automatically determine if different transformations are necessary for fitting different regions of the input search model; as a result, fold em is inherently able to characterize conformational differences (due to inter-domain motions, partial resemblances) between the structures being compared. Using fold em we have demonstrated its effectiveness in (i) partial matching, i.e. successful docking fitting in the presence of extraneous protein residues; (ii) fitting multi-domain structures into cry oem maps in a single step while taking into account flexibility due to inter-domain motions; and (iii) performing fully automated large scale fold recognition and fitting using a protein domain database. The ability to automatically and objectively carry out these challenging tasks allows non specialists to perform sophisticated structural analysis and sets fold em apart from other existing docking packages.
