Motivation: While there are numerous programs that can predict RNA or DNA secondary structures, a program that predicts rna dna hetero-dimers is still missing. The lack of easy to use tools for predicting their structure may be in part responsible for the small number of reports of biologically relevant rna dna hetero-dimers. Results: We present here an extension to the widely used vienna rna Package (Lorenz et al., 2011) for the prediction of the structure of rna dna hetero-dimers.

introduction nucleic acids have many important functions in biological systems, such as information carriers, catalysts and regulators. Both variants, DNA and RNA, can form complex structures by base pair interactions. The pattern of watson crick or wobble base pairs a molecule forms is called the secondary structure. A main difference between RNA and DNA is due to their usage in biological systems: while DNA builds a dimer with its reverse complement almost all the time, RNA, being mostly single stranded, is more prone to fold back onto itself. However, if DNA is single stranded (e.g. during replication, transcription, repair or recombination), it will also form intramolecular base pairs. There are several examples where RNA and DNA interact via base pairing, generating a structure called r loop. They protect CpG (CG dinucleotide regions in the genome) islands from being methylated (). The stability of dna mrna hybrids is reported to have an influence on the copy number of repeats () and can impair transcription elongation, promoting transcription associated recombination (). Moreover, during the intensive search for new functional transcripts, rendered possible by next generation sequencing technology, at least 1000 novel linc rnas were identified that may act as regulators of transcription, and one possibility to do this is via base pairing between RNA and DNA (see Guttman and Rinn, 2012 for a recent review). As a final biological example, dna rna hybrids play a role within the crisp r pathway in bacteria and archaea (). On a technical side, rna dna dimers are often used in micro-array or PCR experiments. The ability to computationally investigate the properties of the structures of interacting RNA and DNA molecules would help in the analysis of these dimers. While a number of programs exist that can predict RNA or DNA secondary structures (For a review, see e.g.) or even their dimers, there is, to our knowledge, no program that also includes the possibility to predict the full secondary structure of rna dna hetero-dimers. This may be due to the lack of compiled energy parameters, as there are only stacking energies available today. We introduce here a possibility to predict the secondary structure of such hetero-dimers within the widely used vienna rna Package.
