Motivation The remodeling of short fragment(s) of the protein backbone to accommodate new function(s), fine tune binding specificities or change create novel protein interactions is a common task in structure based computational design. Alternative backbone conform-ations can be generated de novo or by redeploying existing fragments extracted from protein structures i.e. knowledge based. We present frag rus a web server designed to sample alternative protein backbone conformations in loop regions. The method relies on a database of super secondary structural motifs called s motifs. Thus, sampling of conformations reflects structurally feasible fragments compiled from existing protein structures. Availability and implementation frag rus has been implemented as web application and is available at http://www.bioinsilico.org/ frag rus
introduction structural based computational design aims to alter and change the properties of proteins by using structural information. These include improving protein stability, change and or optimization of catalytic activities, grafting of novel functionalities or altering the binding to small molecules, nucleic acids or proteins [see reviews () and references therein]. Pioneering approaches in the field were focused in single amino acid changes with null or limited backbone flexibility (). However, the remodeling and redesign of short fragments of the protein backbone, i.e. de novo design, overcomes the intrinsic limitations of fixed backbone design. Recent works have shown the potential of de novo design (). The remodeling of the protein backbone usually occurs in the loop regions, given its intrinsic flexibility and variable nature. Usually, remodeling the loop regions seeks to accommodate specific interactions and restraints, e.g. catalytic residues (), or to create new local segments (). The major limitation of de novo approaches is the inherent combinatorial complexity that makes almost impossible the systematic sampling of large insertions. In early works we have described the use of s motifs in loop structure prediction [including protein kinases (, functional annotation () and prediction of protein protein interactions (). Furthermore, we described that the dramatic increase of structures in the protein databank has resulted in the saturation of sampling of loop structures, even in the case of long loops () subsequently confirmed (), and that the geometry of s motifs is fully sampled (). Here we extend the use of s motifs and we present frag rus a knowledge based approach designed to sample the conformation of loop regions between fixed flanking regular secondary structures. The sampling is based in the comparison of the geometry between query and candidate s motifs (see Server Usage in supplementary data), is length independent (the final loop length is not predetermined) and is very fast: a search among thousand of potential conformations is done in a matter of seconds. Candidate s motifs matching the geometrical constraints can then be grafted into the protein scaffold to be used as starting conformations for different de novo design manipulations.

APPLICATION

conclusion in this article, we present a server, frag rus designed to sample loop conformations using the geometrical constrains of s motifs. frag rus has clear applications in de novo computational design by seeding the search of alternative backbone conformations using geometrically suitable backbone regions extracted from known protein structures. frag rus can be also used in protein protein protein nucleic acids and protein small ligand interface design by generating a set of alternative conformation of interface loops. Finally, frag rus can complement loop structure prediction methods and xray nmr refinement protocols by generating loop conformations that are length independent.
