Several approaches to the region based association analysis of quantitative traits have recently been developed and successively applied. However, no software package has been developed that implements all of these approaches for either independent or structured samples. Here we introduce f reg at (Family REGional Association Tests), an R package that can handle family and population samples and implements a wide range of region based association methods including burden tests, functional linear models, and kernel machine based regression. f reg at can be used in genome exo me wide region based association studies of quantitative traits and candidate gene analysis. f reg at offers many useful options to empower its users and increase the effectiveness and applicability of region based association analysis. Availability and Implementation: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/FREGAT/index.html

introduction the development of new and effective whole exo me and whole genome resequencing technologies demands the establishment of powerful and computationally efficient statistical methods to test the associations between rare variants and complex traits. The methods developed for the analysis of common variants are underpowered because of the small number of observations for any given variant (). The statistical power of the association analysis of rare variants is expected to increase when genetic variants in a region of interest are tested simultaneously rather than separately (). Several approaches to the region based association analysis of quantitative traits have been developed and successively applied in practice. The simplest approach uses various methods for collapsing rare variants within a region of interest (burden tests). In this case, a set of rare variants in a region is described by a single genetic variable that is then tested for association (). Other approaches wherein genotype effects are estimated as fixed effects are based on the multiple regression model, especially on its functional data analysis based version (functional linear models, fl ms (). An alternative approach treats the regional association as a random effect and employs kernel machine based regression (i.e. sequence kernel association tests, SKAT and ska to (). Each of these methods has their own advantages and limitations. All have been adopted for pedigree samples (). However, no software package has yet been developed that implements all of these popular approaches for handling population or family samples. We developed the Family REGional Association Tests f reg at package, an R package that can handle population and family samples and implements a wide range of region based association methods including burden tests, fl ms and kernel machine based regression. f reg at can be used for the genome exo me wide association studies of quantitative traits and offers many useful options to increase the effectiveness and applicability of region based association analysis.
