Fragment recruitment, a process of aligning sequencing reads to reference genomes, is a crucial step in meta genomic data analysis. The available sequence alignment programs are either slow or insufficient for recruiting meta genomic reads. We implemented an efficient algorithm, fr hit for fragment recruitment. We applied fr hit and several other tools including BLASTN, mega blast BLAT, LAST, SSAHA2, SOAP2, BWA and b was w to recruit four meta genomic datasets from different type of sequencers. On average, fr hit and BLASTN recruited significantly more reads than other programs, while fr hit is about two orders of magnitude faster than BLASTN. fr hit is slower than the fastest SOAP2, BWA and b was w but it recruited 1–5 times more reads. Availability: http://weizhongli-lab.org/frhit.

introduction meta genomic data provide a more comprehensive picture for our understanding of the microbial world. An important step of such understanding is to compare the raw sequencing reads against the available microbial genomes to analyze the phylogenetic composition, genes and functions of the samples. Such a procedure, referred to as fragment recruitment, was introduced in the Global Ocean Sampling (GOS) meta genomics study (). Sequences from meta genomic samples exhibit great differences from the available genomes. Although there are thousands of available complete microbial genomes, they hardly cover the broad and diverse species in many meta genomic samples. A typical meta genomic dataset may have hundreds or thousands of species, and many of them are novel. Therefore, it is critical for fragment recruitment methods to align reads to homologous genomes. In the GOS study, BLAST () was used for fragment recruitment. However, it is too slow to handle large datasets. The explosion of next generation sequencing data stimulated the development of new mapping programs, such as SOAP (), Bowtie (), BWA () and many others. These programs are several orders of magnitude times faster than BLAST, but they can only identify very stringent similarities that tolerate only a few * To whom correspondence should be addressed. mismatches and gaps. So these mapping programs are insufficient for fragment recruitment. The slightly slower programs like BLAT (), SSAHA2 () and LAST () can recruit more reads than the mapping programs, but their fragment recruiting capacities are still limited. In this article, we present a new fragment recruitment method, fr hit. Given reference genomes, meta genomic reads and sequence identity and alignment length cutoffs, the goal of fr hit is to align the most reads to references with minimal computational time.
