The prediction of protein protein complexes from the structures of unbound components is a challenging and powerful strategy to decipher the mechanism of many essential biological processes. We present a user friendly protein protein docking server based on an improved version of fro dock that includes a complementary knowledge based potential. The web interface provides a very effective tool to explore and select protein protein models and interactively screen them against experimental distance constraints. The competitive success rates and efficiency achieved allow the retrieval of reliable potential protein protein binding conformations that can be further refined with more computationally demanding strategies. Availability and Implementation: The server is free and open to all users with no login requirement at http://

introduction protein protein interactions are involved in every cellular process, and their characterization is therefore critical to understanding the underlying molecular mechanisms. The computational prediction of protein protein complexes from the unbound 3D structures is a successful complementary alternative to ongoing structural and proteomic endeavors. A great variety of computational ab initio docking approaches have been developed to predict protein complexes (). These algorithms employ a variety of efficient search strategies and energy based scoring strategies, usually beginning with an exhaustive six dimensional search to generate many potential predictions, followed by a detailed and more computationally demanding refining stage. However, despite the significant progress in improved scoring functions and the integrative use of biochemical and biophysical information, current algorithms are still limited. In a recent independent comprehensive assessment of current exhaustive docking programs (, the best three docking approaches succeed in identifying acceptable protein protein solutions in 2131, 4052 and 6079% of the cases within the top 10 components in only a few minutes. The user friendly interface permits the interactive exploration of the docking models, including additional screening filters with experimental distance constraints to enhance the success of identifying near native docking solutions.
