The f selector package contains a comprehensive list of feature selection algorithms for supporting bioinformatics and machine learning research. f selector primarily collects and implements the filter type of feature selection techniques, which are computationally efficient for mining large datasets. In particular, f selector allows ensemble feature selection that takes advantage of multiple feature selection algorithms to yield more robust results. f selector also provides many useful auxiliary tools, including normalization, discret-ization and missing data imputation. Availability: f selector written in the Ruby programming language, is free and open source software that runs on all Ruby supporting platforms, including Windows, Linux and Mac OS X. f selector is available from https://rubygems.org/gems/fselector and can be installed like a breeze via the command gem install f selector. The source code is available (https://github.com/need47/fselector) and is fully documented

introduction feature selection is of great importance for building statistical models when mining large datasets of high dimension, such as those generated from microarray and mass spectra analysis (). It proves to be effective in the data mining and bioinformatics fields for reducing dimensionality, selecting relevant and removing redundant features, increasing predictive accuracy and improving model interpretability (). Depending on how they interact with the learning method, various feature selection techniques roughly fall into three categories: filters, wrappers and embedded methods (). Filters investigate only the intrinsic characteristics of a given dataset and have the advantage of being fast as well as being independent of learning method. Basically, there are two types of filters: filter by feature weighting and filter by feature searching. The former measures independently the relevance of each feature to the target problem according to a certain evaluation criterion. It provides a weight or ranking list as output, and features are usually selected based on a given threshold. The latter also takes inter feature correlation into account and generates a subset of the original feature set that tends to be both relevant and non-redundant. Wrappers wrap around a specific learning method and conduct a search in the space of feature subset for optimal model performance. They often report superior results than filters, but coupled with increased computational load (). Embedded methods seek a trade-off between performance and computational cost, by use of the internal information of a learning method. In many applications, specifically in bioinformatics, the datasets are often huge with numerous samples and or very high dimension features. It is thus more practical to apply filters for feature selection because of their computational efficiency. To this end, we primarily implemented filters in f selector. A wide variety of feature selection algorithms have been proposed in the past decades (); however, most of them are scattered in literature and not readily available to researchers. Feature selection algorithms that come in a collection can be found in several machine learning software such as py ml (http://pyml.sourceforge.net/), written in Python and Weka (http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka), written in Java, or serve as additional libraries for statistical platform including R (http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/FSelector/index.html) and Matlab (http://featureselection.asu.edu/software.php). Ruby is a high level dynamic scripting language with a focus on simplicity and productivity, which has become increasingly popular in bioinformatics and other scientific research fields (). To our best knowledge, the only Ruby package related to feature selection is the features election gem that implements only three algorithms (https://rubygems.org/gems/feature_selection). In this work, we presented f selector providing a substantially larger collection of filters with 40 feature selection algorithms implemented in Ruby.

conclusion f selector is a valuable Ruby gem that offers easy and public access to 40 prevalent feature selection algorithms through a consistent interface. We hope the rich collection of algorithms together with other utilities (including various file formats support, auxiliary data pre-processing techniques and comprehensive help documentation) will make f selector a useful tool for supporting various bioinformatics research, such as text mining, microarray analysis and mass spectra analysis.
