Motivation: Feature selection is a key concept in machine learning for microarray datasets, where features represented by probe sets are typically several orders of magnitude larger than the available sample size. Computational tractability is a key challenge for feature selection algorithms in handling very high dimensional datasets beyond a hundred thousand features, such as in datasets produced on single nucleotide polymorphism microarrays. In this article, we present a novel feature set reduction approach that enables scalable feature selection on datasets with hundreds of thousands of features and beyond. Our approach enables more efficient handling of higher resolution datasets to achieve better disease subtype classification of samples for potentially more accurate diagnosis and prognosis, which allows clinicians to make more informed decisions in regards to patient treatment options. Results: We applied our feature set reduction approach to several publicly available cancer single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array datasets and evaluated its performance in terms of its multiclass predictive classification accuracy over different cancer subtypes, its speed up in execution as well as its scalability with respect to sample size and array resolution. Feature Set Reduction (FSR) was able to reduce the dimensions of an SNP array dataset by more than two orders of magnitude while achieving at least equal, and in most cases superior predictive classification performance over that achieved on features selected by existing feature selection methods alone. An examination of the biological relevance of frequently selected features from fsr reduced feature sets revealed strong enrichment in association with cancer. Availability: FSR was implemented in MATLAB R2010b and is available at

introduction an open problem in the field of microarray analysis is the classification of samples in terms of their cancer subtype using * To whom correspondence should be addressed. copy number data derived from high density single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays. Accurate classification of clinically important subtypes can help define subgroups of patients who would benefit from more individualized treatment regimes. While classification of microarray data has received considerable interest in the gene expression domain, challenges of a different nature arise when dealing with copy number in high density SNP array datasets. SNP microarray datasets have more features than gene expression microarrays. Typically, gene expression datasets can comprise tens of thousands of features (genes), while SNP array datasets can comprise hundreds of thousands of features (SNPs). This implies that in SNP array datasets, the number of features are typically several orders of magnitude larger than the available sample size. Consequently, feature selection approaches that work well on gene expression datasets may not necessarily scale well to the increased number of features in SNP array datasets. Moreover, SNP microarray datasets possess a lower signal to noise ratio in comparison to gene expression microarrays. The raw copy number measurements can thus be extremely noisy as compared with gene expression measurements on microarray datasets. While there have been previous attempts at classifying datasets generated from SNP microarrays, these studies were largely based on the earliest generation of SNP microarrays () with 1000 features, which makes these datasets similar in dimensions to gene expression datasets. Therefore, the challenges in scalability are not as apparent in these datasets. Among these studies was based solely on genotype data from SNP microarray datasets and not copy number data, whereas Wang (2006) was based only on loss of heterozygosity (LOH) data that is derived from genotype calls. Other earlier attempts at classifying samples based on copy number datasets were largely based on the lower resolution array Comparative Genomic Hybridization a cgh technology (). Again the issue of scalability was not explored since the number of features in a cgh is much smaller than those of the Affymetrix SNP array. The scalability of feature selection in SNP array datasets with large numbers of features for the purpose of sample classification is an open problem that needs to be addressed. Our aim in this article is to propose a feature reduction approach that is computationally more efficient than existing feature selection approaches () while achieving at least comparable or superior classification accuracy, when applied to copy number page 152 151159

DISCUSSION

conclusion in this article, we have presented a novel feature set reduction method, FSR. We have demonstrated its effectiveness in pruning complete feature sets involving a variety of cancers down to compact sets of potentially interesting features, which ultimately yielded better predictive classification accuracy for an SVM trained on these features. We have shown that FSR is computationally efficient. The speed up in empirical runtimes achieved with an fsr hybrid feature selection approach was at least an order of magnitude faster as compared with feature selection using the respective stand-alone approach. fsr paired approaches also demonstrated significantly better classification accuracy over their stand-alone counterparts in many of the test scenarios. The performance of FSR has implications and applications in the field of cancer genomics. Cancer is often regarded as a single disease with many variations. Each subtype of cancer has a different set of risk factors, different rates of progression, different treatment options and a different prognosis. Being able to classify cancer subtypes more accurately from selected biomarkers can be useful in achieving a more accurate prognosis of the disease as well as in making more informed choices about treatment options. From a computational perspective, the ability to prune feature sets with minimal loss of information facilitates the subsequent application of a wider selection of feature selection approaches, some of which may have been intractable on the original feature set due to its size. FSR is suited for application on high density microarray datasets to analyze diseases such as cancer that typically have a small to moderate number of classes reflecting subtypes, grades or stages of the disease. As microarray resolution grows to improve coverage of the human genome, FSR can be a useful tool in enhancing the computational efficiency and predictive accuracy of disease subtype classification tasks performed on the datasets produced on these microarrays for potentially more accurate disease prognosis and personalized treatment.
