Recent genetic studies as well as recorded history point to massive growth in human population sizes during the recent past. To model and understand this growth accurately we introduce fte c an easy to use coalescent simulation program capable of simulating haplotype samples drawn from a population that has undergone faster than exponential growth. Samples drawn from a population that has undergone faster than exponential growth show an excess of very rare variation and more rapid LD decay when compared with samples drawn from a population that has maintained a constant size over time. Availability: Source code for fte c is freely available for download from the University of Michigan Center for Statistical Genetics Wiki at

introduction recent human sequencing studies have uncovered a pattern of genetic variation characterized by a large proportion of very rare variation sequenced 13 715 individuals across two genes and found on average 1 variant every 24 bases. Singletons and double tons accounted for 30% of variant sites. Other studies with between 5000 and 14 000 individuals have found that 50% of observed variants are found in at most two individuals exo me Sequencing Project, unpublished data; mr submitted for publication). A large fraction of extremely rare variation in a population is evidence of recent dramatic population growth (). Growth in the human population has traditionally been modeled as either instantaneous or exponential ().posited that the pattern of variation observed in their data may have resulted from population growth occurring at an explosive, faster than exponential rate. Incorporating faster than exponential growth into statistical models aimed at estimating population genetic parameters has the potential to improve estimate accuracy. Additionally, refining statistical tools that test for the role of rare variants in disease and trait etiology will require simulated data with an accurate distribution

conclusion fte c provides the opportunity to study easily a broader range of population growth models under the coalescent than has previously been possible. As ever larger sequencing studies bring the rarest portion of the site frequency spectrum into focus, we have provided a tool that can help test theories of how the rarest variation arose and simulate data with a realistic distribution of variants.
