Computational solvent mapping finds binding hot spots, determines their drug g ability and provides information for drug design. While mapping of a ligand bound structure yields more accurate results, usually the apo structure serves as the starting point in design. The ft flex algorithm, implemented as a server, can modify an apo structure to yield mapping results that are similar to those of the respective bound structure. Thus, ft flex is an extension of our ft map server, which only considers rigid structures. ft flex identifies flexible residues within the binding site and determines alternative conformations using a rotamer library. In cases where the mapping results of the apo structure were in poor agreement with those of the bound structure , ft flex was able to yield a modified apo structure, which lead to improved ft map results. In cases where the mapping results of the apo and bound structures were in good agreement, no new structure was predicted. Availability: ft flex is freely available as a web based server at http://

introduction computational solvent mapping emerged as an important tool for the identification and characterization of binding sites in proteins (), for determining their drug g ability () and for providing information for fragment based drug design (). Mimicking the radiographic crystallographic approach of multiple solvent crystal structures (), this computational method places molecular probes small organic molecules containing various functional groups on a dense grid defined around the protein, finds favorable positions using empirical energy functions, further refines the selected poses by energy minimization, clusters the low energy conformations, calculates the partition function for each cluster and ranks the clusters on the basis of their probabilities. The consensus sites are then defined as those where clusters of different probes overlap; such consensus sites identify the binding hot spots, i.e. regions of interactions that substantially contribute to the binding free energy and hence are of prime importance to drug design. We have shown that the approximate location of binding hot spots is generally not affected by conformational changes, and can be identified by mapping unbound protein structures even in cases in which the goal is to find small molecule binding sites in protein protein interfaces (). However, the exact shape of hot spots may change on ligand binding, and hence, accounting for protein flexibility provides more accurate mapping results. Mapping snapshots from molecular dynamics simulations is a useful but computationally demanding approach (). Here we describe the ft flex algorithm, which incorporates side chain flexibility considerations into our previously developed computational mapping method, ft map (), in an efficient fashion, while providing similarly accurate results.

discussion using ft flex we have shown the following results: (i) Mapping results were improved in cases of poor correlation between bound and apo structures. (ii) When the mapping results for apo and bound structures were similar, no new structure was predicted. (iii) For Tyr, Phe, Trp and His, the new residue conformation predicted by ft flex for the apo structure was similar to the conformation found in the bound structure. Funding: This work was supported by grants NIH R01GM064700 and NIH R41GM097907 from NIGMS.
