Motivation: Binding site identification is a classical problem that is important for a range of applications, including the structure based prediction of function, the elucidation of functional relationships among proteins, protein engineering and drug design. We describe an accurate method of binding site identification, namely ft site. This method is based on experimental evidence that ligand binding sites also bind small organic molecules of various shapes and polarity. The ft site algorithm does not rely on any evolutionary or statistical information, but achieves near experimental accuracy: it is capable of identifying the binding sites in over 94% of apo proteins from established test sets that have been used to evaluate many other binding site prediction methods. Availability: ft site is freely available as a web based server at

introduction locating ligand binding sites is of fundamental importance for a range of applications, such as the structure based prediction of function, the elucidation of functional relationships among proteins, protein engineering and drug design. A number of methods aimed at ligand binding site identification have been developed; these include geometric analyses, energy calculations, evolutionary considerations, machine learning and various combinations of these approaches. Over the years, improvements in methodology have led to an increase in the success rate of binding site detection as the top prediction from 52% by SURFNET () to 83% by VICE () for the lig site CSC test set of 48 unbound protein structures (), which has been used to evaluate many binding site detection methods. The VICE algorithm () has not been implemented as a server, and the best server currently available is meta pocket 2.0 (), which seeks consensus among eight different methods and reaches 80% accuracy for the unbound lig site CSC test set. Here we describe the energy based method ft site which is capable of identifying the binding sites with 94% * To whom correspondence should be addressed. success rate as the top prediction for the same lig site CSC test set, and has been implemented as a server.

discussion key to the success of ft site is the use of multiple molecular probes rather than a single probe as implemented in most other energy based methods. Screening by NMR and X-ray crystallography shows that the binding sites of proteins possess a tendency to bind small organic compounds that vary in size, shape and polarity, thus improving the robustness of ft site to conformational changes. Although individual probes may bind to other cavities, the largest clusters of multiple probes occur in ligand binding sites (). Thus, ft site does not rely on surrogate measures of ligand binding propensity such as pocket volume, cavity depth or the ability of binding non-polar spheres. Due to its strong biophysical basis, the method provides high accuracy without evolutionary considerations. We note that solvent mapping also had success in identifying drug gable binding sites in protein protein interfaces ().
