Motivation: Computational approaches that can predict protein functions are essential to bridge the widening function annotation gap especially since 1.0% of all proteins in UniProtKB have been experimentally characterized. We present a domain based method for protein function classification and prediction of functional sites that exploits functional sub-classification of CATH superfamilies. The superfamilies are sub classified into functional families fun fams using a hierarchical clustering algorithm supervised by a new classification method, fun f hmmer. Results: fun f hmmer generates more functionally coherent groupings of protein sequences than other domain based protein classifications. This has been validated using known functional information. The conserved positions predicted by the fun fams are also found to be enriched in known functional residues. Moreover, the functional annotations provided by the fun fams are found to be more precise than other domain based resources. fun f hmmer currently identifies 110 439 fun fams in 2735 superfamilies which can be used to functionally annotate  16 million domain sequences. Availability and implementation: All fun fam annotation data are made available through the CATH web pages (http://www.cathdb.info). The fun f hmmer web server (http://www.cathdb.info/ search by fun f hmmer allows users to submit query sequences for assignment to a CATH fun fam
introduction the rapid increase in sequencing and structural genomics initiatives have provided us with a wealth of data to unravel the complex sequence, structure and function relationships in proteins. However,  1.0% of this data are functionally annotated from experimental studies (). The most commonly used methods for protein function annotation often exploit a sequence or structure homology search of a query protein against a protein database, although more sophisticated approaches which also exploit heterogeneous data (e.g. gene expression and protein protein interaction data, etc.) and combine this diverse information using machine learning approaches have also been developed. [For a review of current approaches, see. It has been observed that proteins sharing high sequence or structural similarity can often evolve different (sub-)functions (). These functionally diverse relatives perform distinct functions even though they may share a general functional feature, e.g. for enzymes this may be a common step along their reaction pathways. Such groups of homologous proteins sharing the same function will be referred to as functional families hereafter.

conclusion the CATH-Gene3D resource provides a comprehensive classification of structure and sequence domains into 2735 structure based superfamilies. We have developed a novel method fun f hmmer for functional classification of these superfamilies. The aim of this classification is manifold. For example, to improve our understanding of the sequence and structure mechanisms of functional divergence within a superfamily during evolution and to improve the functional annotation of uncharacterized protein domain sequences assigned to an annotated functional family within the superfamily. To our knowledge no other such comprehensive functional classification of domain sequences, linked to structural data, exists. Here, we show that our novel functional classification protocol has resulted in fun fams that are significantly more functionally pure than in our previous classification reported in 2011 (DFX,). This was demonstrated using an assessment protocol based on the EC classification and the manually curated s fld superfamilies. We also demonstrate that this enhanced functional purity translates into better performance in functional prediction for uncharacterized sequences using a uniprotkb swissprot rollback assessment. fun f hmmer clearly generates more functionally pure families than other domain based resources and outperforms DFX in protein function prediction as assessed by the uniprotkb swissprot rollback assessment. Moreover, the performance of fun f hmmer in the preliminary results of CAFA 2 (20132014) have been very encouraging. fun f hmmer which only uses domain information, was featured among the top five among 110 automatic function prediction methods (some of which use information from heterogenous data sources for making predictions) in predicting biological process GO terms and among the top 10 in predicting molecular function terms. CAFA 2 results can be accessed from: https://github.com/idoerg/ cafa2 results. The CAFA assessment protocol provides independent validation that the fun fams in CATH-Gene3D are of reasonable functional purity and valuable for providing functional annotations for novel, uncharacterized sequences. CATH currently identifies 110 439 fun fams and for the most populated of these (having high information content), accounting for 72% of CATH-Gene3D sequences, residues implicated in functional sites can be predicted. Our assessment of functional purity of the fun fams has shown that our new families can be used to identify a higher proportion of known functional residues associated with a particular functional grouping than our previous method DFX. A web server has been set up to allow users to submit query sequences for assignment to a CATH fun fam where possible. The server (http://www.cathdb.info/search/by_funfhmmer) takes a protein sequence in the fast a format as input and scans it against the CATH fun fam HMMs. The fun fam matches for the constituent domains of the query sequence are reported when they achieve the inclusion threshold score of the corresponding fun fam HMM. Information on the highly conserved residues identified for those CATH fun fams having MSAs with sufficient information content, is also available on the CATH-Gene3D website (). These positions are highlighted on a representative 3d structure for the fun fam where available. We also provide network visualizations of the relationships between fun fams within each superfamily. These images provide valuable insights into the functional diversity across a superfamily and reveal where particular functions dominate the superfamily. Therefore, CATH fun fams are useful for analysing the variation in functions across a superfamily and since functional sites can be identified for many fun fams they allow a structurally informed analysis of the mechanisms of this divergence. In summary, we have shown that a novel approach to sub classifying fun fams in CATH-Gene3D, based on the difference in SDPs between functional groups is able to separate fun fams exploiting different conserved residues to perform their functional properties. This approach provides a domain classification that is able to provide accurate functional annotations than broader groupings of relatives.
