Motivation: Identifying functional modules in protein protein interaction (PPI) networks may shed light on cellular functional organization and thereafter underlying cellular mechanisms. Many existing module identification algorithms aim to detect densely connected groups of proteins as potential modules. However, based on this simple topo-logical criterion of higher than expected connectivity, those algorithms may miss biologically meaningful modules of functional significance, in which proteins have similar interaction patterns to other proteins in networks but may not be densely connected to each other. A few block model module identification algorithms have been proposed to address the problem but the lack of global optimum guarantee and the prohibitive computational complexity have been the bottleneck of their applications in real world large scale PPI networks. Results: In this article, we propose a novel optimization formulation LCP 2 (low two hop conductance sets) using the concept of Markov random walk on graphs, which enables simultaneous identification of both dense and sparse modules based on protein interaction patterns in given networks through searching for LCP 2 by random walk. A spectral approximate algorithm slc p 2 is derived to identify non-overlapping functional modules. Based on a bottom up greedy strategy , we further extend LCP 2 to a new algorithm (greedy algorithm for LCP 2) glc p 2 to identify overlapping functional modules. We compare slc p 2 and glc p 2 with a range of state of the art algorithms on synthetic networks and real world PPI networks. The performance evaluation based on several criteria with respect to protein complex prediction, high level Gene Ontology term prediction and especially sparse module detection, has demonstrated that our algorithms based on searching for LCP 2 outperform all other compared algorithms. Availability and implementation: All data and code are available at

introduction advances in high throughput profiling techniques have enabled researchers to produce large scale protein protein interaction (PPI) datasets (). Systematic analysis of these large scale interact omic datasets based on their graph representations, in which nodes stand for proteins in species of interest and edges represent interactions between proteins, has the potential to yield a better understanding of protein functions computationally (). One way to chart out the underlying cellular functional organization is to identify functional modules in these networks by grouping the proteins sharing similar biological functions into the same modules (). Intuitively, based on interact omic data, if two proteins interact with each other, they are more likely to share the same cellular functionalities than proteins that do not interact. Thus, densely connected groups or subnetworks of proteins in a given network can be viewed as potential functional modules. Based on this idea, many modularity based algorithms () have been successfully applied to identify functional modules in PPI networks by detecting 'higher than expected connectivity' subnetworks. Several algorithms based on Markov random walk on graphs also have been proposed recently. For example, Markov CLustering (MCL) algorithm is one of such module identification algorithms for biological network analysis by iteratively implementing 'Expand' and 'Inflation' operations on the transition matrix of the underlying Markov chain of random walk on the given network (van). Regularized MCL r mcl () further extends the original MCL algorithm to penalize the large module size at each iteration to obtain more balanced modules with a similar number of nodes within them. Other formulations based on Markov random walk, including finding low conductance (LC) sets (), also can be applied in module identification, which is similar to normalized cut problems () in graph partitioning to minimize the normalized cut size across modules. Recently, several overlapping module identification methods have been developed to detect densely connected modules that may overlap with each other in networks. For example, Cluster One cluster one () can be viewed as the overlapping version of normalized cut. Link community link comm () formulates the overlapping module identification in an innovative framework to implement the hierarchical clustering on edge graph representations, which reveals hierarchical and overlapping organization of networks. In addition to densely connected modules in PPI networks, such as protein complexes, there are other topological structures *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com in PPI networks that may possess important cellular functionalities. Again, based on interact omic data, the proteins that interact with similar sets of other proteins in a given network also intuitively have a higher probability of sharing the similar functionalities compared with the proteins that do not share any interacting partners or neighbors (). These proteins may not directly interact with each other but they still work toward similar cellular functionalities and hence should belong to the same modules. Take transmembrane proteins for example. It is well known that transmembrane proteins, such as receptors in signal transduction cascades, tend to interact with cytoplasmic proteins as well as with extracellular ligands, but rarely interact with themselves (). To identify such types of functional modules, many state of the art block model module identification algorithms have been proposed recently. For example, Power Graph (PG) () greedily collects topologically similar nodes into the same module based on Jaccard index similarity. Graph Summarization (GS) () uses the minimum description length principle to group nodes with similar interaction patterns. However, both PG and GS are solved by greedy algorithms, which can not guarantee the global optimality. Additionally, they tend to over segment the network to get relatively small modules based on our empirical experience. A Bayesian framework () based on a stochastic block model formulation has been developed to identify modules as well as the optimal number of modules. However, the algorithm only guarantees to converge to local optima has proposed to solve block model module identification by optimally mapping the given network to an image graph using simulated annealing, and several optimization strategies also have been proposed to accelerate the original simulated annealing algorithm (). But those algorithms suffer from prohibitive computational complexity due to the inherent combinatorial complexity of the block model problem. In this article, we propose a novel formulation to solve the functional module identification problem, which simultaneously identifies the previously described dense and sparse modules with similar interaction patterns. The article is organized as follows: In Section 2, we first introduce the new optimization formulation by searching for the low two hop conductance sets (LCP 2 ) based on the two hop transition matrix of the underlying Markov chain of the random walk on a given network. Then, we derive the corresponding mathematical programing problem and propose an algorithm slc p 2 (spectral algorithm for LCP 2 ), which solves LCP 2 to search for non-overlapping modules by a spectral approximate method with a close to optimal solution. We also present an extended algorithm (greedy algorithm for LCP 2 ) glc p 2 , which solves LCP 2 to search for overlapping modules by a bottom up greedy strategy. In Section 3, we evaluate and compare our methods with other state of the art algorithms for functional module identification on four large scale PPI networks: the Saccharomyces cerevisiae PPI network extracted from the Database of Interacting Proteins (DIP) () sce dip the corresponding network from the bio grid database () sce bio grid the Homo sapiens hsa hprd PPI network collected from the Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD version 9) (); and the human PPI network h sabio grid obtained from bio grid (). The experimental results of protein complex prediction show that nonoverlapping slc p 2 outperforms most of the non-overlapping state of the art algorithms and performs competitively with the more recent r mcl algorithm (). When we compare glc p 2 with the other algorithms for overlapping modules, our experiments show that glc p 2 outperforms cluster one () and link comm (). High level GO (Gene Ontology) term () prediction results further demonstrate that slc p 2 is superior to other non-overlapping algorithms, whereas glc p 2 and link comm perform equally well. Furthermore, we present a few identified functional sparse modules to illustrate that slc p 2 and glc p 2 have the advantage in detecting functional sparse modules compared with the other state of the art algorithms in the last part of Section 3. In Section 4, we draw our conclusions by briefly summarizing the differences between our new slc p 2 and glc p 2 algorithms and other existing module identification algorithms.
