Motivation: Fusion transcripts can be created as a result of genome rearrangement in cancer. Some of them play important roles in carcinogenesis, and can serve as diagnostic and therapeutic targets. With more and more cancer genomes being sequenced by next generation sequencing technologies, we believe an efficient tool for reliably identifying fusion transcripts will be desirable for many groups. Results: We designed and implemented an open source software tool, called fusion hunter which reliably identifies fusion transcripts from transcriptional analysis of paired end rnase q. We show that fusion hunter can accurately detect fusions that were previously confirmed by rt pcr in a publicly available dataset. The purpose of fusion hunter is to identify potential fusions with high sensitivity and specificity and to guide further functional validation in the laboratory.

introduction one of the key features observed when analyzing cancer genomes is the chromosomal abnormality. Genome arrangements could result in aberrant fusion genes, and a number of them have been found to play important roles in carcinogenesis. Different functional fusion genes have been detected in both hematological malignancies and solid tumors (). Precisely identifying these fusion genes is important for developing potential diagnostic and therapeutic targets. Recently, rnase q has proven to be a valuable tool for transcriptome profiling based upon ultra high throughput next generation sequencing technologies. It has been shown that rnase q is a more accurate method to survey the entire transcriptome in a quantitative and high throughput fashion than microarray technology and EST sequencing (). rnase q can provide a great deal of information about genome wide transcription, including the identification of fusion genes in cancer. A number of novel fusion genes has been identified using single end rnase q reads () and paired end rnase q reads * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(). The advantage of paired end technology is that it provides a more reliable way to uncover breakpoints when comparing two genomes. However, although a computational pipeline that identifies fusion transcripts using rnase q has been mentioned in a number of recently published cancer transcript omic studies (,b), there was no publicly accessible, open source software available until a recently published tool named fusion seq (). With more and more cancer transcriptome s being sequenced by next generation sequencing, we believe an efficient tool for reliably identifying fusion transcripts will be desirable for many groups. Here, we describe an open source software tool, called fusion hunter that identifies fusion transcripts in cancer, using reads from paired end rnase q. This high throughput software tool is designed for efficient and precise detection of fusion transcripts in cancer for further functional validation in the laboratory.

discussion recently several works have been published to detect splice junctions and chimeric transcripts based on rnase q including page 1710 17081710
