Motivation: Next generation sequencing technology generates high throughput data, which allows us to detect fusion genes at both transcript and genomic levels. To detect fusion genes, the current bioinformatics tools heavily rely on paired end approaches and overlook the importance of reads that span fusion junctions. Thus there is a need to develop an efficient aligner to detect fusion events by accurate mapping of these junction spanning single reads, particularly when the read gets longer with the improvement in sequencing technology. Results: We present a novel method, fusion map which aligns fusion reads directly to the genome without prior knowledge of potential fusion regions. fusion map can detect fusion events in both single and paired end datasets from either rnase q or gdna seq studies and characterize fusion junctions at base pair resolution. We showed that fusion map achieved high sensitivity and specificity in fusion detection on two simulated rnase q datasets, which contained 75 nt paired end reads. fusion map achieved substantially higher sensitivity and specificity than the paired end approach when the inner distance between read pairs was small. Using fusion map to characterize fusion genes in K562 chronic myeloid leukemia cell line, we further demonstrated its accuracy in fusion detection in both single end rnase q and gdna seq datasets. These combined results show that fusion map provides an accurate and systematic solution to detecting fusion events through junction spanning reads. Availability: fusion map includes reference indexing, read filtering, fusion alignment and reporting in one package. The software is free for noncommercial use at

introduction a fusion gene is a hybrid gene by joining parts from two previously separate genes at transcript or genomic level. The importance of fusion genes in cancer development has been well recognized * To whom correspondence should be addressed. since the discovery of the recurrent BCR-ABL1 fusion gene in chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) () and TMPRSS2-ERG fusion gene in solid tumor (). Fusion genes are caused by chromosomal aberrations, e.g. inversion, translocation, large deletion or insertion. For example, BCR-ABL1 is formed by a translocation event involving chromosome 9 and 22. Its fusion transcript is translated into an abnormal tyrosine kinase, which plays a critical role in the development of CML (). These chromosomal aberrations were traditionally detected through fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) techniques (). array cgh and SNP array were later developed to detect genomic copy number variations at 1Kb resolution in a high throughput fashion (). Compared to these techniques, next generation sequencing (NGS) generates base pair resolution data, which allows the detection and characterization of genomic aberrations at more levels of details. With NGS, fusion genes were detected using either genomic DNA sequencing gdna seq () or transcriptome sequencing rnase q (). In NGS datasets, fusion genes can be detected based on both paired and single end reads. On the one hand, paired end reads (50100 bp) generated from long fragments (200500 bp) are shown to be useful in increasing the ability to detect fusion events (). In a paired end NGS dataset, a discordant read pair is one that is not aligned to the reference genome with the expected distance or orientation. If a set of discordant read pairs are mapped to two different genes, a fusion gene is suggested (). Computational tools like fusion seq () have been developed to detect fusion candidates by analyzing paired end reads and removing spurious candidates using varied filters. On the other hand, single end reads that span the fusion junctions provide base pair evidence for the fusion events. Since sequencing technology is improving rapidly, the current usable read length from the Illumina Genome Analyzer is typically in the range of 75100 nt and reaches 150 nt using illumina s tru seq SBS V5 GA Kit (). Long read lengths not only increase the number of fusion junction spanning reads but also allow us to align them unambiguously to the fusion junction. Moreover, junction spanning reads can also be present in paired end datasets. They provide additional information. Identification of fusion events in NGS dataset through junction spanning reads. Fusion source 1 and 2 are from two different genes or genomic regions. for fusion genes suggested by discordant read pairs. When the read length is long or the inner distance (the gap size) between read pairs is short, the number of junction spanning reads would be larger than that of discordant read pairs. Then, fusion detection based on junction spanning reads is more powerful than the paired end approach. One approach to detect fusion junction spanning reads is mapping the reads to a set of artificially constructed exon exon segments from potential fusion gene pairs (). However, such an approach relies on prior knowledge of potential fusion regions and only identifies fusion junctions between known exons. Another approach is using splice aligners, such as top hat () splice map () and map splice (), to detect splice junctions. These alignment tools can split and map a read to different locations in a genome but only within local regions (usually 50 Kb). They are not able to identify distant or inter chromosome fusion genes. Therefore, the development of a dedicated fusion aligner to align junction spanning reads is necessary for fusion detection. In this article, we describe a new method, fusion map which detects and aligns fusion junction spanning reads to the reference genome systematically. fusion map can be applied to both single and paired end datasets from either rnase q or gdna seq studies. During the fusion alignment, fusion map dynamically creates a pseudo fusion transcript sequence library based on consensus junction sequences suggested by seed reads, and then aligns the remaining full length reads to this pseudo reference (and Supplementary). The program reports a list of detected fusion junctions, statistics of supporting reads, fusion gene pairs, as well as genomic locations of breakpoints and junction sequences, which characterize fusion genes comprehensively at base pair resolution.

discussion the fusion map method described in this article allows us to align fusion junction spanning reads to references and can, therefore, fully utilize NGS data to characterize fusion genes at base pair resolution. The method achieves the following three goals in computational detection of fusion genes using NGS data. First, fusion map performs a sensitive and complete search of fusion junction spanning reads without relying on any additional information. It has the same detection power in both single and paired end NGS datasets. In paired end datasets, the fusion report from junction spanning reads is complementary to that from discordant read pairs. Moreover, as shown by dataset P2, fusion detection based on junction spanning reads is more powerful than the paired end approach when the inner distance between read pairs is short. In theory, for a set of 75 nt paired end reads generated from a 400 bp fragment library, the ratio between the number of junction spanning reads and discordant read pairs is close to 75*2/(400-75*2) = 0.6. The ratio will increase when the usable read lengths increase with new sequencing techniques or reagents (), making fusion map more useful and effective. Second, fusion map can be applied to both gdna seq and rnase q datasets. Compared to gdna seq datasets, rnase q is more complicated to detect fusion genes due to the implication of exon exon junctions. In gdna seq fusion junctions detected are the actual fusion positions in the genome, while junctions detected in rnase q are more likely to be splice junctions rather than genomic
