FX is an rnase q analysis tool, which runs in parallel on cloud computing infrastructure, for the estimation of gene expression levels and genomic variant calling. In the mapping of short rnase q reads, FX uses a transcriptome based reference primarily, generated from ∼160 000 mRNA sequences from RefSeq, UCSC and Ensembl databases. This approach reduces the misalignment of reads originating from splicing junctions. Unmapped reads not aligned on known transcripts are then mapped on the human genome reference. FX allows analysis of rnase q data on cloud computing infrastructures, supporting access through a user friendly web interface. Availability: FX is freely available on the web at (http://fx.gmi. ack r and can be installed on local had oop clusters. Guidance for the installation and operation of FX can be found under the Documentation menu on the website.

introduction accurately quantifying gene expression levels and identifying variants in the transcriptome is important for research into cell differentiation and disease diagnosis. Recently, various genome research groups have developed genome and transcriptome analysis software based on cloud computing technology to facilitate the analysis of large amounts of sequencing data without the purchase of computing resources. Bioinformatics cloud resources using the had oop map reduce framework have been released, such as cloud aligner (), CloudBurst (), Crossbow () and MyRNA (To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint First authors 2010 (Supplementary). However, operation of cloud based analytic tools can be difficult for non expert users such as biologists and medical doctors. In our previous study (), we found a problem inherent to rnase q analysis tools that align to the human reference genome: reads coming from spliced junctions of large introns can not be aligned due to in del (insertion and deletion) sensitivity of alignment tools. To resolve this problem, recent studies have analyzed gene expression and alternative splicing by aligning short rnase q reads against previously known or predicted transcripts (. Following this approach, we enhanced the mapping of short reads by aligning toward a reference composed of known genes and their isoforms. To identify unannotated transcripts, FX aligns the remaining unmapped reads onto human genome reference. When short reads align to multiple cDNA sequences from the three databases, only the hit with the highest mapping score is used (Supplementary). This method allowed us to profile gene expression and call variants with great accuracy (). In this work, we implemented these methods in the user friendly gene eXpression analytic tool (FX), allowing rnase q data analysis to begin immediately upon completion of sequencing. FX can be run by researchers without investment in their own high performance computing (HPC) at low cost using the Amazon Web Services (AWS, http://aws.amazon.com). The results output by FX are gene expression profiles, SNP calls and short indels (Supplementary Material 1). This service can be accessed through our web interface. Alternatively, FX is freely available for local distribution.
