Motivation: Increasing use of structural modeling for understanding structure function relationships in proteins has led to the need to ensure that the protein models being used are of acceptable quality. Quality of a given protein structure can be assessed by comparing various intrinsic structural properties of the protein to those observed in high resolution protein structures. Results: In this study, we present tools to compare a given structure to high resolution crystal structures. We assess packing by calculating the total void volume, the percentage of unsatisfied hydrogen bonds, the number of steric clashes and the scaling of the accessible surface area. We assess covalent geometry by determining bond lengths, angles, dihedrals and rotamer s. The statistical parameters for the above measures, obtained from high resolution crystal structures enable us to provide a quality score that points to specific areas where a given protein structural model needs improvement. Availability and Implementation: We provide these tools that appraise protein structures in the form of a web server Gaia (http://chiron.dokhlab.org). Gaia evaluates the packing and covalent geometry of a given protein structure and provides quantitative comparison of the given structure to high resolution crystal structures.

introduction modeling protein structure has become an integral part of biological studies via providing experimentally testable predictions of molecular interactions. Similarly, comparative modeling plays an important role in expanding the structural landscape of proteins. However, important quality control steps are essential to ensure that any given protein structural model conforms to known properties of proteins starting from its covalent geometry to ideal atomic packing. Several studies have measured properties like bond lengths, bond angles and bond torsions allowable in protein structure (). Other studies have also benchmarked properties like steric clashes, hydrogen bonding and rotamer outliers (). In this study, we systematically determine the distribution of these structural parameters as well as other properties such as solvent accessibility and void volume, using high resolution structures. Based on statistical analysis, we introduce Gaia, a new web based tool with filters that systematically report on protein structure quality. We select structural filters that represent some of the important features in stable protein folds: (i) close packing in the buried core of the protein, which minimizes the void volume in the protein core; (ii) minimal number of free polar charged residues in the buried core of the protein; and (iii) minimal number of sterically overlapping atoms. These factors are incorporated into the energy functions of most protein force fields to recapitulate the structure of the folded state of a protein. However, due to approximations used in all force fields and insufficient sampling, there can be predicted low energy decoy structures possessing nonphysical structural features. Measures that compare theoretical structures with high resolution structures on the basis of known characteristics of folded proteins can be used to 'filter' out the nonphysical models from a pool of predicted models. Additionally, these filters will also point to regions in a given structure that need to be refined to ensure quality of a structural model closer to that of the native structure. In order to report on the packing quality of a given protein structure, Gaia computes its total void volume, percentage of unsatisfied hydrogen bond donors acceptors and extent of steric clashes. In addition, to report on the quality of a model structure's covalent geometry, Gaia also determines deviant bond lengths, angles, torsions, side chain rotamer s and the scaling of accessible surface area with protein length. The users are also provided with an option to resolve clashes using Chiron (http://chiron.dokhlab.org), our recently developed rapid clash minimization routine () and anomalous side chain orientations using our force field, Medusa ().
