

introduction the network modeling of biological systems has been demonstrated to be a formidable tool to decipher the collective behavior of various biological processes. However, the construction of a biological network per se is not sufficient to accomplish this task. To better understand the biological systems and their responses, it is necessary to extend and complement these networks with data collected from different sources, such as gene or protein expression profiles (). Moreover, owing to the human natural strengths in rapid visual pattern recognition, the visualization of these data through maps overlaid on interaction networks would be an efficient way to extract information that could be missed by a purely statistical or numerical approach. Virtually, all existing tools capable to map data to biological networks perform this task by coloring the nodes according to data values (for a review, see). Although these tools have proven to be useful, these 'colored networks' specially the large and dense networks are often noisy, and, therefore, the visual identification of patterns in the data mapped to these networks are difficult. To facilitate this task, these large colored networks could be transformed in smoothed data maps. To the best of our knowledge, only the via complex (), an open source software implemented in Fortran, is currently able to generate smoothed data maps by projecting data as functional landscapes onto biological networks. To expand the collection of tools providing this functionality, we developed in this work a Cytoscape plugin version of via complex the GrAph LANdscape VisualizaTion (GALANT). Although GALANT provides the same essential functionality found in the original via complex its main advantage over via complex is the well known versatile network visualization and data integration environment provided by Cytoscape ().

description galant projects any type of numerical data onto a network to create landscapes resembling the network layout. For this purpose, GALANT uses the java class heat map created by Matthew Beckler (http://www.mbeckler.org/heatMap/). heat map defines the color gradient by finding the minimum and maximum values in a matrix superposed to the network. The values of this matrix are calculated from the data mapped to nodes in the network through three different functions: Gaussian, Moving Average or Power Law (see 'Supplementary Data' for details on these functions). GALANT offers a friendly interface fully integrated with Cytoscape where users can easily build their landscapes of interest by using one of the previously mentioned functions. Users can project their functional data either as raw values by selecting the 'Attribute' option or as normalized ratios between raw values from two different conditions by selecting the 'Exp X Control' option (see details at http://www.lbbc.ibb.unesp.br/galant). Moreover, in both options, users can set parameters to control smoothness ('sigma' in Gaussian mode, 'smoothness' in Moving Average mode and 'exponent' in Power Law mode) and resolution to get the desired landscape more appropriate for their analyses (see details at http://www.lbbc.ibb.unesp.br/galant). After generating the landscape according to the selected parameters, users can also select the type of color gradient that is more appropriate to represent their mapped data. GALANT *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com provides 10 different types of color gradient through the Matthew beckler s heat map class (http://www.mbeckler.org/ heat map. In addition, users can export the landscapes as images in PNG format. Detailed instructions on how to construct a landscape can be found in a tutorial page at http://www.lbbc.ibb.unesp.br/galant.
