Motivation: Gene expression profiles have been widely used to study disease states. It may be possible, however, to gather insights into human diseases by comparing gene expression profiles of healthy organs with different disease incidence or severity. We tested this hypothesis and developed an approach to identify candidate genes associated with disease development by focusing on cancer incidence since it varies greatly across human organs. Results: We normalized organ specific cancer incidence by organ weight and found that reproductive organs tend to have a higher mass normalized cancer incidence, which could be due to evolutionary trade-offs. Next, we performed a genome wide scan to identify genes whose expression across healthy organs correlates with organ specific cancer incidence. We identified a large number of genes, including genes previously associated with tumorigenesis and new candidate genes. Most genes exhibiting a positive correlation with cancer incidence were related to ribosomal and transcriptional activity, translation and protein synthesis. Organs with enhanced transcriptional and translational activation may have higher cell proliferation and therefore be more likely to develop cancer. Furthermore, we found that organs with lower cancer incidence tend to express lower levels of known cancer associated genes. Overall, these results demonstrate how genes and processes that predispose organs to specific diseases can be identified using gene expression profiles from healthy tissues. Our approach can be applied to other diseases and serve as foundation for further on co genomic analyses.

introduction pathological conditions to identify disease biomarkers and gain insights into pathophysiological processes. Few studies, however, have compared data between healthy tissues to identify normal tissue specific pathways that predispose or contribute to disease. One study focused on the expression of disease associated genes in healthy tissues and found that they tend to be overexpressed in tissues where their disruption causes pathology (), but this remains a largely unexplored area. Herein, we wanted to develop a method that takes advantage of gene expression profiles from healthy organs to determine new candidate genes and processes associated with complex diseases. Although many diseases are tissue specific, for others disease incidence and severity varies widely across organs. It is plausible that variation in particular organ features affects their predisposition to pathophysiological mechanisms and therefore identifying such features will provide clues on disease etiology. Given that large scale gene expression data is available for the major human organs (), the basic premise behind this work is that it may be possible to gather insights into human disease by comparing gene expression profiles of healthy organs with differences in disease incidence or severity. Our aim in this work was to test this hypothesis and develop a method for identifying genes and processes associated with organ specific disease incidence using gene expression data from healthy tissues. Because cancer can originate in multiple organs, we focused our proof of concept analysis on cancer incidence. Cancer is caused primarily by alterations in the genome of the affected cells (), yet organ characteristics may predispose or protect from tumorigenesis. In fact, there is a great variation in the incidence of cancer across organs. Differences in cell proliferation and turnover have been put forward as an explanation, though the topic remains controversial (). A previous study found that while gain of function cancer genes (i.e. oncogenes) are overexpressed in tissues more associated with cancer, loss of function cancer genes (i.e. tumor suppressor and caretaker genes) are under expressed in such tissues (). In order to study the differences in cancer incidence between different human organs, we conducted a genome wide correlation study between cancer incidence normalized for organ weight and gene expression patterns using microarray data from healthy tissues. Our results reveal a large number of genes and processes whose expression is associated with cancer incidence and show it is possible to employ gene expression profiles across healthy organs to

discussion gene expression analyses of pathological conditions have been widely used, yet few studies have focused on comparisons across healthy tissues to identify normal tissue specific pathways that contribute to disease. One can consider human organs as different experimental samples with varying disease incidences and understanding these differences could provide new biological insights into disease etiology. As a proof of concept, we focused on cancer incidence and developed a simple method to determine genes and processes associated with organ specific cancer incidence. Elucidating the biological reasons for differences in cancer incidence among organs could help our understanding, diagnosis and treatment of cancer. Although to our knowledge no systematic studies have been conducted to date, it is expected that the number of cells within a tissue is proportional to cancer risk (). We were hence surprised to find that organ cancer incidence does not correlate with organ weight (Supplementary). On the other hand, the two heaviest organs in our analysis (muscle and bone) have relatively low cancer incidence, whereas the organ with the highest incidence (prostate) is a relatively small organ. Our results provide no evidence then that organ size determinants, like progenitor cell number () and p53 mediated stress and apoptosis (), contribute to cancer. Since no doubt a lower number of cells will make it less likely to develop cancer, however, there must be strong features in cells from tissues with high cancer incidence that predispose them to cancer development. To find these features, we used mass normalized cancer incidence to control for number of cells in organs and emphasize cellular properties that may predispose to cancer. To our knowledge, our work is the first to calculate cancer incidence across organs controlling for the organ's weight. This normalization provides a measure of organ specific cancer incidence that can serve as basis for further studies, in particular since a large variation in mass normalized cancer incidence was observed for healthy human organs. Strikingly, we observed that reproductive organs were overrepresented among those with the higher rates of cancer incidence (). This may reflect evolutionary trade-offs involving selective pressures related to reproduction. Reproductive organs may be under stronger evolutionary selection, because reproduction is more important than late life survival and thus alleles that favor reproduction early in life will be selected for even if they are deleterious later in life, as predicted by evolutionary theory (). Indeed, although cancer is an age related disease, it is interesting to note that testicular cancer is
