Motivation: Bicoid protein molecules, translated from maternally provided bicoid mRNA, establish a concentration gradient in Drosophila early embryonic development. There is experimental evidence that the synthesis and subsequent destruction of this protein is regulated at source by precise control of the stability of the maternal mRNA. Can we infer the driving function at the source from noisy observations of the spatio-temporal protein profile? We use non-parametric Gaussian process regression for modelling the propagation of Bicoid in the embryo and infer aspects of source regulation as a posterior function. Results: With synthetic data from a 1D diffusion model with a source simulated to model mRNA stability regulation, our results establish that the Gaussian process method can accurately infer the driving function and capture the spatio-temporal dynamics of embryonic Bicoid propagation. On real data from the fly ex database, too, the reconstructed source function is indicative of stability regulation, but is temporally smoother than what we expected, partly due to the fact that the dataset is only partially observed. To be in line with recent thinking on the subject, we also analyse this model with a spatial gradient of maternal mRNA, rather than being fixed at only the anterior pole.

introduction patterning during embryonic development, is thought to be regulated by a class of molecules known as morphogen s which propagate spatially and establish concentration gradients. As early as 1952 hypothesized that a reaction diffusion mechanism might form the basis of such differential concentrations further developed this view as a universal mechanism of spatial pattern formation arising from position dependent cell fate. Subsequently, dri ever and nss le in volhard (1988a, b) discovered the role of the Bicoid morphogen in early embryonic development of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. Bicoid sets up a concentration gradient along the anterior posterior (AP) axis of the embryo and regulates several downstream gap genes including Hunchback and krp pel which are implicated in * To whom correspondence should be addressed. segmentation along the AP axis (). The bicoid mRNA is maternal, deposited at the anterior pole of the embryo and translation of this mRNA is thought to begin immediately after egg deposition () with the resulting protein propagating towards the posterior end. Most of the computational and experimental work on the Bicoid morphogen is concerned with the establishment of the steady state concentration gradient, and the sensitivity with which a threshold on it may be sensed for downstream gene expression (). Systematic computational modelling of downstream gap gene circuits, and how their non-linear interactions result in segment boundary formation have also been published in;, and include steady state exponential Bicoid expression profiles as a regulating input. In an alternate view of the dynamics of this system suggested that much of the desirable decoding properties of the steady state profile can also be realized during the pre steady state stages. A particularly novel insight into the process of Bicoid translation comes from the experimental work of sur dej and jacobs lorena (1998). These authors suggested that the stability of the maternal mRNA may be systematically regulated; i.e. kept stable for a period of time during which mRNA is translated and morphogen synthesized, and subsequently rapidly killed off by some active processes. This observation, of course, matches our natural expectation as there is no need for the organism to continue to produce Bicoid protein beyond the point in time when it is decoded. However, to our surprise, modelling literature over the 30 years since the discovery of Bicoid ignore this possibility and assume a constant production rate at the anterior pole. We showed recently () that it is possible to model Bicoid production in a manner similar to sur dej and jacobs lorena (1998)'s experimental findings and computationally extract the time at which mRNA decay begins, and the rate at which it is killed off, to match data measured on real fly embryos and archived in the fly ex database (). We used an explicit model of mRNA stability regulation and a least squares fitting procedure between model output and observed data. Bayesian inference has been shown to be useful in a range of applications including systems biology and bioinformatics. Successful examples range from the identification of gene regulatory networks by dynamic Bayesian networks

conclusion in this contribution, we have shown that the non-parametric GP regression model can be effectively applied to the problem of inferring biologically useful information from the spatiotemporal distribution of the Bicoid morphogen in early Drosophila embryogenesis. Discretization of the spatial domain transforms the spatio-temporal problem into a dynamical system for which, with a GP prior imposed on the source, the solution can be obtained as a matrix exponential. With synthetic data obtained from a linear spatio-temporal dynamical system, our results show that the GP approach is able to accurately recover the driving input and model the Bicoid distribution. On real world data, our results also estimate a smoothed version of the driving input due to the data being available only during part of the developmental process, and yet the part of the source decay is fairly well estimated.
