Motivation: Since 1990, the basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) has become one of the most popular and fundamental bioinformatics tools for sequence similarity searching, receiving extensive attention from the research community. The two pioneering papers on BLAST have received over 96 000 citations. Given the huge population of BLAST users and the increasing size of sequence databases, an urgent topic of study is how to improve the speed. Recently, graphics processing units (GPUs) have been widely used as low cost high performance computing platforms. The existing gpu blast is a promising software tool that uses a GPU to accelerate protein sequence alignment. Unfortunately, there is still no gpu accelerated software tool for blast based nucleotide sequence alignment. Results: We developed g blastn a gpu accelerated nucleotide alignment tool based on the widely used ncbi blast. g blastn can produce exactly the same results as ncbi blast and it has very similar user commands. Compared with the sequential ncbi blast g blastn can achieve an overall speed up of 14.80X under mega blast mode. More impressively, it achieves an overall speed up of 7.15X over the multithreaded ncbi blast running on 4 CPU cores. When running under blastn mode, the overall speedups are 4.32X (against 1-core) and 1.56X (against 4-core). g blastn also supports a pipeline mode that further improves the overall performance by up to 44% when handling a batch of queries as a whole. Currently g blastn is best optimized for databases with long sequences. We plan to optimize its performance on short database sequences in our future work. Availability:

introduction the basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) is one of the most fundamental software tools in bioinformatics for matching biological sequences (). Due to the explosive growth of sequence data, improving the speed of BLAST has become increasingly critical. In the last decade, many attempts have been made to design and develop new BLAST software tools for specific hardware () or even parallel supercomputers (). Unfortunately, most researchers do not have access to these hardware platforms. Following the popularity of multicore processors, several BLAST software tools using multiple CPU cores for increased speed have been developed. One good example is the widely used National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) BLAST, which supports multithreading in the preliminary stage of the BLAST algorithm (). Our experiments on a server with two quad core Intel Xeon CPUs show that the multithreaded ncbi blast can achieve an average speed up of 3$4X over the sequential version. ncbi blast also supports an indexed mega blast module, which uses the database index to achieve an approximate speed up of 2$4X (). PLAST is a parallel implementation of BLAST () that applies a new indexing technique together with SSE instructions and multithreading to achieve better alignment speed. k last is an optimized and extended version of PLAST, and includes a module k last n to compare two sets of DNA sequences. As compared with NCBI BLASTN, k last n can achieve good speed up with comparable sensitivity. In recent years, Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) have been widely accepted as low cost high performance computing platforms (). Compared with traditional multi-core CPUs, GPUs have much higher computational horsepower and memory bandwidth. Many bioinformatics tools have been accelerated by GPUs in recent years (). The significant difference between GPU and CPU architectures has created many challenges in developing highly efficient GPU software (). Without the development of carefully designed parallel algorithms and sophisticated optimizations, the huge potential of GPUs may not be fully realized. Some gpu based software tools have been developed for protein sequence alignment. Ling's gpu based BLAST software can achieve a speed up of 1.7$2.7X, compared with ncbi blast (). Recently, vou z is and sahin id is (2011) developed gpu blast which can typically achieve acceleration speed up of 3$4X relative to the sequential ncbi blast. The major advantage of gpu blast is that it can produce the same results as ncbi blast. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to provide an open source GPU solution, namely g blastn for nucleotide sequence alignment that can produce the same results as ncbi blast. g blastn is developed on top of the ncbi blast source code. It currently supports the mega blast and 'blastn' modes of ncbi blast. For brevity, we use BLASTN to refer to the nucleotide blast module of ncbi blast. The major idea behind g blastn is to store a small hash table in the fast GPU cache memory and then scan the DNA database in parallel using all of the available GPU cores. We have overcome several challenges to fully use the GPU horsepower. To achieve significant speed up some other parts of BLASTN have also been optimized. We evaluate gb last ns performance by running a set of experiments on human and mouse genome databases, as well as a partial of the NCBI nucleotide (nt) collection database. Using a contemporary NVIDIA GTX780 GPU with a cost of $650, g blastn under mega blast mode can achieve significant speedups over the multithreaded BLASTN running on 4-core or 8-core CPUs. When running under the more sensitive 'blastn' mode, g blastn also achieves reasonable speedups. When processing a batch of queries, g blastn supports a pipeline mode that can further improve the performance by up to 44%. The remainder of the article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly review the main algorithms of BLASTN and present our design for g blastn. In Section 3, we present the detailed implementation of g blastn. In Section 4, we present the experimental results. We conclude the article in Section 5.
