next generation sequencing (NGS) has a large potential in HIV diagnostics, and genotypic prediction models have been developed and successfully tested in the recent years. However, albeit being highly accurate, these computational models lack computational efficiency to reach their full potential. In this study, we demonstrate the use of graphics processing units (GPUs) in combination with a computational prediction model for HIV tropism. Our new model named g cup parallelized and optimized for GPU, is highly accurate and can classify 4175 000 sequences per second on an NVIDIA GeForce GTX 460. The computational efficiency of our new model is the next step to enable NGS technologies to reach clinical significance in HIV diagnostics. Moreover, our approach is not limited to HIV tropism prediction, but can also be easily adapted to other settings, e.g. drug resistance prediction. Availability and implementation: The source code can be down-loaded at http://www.heiderlab.de Contact

introduction next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies are currently moving into the field of clinical diagnostics, as such enabling the clinicians to analyze not only the majority variants in HIV quasispecies but also smaller fractions and minority variants (). This is especially important for HIV drug resistance prediction, as small fractions of resistant variants can rise during antiviral treatment and can lead to failure of antiviral therapy. An example for such a therapy failure due to minority variants can be found in. We analyzed NGS data from four different patients during treatment with an ccr5 antagonist. These drugs bind specifically to the CCR5 co-receptor on the host cells and, by this, prevent viral entry. However, there exist two classes of HIV viruses, the ccr5 using viruses and the cxcr4 using viruses. Obviously, these ccr5 antagonists have no effect on the latter ones. The binding of HIV to the co-receptor is mainly mediated by the so called V3 loop (), which is part of the surface protein gp120 of HIV. There exist some computational models for HIV tropism prediction, e.g.) and geno2pheno (). These models make their predictions based on genotypic information of HIV, namely the sequence of the V3 loop. Albeit these computational models have been demonstrated to give reliable results on NGS, they all lack computational efficiency with regard to computing time, which is the main bottleneck to clinical relevance of these technologies. next generation sequencing technologies can generate up to billions of reads for a given sample. For instance, with 454 technology one can generate around 1 million reads, while with the use of the Illumina technology one can generate up to 3 billion reads (). With this large number of reads, minority variants can be reliably detected. However, the huge amount of data generated needs to be efficiently analyzed in a reasonable period. For instance, t cup albeit highly accurate, needs around 50 days on a single CPU for 40 million reads from a 454/Roche GS FLX sequencing run. In this study, we introduce and benchmark our new compu tional prediction model named g cup. This model is based on our recently developed method t cup (), but was redeveloped, parallelized and optimized for the use on graphics processing units (GPUs). In, we demonstrate the accuracy of our t cup model for the prediction of HIV-1 tropism compared with other available models. On an independent dataset, t cup outperformed Geno2Pheno as well as the model of. g cup and t cup give identical predictions and thus the accuracy of the model is not compromised by using GPUs. By harvesting the power of GPUs and optimizing the use of their fast local memory, g cup can drastically reduce the runtime and process the same 40 million reads in just 4 min using one modern GPU.
