There are several experimental contexts in which it is important to identify DNA integration sites, such as insertional mutagenesis screens, gene and enhancer trap applications, and gene therapy. We previously developed an assay to identify millions of integrations in multiplexed bar-coded samples at base pair resolution. The sheer amount of data produced by this approach makes the mapping of individual sites non-trivial without bioinformatics support. This article presents the Genomic Integration Site Tracker (GeIST), a command line pipeline designed to map the integration sites produced by this assay and identify the samples from which they came. GeIST version 2.1.0, a more adaptable version of our original pipeline, can identify integrations of murine leu-kemia virus, adeno associated virus, to l2 transposons or a cds transposons, and can be adapted for other inserted elements. It has been tested on experimental data for each of these delivery vectors and fine tuned to account for sequencing and cloning artifacts. Availability and implementation: GeIST uses a combination of Bash shell scripting and Perl. GeIST is available at http://research.nhgri.nih.gov/software/GeIST/.

introduction the technique of identifying the sites at which foreign DNA integrates into a genome has many uses in genomic research, with the approach for identifying these sites taking numerous forms. Insertional mutagenesis can be used as a powerful forward genetic screen (). Gene therapy vectors can be tested to establish the expected level of insertional mutagenic activity (). Gene and enhancer traps are important tools for tagging and studying genomic elements (). In each case, it is important to have a means of identifying the integration sites, preferably at as high a resolution as possible. For small scale studies, this may be accomplished through inverse PCR, or through linker mediated PCR lm pcr subcloning, and Sanger sequencing (). At a larger scale, a high throughput approach is preferable. We developed a method capable of identifying millions of integrations from a single run of high throughput lm pcr sequencing (). To maximize efficiency, the method uses 6-bp DNA barcodes that can be used to multiplex samples or discriminate between independent integration events (). The large volume of data produced by this approach means that an unassisted interpretation of the sequencing output is nontrivial. Therefore, we have developed the Genomic Integration Site Tracker (GeIST) to address this. GeIST accepts a BAM or fast q file of paired end lm pcr sequences and a file indicating the association between samples and barcodes. The software returns a BAM file of the sequences at each integration junction, a Browser Extensible Data (BED) file for easy visualization of the integration patterns, and a summary of how often each barcode was detected published by Oxford University Press 2015. This work is written by US Government employees and is in the public domain in the US.
