Phylogenetic models are an important tool in molecular evolution allowing us to study the pattern and rate of sequence change. The recent influx of new sequence data in the biosciences means that to address evolutionary questions, we need a means for rapid and easy model development and implementation. Here we present GeLL, a Java library that lets users use text to quickly and efficiently define novel forms of discrete data and create new substitution models that describe how those data change on a phylogeny. GeLL allows users to define general substitution models and data structures in a way that is not possible in other existing libraries, including mixture models and non reversible models. Classes are provided for calculating likelihoods, optimizing model parameters and branch lengths, ancestral reconstruction and sequence simulation.

introduction many studies in molecular evolution use phylogenetic substitution models to infer patterns of change between homologous characters using maximum likelihood (ML). These models allow us to infer many valuable quantities, such as how the rate evolution varies among sites or the selective pressures acting on codons (). The growing availability of genome sequences has led to new forms of data, such as gene content and the presence or absence of promoters (e.g. ENCODE), and their study requires statistically rigorous inferential tools. Nearly all phylogenetic substitution models are continuous time Markov chains with discrete and finite state spaces, which require the same underlying computational machinery. General phylogenetic libraries, such as BEAST (), PLL () and Bio (), take advantage of these similarities and allow programmers to build phylogenetic models and are often the basis of existing packages. Here, we present GeLL, a Generalised Likelihood Library, which provides non expert users a text interface to define data and models, allowing users to create data structures and models parameterizations that reflect the properties of their data. To aid in characterization of these models, GeLL also allows users to perform ML inference, simulate data and perform ancestral reconstruction.
