Motivation: genome scale metabolic network models have become an indispensable part of the increasingly important field of systems biology. Metabolic systems biology studies usually include three major components network model construction, objective and experiment guided model editing and visualization, and simulation studies based mainly on flux balance analyses. Bioinformatics tools are required to facilitate these complicated analyses. Although some of the required functions have been served separately by existing tools, a free software resource that simultaneously serves the needs of the three major components is not yet available. Results: Here we present a software platform, gems irv genome scale Metabolic model Simulation, Reconstruction and Visualization), to provide functionalities of easy metabolic network drafting and editing, amenable network visualization for experimental data integration and flux balance analysis tools for simulation studies. gems irv comes with downloadable, ready to use public domain metabolic models, reference metabolite reaction databases and metabolic network maps, all of which can be input into gems irv as the starting materials for network construction or simulation analyses. Furthermore, all of the gems irv generated metabolic models and analysis results, including projects in progress, can be easily exchanged in the research community. gems irv is a powerful integrative resource that may facilitate the development of systems biology studies. Availability: The software is freely available on the web at

introduction genome scale metabolic networks (GEMs) are important for understanding systems level cellular behaviors. These networks have been successfully applied to the studies of bacteria evolution, metabolic engineering, biological network analysis and generation and validation of novel biochemical hypotheses (). With the growing availability of complete genomes, the number of GEMs is expected to increase rapidly. However, the genome scale reconstructions have been progressing at a slow pace. Recently, a web based resource (Model SEED) was built to speed up the construction of new GEMs by generating functional draft models on the basis of genomic sequences (). While GEMs can be generated automatically through the Model SEED platform, an alternative, bottom up approach () has been highly regarded and widely applied over the last decade because of its expert opinion reinforced accuracy and iterative refinements that integrate both computational and experimental advantages (). However, a user friendly tool that accommodates the requirements of the bottom up approach (which includes recursive model refinements that go back and forth between computational and experimental analyses) remains unavailable. For example, the researchers may wish to incorporate gene expression data into the metabolic network by shutting down the reactions of which the responsible genes are not expressed. This function, as far as we understand, has not been provided by any existing tools. Furthermore, tools that integrate functionalities of both GEM reconstruction and subsequent computational analyses are very rare. An important application of GEMs is flux balance analysis (FBA). FBA simultaneously monitors hundreds to thousands of biological reactions and yields the integrated outputs of a single cell according to the stoichiometric matrix and the biological physicochemical constraints that are imposed on the GEM of interest (). A limited number of software tools and packages have been developed to enable FBA, thus allowing quantitative prediction of cellular metabolisms. Examples include Acorn (), BioMet Toolbox (), cellnet analyzer (), COBRA (), fba sim vis (), Model SEED (), opt flux () and SBRT () (). However, none of these tools has the dual function of FBA and GEM reconstruction. Meanwhile, free and open source reconstruction tools, including met an nogen () and met net maker () provide an environment for constructing metabolic networks based on the KEGG database. Yet these tools can neither perform FBA simulations nor import existing models for further curation s. Although yana square () is an integrated network reconstruction, visualization and analysis tool, it can not perform FBA. Furthermore, the major data resource of these tools (the KEGG database) may include metabolic
