gen alex Genetic Analysis in Excel is a cross platform package for population genetic analyses that runs within Microsoft Excel. gen alex offers analysis of diploid codominant, haploid and binary genetic loci and DNA sequences. Both frequency based f statistics heterozygosity, h we population assignment, related-ness) and distance based a mova pco a Mantel tests, multivariate spatial autocorrelation) analyses are provided. New features include calculation of new estimators of population structure: G 0 ST , G 00 ST , jost s D est and F 0 ST through a mova Shannon Information analysis, linkage disequilibrium analysis for bi allelic data and novel heterogen-eity tests for spatial autocorrelation analysis. Export to more than 30 other data formats is provided. Teaching tutorials and expanded step by step output options are included. The comprehensive guide has been fully revised. Availability and implementation: gen alex is written in VBA and provided as a Microsoft Excel

introduction gen alex 6 was originally developed as a teaching tool to facilitate teaching population genetic analysis at the graduate level (). gen alex operates within Microsoft excel the widely used spreadsheet software that forms part of the cross platform Microsoft Office suite. Packaging genetic analysis within a familiar and flexible environment resulted in quick understanding and effective performance of population genetic analyses. Taking advantage of the rich graphical options available within Excel, gen alex offers a wide range of graphical outputs that aid genetic data analysis and interpretation. gen alex is now widely used by university teachers at both undergraduate and graduate levels around the world. Moreover, the software has also attracted a large number of researchers who utilize its unique features. Here we provide an update on the new features offered in gen alex 6.5 that we believe will be welcomed by students, teachers and researchers. gen alex offers population genetic analysis of diploid codominant, haploid, haplo typic and binary genetic data from animals, plants and microorganisms. It accommodates a wide range of genetic markers, including microsatellites (SSRs), single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), amplified fragment length polymorphisms and DNA sequences. Both allele frequency based and distance based analysis options are provided. The former includes estimates of heterozygosity and genetic diversity, f statistics ne is genetic distance, population assignment and relatedness. The latter includes Analysis of Molecular Variance a mova Principal Coordinates Analysis pco a Mantel tests, two gener multivariate and 2D spatial autocorrelation. Readers are referred to peak all and s mouse (2006) for a more comprehensive outline of these standard procedures, data formats and data import options. gen alex 6.5 maintains backward compatibility, but it provides access to the expanded spreadsheet of Excel 2007 onward. Thus, the maximum numbers of loci and samples are vastly expanded and only constrained by memory. More than 30 different Excel graphs summarize the outcomes of genetic analyses. Graphics can be further manipulated with Excel options and easily converted to pdf or other publication quality formats.
