meta analysis across genome wide association studies is a common approach for discovering genetic associations. However, in some meta analysis efforts, individual level data can not be broadly shared by study investigators due to privacy and Institutional Review Board concerns. In such cases, researchers can not confirm that each study represents a unique group of people, leading to potentially inflated test statistics and false positives. To resolve this problem, we created a software tool, g encrypt which utilizes a security protocol known as one way cryptographic hashes to allow overlapping participants to be identified without sharing individual level data.

introduction genome wide association studies gw ass have identified over 1000 genomic loci associated with numerous diseases and traits (). These associations are often discovered by meta analysis of summary statistics from multiple, independent cohorts. One key concern of this type of approach is that the same individuals may be present in multiple cohorts, especially if the cohorts recruit from overlapping regions. The presence of duplicate individuals in multiple studies may affect meta analysis results, producing inflated test statistics and spurious associations (). However, sharing individual level data across research groups is often not permissible due to Institutional Review Board (IRB) restrictions, thus inhibiting researchers from directly assessing whether individuals are present in multiple datasets ('overlapping individuals'). To address this issue, we have created a software suite, g encrypt which takes advantage of a security protocol known as one way cryptographic hashes. one way cryptographic hashes are a form of security algorithms that alter input in such a way that the resulting output bears no resemblance to the original content (referred to as 'digesting' * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the input), and attempt to produce a unique output for each unique input (referred to as a 'collision' when this fails (). Cryptographic approaches have already successfully been applied to other fields in biology, such as DNA forensics (). The advantages of using such an algorithm in the context of gw ass is that the original genotype specificity is kept, but the privacy that is necessary to maintain when using IRB and consent form protected data are not compromised. As a result, we can use one way cryptographic hashes on genetic information, and compare the resulting outputs against one another to securely ascertain identical individuals between datasets used in gw ass
