Motivation: Synthetic lethal interactions represent pairs of genes whose individual mutations are not lethal, while the double mutation of both genes does incur lethality. Several studies have shown a correlation between functional similarity of genes and their distances in networks based on synthetic lethal interactions. However, there is a lack of algorithms for predicting gene function from synthetic lethality interaction networks. Results: In this article, we present a novel technique called kernel rod for gene function prediction from synthetic lethal interaction networks based on kernel machines. We apply our novel algorithm to Gene Ontology functional annotation prediction in yeast. Our experiments show that our method leads to improved gene function prediction compared with state of the art competitors and that combining genetic and congruence networks leads to a further improvement in prediction accuracy.

introduction synthetic lethality concept and mechanisms: synthetic lethal interactions have received much attention in the genetics community over recent years. A synthetic lethal interaction refers to a pair of genes which 'interact' in the following sense: while mutating each of the two genes individually does not cause lethality, a double mutation of both genes does show a lethal effect on the organism. Hence, synthetic lethality seems to indicate a compensatory effect of two genes, with one gene compensating for the deletion of the other and with lethal consequences only if both genes are deleted jointly. The two main hypotheses to explain synthetic lethality between two genes A and B are the within and between pathway models (). The within pathway hypothesis assumes that both genes A and B are part of the same pathway, and that the function of this pathway is diminished by the single mutations, but rendered below the viability threshold by * To whom correspondence should be addressed their double mutation. The between pathway hypothesis assumes that A and B act in parallel pathways that can compensate for defects in the other. These two main hypotheses can be extended in more complex models of synthetic lethality (e.g. see), and algorithms for detecting pathways within genetic networks have been defined based on these hypotheses (). Synthetic lethality and gene function: the compensatory effect of genes in synthetic lethal interactions and the two main hypotheses to explain this phenomenon already hint at a strong link between gene function and synthetic lethal interaction. This link could be confirmed in several studies report that 12 and 27% of synthetic lethal interaction pairs have identical or similar Gene Ontology (GO;) annotations, respectively report correlations between GO annotations of genes and their distances in so called congruence networks which are derived from the genetic network. These congruence networks quantify similarity between two genes by means of a score that depends on their number of common neighbors in the genetic interaction graph. In a second study report correlations between GO annotations of gene pairs and this congruence score. This correlation is strongest for the GO annotations that refer to the biological process and the cellular component that these genes are part of, and weaker for their molecular function defined diffusion kernels on genetic interaction networks whose scores were shown to correlate with semantic similarity of gene functions according to all three GO categories. Goals and scope of this article: while previous studies focused on examining whether there is a correlation between genetic network structure and functional associations (, b) or in discovering pathways (), our goal in this article is to define algorithmic machinery to rank all the genes in a genetic network based on their likelihood of belonging to a particular functional class, given a set of examples from this class. This ranking provides guidance in choosing promising targets for experimental function determination. First, we study this problem of gene function prediction in yeast and for all three definitions of gene function provided by the GO (): biological process, molecular function and cellular component. Second, we assess the prediction accuracy of our method in comparison with that of state of the art methods. Third, we study whether combining predictions based on genetic

discussion in this article, we have presented kernel rod a novel ranking approach for gene function prediction from synthetic lethality networks. In function prediction in yeast, we observe that our kernel based approach kernel rod outperforms state of the art methods and that a combined random walk kernel on genetic networks and on congruence networks () often improves, and never harms prediction accuracy. Considering indirect interactions (walks of length 2) in the synthetic interaction network results in improved rankings compared with considering only direct interactions. We could confirm that congruence networks are useful for function prediction from genetic networks, as reported by). We could also confirm that diffusion or random walk based kernels are a promising approach to function prediction on genetic networks, as reported by. Furthermore, we also established that random walk kernels achieve even better Page: 917 912918
