The gene mania Cytoscape plugin brings fast gene function prediction capabilities to the desktop. gene mania identifies the most related genes to a query gene set using a guilt by association approach. The plugin uses over 800 networks from six organisms and each related gene is traceable to the source network used to make the prediction. Users may add their own interaction networks and expression profile data to complement or override the default data.

introduction the gene mania Cytoscape plugin is a standalone tool for making fast and efficient gene function predictions. The plugin implements the gene mania algorithm (), which uses a guilt by association approach to derive predictions from a combination of potentially heterogeneous data sources. gene mania has been shown to be as good or better in speed and accuracy compared with other gene function prediction algorithms in a competition based on mouse functional association network data (). The plugin extends the Cytoscape network visualization and analysis platform () and the functionality of the gene mania gene function prediction website () to enable computational biologists and biologists to conduct queries using any number of genes and networks as long as their machine has enough memory. The resulting predicted network of functional relationships among query and predicted genes is then available as an annotated Cytoscape network for further analysis (). The plugin uses a large dataset of functional association networks, which includes over 800 networks for six organisms: Arabidopsis thaliana, Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, Mus musculus, Homo sapiens and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The networks are grouped into six categories: co-expression, colocalization, genetic interaction, physical interaction, predicted and * To whom correspondence should be addressed shared protein domain. The data come from a wide range of sources including individual studies and large databases such as bio grid (), GEO (), I2D () and Pathway Commons (http:// www pathway commons org. Networks are updated regularly. The plugin automatically checks for these updates and prompts the user to download and install new networks and organisms as they become available.

conclusion the gene mania Cytoscape plugin is freely available at http:// www gene mania org plugin and via the Cytoscape plugin manager. It also includes command line tools for running multiple predictions in an automated fashion to facilitate performance evaluation of different algorithm parameters via cross validation. For example, users can determine the contribution of their own networks to the performance of the algorithm using all publicly available data.
