We present gene net Toolbox for MATLAB (also available as a set of standalone applications for Linux). The toolbox, available as command line or with a graphical user interface, enables biologists to assess connectivity among a set of genes of interest seed genes within a biological network of their choosing. Two methods are implemented for calculating the significance of connectivity among seed genes seed randomization and network permutation. Options include restricting analyses to a specified subnetwork of the primary biological network, and calculating connectivity from the seed genes to a second set of interesting genes. pre analysis tools help the user choose the best connectivity analysis algorithm for their network. The toolbox also enables visualization of the connections among seed genes. gene net Toolbox functions execute in reasonable time for very large networks (10 million edges) on a desktop computer. Availability and implementation: gene net Toolbox is open source and freely available from http://avigailtaylor.github.io/gntat14.

introduction in search of the genetic causes of diseases, high throughput experiments, such as genome wide association and gene expression studies, are often used to find putatively causative genetic variants. Such experiments implicate many genes seed genes to gain insights into the biological mechanisms through which these genes' variants exert their effects, we often explore the hypothesis that the seed genes participate in a shared biological pathway or process. To this end, within a given biological network, (say, a protein protein interaction (PPI) or gene co-expression network), we can count the direct connections between the seed genes seed genes and direct connections between them comprise the 'direct network' (see Supplementary)], and determine if this 'direct seed connectivity' is more than expected by chance. Broadly speaking, there are two ways to assess direct seed connectivity within a network of interest: In 'seed randomization' (SR), we keep the network the same, randomly select gene sets equal in size to the set of seed genes and obtain an empirical p value by comparing the direct seed connectivity to the connectivity of the random gene sets (see Supplementary); conversely, in 'network permutation' (NP), we keep seed genes the same, permute the edges of the network many times (while preserving node degree and network clustering structure), and obtain an empirical p value by comparing the direct seed connectivity in the real versus permuted networks (see supplementary and Supplementary Information for algorithmic details). Sometimes, experimental biases influence seed gene selection; for example, when using rna sequencing to call differentially expressed genes, there is a length bias towards longer transcripts (). In such cases, gene attributes affected by these biases must be accounted for when assessing direct seed connectivity. In SR, we can do this by matching gene attributes of randomized gene sets to the real set of seed genes (see Supplementary; note this approach will not work if seed genes have unique attributes). In other scenarios, the biological network used to determine direct seed connectivity may be subject to an ascertainment bias; for example, gene gene connections reported in pp is are biased by the number of studies pertaining to processes in which gene products participate (). With SR, we can account for an ascertainment bias by matching randomized genes to real seed genes by degree. However, if such a bias is the primary concern, then NP should be used to better account for node degree [on condition that the network in question can be sufficiently permuted, while preserving its clustering structure (see Additional features)]. NP can also be used to evaluate three further properties of the seed gene network [proposed in (), but renamed here]: 'seed direct degrees mean'; 'seed indirect degrees mean'; and 'common connectors degrees mean'. [The latter two properties use the 'indirect network' among seed genes (see Supplementary); Supplementary Figures S4S6 explain these properties.] Last, NP can help identify which seed genes if any, might be hubs in the direct network (see Supplementary).
