Motivation: The discovery of new protein folds is a relatively rare occurrence even as the rate of protein structure determination increases. This rarity reinforces the concept of folds as reusable units of structure and function shared by diverse proteins. If the folding mechanism of proteins is largely determined by their topology, then the folding pathways of members of existing folds could encompass the full set used by globular protein domains. Results: We have used recent versions of three common protein domain dictionaries (SCOP, CATH and Dali) to generate a consensus domain dictionary (CDD). Surprisingly, 40% of the meta folds in the CDD are not composed of autonomous structural domains, i.e. they are not plausible independent folding units. This finding has serious ramifications for bioinformatics studies mining these domain dictionaries for globular protein properties. However, our main purpose in deriving this CDD was to generate an updated CDD to choose targets for MD simulation as part of our dy name omics effort, which aims to simulate the native and unfolding pathways of representatives of all globular protein consensus folds meta folds. Consequently, we also compiled a list of representative protein targets of each meta fold in the CDD. Availability and implementation: This domain dictionary is available at www dy name omics org
introduction structurally similar proteins need not share significant sequence identity. The early observation of structurally and functionally similar proteins (such as hemoglobin and myoglobin) led to the partition of different sets of structurally similar proteins into folds (). However, as more structures were determined and more folds discovered, it became clear that not all members of a fold were necessarily linked by a common function (). Also, the determination of structures with conserved structural cores surrounded by variable regions complicated the classification of new structures into existing folds. Different approaches to resolving this heterogeneity of fold classification have been reviewed elsewhere (). What degree of structural variation is tolerable between a domain * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and a potential cousin before they no longer can be considered to belong to the same fold? The inconsistencies of analyzing and generating protein domain dictionaries are one component of the vigorous discussion surrounding the properties of protein 'fold space' (). Distinct folds can contain regions of shared structural similarity (). Folds are both populated to different degrees and structurally heterogeneous (). This heterogeneity complicates estimates of the size and 'shape' of fold space, and is likely responsible for the wide range of the estimated number of protein folds. The presence of unclear domain boundaries in regions of fold space has led some to question the utility of a hierarchical definition (). Furthermore, fold assignment is also dependent on the problem of domain detection (). The gold standards among domain dictionaries, SCOP (Structural Classification of Proteins;) and CATH (), have been the subject of many detailed comparisons (). In general, both dictionaries weigh potential functional and evolutionary relationships between fold members with different strengths at different levels of their hierarchies. The presence of shared fragments between differing folds and or regions of 'conserved' structure have been well documented and are one reason for the development of different empirical classification methodologies, as more knowledge of protein structural evolution emerges, hope remains that an evolutionary classification will be derived (). In their early formulations, these domain dictionaries represented different design methodologies. Whereas SCOP was hand curated by experts, CATH was maintained by a combination of automated process and expert curation. However, SCOP has assumed more automated pre classification of new structures in response to the increasing rate of structure determination, diluting this methodological distinction (). Although individual domain dictionaries may contain their own biases, we can minimize the effect of those differences by extracting a consensus from a group of such dictionaries. We previously demonstrated the application of this method to SCOP, CATH and the Dali Domain Dictionary () to generate a consensus domain dictionary (CDD 2003 version, v2003) (). This domain dictionary was the basis of our initial high throughput survey of native dynamics (). Additionally, the concept of the meta fold that we introduced in the v2003 CDD was further developed in a study of cradle loop page 47 4654

discussion the recognition of spatially distinct motifs and structural patterns is a long-standing component of structural protein studies (). The understanding of the term 'domain' to denote an autonomous, structurally cohesive unit is similarly well established (). However, the multiple extant definitions for 'domain' do not always converge (). A spatially distinct region within a structure may not coincide with an autonomous, stable unit. Our interest in domain dictionaries is to establish a systematic, broad sampling of topologies that satisfy our autonomy criterion. The single most striking conclusion from this endeavor was that a significant fraction of meta folds generated by our consensus method contained no suitable for simulation. This occurred due to a variety of factors, but the single largest reason for rejection was that the domain was not self contained. Identification of protein domains can be split into two problems: the partition of a chain into multiple domains, and the separation of domains into folds. The difficulty of partitioning a chain into domains has been well studied (). The separation of domains into fold has been similarly examined. Both problems share similar elements. It may be that the smallest repeating structural element observed between two structures is not necessarily a shared domain. For example, if chain discontinuity is allowed within a domain to increase structural similarity of the domains in a fold, then the structural integrity of the excised region may be sacrificed. The problem becomes more complex when considering domains that are solely observed in the context of multimeric structures or in complexes. In our opinion, one must be very careful to consider the effect inadvertent inclusion of such domains may have on bioinformatics studies; they are not independent, globular structures. We note that the distribution of autonomous and non-autonomous domains is not necessarily related to the dependent or independent folding of these domains in nature. Indeed, characterizing the unfolding behavior of the autonomous domains is one of the primary goals of the simulations that we have performed of these domains. We have generated a CDD from three major domain dictionaries. This CDD contains 1695 meta folds. We have inspected each meta fold and selected a representative. These representatives constitute our release set, which consists of 807 simula table domains. These 807 meta folds represent 81% (64 700) of the domains in our CDD, or 95% of the known autonomous protein folds (). This set of domains is the basis for our high throughput MD simulation of representatives of all globular protein folds (). Also, to reduce artifacts, we would suggest that the reduced list of 807 meta folds be used for bioinformatics studies, not the full CDD, nor the domain dictionaries from which they were derived.
